A SECOND VINDICATION Of a Disciplinary, Anti- Erastian, Orthodox
Free-admission to the LORDS-SVPPER; OR, The State of this Controversy revised
and proposed: For the fuller understanding of the most, as to the grounds
whereon it stands; and more especially for the case, and clearer proceeding of
those, that shall write about it, whether for it, or against it.

By John Humf^^y, Min: of F^oome.

(...)

Ignatii Epist ad Philadelph. Nos a communione quamquam prohibere non possumus,
nisi sponte confessum, aut in aliquo Judicio ecclesiastico vel seculari
nominatum atque convictum.

Austin. Tom 9. lib. De Medicin. Poe^^tentiae, cap. 3. Ex Aquino. And Moses
took the blood, and sprinkled it on the people, and said, Behold the blood of
the Covenant which the Lord has made with you,

Exo. 24.8. They all drank of that spiritual rock, and that rock was Christ.

1 Cor. 10.4. LONDON, Printed by F. L. for E. Blackmore at the Angel in Paul's
Churchyard, 1656.

Reader,
IF thou have a desire to see briefly the state of my Opinion, but think
that these few sheets are something too long for thee to read over at once,
which I would have thee to do when thou take it in hand; thou may be
pleased if thou will, at thy first view, to wave or pass over (with the
Epistles wholly) the Second, Fifth, Twelfth, and Thirteenth Sections, (which
are more particularly polemical and the longest) and so both the matter will
lie more round in its self, and thou have thy end in a trice. Only let me
persuade thee afterward, to read the rest in the whole together, at thy
leisure, with more deliberation.

J. H.


The Epistle to the Reader.
WHereas I understand by my Bookseller, that many do call upon him for more
copies of my first little book, (which has been so much oppugned) about
Free-admission to the Sacrament, there being now 3. or 4. Impressions out of it
already, and notwithstanding my advice to the contrary, he is resolved to make
his advantage; I have thought good to take this course, which seems to me best;
to wit, to set my self (upon so much longer study on my own thoughts) to write
again about as many sheets as at first, and propose the same, as a second
Vindication of this Subject, in stead of the former; to the end, both that the
Friends of my Opinion, may see more clearly into its foundations, whereon it is
to be defended; and those that will oppose it, may go about their work more
dexterously and perspicuously, having no need to use any bitterness or personal
reflections in the doing.

It must be acknowledged that my first Discourse about this matter being
prepared in two Sermons to the people, is written suitably, that is, more
popularly, and so the arguments may not seem to be so full and convincing, as
might be expected in a more large, or in a more close and dry dispute: and
therefore having an occasion something too tetrically given me by Dr. Drake, a
man otherwise reverend, pious and learned, I thought it fit in another book,
being A Rejoinder to him, to do my endeavor for the strengthening and
confirming what I had written, amplifying my conceptions all along, as the
matter leads me on. And this book I perceive has gained so much with some,
even of my Presbyterian friends, that though they thought the first piece not
so cogent, as many were apt to speak thereof, yet they think that there is some
strength put to it herein, and many particulars not unworthy consideration.

However this be, having since read Erastus, and some of his opposers, with a
few others about this matter, I find it to be necessary that I should deliver
my mind more fully and openly as to the state of the Question, for the avoiding
of that prejudice, which I see else by one Mr. Collings, is like to be fastened
on me; which person speaks of me every where in his late book about Suspension,
as Erastus disciple, and as if I had all out of him, which is no ways
ingenuously done, seeing I must profess really, I never once saw Erastus, until
I had printed both my Vindication, and my Rejoinder.

And since I have seen him, I find the ground Erastus goes upon, by his first
Theses, lies thus, There is none ought (says he, as a thing he counts should
be granted) to be kept from communion in other Ordinances, being the ordinary
means to work grace in them; and for an exclusion from the Sacrament only, he
shows there is no proof at all in Scripture, and so he quite takes away all
Church-punishments. Now Dr. Drake, and those that contend for a bare exclusion
from actual receiving (as if Excommunication were nothing else) do manifestly
herein become semi- Erastian, yielding to him his very foundation, which Dr.
Hammond has observed before me, Power of the Keys, cap. 4. sect. 43. whereas
we that do acknowledge indeed that there is no command for exclusion from the
Sacrament alone, yet that the Scripture is clear for an exclusion from society
in general, by censure, and so from the Sacrament as a part thereof, do
plainly stand at the greatest elongation from Erastus here, and nearest to the
truth otherwhere (we conceive) of any. Nos (says Bullinger to the point)
nunquam concedere anabaptistis voluimus, ut disciplinam et coenam commiscerent.
Coenam (docemus) esse publicam et laetam gratiarum actionem, et non poenam.
Disciplinam vero comprehendere monitionem et correptionem, adeoque poenam,
Epist. 2. ad Erast.

Besides Mr. Collins, I know there are some others that have written against
me, and it may be expected happily by some, that I should give a particular
answer to my several brethren, as I have to Mr. Drake; and I must confess I
have had some temptations thereunto, insomuch that I had done something herein
at my first meeting with some of them: But when I understood, that one whom I
never knew, before I saw his first book, John Timson, had undertaken such a
task, I was soon willing to cease my self; for that man having given such good
satisfaction to Dr. Drake and the Gloucester-shire Ministers, in his first
work, The Bar removed, which to my knowledge was much taking with many plain
judicious men, and more, I suppose to some, than my own; I did not doubt but we
should have many more good things from him in his second work also (which has
been a while come forth,) in answer to Mr. Collings and Mr. Saunders. If there
be any therefore who are weakened by what is said in particular by any of those
aforesaid opposers, I referr them to this Author; Of whom I shall think fit, in
the way to say thus much, as what is just to him. He is a man, as I understand,
pious and sober; One belike, that is no other for his condition, than a plain
husbandman, but exemplarily studious for the time he can spare from his daily
and necessary labors. He was, it seems, bred up under the famous Robert
Bolton, and so one of the old Puritans, who using often with some of his
neighbors to seek God together in the holy duty of religious conference, (Mal.
3.16.) and being deeply affected (as I suppose) with the evil of the neglect in
many places of the Sacrament, (himself being one that received the first
impression of that grace which is in him, at this Ordinance) they were in the
end convinced wholly of this opinion, and satisfied their Minister about the
same. After a while Doctor Drakes book coming out, it pleased God to raise up
the spirit of this serious man, like another Amoz, as it were from the flocks,
the plough and the herds, to publish his thoughts about this business. I know
well, that many kind of spirits cannot choose but be ready to despise such a
one; How knows this man letters? but others, happily, that are more humble
and ingenuous, and no less understanding, will rather be ready to bless God
(Mat. 12.26.) to see what solidity, clearness of expression, and eminency of
gifts and piety, he is graciously pleased to shoud oftentimes, in some very
mean and plain persons.

As for my self, I have no desire to draw the Saw any more hand to hand with
any in these personal contestations; I have thought it necessary to answer the
chief and first of them that came out against me, and for the rest, I do humbly
conceive, that when the state of my question is well read over in these few
sheets, then my Rejoinder to Dr. Drake, adding those few things, if you please,
in the Postscript Epistle adjoined, will be enough to answer all (as to the
main) that any other has said after him. Only it is my desire, that those who
shall think fit to write against me for the future, will be pleased to deal
principally with this last work, which is more digested and ordered for
dispute, and then to take in what I have written in my other two books
(especially in my Rejoinder, wherein is most) as it will fall in for
confirmation and farther probation of what here is proposed as the standard to
them; which if they will do heartily, as it lies in its full strength, and deal
with me fairly without invectives and impertinencies, they shall do well. For
my part I have so prepared these sheets, as nothing else may prevail, but
plainness of truth and strength of argument. If any shall come with expectation
of expressions to please the fancy, they will be frustrated; The author desires
here both to appear himself without affectation, and to leave his matter wholly
upon the test of the judgment, without any insinuation by the affection.

There is one thing yet I have to add upon advice, and it is this; that,
Forasmuch as many good men; that are remote, have entertained some prejudicate
thoughts of my person, (very likely for my judgments sake) whom they have not
known; which has made them weight the less formerly what I have said, and so
may still: I have thought good for the satisfying and un-bending such of my
Brethren, having had some occasions lately to desire the testimonial of my
reverend neighbors in the Ministry to the Commissioners for approbation of
public Preachers about matters of my living, to subscribe here their
certificate; which I doubt not but they will own, to this effect. Only with
this caution, that it be not understood, as given with any reference in
particular to this controversy, wherein they and I do leave one another to
our own opinions.

THese are to certify whom it may concern, that we whose names are hereunder
written, upon our personal acquaintance with Mr John Humfrey Minister of
Froome, do know him to be a man Orthodox in doctrine, and Pious in his
conversation.

Richard Allen, Min: of Batcomb. Christoph: Read, Min: of Wanstrow, Rich:
Fairclough, Min: of Mells, Will: Thomson, Min: of Laverton, John Geree, Min: of
Freshford, John After, Min: of Beckington, William Parker, Min: of Bruton.
Mr. HUMFREYES FREE-ADMISSION STATED.
SECTION 1.
IT has ever been the gracious appointment and will of God, to have a Church
upon earth, or a certain number of men and women to be in covenant relation
with him, in opposition to others, who are said to be without God, and without
Christ in the world.

Under the Old Testament it pleased the Lord to choose out Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, and their posterity, to be the lot of his inheritance, Deuteronomy. 9.26, 27.
and 32.8, 9. and his peculiar people, Deuteronomy. 7.6. and 14.2. Ps. 135.4. Under the
New Testament he has enlarged the tents, and lengthned the cords: so that
herein now is his glory shown in having multitudes, people, nations, languages,
to flow in to him, Dan. 7.14. Is. 2.2, 3, 4. Behold, thou shall call a nation
which thou knew not, and nations which knew thee not shall run unto thee,
Is. 55.5. there is Gods call of a Nation, and the Nations answer to that call,
which being spoken of Christ under the Gospel, Romans 9.26. Romans 10.19. is
manifest proof for our national Churches, as others have observed.

For as the whole people of the Jews were the Church of God, and so accounted a
holy seed, a chosen generation, a sanctified people, Ezra 9.2. Deuteronomy. 14.3. Dan.
8.24. Gods vine, the daughter of his people, his children, Deuteronomy. 14.1. insomuch
that every man, woman and child of them, without exception, are taken into
covenant, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12. There were many of them ignorant persons, Is.
1.3. Is. 5.13. many of them wicked persons, Ps. 81.11. Amos 3.2. Yet are they
owned of God for his people, and so called his people, children of the Kingdom,
Mat. 8.12. children of the covenant, Acts 3.25. Deuteronomy. 32.6. in reference to
this covenant relation. Hear O my people, and I will testify against thee, I
am God, even thy God, Psalm. 50.7. I entered covenant with thee, and thou
becamest mine, Ez. 16.8. He came to his own, and his own received him not, Jo.
1.11. they are called his own still, though they refused him.

So is it now with all those Nations that having had the Gospel preached, and
answering to that Gospel have received the doctrine of Christ, submitting to
his Ordinances in profession of his name, they are hereby engrafted into the
Jews olive or covenant, Romans 11.17. with Romans 2.26. and so to be reckoned, as
they were, the people of God, 1 Pet. 2.10. Believers, Acts 8.12, 13. Disciples,
Jo. 6.66. Christians, Acts 11.26. Saints by calling, 1 Cor. 1.2. the Church of
the Gentiles, and Kingdom of Christ. Mat. 13.41.

And to this purpose do such texts as these, Mi. 4.2. Jer. 4.2. Zach. 2.11.
Is. 65. 1. Romans 4.17. Matt. 21.43. Ps. 86.9. Is. 25.6. Ps. 22.27. Ps. 2.8.
Zach. 14.9. etc. (See Mr. Hudsons Vind. p. 16. and Mr. Baxt. Inf: Bap: p. 339,
340. Edit. 3.) speak of the Church very largely and magnificently under the
Gospel. The same covenant, says Rutherford (Treat. Cov. p. 73. and 343.) that
was made with Abraham, is made with the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 6.16. I will be
their God, and they shall be my people. And as that is extended to the whole
Jews, Lev. 26.12, 13. So are the whole Gentiles, Is. 55.4, 5. Is. 11.10. Is.
60.1, 2. All Nations, Isa. 2.1, 2. All flesh, Is. 66.23. Is. 40.5. Psalm. 65.2.
All the kinreds of the earth, Ps. 22.26, 27. The Kingdoms of the world, Rev.
11.15. From the rising of the Sun, to the going down thereof, Mal. 1.11. (to
wit, even as many of them as the Lord our God shall call, Act. 2.39.) said to
become the people of God under the New Testament.

SECT. 2.
I Know indeed, for all these many and arge expressions every where in
Scripture, some eminent Divines do conceive the Church and Covenant ought to be
restrained to the regenerate only, and that none else are really, but nominally
and aequivocally Church Members. And so I remember Arminius expresses it for
them, Disp. pub. These. 18. Sec. 15. Vocati, et non electi, ad ecclesiam
visibilem pertinere judicantur, quanquam Aequivoce, quum ad invisibilem non
pertine ant.

This doctrine enforces them to distinguish, between what gives right as to a
man's own part unto Church Membership and the Ordinances, and that which gives
right to be admitted; whereas the truth is, these are Relata, quorum posito and
sublato uno, ponitur and tollitur alterum; Besides, there is this grievous
inconvenience it runs do^nright into, that the Minister shall be bound to
administer the Ordinances (particularly the Sacrament) unto people, when they
are bound upon pain of damnation not to take them. Upon this arises
inextricable difficulties which as they incline men to separations, so they
leave the doubtful Christian in such a case, that he can hardly ever act in
faith upon such foundations.

It is my opinion therefore, that the Covenant may be considered in the special
grace thereof and in ernal administration, and thus it belongs only to the
elect and regenerate: Or in the general grace and external administration of
the Ordinances, and thus it belongs to the whole Church as visible, and to the
several members alike, whether regenerate or not.

My reasons for this latitude are these:

1. It is manifest that the whole Nation of the Jews, Deuteronomy. 29. were Gods
peculiar people, in covenant with him, by the texts fore-quoted; and this is
amply proved by Mr. Blake, Treat. Cov. p. 189, 190. but that most of them were
only aequivocally so, is by others assumed gratis. 2. It is plain, that the
Gentiles are ingrafted into the Olive of the Jews, Romans 11.24. that is, into
their external covenant, which covenant must be the covenant of grace, for else
it could be no prejudice for any of them to be broken off, nor privilege for
any of us to be ingrafted in. And it must be as to the external administratio,
for else neither could any of them be broken off, not any of us ingrafted in.
3. It appears, that the Promise or covenant of Grace in the external
administration belongs to all that the Lord our God shall call, Acts 2.39. To
those that are afarr off, (that is, the Gentiles) and their children, when the
Lord should call any of their parents, as it did for the present to the Jews,
and theirs. 4. The called, no doubt, are many more than the elect; many are
called, but few chosen. The called are such, as Mr. Blake phrases it, as are
brought in covenant, The chosen, such as are brought up to the terms of it. Now
it is to be considered, The called contain the chosen. As there is an outward
vocation, and an effectual vocation, yet that outward is real as well as the
other; So there is an outward being in covenant, and effectual, (as we speak
for distinctions sake,) Yet that outward is real, not aequivocally only. 5. The
Scripture puts a real difference between the Nation of the Jews, as being in
covenant, Romans 3.1. and 9.4. and others that were alienated from the
Commonwealth of Israel, without hope, without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. but
if none but the regenerate are in covenant, there is no such difference
externally between a Jew and Gentile, Christian and Heathen, but aequivocally
only, in which manner methinks the Scripture should not be made to speak so
abundantly. 6. For this latitude, as to Obligation and privilege of
Ordinances, it is evident, Genesis 17.10. This is my covenant ye shall keep
between me and you, every man-child among you shall be circumcised. Here I
note, that the waiting on Gods ordinance, is the keeping the covenant it self,
in the external administration; And surely there is so much plain strength in
the instance of circumcision, Genesis 17. Jud. 5. from this large right of
Ordinances from covenant relation, that it alone will hold against all can be
said against it. 7. Excellent Mr. Baxter in his Inf: Bap: p. 224. mihi Ed. 3.
highly commending Mr. Blakes opening of the conditional covenant, and affirming
that he has fully proved, that the reprobate (meaning of professors) is within
the verge of it, he adds, And doubtless this imerest in the covenant is afruit
of Christ's death. Now if it be so, how can it be aequivocal only? that is, an
interect or privilege, which will become a lie, and dissimulation for those
that have it, to assume; and can that be a fruit of Christ's death? 8. If no
unregenerate Christian be in covenant but aequivocally, then must not such a
one bring his child to baptism, nor partake himself of Christian communion, but
it is a mere mockery of Christ (as some seem to me here to speak harshly) to
avoid which, he must tenounce his profession, and never come to the Supper, and
to the other Ordinances, but only as an Heathen and Infidel. 9. Then those that
are disciples of Christ (for so was Judas) must not be caught to do all things
Christ has commanded, Mat. 28.20. 10. The Scripture (as Mr. Blake urges)
speaks of dealing falsely in covenant, breaking, and not being steadfast in it:
but if the regenerate only be in covenant, there can be no such thing really,
but nominally only. 11. Christ said expressly to the twelve, Do this, Drink you
all of it, that was a command, and yet one of them was unregenerate; From
whence it follows, that receiving the Sacrament is a duty of a disciple, though
unregenerate, and so the covenant, as to privilege of ordinances, belonging to
such. For my part, I cannot but think those titles of Disciples, Believers,
Christians, Saints by calling, and the like, given to all within the Church,
are titles of right, and not nominal only. We must distinguish (says Timson)
of believing in a large sense, and of believing in a strict sense, both to be
accounted true believing in Scripture sense: The denomination of a believer,
(and so Saint, Christian,) is as well derived from a right object believed on,
as from the holiness of the subject believing. (Answ. to Mr. Col: p. 153.) It
is in my apprehension appositely spoken. 12. The covenant is founded upon
grace. Gratia (says Bullinger, Decad. 5. Ser: 6.) est favor numinis, quo Deus
pater, nos propter Christum complectitur, et donis instruct. Now in the
Scripture there is twofold grace; General grace, and Special grace; God is
said to love all, (that he would have all to be saved) yet elect some; Christ
is said to dye for all, and to dye for his sheep; Both these are true,
whatsoever men contend, the Scripture must be believed, and we must not argue
from the one to the destruction of the other. To define this sense orthodoxly
how both are reconciled, who is so wise to undertake? One Cottier, a grave
French-Protestant Divine, in an Epistle of his to one of their Provincial
Assemblies, and well approved of by them, having studied this point long, says
thus. Ad haec respondemus, non esse asystata, quia gradu and modo differunt.
Deum putamus posse magis et minus velle. Par est majora magis, minora minus
velle. Quod vero de Deo dicitur, Christo etiam convenit, Pro omnibus mortuus,
magis vero pro Electis. Doctor Twisse says thus often, Fatemur et nos
Christum-mortuum esse pro: omnibus et singulis, hoc sensu, nempe ut inomnes and
singulos per mortem ejus redundet salus, modo in ipsum credant. Lib. 2. Crim.
4. Sect. 6. For my part, I dare not be peremptory in determining this sense of
General grace, it suffices me that there is some sense thereof according to the
word of truth, and I shall only observe this one thing, that in the Scripture
this General grace belonging to all in some Orthodox sense whatsoever it be, is
often appropriated to the visible Church, who are said to be redeemed, to be in
Christ, and sanctified with his blood: in way of distinction from the world;
when some of them are reprobates, and perish with it, 2 Pet. 2.1. Jo. 15.2.
Heb. 10.29. And herein I do conceive we may see how the covenant of grace in
this latitude to the whole Church may stand upon a real, and not an aequivocal
foundation; and that will be, if we do not reckon the unregenerate and
non-elect to be in covenant in reference to special grace, as Christ is said to
dye for his sheep and elect, whereof these cannot partake indeed, only in the
account of men, which is nominally only; but in reference to General grace, as
Christ is said to dye for all (and that not nominally, aequivocally, in the
account of men only; but really, so that the tender and offer of Christ to all
is serious and real) as it is appropriated to the Church that receives it, with
distinction of privilege from the heathen or world, that do not receive this
grace and Gospel, but deny it. And this by the way I shall humbly offer, for
the removing some grand objections which stick with many. For instance, The
Sacraments are signs of grace, instituted to testify the being and having the
thing, says. Gillespie, Aar: rod blos. B. 3. c. 13. Therefore they belong to
the regenerate only. Again, It is not credible that Christ should say, This is
my body broken for you, and my blood shed for you, if Judas were amongst the
other disciples. B. 3. c. 8. Again, The Sacrament is the communion of the body
and blood of Christ, with the like. I answer, The Sacraments are signs directly
of this general Grace, as it is appropriated in Scripture to the Church and
they do testify to every nember the being and their having thereof, by way of
advantage and distinction from the world; And thus, as it is credible that
Christ should say there are some branches in him that yet are fruitless; that
Peter should say, some are bought by the Lord, that deny him; and Paul, that
some are sanctined by the blood of the covenant, that trample upon it,
according to the texts fore-quoted; So is it credibse that Christ should say
these words, This is my body broken for you, to Judas among the rest, and in
the same sense is there a communion of Christ's body and blood to all within the
Church, (even as Moses says to all the people. Rehold the blood of the
covenant which the Lord has made with you. Ex. 24.8. Heb. 9.19.20.) though
some of them be professors only. Two things here may be demanded, 1. How can
this General grace of the covenant be appropriated to the Church, which belongs
to all the world? I answer. It belongs to the world only in regard of
publication, tender, and a kind of potential interest if they come in; but it
belongs to the Church by way of actual interest, as already come in (See my
Rejoynd. p. 202.) so that one is said to be in covenant, and the others yet
aliens, from it, Ephesians. 2.12.2ly. What is that then which brings a man into this
outward actual interest in the covenant, whereby this General grace thereof
belongs to him by way of privilege now, when as yet he is no more partaker of
the Special grace thereof than before? I answer with Mr. Hudson, Vind. p. 8.
There are two Sieves which God uses, the first is to sift the world into a
visible ecclesiastical body; The second is to sift this visible ecclesiastical
body, into a spiritual invisible body. The one Sieve is managed by the hands of
the Minister, the other is in the hands of God only: Into the one a man is
brought by the outward call of the Minister, and his own answering that call in
receiving the doctrine of Christ, and subjection to the Ordinances; Into the
other a man is brought only by election and regeneration. 13. Lastly, The
covenant under the New Testament is said to be better than under the Old, Heb.
7.22. and 8.6. But to account this privilege of Ordinances which was in common
to the Jews (as is proved before) to belong now only to the regenerate, is to
make it worse under the New testament than under the Old, which is injurious to
do. Arbitrari (says Calvin, Inst. l. 4. c. 16. Sec. 6.) Christum adventu sno
patris gratiam immiouisse, aut decurtasse, execrabili blasphemia non vacat. I
know some do make this difference between the New and Old Testament, that the
Jews were all called Gods people, and reckoned in covenant, though many of them
were wicked; but it is not so now (say they) under the New. Against these I
shall oppose only those two plain texts, 1 Cor. 5.11, 12. there are scandalous
persons enumerated, a Fornicator, covetous, drunkard, yet within, (that is,
within the Church and covenant) yet a brother. So 2 Thessalonians. 3.15. There is the
disorderly person, yet count him not as an enemy; that is happily (considering
the word in other places, as Romans 11.28. Ephesians. 2.16.) count him not as one out
of the Church, an Unbeleever or Heathen, but admonish him as a brother. And
indeed, unless such be looked on as brethren, and as within, how can there be
any excommunication, for what have we to do to judge those that are without? I
know that Cameroes authority is here quoted, but that grave and pious man Mr.
Blake has made it his business to confute this difference, in the 27, 28, and
29 Chapters of his Treatise of the Covenant; wherein as I find Mr. Anthony
Burgess particularly in this point commending that Tract as solid and
judicious, in his second part of Justif: after he had seen what has been put
in against it; likewise Mr. Vines, and others; So do I humbly judge his
labors therein are worthy to be attested, as very serviceable to the Churches
peace.
SECT. 3.
Unto the Church, under that notion, as his Church, or people, the Lord has
vouchsafed his ordinances by way of privilege and distinction from the world.
He showed his word to Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel, he
has not done so to any nation, as for his judgments they have not known them,
Ps. 147.19, 20. Ps. 78.5, 6, 7. What advantage then has the Jew? Much every
way, chiefly because that unto the^ were committed the oracles of God, Romans
3.12. To them pertains the adoption, the convenants and the service of God,
Romans 8.4. with Ephesians. 2.12. Upon this account, do our Divines solidly (as I
think) make the Ordinances, the right administration of the Word and Sacraments
(under which, a profession of the doctrine of Christ, prayer, and other worship
is comprehended) to be the notes or marks of the visible Church. It is true
indeed, that the Gospel is to be preached unto every creature to bring men in
unto the Church, as the Jews no doubt might use the Word to make proselytes,
nevertheless the word of God as other ordinances, cannot be said to pertain
unto any out of the Church, in the sense of the Scriptures now mentioned, until
they receive the doctrine thereof, and externally subject themselves to the
same. For this same privilege of ordinances, or this donation of ordinances by
way of privilege to the Church, in distinction from others, is a thing to be
stood upon as a matter very considerable, both because, if we let this
advantage fall, we shall presently level a Christian with an Heathen, the
Church of Christ, with the Pagan world: and also because the Lord has
appointed these his ordinances (whereby the advantage of them does appear) to
be the ordinary means of bestowing his effectual grace, which he has
indefinitely promised in the use thereof.

SECT. 4.
Upon this latitude of the convenant, and this privilege of ordinances
belonging thus to the Church, as a proprium quarto modo, or an essential mark
thereof, it must follow, that every member in statu quo, must have a right
^evolved on him, or flowing to him from that relation as a member. Only here
we must observe two distinctions.

1. We must distinguish between a Right unto the effectual benefits of Christ
held forth in an ordinance, as particularly the Lords Supper; and a Right to
the external ordinance: The former right indeed, belongs to none but the
regenerate; but the latter belongs to all within the Church, to all alike that
are Members. Aliqui induunt Christum (says Austin) usque ad Sacramentorum
receptionem, aln ad vitae sanctificationem. I know some choose to distinguish
here between an active ^ight in the Church to confer the Seals, and a passive
right in a visible Member to receive; a right in foro Ecclesiae, and in foro
Dei. But for my part, I think this former plain distinction of mine, respecting
an active and passive right in foro Dei and Ecclesiae alike, is rather (for
these two reasons, see Sect. 2.) to be used; and in other terms may, if you
please, be expressed thus. The Sacraments may be considered either Complexly,
with the entire fruits and benefits of the Covenant, unto which truth of Grace
is necessarily required to the obtaining thereof: Or precisely in the Ordinance
it self, and so it is Church Membership alone, or external covenant relation,
denominating the subjects, Saints, Believers, Disciples, Christians, that gives
men right unto the same. See reverend Dr. Worths Inf: Bap: p. 16. It is one
thing what is required of the receiver in his coming or that comes to the
Sacrament (as of the hearer, and him that prays in their hearing and prayer)
and another thing what is required to receiving: so that else he must not come.
2. We must distinguish between a Right, and use of that right; Though this
right unto all the ordinances be in common, It must be acknowledged for the use
and actual partaking of some ordinances, particularly the Lords Supper; there
is a difference to be put between such as are not of age or capacity, but want
the use of reason (as Infants, Idiots, Distracted, with the like) and other
members; the direct and immediate ground hereof lying herein, in that the use
of a right, is not of so large extent, as the right is. A man may have a right
to a thing, or to do a thing, when it is impossible for him to use the thing or
to do it, and the impossibility does disoblige, and excuse him from the doing.
It is thus with infants and distracted persons in point of the Lords Supper; it
is not for want of a right they are not admitted, (any more than the infectious
or sick) they have a right, nay a full plenary right (let others use their own
terms as they will) as appears convincingly by the other Sacrament of baptism,
where there being only a passive reception, which they are capable of, they do,
and must receive it: But it is because they cannot use the same right here,
where such an activity is required, as they are not capable of; Even as in
their estates they have a right to them, but they do not manage them. An heir
in his infancy is Lord of all, in respect of the one, and yet differs not from
a servant, in respect of the other, Gal. 4.1.
SECT. 5.
FRom this concession of mine about Infants and the Distracted, it cannot be
argued, a pari, by my opposers, for an exclusion of all ignorant, unregenerate,
and scandalous persons.

1. Because in the one they stand wholly on the point of Right, but in the
other we look only on the use of that tight. The unregenerate (say they) have
no right to the Sacrament, and if they be visibly so, through ignorance or
scandal, they must be excluded: We say Infants and the distracted, have a
right, but only they have not reason to manage their right, as the other have;
so here is no parity. The truth is, it is membership (as before) that alone
gives right, so that though a person be unregenerate he may have a right to the
ordinance, and whether he be Infant, Distracted, Ignorant or Scandalous, it is
all one for that, if he be a member, this external right is the same in the one
as in the other; Now the right being the same, in the use of the right must lie
all the difference; which between these is plain enough; the one have the
exercise of reason, and are thereby able to act from a principle of reverence
toward God, the other have not. The Corinths sin of not discerning the Lords
body, was more of carelesnes or profaneness, than bare ignorance; there is as
much difference between Infants and Ignorants, (as I have said otherwhere) as
between a Do not, and a Cannot, if the one does not, it is their fault; but
the other cannot, and are excused.

2. Because there is yet a farther thing here, most considerable, and that is
this. The very ground upon which we are to do any thing, or leave it undone, is
the consideration of duty; The command of God, as it is our rule, so it must be
the reason of our actions. Now there is a difference in the very point of
obligation or duty, between Infants and Distracted persons, and Ignorant and
Scandalous persons. The command of the Apostle is this, 1 Cor. 11. Let a man
examine himself, and so let him eat, discerning the Lords body; Now as for
Infants, and the Distracted, they are not bound to this command, it is
impossible for such to examine themselves, and discern the Lords body; and
there can be no obligation to that which is naturally impossible: But as for.
Scandalous and Ignorant persons, they are bound to examine themselves, they are
of capacity, and are bound to get knowledge, and discern the Lords body, Who
can deny that they are bound to do this, and that if they do it not, it is
their sin? It is true, an ignorant person cannot examine himself, as well as
a knowing Christian; but he can examine himself though so far that he is bound
to it: He cannot hear and apply the Word, as a man of more knowledge; but he
can hear and apply the Word after a sort, though as an ignorant man, which he
is bound unto; and so far as he can apply the word, he can examine himself, the
doing of one, is a doing of the other. Likewise, an unregenerate man cannot
discern the Lords body with that faith and love as the regenerate do; but yet
nevertheless, in point of duty, the case is plain, every man must do still
what he can, that God may help him to do what he cannot. That which is a sin to
neglect or leave undone, is a duty to be done; but it is a sin in Ignorant and
Scandalous persons not to examine themselves and discern the Lords body, and no
fin in Infant and Distracted persons; and therefore it is a duty in the one,
and not in the other. And if it be a duty, here comes in then this rule, which
can never be taken off, that Man's impotencie in the manner of performance of a
duty, must not make void Gods authority in the substance; and so I cloze up
this, if there be a duty incumbent upon Ignorant and Scandalous members in
respect of this Sacrament, which is not on Infants, and those which have not
the use of reason, then can there be no argument here from the non-admission of
the one, to the exclusion of the other. And this might suffice, but I will add.

3. It cannot be reasonably imagined that such a state of persons (as Infants
and Idiots) in the Church should be admitted to actual receiving, that in the
discretion of the Church are no proper objects of Church Censures in point of
offending, which grown persons in the Church are, though never so ignorant. As
John Timson has put in to my assistance in his Bar removed, p. 6. I will add,
it is as unreasonable likewise that such a state of men in the Church as
ignorant persons, should not be capable of a right of receiving the Sacrament,
who are upon their misdemeanour liable to a censure of exlusion from it. Eadem
est ratio contrariorum.

4. The non-admission of Infants, and Distracted or Idiots, is the office of
every single Minister, belonging only to the right administering of the
ordinance; so that the precept alone, Let a man examine himself, and discern
the Lords bodies, does suffice for the doing thereof: But exclusion of ignorant
and scandalous persons is an act of Jurisdiction, and belonging (according to
the Presbyterians) to the Elders: so that there are other texts required, upon
the account whereof that is to be done, to wit, those texts which concern
discipline, as Mat. 18. 1 Cor. 5. Put away from among you such a person. There
is not therefore the same reason for the one, as for the other, as may be
gathered farther from what will follow. There is more required, and another
ground, to an act which is ecclesiastically inflictive of punishment, than to a
bare act of pastoral discretion.

5. The Ordinances all are to be used only for edification: Now the work of the
Sacrament on the receiver being only by way of sign, as the understanding is
exercised thereon, it is not possible, that those who have not the use of
reason to discern any meaning here of can be edified, or have any real grace
wrought on them by it. But for such as are of years and understanding, though
spiritually ignorant and scandalous, though unregenerate (for the regenerate
may sometimes be such) I do conceive they are capable through the grace of God
to receive good by it, as by the word; the Sacrament being nothing else but a
visible word, or an appendix to the Gospel.

As for the ignorant in the first place, I suppose such as are of age and
reason, let the Minister speak of Man's misery, redemption by Christ, and tell
the people plainly the meaning of the Sacrament they come unto, in as few plain
words as they can and ought, who can deny that they may not receive
instruction) and with instruction, conviction) now at this time they are here,
as at another? If they do not, the fault will be their Ministers or their own.
The Sacrament, mediante verbo, through the word, will be granted a teaching
ordinance, but the Word does accompany the Sacrament, and is indeed a part of
it. The Novices of the Jews were instructed in the meaning of the Passover and
some mysteries of their Religion; at their eating the Passover ( Godwin,
Jewish Antiq. l. 3. c. 4.) the Paschal Lamb was appointed for a teaching sign,
and memorial in their generations, Exodus 12.26, 27. So doubtless is the
Sacrament a teaching sign also. I must confess, if you will say that some are
so grossly ignorant that they are not capable for the present to learn, or be
instructed by public teaching, then may you have the liberty for me to number
them amongst Idiots, and such as have not the use of reason, and so deal with
them accordingly; and if indeed there be such, we had best happily, for
avoiding cavil, to distinguish between these (excepting them, together with
Infants and the Distracted) and those whom I speak of, that though they be
ignorant, are of discretion and capacity to edify by the public ordinances;
and as for such, it seems to me against sense to deny that they may not receive
instruction and edification by the Word that accompanies the Sacrament,
(especially in things of the Sacrament) as well as by that which goes before,
or after it. And by the way, as for the younger sort come out of their
childhood, my judgment is with Aquinas, Quando pueri incipiunt aliqualem usum
rationis habere, ut possint devotionem hujus Sacramenti concipere, tunc potest
eis hoc Sacramentum conferri, Part 3. Quaest. 80. Art. 4.

For the Scandalous in the next place, I would have some to know or consider
that the Sacrament is an ordinance wherein the curse and wrath of God against
sin is held forth in the sufferings of Christ, as well as pardon upon
repentance, Herein is the joint strength of the Law and Gospel applied in power
to the understanding, and a most high-aggravating of sin upon the conscience,
says Mr. Blake, in his late Book, called The Covenant sealed, in reference to
his former, The Covenant opened, chapter 7. Sect. 13. Arg. 3. and 4. A
sin-aggravating, heartbreaking, soul-humbling ordinance (as he calls it) is a
means to reclaim even a scandalous sinner.

Reader, I speak not these things on the one hand, to hinder Catechism,
Examination, and any means of private conference for the bringing our people
unto knowledge; Nay, I am not against a prudential making use of this season to
this end; but only in regard that few Ministers do or can go to all their
people, and their people will not come to them, I do conceive it may be
satisfactory to their spirits in doing their office, that though some persons
be ignorant, yet coming to the Supper, and hearing the nature and use of the
Sacrament laid open, there is hope through Gods grace, that they may receive at
the very time competent information to be edified and wrought on by it. I will
speak plainly, they may receive instruction for the knowing (according to their
model) the wretchedness of sin, that Christ is the Son of God, through whose
name alone we can be saved, and that he is held forth as crucified in the
elements, and tendered to believers, which is as much as Mr. Blake says, he
dares require to admittance, Cov. Seal. p. 233. Again on the other hand, I
speak not neither to favor the scandalous, my doctrine is rather too harsh in
the casting them out, yet am I not so far gone, as to think that it is not
possible for such a person (not yet under censure) to be wrought on, or edified
by this ordinance. No, let but a right application of what is held forth herein
be made by every receiver, according to the state of his soul, and what can be
more effectual through the word to break his heart? Let the man which is most
keen against sin, consider what I have proposed in my Rejoinder, p. 37, 39, 40,
75, 76. 112, 113.235, 236, 237, 238, 239, 255. and he will see this is no loose
doctrine I have taught.

Neither may they say this is no means to work grace or repentance, but confirm
it; this is not an ordinance for conversion; but for edification* For I say
otherwise, It is a means of edification and salvation, and therefore unto some
likewise of conversion. The whole exercise of Christ's officers in dispensing
the word, seals, and all other ordinances of Christ, say the London Divines,
(in their Jus Divin. Reg. Ec. p. 36.) is for the edifying the Church of Christ,
or the visible body, Ephesians: 4.11, 12. with v. 4, 5, 6. and 1 Cor. 12.11, 12. From
hence then I argue, If the Lord has appointed all his ordinances within the
Church for the edification of the whole, and there be some unregenerate within
the Church, then is the Sacrament appointed for some unregenerate men's
edification, and consequently their conversion, for otherwise such cannot at
all be edified unto salvation. But the former is true, therefore the latter.
Again, The solemn application of the covenant to a man's self, according to his
estate, to wit, of salvation through Christ, if he will believe and repent, and
of judgment from Christ, if he continues in his sins, and does not turn
effectually to him, is the very only way whereby the Spirit usually works
conviction and sincere conversion: But actual receiving of the Sacrament is a
solemn means of such an application. Ergo. I pray see what I have written in
the fore-quoted places for the clearing of this, and compare it with the
substance of what Mr. Blake has put in since (and, it may be, more cautiously
expressed) in the said place of his Cov: Seal. p. 204. and 240. which has much
confirmed me; and I am persuaded, when this matter is a little more laid to
heart, that many will not only be ready to confess with him, (ibid. p. 240.)
that there is more weight herein, than personally has been acknowledged; but
also, that though it be objected against my doctrine, that it strengthens the
hands of the wicked, Ez. 13.22. yet shall the godly find here a sword put in
their hands for the smiting the wicked, the secure, and hypocrite, up to the
heart, with this Sacrament it self; while they are but taught to apply what is
held forth to them according to their condition.

Indeed I conceive a forbearance sometimes for all this may be piously advised
upon the account of prudence, and the solemnity of the ordinance, to do more
good by it; (which I shall speak something of in the end, to yield what may be,
to the satisfying the pious) but this will not come up to a necessity. All the
disciples of Christ were ignorant in the fundamentals of Christ's death and
resurrection, and Judas was scandalous (See my Rejoynd. page 15.) yet Christ
excluded neither of them at his Supper.

SECT. 6.
WEll now, let thus much be considered, that the Lord has his Church in such a
latitude, to take into it whole Nations, regenerate and unregenerate; That the
privilege of ordinances belongs to this Church by way of distinction of it
from the world* That every member thereof therefore has a right unto the
ordinances devolved on him from this Church-covenant-relation: While yet it is
confessed, that there are some which through their incapacity of reason cannot
use the same. The result of all will come to this, that there is no person of
discretion within the Church can be debarred any public ordinance,
particularly the Sacrament, before he be turned out of the Church, with which,
this privilege of ordinances is convertible, and from it inseparable. The
Sacrament is the communion, or token of our communion in Jesus Christ; But
every Churchmember in statu quo, is in Christ, Jo. 15.2. and in some sense
partaker of his blood, so as to sanctify him, Heb. 10 29. and redeem him, 2
Pet. 2.1. and therefore his right is good to that which is in the same sense
the token hereof; So long as he is in communion, how can he be debarred the
communion? while he is in the body, he may partake of the body; The Church is
the body of Christ, and so long as we are one body, we are one bread, and
partakers of that one bread.

I must yet follow moreover, if it cannot be proved that Jesus Christ has
given order for the casting out some from the Church, so far that for the
present they are thereby cut off their external covenant-Church-relation, we
must maintain a promiscuous communion, in the largest way, as learned Musculus,
and others before Erastus have done; which yet I dare in no wise approve, so
far as it opposes an Ecclesiastical government distinct from the Civil within
the Church. It is my opinion therefore, that the Lord Jesus has set up a power
of the Keys under the Gospel, distinct from the Magistrate, whereby he has
taken order, that if there be any persons within the Church that are
scandalous, and remain obstinate after due admonition, that they are to be cast
out by the censure of Excommunication, which being such as turns them out from
the Church ( Mat. 18.17. 1 Cor, 5.7, 13. Io. 9.22.3. Io. 10.) their right unto
the ordinances must needs fall together with their Church-relation, and then
they are justly to be kept from the Sacrament. So that I herein declare against
an Erastian in-disciplinary promiscuous communion, though I stand for an
orthodox disciplinary Free-admission.

And here I will advance this one argument against Erastus, which will stand, I
suppose, when others will not; and it is this. If the Scripture does allow an
exclusion of some from the Church in general, or from her society and
communion in general, then may some be excluded from the Sacrament, because the
Sacrament is a part of that communion. But the Scripture does allow and command
this, Mat. 18. 1 Cor. 5. Purge out the old leven; Keep no company; Put away
jrom among you such a person; Let him be to thee as, an heathen. Therefore an
exclusion from the Sacrament upon those grounds as do respect it only as a
part of Church-society in general, is to be maintained against the Erastian by
excommunication; as an exclusion upon other grounds, as particularly from the
distinct nature of the ordinance is to be opposed against others that would
have it without excommunication.

SECT. 7:
FOr the Excommunicate, there is a received distinction of such that are so,
Either Ipso jure, or De facto; Those are accounted ipso jure excommunicate,
whose scandal and impenitency is evident to the Church, that there need no
trial for their conviction. Those are de facto excommunicate who have farther a
legal sentence passed on them. It must be acknowledged that many Divines and
Churches of God have allowed the Minister a liberty to withhold the Sacrament
from persons Excommunicate ipso jure, before sentence; unto whose reverend
authority, I have ever judged with due limitation much is to be submitted; so
that upon their score I have expressed my self in my Rejoynd. p. 21, 26. so
far, that supposing there are scandals, 1. Notorious, that they offend the
Congregation. 2. Open, that they need no proof or debate. 3. Actual, or in the
present fact, that no repentance can be pleaded, it may not matter much, if you
deal with such as excommunicate, when you judge it like to do good. In
extraordinary cases, some extraordinary proceedings break no squares.
Nevertheless (ordinarily) upon my farthest consideration, I do believe it a
thing more consonant to the scope of the Scripture, and less liable to
opposition, to resolve that an ecclesiastical judgment first pass upon a
person, before he be excluded any part of our Churches public communion: and
therefore I do own here that thing (as fit and good) which is noted by Mr.
Collings, Vind. Suspens: and Presb: p. 36. That though I grant to the Minister
thus much upon a pinch, in case of some intolerable evil, yet as to what is
ordinarily to be done, all my arguments are so framed, as to conclude, that a
person must not be only de jure, but also de facto excommunicate, before he be
debarred his admission.

My reasons are, 1 Because the Apostle commanding the Corinths, 1 Cor. 5. Not
to keep company nor eat with those brethren, that were fornicators, drunkards,
railers, and the like, lays down expressly this proceeding, For do not ye
judge those that are within? v. 12. that is, this not keeping company is
intended no otherwise, than upon a judgment foregoing. This refusing to eat
with such a one, was by virtue of a judicial sentence (says Gillespie, Aar.
rod. bloss. p. 430.) past against the scandalous person. And Beza, De Presb. p.
57. So in 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. If any obey not, note that man, and have no company
with him. The disorderly person is first to be noted, (...), that is, according
to our chief Anti- Erastian Divines, Beza, Hammond, Rutherford, Gillespy. Set a
mark upon him, or a censure, and then withdraw from him. Indeed it is a
question whether this Note or Judging, in these texts be authoritative, or
private only; I must confess if they be not authoritative, but of private
discretion, as Erastus holds, then this will not reach the purpose, nor this
Have no company, I suppose then, reach to the Sacrament.

2. Because it seems not reasonable, that a penalty should be inflicted on a
person before a judgment be given. I will express this in the words of
Reverend Bowls, quoted by another out of his Evangelical Pastor. Qui omnium
pessimi, usque dum ecclesia sua sententia decretoria pro canibus et porcis
habendos declaraverit, non mihi cum illis ut canibus and porcis agendum est.
Latronem, qui mortem commeruit, nullus jure de vita tollat usque dum judex et
reum declaraverit et sententiam tulerit.

3. Because there are like to follow many flippery and dangerous inconveniences
upon the allowing the Minister power of doing otherwise: insomuch as I find
Beza in his book against Erastus, very often, and very earnestly methinks,
speaking to this purpose. Etiamsi suis oculis minister quempiam viderit aliquid
agentem, quod coenae exclusionem mereatur, jure tamen nec debeat nec possit,
nisi vocatum, convictum, legitime denique secundum constitutum in ecclesia
ordinem, damnatum, a mensa domini, cum authoritate prohibere. See p. 26. 23.
75, etc.

4. Because Exclusion from the Sacrament, according to my judgment, is not to
be allowed by any means upon those reasons which are most stood upon from the
nature of the ordinance it self, as distinct herein from others, but upon the
account of discipline only. To exclude from the Lords Supper (says
Scholastical Mr. Jeanes as the subject of his discourse upon this question,
which he has strongly carried) is a kind of Ecclesiastical punishment, and
therefore presupposes an Ecclesiastical censure; though men have deserved such
a punishment, yet it is not to be inflicted on them, until they be legally
censured, p. 118. Ed. 2.

SECT. 8.
THat my mind here may be clearly understood, the controversy between me and
those that oppose me be more fully stated, and some prejudice avoided, I must
crave pardon to use some more words, it may be some more than enough, upon this
particular.

In my Vindication of Free-admission (my first little book, p. 33.) for the
explaining my conceptions, I have laid down a distinction between discipline
and worship. The exercise of the keys, as acts of discipline, I would have
accounted one thing, and the use of the ordinances, as acts of worship, to be
another. Discipline to be in one element, Worship in another. I know, if some
list to be contentious, they may confound these, but docendi gratia at least,
for the expressing my self, no equitable man can deny me thus to distinguish
for my purpose. Now there are two extremes, I conceive, concerning
Free-admission to the Lords Supper; On the one hand, of such who are too large
for it, and the other of such as are too strict against it.

There are some then, as has been touched before, that plead for free
admission, not only in regard of Worship, but also in regard of Discipline;
disclaiming all exclusion from any of the public Ordinances of God by the
censures of the Church, and indeed denying all Ecclesiastical government,
distinct from the civil, where the Magistrate is Christian. There are others
that plead against free admission, not only in point of Discipline, but also in
point of Worship, herein advancing the Sacrament above all other Ordinances,
that those who have a granted right to all other parts of Gods worship and
Church Communion as baptized members, are deni-to have any right unto the
Sacrament, though they be yet under Church-indulgence, and not censured. The
Sacrament (say they) requires truth of grace in the receivers; unless a man be
regenerate on his own part, he is forbidden to come, and consequently, unless
upon trial and examination there be some evidence that he is visibly or
probably such, on the Churches part, he must not be admitted. In the middle,
between these extremes, my opinion (and the truth, as I think, without
engaging others) does lie; Affirming against the former, who are the Erastians,
that the Lord Jesus Christ, has set up a power of the keys in the Church, (as
I have said before) and that the Scripture is manifest for an exclusion of some
persons (to wit, the scandalous and obstinate) from Christian communion in
general, and so consequently from the Lords Supper, as a part thereof.
Nevertheless I do assert likewise against the latter, that there is no
Scripture for the exclusion of any from this Sacrament without discipline, but
that administering and receiving the Lords Supper, is as free and universal (in
the nature thereof to our members) as other parts of Church Communion.

The same qualifications are required to effectual prayer, and other parts of
Gods worship, as to the Sacrament; and as the want hereof puts no bar to the
one, no more does it to the other. It shall never be proved, I believe, that
the Scripture has advanced this difference between the Sacrament and other
ordinances, that herein alone it must be better to omit the matter and manner
both, than to do the matter, if it be not done in such manner as it ought,
directly contrary to all other duty. In short then, neither the Erastian, nor
rigid Suspensioner must have their wills; In point of Discipline,
Free-admission is to be denied against the one; In point of worship,
Free-admission is to be maintained against the other.

It is a thing very considerable in the holding any point, upon what grounds it
is we hold it; Those that oppose me in my opinion, are very hot for an
exclusion from the Sacrament, and I for my own part do allow and uphold the
same. An exclusion it self, neither of us do deny, the very difference between
us is, upon what grounds or arguments we hold it. Now all those arguments for
this exclusion against Free-admission may be reduced to these two heads; Either
to such as do arise from the nature of the Sacrament, as distinct herein from
all other parts of Church Communion; Or to such as do arise from the nature of
discipline, that respects the communion of the Church in general, and so this
Sacrament in common with the other parts thereof.

Arguments of the latter sort are those, and those only which are from such
texts. Let him be to thee as an heathen. Keep no company with such. Pu^ge out
the old leven. Avoid, withdraw from them. Put away from your selves such a
person; with the like. The sum whereof comes to this briefly. The Scripture
commands Excommunication, that is, an exclusion from the Church, and society in
general; therefore from the Sacrament also. These arguments now, I conceive,
are firm; Free-admission, as Erastus holds it, I maintain not.

Arguments of the former sort, are such as these. The Sacrament is appointed
only for the regenerate. It is a seal of Faith, and set to a blank, if given to
any others. Every one else does but necessarily eat and drink damnation in the
Apostles sense, with the like. Now these arguments, I conceive, are to be
satisfied, and taken off as such as are both invalid, and do hurt.
Free-admission will stand for all them. Alas! were all such arguments
conclusive and true, what will become of the poor doubtful Christian? How
shall he act in faith? How shall the Minister himself act? What will become of
the Churches unity and peace, the command of Christ, and the foundation of
discipline? If it be from the nature of the Sacrament, and these grounds, upon
which men are to be excluded, then must they be excluded if there were no
discipline; then must the keeping away of such not be an act of vindicative but
distributive Justice. As a godly Father shuts his stubborn son from prayers in
his family, and from his presence: So does the Church (as I conceive) exclude
her refractory children. It is not because the coming to prayer is not the duty
of such a child, and is not a means to do him good; No; but because indeed it
is so, the Father would make him sensible hereby how highly he has offended
him, and how much the more heinous is his evil, to reclaim him. A man has
enjoyed those privileges and means of grace which should have done him good,
so long, and he grows but the worse: Well now, the Church in her exclusion,
does as it were say thus to him, I will teach you Friend (1 Timothy 1.20.) to make
better use hereof when I again admit you to them. If the Sacrament were not a
man's privilege before, and for his benefit, then could not (as I say)
Suspension be a judicial proceeding; It were not a punishment, but a
deliverance; That cannot be in way of punishment, that is only to preserve a
person from that which is noxious, and can be no ways any good to him. It is
not upon such grounds therefore we must stand; the Scripture knows no such
advancement (whatsoever humane prudence may make) of this Ordinance above her
fellows in point of duty; but for ought I know, leaves every man free in the
use of this, as well as all other of his outward privileges, until he be
legally deprived of the same by a juridical censure,

To this purpose (farther) It is a question, Whether the debarring of persons
from the Sacrament, be an act specialis muneris, of the power of order,
belonging to the Minister singly; or of the power of Jurisdiction, not
belonging to him alone, but in common with others, that are rulers in the
Church The Schoolmen (as Mr. Jeanes tells us p. 95.) are of the former
opinion, who affirm, that this denegation of the Sacrament if not to be
considered as a judicial action, or inflictive of punishment, but only as a
prudent and faithful administering of the ordinance; ( Suarez. in part. 3.
Thom. Tom. 3. Disp. 67. Sect. 3. p. 856.) and so belonging to every private
Minister alone, by virtue of his office. Now let this be well considered, and
if any of the arguments of the former sort (last mentioned) be binding, that
is, if it can be proved that the nature of the Sacrament be such, that those
who have a full right, and are in actual possession of all other parts of
Church Communion, have yet no right hereunto, and upon this account are to
keep, and be kept away from it, then must these Schoolmen in all reason be in
the right, and the denegation thereof to such, be requisite to the faithful
administering the ordinance, which is the office no doubt of the single
Minister; But the reverend Presbyterians, generally disliking that such a power
should be left to every single Minister, wisely considering the dangerous
consequents thereof also determine, that this same excl^ from the Sacrament,
does belong to the power of Jurisdiction, and consequently, if they will be
consonant to themselves, they should deny that any of those arguments which
arise from the nature of the ordinances alone, as distinct from others, are
cogent, and stand upon those only that arise from discipline.

As for the Schoolmen, by the way, it will be no wonder if they stand u^ those
arguments from the nature of the Sacrament, as herein transcending all other
ordinances, whose superstitious conceit of Christ's corporal presence in the
Sacrament, could not choose but induce them to it; as may appear upon their
solutions of such questions as these, Utrum peccator sumens corpus Christi
Sacramentaliter peccet? Videtur quod non; Quia, Sicut hoc Sacramentum semitur
gustu and tactu, ita and visu; At peccator non peccat videndo. Respondeo, Quod
per visum non accipitur ipsum corpus Christi, sed solum Sacramentum ejus. Sed
ille qui manducat, non solum sumit species Sacramentales, sed etiam ipsum
Christum qui est sub eis. Aquinas Part 3. Quaest. 80. Art. 4. Upon such answers
as these, I am the ^^e moved with their thoughts about this matter; as also
with some passages often quoted out of some of the Fathers. Of whom I do
observe, that those out of whose writings the Papists usually have most for
them, are most harsh, and high flowen in their expressions about keeping of
sinners from the Sacrament, as Chrysostom (a man of a hot spirit, according to
his life, Soc: Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 14 and 16.) and those, whose writings are
quoted as most clear on our side, (as Augustine) are more solute and open in
their speeches about admission.

SECT. 9.
THese things laid down, the substance of the controversy between me and
others, about Free-admission, will amount to these two questions.

1. Whether there be any argument from the nature of the Sacrament, without
discipline, that remains binding according to Scripture, for the necessary
exclusion of such from the same, who are yet rightly impriviledg'd, and
actually possessed of all other parts of Church Communion, being baptized
intelligent members. I put in the word Necessary, because prudentially by way
of advise, something may be granted and wished. 2. Whether there be any such
juridical proceeding or censure in discipline to be proved, either expressly, or
by consequence from Scripture, as Suspension, distinct from Excommunication.
SECT. 10.
FOr the former of these questions, It seems to me, (as is before said) that
were the Presbyterian judgment right and uniform to its self, I should not
need to have any dispute with them; for, if Suspension, or exclusion from the
Sacrament, be no other than a juridical action, which those that are for Ruling
Elders do, and ought to maintain, then can no argument from the distinct nature
of this ordinance, that would conclude this exclusion, though there were no
discipline, be of sufficient force for it. It there be one such, then is this
exclusion thereby proved to belong to the Ministers office in his faithful
administration of the Ordinance (as before) and not to the power of
jurisdiction. Nevertheless, for ought I see, when they come to dispute, it is
these arguments mainly they stand upon. And therefore, for my own part, upon
consideration of those perplexities which arise from hence on tender
consciences, together with the injury that is hereby offered to the Church in
laying the ground of all her divisions and separations (and upon no other
interest of parties I profe^^e in the world) I have thought good to do my
endeavor for the answering and taking off those arguments, in what I have
formerly written, and I hope I have in some measure done it, especially in my
Rejoinder, to some men's satisfaction.

For 1. let but a candid interpretation, be given on that Chapter, 1 Cor. 11.
laying no more stresse on the words, than the purport of the contents will
bear, and so those objections that arise from thence be allayed, which sink
deepest; For which, I humbly offer that 4th Section in my Rejoinder, p. 29. to
44.2. Let the covenant be laid down in that latitude as the Scripture does,
and so those objections from the Sacrament being a seal, be satisfied, seeing
the seal (Quoad jus) must be as large as the covenant; For which read p. 170.
to 180. 3. Let the Sacrament with all the ordinances be looked upon, as
instituted for the visible Church, which consists of the unregenerate as well
as the regenerate, and consequently, that it is both the duty and a means
(subordinate to the word) for edification of the one as well as the other;
whereby that objection, that the Sacrament is for confirmation, and not
conversion, is taken off, For, though this ordinance is no converting ordinance
to the Heathen, it hinders not, but it may beget grace in a Christian. And I
must confess, I sometimes wonder, to see how this sticks upon the spirits of
most at their first thoughts: The Sacrament is no ordinance (say they) for the
Heathen to convert them; therefore it is no means of conversion: whereas indeed
the Sacrament is no ordinance for the Heathen, not because it is not
converting, but because God has appointed it only for his Church. The
Sacrament is no confirming ordinance to the Heathen; therefore is it no
confirming ordinance? There is the same arguing in both: It is neither a
converting nor confirming ordinance to the Heathen, because it is no ordinance
at all for them. Notwithstanding, That it is a means for edification of the
Church, (as I say, and choose to lay it down so) whether her Members be
regenerate or not, I humbly tender my Rejoinder, p. 206. to 241. and likewise
what learned Mr. Blake has put in more lately, Cov. Seal. chap. 7. sect. 13
and 14. who does fully agree with me in this point, and has easily answered
Mr. Gillespyes twenty arguments, which have been stood upon so much by many.

Let these three things, now I say, be done, as I think they are, and there
will be nothing left, as I suppose, that can hold considerable against the
negative of the former question; for which, it shall suffice me to produce the
judgment of my reverend and pious, though harsh adversary, Doctor Drake
himself. Let Mr. Humfrey (says he, p. 116.) prove that actual receiving is a
debt on the part of a natural man, and we shall be far enough of hindering any
the payment of their debts. Now this is proved in the third particular; The
Sacrament is appointed for the Church, the Church consists of unregenerate, as
well as others, which is a firm and solid probation; and is indeed that strong
bottom (as Mr. Blake acknowledges it, Cov. Seal. p. 247. whatsoever others have
said hereof) on which not only my book, but both his too, so far as concerns
this matter, are founded.

And as for that instance of Judas joined by me to the precept, Do this. Drink
ye all of it. And they all drank of it. (in the choice of that text, Mark
14.23.) it does add much strength hereunto, let it be taken directly, not on
the part of the admitters, as it is usually urged, but on the part of the
receivers; Thus. That these words Do this, Drink ye all of it, was spoken to
All present, it will be granted. That Judas was present, the Evangelists do as
it were command, at least allow us to believe, while they tell us he sat down
with the rest, and his hand was at table. Now supposing him present, Christ
bids Judas expressly to receive, (to Take) amongst the rest; From whence, actual
receiving is irrefragably proved the duty of a disciple, though unregenerate,
or in his natural estate. And then you see what Mr. Drake yields me, and what
would be won, though he should not; for this foundation, as to the main,
must hold so long as the precepts of God can be preserved from being made void
by man's tradition. Go and disciple all Nations, says Christ, baptizing them,
and teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, Mat.
28.19, 20. From hence we collect, that those who are discipled by baptism, that
is, are baptized members, must be taught to observe all the commands of Christ.
But the Sacrament is one of Christ's commandments.

I will only urge here farther one argument, which I must confess, sinks deep
into me, as that which is not merely fetched from the brain, but from the hearts
of many that are wounded by it. That doctrine which cuts off every doubtful
Christian from the Sacrament, is harsh doctrine and not to be endured: (By the
Doubtful Christian, I understand a man in doubt of his regeneration, a man
that is indeed truly gracious, but doubts so, that he is inclined rather to
think he is not.) But this doctrine that holds it not the duty, but unlawful
for every unregenerate man to receive, does cut off every doubtful Christian
from receiving; Therefore this doctrine is not to be endured. The Major I hope
will not be denied, the Minor I prove, That doctrine which concludes it to be
sin in the doubtful Christian to receive the Sacrament, cuts off the
doubtful Christian from receiving. This is manifest. But this doctrine
concludes it to be sin in the doubtful Christian to receive. Probo. That
which a man is not fully persuaded in his conscience is lawful to be done, it
is sin if it be done: This is the very direct meaning of those words, Romans
14.23. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. But if it be not the duty, or it be
not lawful, according to this doctrine, for any man which is not regenerate, to
receive the Sacrament, then cannot the doubtful Christian, that is in doubt
whether he be regenerate or not, be fully persuaded in his conscience, that it
is his duty, or that it is lawful for him to receive; and consequently, if he
receives, he sins. If he eats and doubts, he is damned if he eat. This I
humbly conceive is convincing. The argument I presume is strong as it is urged
by others on the part of the admitters. If truth of grace be necessarily
required to receiving, how shall the Minister act in faith, that cannot be
assured of the truth of grace in an other? But as I do urge it thus, on the
part of the doubtful receiver himself, I think it is irrefragable. And as it is
that, which has wrought much with me in my Rejoynd. p. 30, 31. So has it with
pious Timson, who agrees with me in it, Ans. to Mr. Col. p. 51. and likewise
Mr. Blake, Cov. Seal. p. 192. wherein you may see a sympathy of our very souls
and spirits in this point. I shall not need therefore to say any more of this
former question, but refer to what is already written.

SECT. 11.
FOr the later question; Were the former granted, that Exclusion from the
Sacrament, does indeed belong only to the power of jurisdiction, which the
Presbyterians grant; and consequently that no arguments from the nature of this
ordinance barely, as distinct from all others, without discipline are firm and
cogent for it; which they should grant likewise. Then will the whole dispute
between me and them, come to this issue, that they must prove, Either, that
there is a power in the Ministers to set up a discipline, or a part of
discipline which is not prescribed in the Scripture, a thing which none of them
I think will maintain: Or that there is such a part of discipline prescribed,
in Scripture, as exclusion from the Sacrament, distinct from exclusion from the
Church; that is, Suspension, defined to be, a juridical act of the Officers of
the Church; whereby upon their having had due cognizance of such, as are
unworthy the Lords Supper, they deny the Ordinance to them, as a censure,
distinct from, and in order to Excommunication.

And here, that the whole difference between me and the moderate Presbyterian
(unless where they fall from their own principles) does indeed come to this
only, I shall produce one testimony that may suffice. Reverend Beza, De Presb:
and Excom. p. 23. lays down, or yields to us these three things. 1. That the
Supper is instituted for disciples. 2. That all such as profess Christ, though
hypocrites, are disciples. Quales fateor quidem generaliter omnes censeri, qui
se tales esse testentur, etiamsi reipsa nihil minus sunt quam Christiani. 3.
That they are so to be accounted of, in regard of admission, until they are
orderly convicted and sentenced.
Deinde pro non detectis haberi, qui tales esse non fuerint, eo, quem Deus in
ecclesia constituit ordine, convicti, and pro rebellibus damnati. So page 27.
Christus, inquit D. Erastus, jussit omnes edere illum panem, et ex poculo illo
bibere; Ergo neminem vult excludi qui se suum discipulum profiteatur. Id vero
concedimus, adeo quidem ut ipsos etiam hypocritas, quamdiu vel penitus sunt
tecti, vel neque authoritate publico convicti, et damnati inter discipulos
numeremus. I know some of our Divines of late, but not of the gravity and
moderation of Beza (as Mr. Collins p. 41. Gillespy, Mr. D. and others) are more
bold with the command of Christ, and taking up Beza for granting thus much, do
restrain it to the regenerate only. But this reverend man, who is much rather
to be heard, durst not do so, but is plain you see and clear in these
concessions,, upon which, the substance of my whole opinion (at least, as to
the Ministers part) will stand. For if the Sacrament be instituted for
disciples; and all that profess Christ are to be accounted such; and none of
them to be excluded, until they be convicted and condemned for rebels in that
order God has appointed, (as he affirms) then must that disciplinary
Free-admission which hold before excommunication, be good, unless it can be
proud that there is some other censure in the order God has appointed, whereby
the said rebels are to be condemned, besides excommunication, which I deny. And
so you see to what a little point our difference draws. Beza says, they must
be convict and sentenced first, before they be excluded, as well as I; only he
conceives there is a lesser censure to be first inflicted, before the greater;
which I must confess I find not. And herein likewise Beza himself acknowledges
thus far, that there is seldom mention in the Scripture of any such lesser
censure, but the greater only. Tantum abest ut major excommunicatio censeri
possit praeter Dei verbum invecta, ut contra rara sint in ipso verbo Dei
expressa minoris excommunicationis exempla; majoris autem multa, p. 11. Now if
here instead of rara, he had said nulla, I think he had delivered the very
truth.

My reasons against the affirmative of this question, are these.

1. Because the Lord Jesus in that primitive institution under the Gospel, Mat.
18.15, 16, 17. has prescribed no other parts or order in discipline, than
admonition and excommunication. After the offending party is admonished
privately, then publicly, If he will not hear the Church, (says Christ) let
him be as an Heathen, that is, let him be excommunicate, according to those
that oppose Erastus. Now if the Apostles have prescribed any other order of
discipline, than what is prescribed in this original pattern, let it be
produced; If not, then may this text be sufficient, that there is no such
middle thing in the order Christ has appointed, as Suspension, between
admonition, and excommunication.

2. Because the power of the Keys are given for binding and loosing, which I
conceive is done, not in regard of a persons being debarred or admitted any
ordinance; The Levitically unclean were kept from the ordinances during their
uncleanness, yet were not their sins bound thereby; for many times they might
become unclean without sin, Lev. 21.3. Numb. 19.8. But in regard of that state
and relation men have to the Church outwardly, and Christ, as visible members,
from which, while they are excluded, their sins are accordingly, and no
otherwise bound or retained (because there is no remission out of the Church,
or out of Christ, the visible herein, clave non errante, presenting the
invisible) as they are loosed by being received, in again through repentance.
From whence I argue, where the sins of men are not bound or retained, there is
no Church-censure, Mat. 16.19. Io. 20.23. But it is not excluding men from the
Sacrament, but the excluding them from the Church, and so Relatively from all
its benefits, in that sense as we say, Extra quam, non est salus aut remissio,
that does bind the sins of men upon earth. Therefore suspension can be no
Church-censure distinct from excommunication. See my Rejoynd. p. 145, 150. As
the being within the Church puts men into a state, whereby every member,
Relatively, though a Reprobate, is said in Scripture to be in Christ, redeemed,
sanctified, to have communion of his body and blood, with the like; so does the
casting them out of the Church put them likewise into a contrary state or
condition, whereby they are Relatively to be said without Christ, without God
in the world, without redemption, remission, salvation.

3. Because the Scriptures wheresoever they speak of exclusion in point of
discipline, do still speak in general. Purge out the old leven. Have no
company. Put away from among your selves such a person, etc. From whence my
argument will be framed thus. If there be no place in Scripture to prove any
exclusion at all, but such as speaks of exclusion from the Church, the whole
lump, society in general, or the like; then is it not possible to prove by the
Scripture Sacramental exclusion, as distinct from Church-exclusion. Or, If
there be no other medium in Scripture-discipline (I speak of the word
Discipline all the way restrainedly, as to this part of censure) but
excommunication it self, for the proving a withholding any at all for moral
uncleanness from any public ordinance (as may appear by any thing of weight in
Gillespyes 14 Arguments for exclusion from the Passover. B. 1. c. 12.) then
cannot suspension be proved, as distinct from, but only as conjunct with
excommunication. The consequence here is apparent; But the former is true,
therefore the latter. In a word, the Scripture knows no other exclusion that is
disciplinary, but a casting out of the Church, and so from the Sacrament only,
as included in it.

SECT. 12:
ANd this I take to be so true, full, and convincing, that I should hardly need
any thing more for the answering even the whole of those arguments for
juridical suspension, which is of late put forth by Mr. Coll: in that book of
his upon this subject, wherein I may truly say there is bestowed a good deal of
reading, only as it were to discover how little there is to be found in others,
and nothing from himself (besides humane authority) for his opinion.

I must confess there are here Certain Scriptures and Reasons urged by him,
with so much pedantry, that is more than enough; and it will be necessary that
I give my thoughts concerning the Scriptures, though for what is mere
formalitie, ostentation, or personal abuse, it may pass. I pray God teach that
author, and all of us, to become a little more vile in our own eyes, that we may
learn to vilify others less. The Scriptures are four or five.

The first is Mat. 7.6. Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, nor cast ye
your pearls before Swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and rent
you. For my judgment on this text, I conceive,

1. That this speech was proverbial among the Jews; and I think I have read or
heard it is in the Talmud. 2. That the purport or meaning, not the letter, is
to be attended. 3. That this meaning or sense hereof tends unto prudence, or a
prudential managing of such things as are designed to a good end. 4. That these
holy things and pearls, (though they may more specially in the coherence, and
in the thing, agree with admonition) are to be taken in general for all such
things as have a subserviency to holy uses. 1. Because the text limits them
not. And 2. Because there is no necessity for us to do it. 5. That these dogs
and swine are not to be taken in general for all sorts of sinners, for the same
reasons on the contrary. 1. Because the text it self does describe them, to
wit, to be such as will trample the holy things under their feet, and turn
again and rent us. 2. Because there is likewise necessity so to do. For no holy
thing or pearl can be given to dogs or swine by this precept, it being
boldness to limit what Christ has not limited.
But some holy things (as the word, or admonition) may be given, and was given
by Christ himself unto such as are dogs and swine in general in other texts, as
suppose ignorant and scandalous persons; therefore must not the sense of these
dogs and Swine, be of all ignorant and scandalous sinners in general; but on
necessity be confined to the text in hand, in which sense it is true, that no
holy thing at all is to be given to such. 6. By these holy things then and
pearls, I understand all things, whether matters of Religion, which are more
properly the holy things, (as wholesome counsels in Scripture, pious
conferences, opening our experiences, and in general, the ordinances;) or
matters of morality, which may be more properly the pearls (as precious
sayings, wise serious contrivances, advice, actions) so far as they are either
appointed of God, or made use of by reason for the Edification of others. And
by dogs and swine I understand all persons, whether ignorant, or not ignorant,
scandalous or not scandalous otherwise, that are but like in the use hereof
toward them, to trample on) he things, and rear the givers, that is both to
contemn the one, and despite the other.
The substance then of this precept or counsel of Christ, as I am fully
persuaded, without binding others, comes to this, that every man in the
managing of good things, should be prudent, so far, as to have a care, and such
regard to the persons (with other circumstances) to whom he dispenses them,
that we are to forbear, when we shall but exasperate, give occasion of
contempt, and do no good by them.

For instance, suppose a man (otherwise godly) is in a passion, so that I see
reproof, (which is a pearl and good thing in its season) would be surely
contemned, if I should give it him at the present, and make him fly upon me,
in this case now, under this dogged humor, this rule of Christ commands me in
prudence to forbear, and take another opportunity to do my duty.

This foundation being laid, I shall here propose these two questions.

1. How can our delivering the Sacrament to our intelligent and unexcommunicate
members, be a giving thereof unto dogs, seeing we are sure they will not turn
again upon us, and rent us for that; Or swine (which some distinguish) seeing
they do not trample thereupon, by neglect, vilipending, despising or rejecting
of it (for that is trampling the holy things in the text) but so far as we can
possibly see, do reverently receive it? 2. Whereas if we with old the Sacrament
from them, unless we could have a fair proceeding unto censure, which would
stop their mouths, they on the contrary will turn upon us and rent us; withal
trampling thereupon, by not caring at all for it: Whether or no is not this
rather a plain breach (in the want of prudence) of this rule, seeing suspension
of them is supposed to be a holy thing and pearl, and these persons in this
case, unless we could take farther order, we are sure are dogs and swine in
reference thereunto, in the very sense of the text. Let those tender Ministers
that have been so much scrupled about this business, lay this consideration
well to their hearts, together with the wisdom and sweetness of their Savior,
whose commands are not grievous, and they may happily find satisfaction, even
in this very text, from which they may have likely received at first the
deepest impressions toward the ensnaring of their consciences.
The second Scripture is 1 Cor. 10.21. Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord and
the cup of Devils, ye cannot be partakers of the Lords table, and the table of
Devils.

For the sense of these words, I judge there is no difficulty. Many of the
Corinths being brought over from Heathenism to Christianity, and so members of
that Church, made nevertheless but little conscience (as if it were a lawful
thing) of going to the temple of Idols, and eating there, of those things that
were sacrificed to Devils; Now to reclaim them from this, and prove that they
ought not so to do, the Apostle uses this argument; I speak to you, says he,
as wise, that is, as rational men, Judge ye what I say; Do not you know that
the Sacrament which we celebrate is the communion of the body and blood of
Jesus Christ, so that all that partake thereof are visibly professors of
communion with him? So all that partake of those meats sacrificed to Idols, are
visible professors of communion with these Devils. Now there is no agreement
between Christ and these Idols, such things are (...), you cannot partake of
the table of Lord, and the table of Devils.

In which words we are to understand by this Cannot, (...), a Logical cannot,
that is, in reason you cannot; this is manifest, because he lays it down by way
of argument, which the more you consider, will be the less denied; and by
these words, the cup and table of the Lord, and the cup and table of Devils, we
must understand the outward elements in both, that is, the bread and wine in
the Sacrament, and that meat offered to Devils in their Idol-temple, the reason
being open, because the Apostle argues from their partaking of the one, against
their partaking of the other.

For those Commentators (as Pareus) that restrain the sense to inward spiritual
communion, because we Can (say they) partake of the outward things in both,
they go but on a slight foundation; for this Cannot, we say, is not a natural
cannot, but a logical cannot, A cannot argumentative. Ye cannot partake of this
Sacrament (says the Apostle) and of those meats sacrificed to Idols, because
there is no agreement between these things (he explains his own cannot) there
is a plain inconsistency in reason between them; for by the one we profess
communion with Christ, by the other with devils; and I would not have you
(says he, v. 20.) have communion with devils.

To this purpose, that Note from Beza upon the word cup is pertinent, that it
is not said, you cannot partake of the body and blood of Christ, which would
rather express this inward communion, but you cannot partake of the cup and
table, which must intend the outward elements, and not the things signified
only, the very drift, reason, and matter of the Apostle else is evacuated. Not
as Mr. Col. urges, because Paul's argument is plainly to prove the unlawfulnes
of their coming to this table, while they were guilty of such sins, which is
indeed a plain untruth, but because his argument is from their partaking of the
Lords table as their duty, being Christians, to disprove their partaking of the
meats offered to Idols with the Heathens.

I know some interpret this Cannot morally, Id possumus solum quod jure
possumus, You cannot, that is, in few words, you ought not; which might be
admitted, if they will apply it right, to wit, thus; You cannot, that is, you
ought not, to go to the Idol-temples, who are according to your profession to
be partakers of the Lords table. But for them to apply it quite contrary, you
go to the temple of Idols, and so you cannot, that is, you ought not, come to
the Sacrament; This I must tell them cannot be admitted, Cannot, in the sense
of the Texts cannot, that is, cannot in any reason.

Let this cannot then here be understood, not of a physical cannot, nor a bare
moral cannot, but a logical cannot, grounded if you will on a moral cannot on
the one side, yet so long as you shall not be able to deny the moral Can, which
the whole former part of the chapter enforces, on the other, here will be
nothing at all for the adversary. The Apostle does not say any where before,
You partake of the table of Idols, or have eaten of those meats, and I would
not have you have felloship with Christ; But he says plainly, you partake of
the Lords Table, you are in communion with Christ, and I would not that ye
should have fellowship with devils.

Thus then the main being clear, I shall propose here four things.

1. Whether it can be denied that this action of these Corinths, in partaking
of these Idol-tables, was scandalous? Scandalum being dictum vel factum minus
rectum praebens atteri occasionem ruinae. 2. If it cannot, how then can any man
gather an argument from this place (whatsoever they may do from others) for the
keeping away persons from the Sacrament for scandal, when the Apostle himself
pleads the general privilege of these persons coming to the Sacrament, as an
argument to reclaim them from their scandal? 3. Whether this argument here may
not be irrefragably advanced; Those that were by the A ostles reasoning engaged
from partaking of the table of Idols, partook of the Lords Supper (for this is
the ground upon which he proves they might not partake thereof) But not only
those Corinths that were more pious, but those scandalous patricularly, were
hereby engaged, and warned from partaking of those tables of devils; Ergo,
these Corinths, though scandalous, were admitted to the Sacrament. Thus much is
not to be gain aid they were. I add, and they ought to be (tid excommunicate)
upon the same consideration, because else you make a sinful medium in the
Apostles Argument. 4. Whether many of our godly brethren that take occasion
from these words, to separate from us in our mixed communions, are not a little
mistaken in them, seeing the Apostle here pleads not against the coming of
diverse persons (good and bad) to the same table, but against the same persons,
going to diverse tables.
The third Scripture is, 1 Cor. 5.8. Therefore let us keep the feast not with
the old leaven, etc.

For the meaning of these words, we find in the beginning of the chapter, the
Apostle is speaking to these Corinths about their gathering together in an
ecclesiastical way, for the exco^municating the incestuous person, as appears
especially from the last verse, unto which with v. 7. and the word (...) in v.
5. what Erastus opposes I judge is strained and insufficient, though what he
urges upon the words (...), were plausible otherwise. For this now St. Paul
gives his plain reason, which yet he expresses metaphorically, Know ye not that
a little leaven, leaveneth the whole lump? that is, one such evil example
tolerated, will bring a blot or infamy upon the whole Church, besides the hurt
it may do through imitation. Purge out therefore the old leaven that you may
be a new lump, that is, Cast our of your society therefore this person; For
Christ our passover is sacrificed for us, that is, as to the sense and matter
agreeable to Tit. 3.14. Christ gave himself for us to redeem us from all
iniquity, and to be a peculiar people zealous of good works: so that Christ
being sacrificed for us, is an argument to us, as to purge out sin in our
selves, so to purge out the old leaven from the Church. The word Old, happily
may signify, not every fresh sinner for one lapse, or so, but the veterate,
and obstinate therein. For the manner of the expression, it is plainly brought
in by way of elegancy, in pursuance of the Metaphor, as likewise the text that
follows, therefore let us keep the feast. The words are (...), Igitur epulemur,
as the olo translation; that is, Itaque solenniter vivamus; or, vitam presentem
transeamus; Let us live festivally: or as the Margin of our English Bibles,
most properly, Let us keep holy day, to wit, in our communion together as
Christians. Let us lead or pass our life, which ought to be a perpetual
celebration of our redemption, Not with the old leaven, or the leven of malice
or wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth; that is,
what the Israelites did typically for 7 days, let us perform in the truth and
thing signified, all the days of our lives, to wit, purging out the leven both
of imbred corruption, and scandal from amongst us. So that to make here a
solemn enquiry what is this feast we are to keep in the text, seems to me, an
injudicious and needless trouble, the substantive Feast being not in the text,
but the Metaphor expressed only in one verb (...) manifestly borrowed to follow
the allusion, or to suit with the rest in the sense I have spoken according to
Athanasius, Chrysostom, Theophilact, Lyra, Calvin, Beza, 'Diodate, our
Assemblies annotations, with the most upon the place. From all which, it will
appear, that though this text may be well urged, as it is by Beza and his
followers against Erastus, to prove Excommunication, yet here is nothing
against me, to prove Suspension as distinct from Excommunication: which Mr.
Rutherford acknowledges in his Divine right of Ch: Gov: p. 349. We contend not
(says he) that the debarring of men from any one Ordinance, was signified by
the putting away of the leaven, but the putting a wicked person out of the
church 1 Cor. 2. with v. 5, 6, 7, 13.

The Fourth Scripture is 1 Cor. 5.11. which with the words before is this, I
wrote to you in an epistle not to company with fornicators; yet not altogether
with the fornicators of this world, for then must ye needs go out of the
world. But now I have wrote to you not to keep company, If any man that is
called a brother, be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or
a drunkard, with such a one no not to eat.

In this text there is only one difficulty to our purpose, and that is, what is
meant by this Company and Eating? Dr. Hammond in his Power of the Keys, is
something willing to take it of sacred communion only, as others both of sacred
and civil upon the censure of excommunication; Unto which, as I have ever
confessed my self inclining, so am I now no less than ever. Notwithstanding
there are these reasons may be produced for the contrary, that it is to be
taken only of common eating and ordinary familiarity, without censure.

1. Because the Apostle seems to bring in this as a new matter from that before
(which is more manifestly about excommunication) though suitable to it. I wrote
to you in an epistle, etc. 2. Such as is the communion with these we are to
avoid, such is the eating, because the one explains the extent of the other;
But that seems to be of ordinary familiarity, Keep not company with them. 3.
That company and eating is permitted in this place to an heathen fornicator,
which is not to such a one called a brother; But Sacramental eating or
communion was not permitted to an Heathen; therefore it is not Sacramental
eating, of which the place speaks. 4. The manner of expression, which is, by
way of explanation, as to the extent, how far this not keeping company
reaches; with such keep no company, no not to eat, as it shows this eating to
be of the same kind with companying, so it seems plainly to hold it forth, as a
thing the most common, or dinary, and the least matter amongst them to be
admitted to, of any, No not to eat. But my opposers will hardly sure conceive
thus of this sacred and solemn eating at the Sacrament. If they will, (it being
of old in common with their love feasts, and and mingled with them) why should
they scruple at free-admission as to this ordinance, above other parts of
Christian communion, from which they exclude none before excommunication? 5.
There may be clear reason for a man to eat at the ordinance with such a person,
whom yet he is to avoid in his common familiarity, because the one is
necessary, which he is bound to observe as part of the service of God; but the
other (at least as to the nature of the thing in its self) is arbitrary, at his
own liberty. 6. This may be exemplified in the Pharisees, who would not eat at
their common table with any of the Publicans, whom yet they could not debar
the Sacrifices, Passover, or service of the temple, many of them being not
only Jews; but devout men. 7. There may very probably be a difference between
this (...) in v. 11. and an (...) in v. 13. and 2. It may be one thing to
withdraw our selves from such a man, and another to remove such a man from
amongst us. The one may respect Church-censure, and not the other.
Upon these reasons I confess for my own part, before I read Erastus, (which
to say the truth I had not done, nor yet seen him, till after my Rejoinder was
abroad) I have been swayed to this opinion But since I have read him and some
of hi^ opposers, I am more indiffer^nt ^oward the other.

1. Because the most Commentators I see, and the ablest of Erastus antagonists,
do go that way, making these verses, as the rest of the Chapter, serve for
excommunication, and I have no mind to approve of the taking away of
Churchcensure, which this text as well as others, may help to maintain. 2.
Because the Apostle speaks of keeping company in general, and eating in
general, and I begin to fear a man may be too bold to limit it to common
familiarity only, as to sacred only; Yet as to the limitations of that old
verse, Utile, lex, humile, res ignorata, necesse. I count these words in v. 10.
will bear them out by way of proportion, to wit, Yet not altogether, for then
must you needs go out of the world. 3. Because these reasons I have laid down
do indeed seem to me cogent (at least some of them) for the proving that
common society and eating must be understood here inclusively; but I think them
not so cogent to prove it exclusively, that sacred communion and eating may not
be meant here also. 4. Because I question whether a man be bound to avoid every
scandalous sinner in civil communion, or ordinary eating, unle^^e in case of
partaking in their sins, by acting with them, connivance or the like, until he
is censured by the Church, and so this precept may be perhaps to be understood
only upon supposition, that there is a precedent ecclesiastical judging, and
declaring him to be avoided; for it seems a grievous thing to think, I may not
eat with a covetous person, or the like, in our neighboring invitations; yet
indeed I may be bound not to choose such for my Companions in intimate
familiarity.
However, as unbyassed herein, and not more peremptory than the matter will
afford; It shall suffice me to speak to the text so far as it concerns my self;
To do which partially we must have recourse to the following verse, ver. 12.
For what have I to do to judge them also that are without, do not ye judge
them that are within? The Illative, for, plainly brings the matter before to be
concerned here, and the meaning of the words I take to be this; The Apostle may
be said to judge such by prescribing rules, or giving precepts concerning
avoiding them, and the Church may be said to judge them by doing answerable to
his prescriptions; Whether that must be necessarily understood in their Elders
meeting together according to Order for the excluding such by ecclesiastical
censure; Or the people only every one avoiding such by a judgment of private
discretion, I cannot determine; but rather doubt, whether any reasons can be so
manifestly laid down on the one side, but that there will be reason lest like
wise for the other.

If this judging then, Do not ye judge those that are within? be meant of
ecclesiastical censure, upon which, such men are to be avoided, then must this
censure be the censure of excommunication. For, That censure by which men are
excluded Christian Society in general, and not the Sacrament only, is the
censure of excommunication. But such is this, in the express words, Keep not
company with such. It is not said only, Eat not with such, but Keep not
company, no not to eat, explaining as I have said, the extent thereof; And then
you may have still a text here, if you will, against Erastus, to prove
excommunication; but here is nothing against me to prove Suspension as distinct
from Excommunication.

If by judging (Do not ye judge, etc.) be meant only a judgment of private
discretion, and no Church-censure, then must this keeping company and eating,
be meant only of common familiarity, and those reasons before mentioned will
certainly evince it upon that suppositio^; For it is a most grievous and
unreasonable thing, that one private brother should avoid another in any one of
the public Ordinances or worship of God upon his own private judgment.
Privato cujusquam ar bitrio hunc vel illum defugiendum relinquere nihil aliud
est qua^ schismatibus and infinitis offendiculis januam aperire, says Beza De
Presb. p. 91. and so Gillespie, and others; and then this text makes nothing
for Suspension nor Excommunication neither.

There is but one thing here, which all have, can be urged: and that is this,
If we must avoid such a person at our own table in common familiarity, then
much more at the Lords table. But this objection is sufficiently met withal in
the laying down my matter. It is true, if this avoiding such, be upon a
Church-censure (which then I say is excommunication, not suspension) the
argument, a minori ad majus, may hold. That censure, that excludes a man from
common eating, does much more exclude him from the Lords table; if from common
familiarity, then much more from sacred communion. But if this avoiding such
(which is supposed in the pleading hereof) be upon private discretion, the
argument is no ways valid, because the denial of common eating at our own
table is in every man's private hands, but the denial of eating at the Sacrament
is in the Churches hands, and for one private brother to take upon him to avoid
another at the public ordinance, before Church-censure, will not I hope be
maintained, by any that are not in love with Schism and separation.

Unto this text I might add a fifth, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. which is a parallel to it.
If any man obey not our word by this Epistle, Note that man, and have no
company with him, that he may be ashamed.

Here we have the same (...) and I conceive the same difficulty. For some do
look on this Note here as private, civil, common only; and some do take it to
be Ecclesianical, authoritative, a Note of censure, for which Austine, Ambrose,
Chrysostom, Theophylact, Theoderet, are quoted among the Fathers, and the
learned Anti- Erastians of late, do all go this way.

For my part therefore (without determining that which is dubious, and having
no need to determine it) I should answer to this text as to the last. If this
Noting be private only, then does the Apostle command us only not to keep
common company or familiarity with disorderly persons, and so the text concerns
not the Sacrament at all. If this Note be Ecclesiastical, then does the Apostle
command us to excommunicate such persons, and so the texts concerns the
Sacrament as a part of company in general, and no otherwise, which is most
plain and undeniable, in that there is not a tittle in the chapter to point out
to us this Sacrament in particular.

For the former interpretation there may be these reasons, 1. The persons to be
noted are the disorderly in the verses before, that went about idle, and would
not work for their living; Now the bare denying such persons entertainment in
their houses, and not keeping them company, seems a direct and sufficient
course alone to reclaim them herein, and set them to work, especially when they
knew the Apostles precept, That if any would not labor, neither should he eat,
v. 10.2. These words (...) may refer to the (...), and be thus construed, Hunc
notum facite per epistolam, signify that man by an epistle, to wit, that he
may be censured if the case require, and not to be understood as already under
censure. 3. The person that is under censure, is to be accounted as an Heathen,
Matt. 18.17. but this person here is not to be accounted as an Heathen, (for so
the word Enemy probably signifies, as in Romans 11.28. Ephesians. 2.16.) but admonished
as a brother, v. 15.

For the other interpretation there may be these reason. 1. The person to be
noted, is not only disorderly, v. 11 but seems here also to be refractory; If
any man obey nor, or will not obey. 2. The word (...) is judged more than a
bare (...) indeed signifies barely indico, but (...), notam imprimo. 3. The
(...) (which I desire may be most observed) Keep not company (as in the text
before) is general, and indefinite, comprehending all society, both sacred and
civil, and there is nothing to limit the same in the text. Now to avoid a
person so far, as to have no company in general with him, is not to be
supposed, but upon an ecclesiastical censure. 4. The end wherefore the person
is Noted, is the same with excommunication, to wit, that the man be brought to
shame or repentance.


I must confess, to deal ingenuously, If I were to choose out an argument to
prove Suspension, I should pick out this text chiefly, which yet Mr. Coll:
fore-quoted, has not produced for one amongst these others. And I would urge
it thus, Here is a Noting of a person to this end, that he may be ashamed,
which is probably a Church-censure. But this censure is not excommunication,
because the excommunicate is to be counted as an heathen, Mat. 18. but this
person is still to be accounted as a brother, v. 15. (which reason is not the
least amongst the rest now mentioned) therefore must this censure be an
Exclusion from the Sacrament only, or Suspension. And this argument, I suppose,
were more to the point, than any of those I read in this reverend Brother,
which generally do labor still in this one fault, that they prove Suspension
by Excommunication, when they should prove the same as distinct from it.

Yet were not this argument neither to be thought sufficient and convincing, 1.
Because the ground on which it stands, is at most but probable; We are not sure
this Noting here is ecclesiastical. 2. Because those Divines that do understand
this text, as well as Mat. 18. of Excommunication, do reconcile them both
pretty well together.
Some say the Excommunicate is not as a man quite dismembered, but as a
diseased member under cure. It is not said (...), but (...). Some say he is
cast out, quoad us in se, not quoad jus ad rem. Others say he is indeed cast
hereby out of the Church, but this is conditionally, he is not as an heathen
absolutely, but that such an expression may be used. I will add, A man may be
Relatively put into the state of a heathen, through some misdemeanour, when yet
Really he may be a Saint and a true child of God. 3. If this does not satisfy,
but that you think here is a censure, and that not so high as excommunication,
it will not follow for all this, that it must be necessarily this suspension,
because it may be any thing else as well, unless there was something in the
place, to discover that the Apostle had some aim here in particular at the
Sacrament; which being a vain thing to affirm, if you should frame twenty kinds
of keeping not company, or exclusions, as well as from the Sacrament, and
should say the Text means one of them, you would have quite as much from the
place to prove the one as well as the other.

To conclude then these Scriptures, (about which I have been something long)
Mr. Col. argues thus still in the main (and in particular p. 87.) It is the
duty of Church Officers to keep the fellowship of the Church pure, for to this
end is the rod of Discipline put into their hands, Therefore must such and such
persons be excluded the Sacrament. But he should say therefore they should be
excluded Church Fellowship; for to plead for suspension from this Ordinance
only, instead of casting them out of fellowship in general, to this end that it
may be kept pure, is nothing else but to yield openly, that Church Fellowship
in other parts of it should remain polluted and impure. And then will all these
texts return most forcibly on himself, and overwhelme him. Christ does not say,
keep the Sacrament only from Dogs and swine, but give no holy things at all to
them. Paul does not say, Purge out the leaven from this ordinance only, but
from the lump. He does not say, Keep not company only in the Sacrament; but
Keep no company, Put such a one from amongst you; Let him be as an Heathen. The
sum then is this, according to what has been before. If these very
Scriptures which are alleged for suspension, do respect the Sacrament no
otherwise but as a part of Church Communion, that is, if they do not prove a
man is to be excluded from communion in the Sacrament at all, but only that
they prove he is to be excluded communion in general, we shall not need any
stronger proof against Suspension, then that there is not such a censure in
Scripture, as distinct from Excommunication.

SECT. 13.
THere are some other Divines of something more candid spirits, that look upon
Suspension only as a prudential, pastoral duty, and no juridical censure, and
so labor to maintain it. For such as these, I must acknowledge that those
reasons of mine laid down before, do not strictly meddle with them. It may
suffice me as for such, that they have Beza with the Presbyterians directly
against them, and no Scripture for any Suspension at all (I speak as to the
Sacrament) whereon to build such an opinion. And as for that they have to say
for it, for that is the whole, that the Apostle commands a man to examine
himself, and discern the Lords body, upon which, we granting that infants and
distracted persons are not to be admitted by the Minister; therefore say they
likewise, neither ignorant nor scandalous persons, I conceive it too
insufficient a ground alone, to build a business of so much practical weight
and trouble upon. I will add therefore two or three reasons more against this
opinion.

1. A regenerate person that can examine himself, and discern the Lords body in
the strictest sense, yet may be scandalous, and for that scandal deserve
exclusion, as Theodosius by Ambrose. It is not therefore because the Apostle
commands a man to examine himself, and discern the Lords body, that a
scandalous person is excluded; but, because the Apostle commands other-where,
let such be censured, Put away from your selves such a person. The same ground
or reason that will exclude an unregenerate man, will exclude the regenerate,
and no other. From whence likewise, I shall take away this argument from the
hands of my proper opposers. If the keeping of persons from the Lords Supper
upon this ground or account; that the Apostle commands those that come hither
should examine themselves and discern the Lords body, be a pastoral duty, as
these think, (and indeed so far as it is done barely on this ground in infants
and distracted persons (who being not bound hereunto through incapacity of
reason are refused) it is no other) Then must not exclusion of ignorant and
scandalous persons stand upon this ground with the Presbyterians; for that is
an act, that cannot be done according to them (as Beza fore-quoted) but by the
power of jurisdiction. This is, what has at large been said before Suspension
from the Sacrament, must not be held upon any argument from the nature of the
ordinance, but from discipline.

2. It is manifest that the same grace is required of a person to be accepted
of God in one part of Gods worship, as in another. The Scripture requires us
expressly to pray in faith, in love, with understanding, and the like, when it
does not expressly but by consequence command us so to receive; and as for due
preparation, or self-examination, and a right discernment of the Lord in his
worship, who will deny it to be required in every ordinance, by the same
consequence as in the Sacrament it is express? It cannot therefore be said,
that the debarring of scandalous or ignorant persons from the Sacrament, is a
Scripture-result from the nature of that service and the requisites to it
(which is the whole can be pleaded to make this a pastoral duty) any more than
from prayer and other Ordinances. It is true, we may suppose, according to the
ratity and solemnity of an Ordinance, our addresses to it may and ought to be
more solemn, but yet is the Ordinance alike otherwise, as to the nature and
requisits to it; and not to be preferred before others, to the breeding such a
superstitious conceit on the spirits of men, that looks to me, like to bowing
at the name of Jesus, and not at the name of Christ, God, and the Holy Ghost.

3. It is not the part of Pastors to content themselves with keeping men away
from the Sacrament without proceeding unto censure and debarring them other
communion (at least that of common familiarity) to make them ashamed. I know
many happily may be ready to think thus: The Scripture commands such and such
should be censured, cast out of the Church and a voided; Now seeing we cannot
proceed so far, it is good to do something toward it, we will keep them
from the Sacrament, and that will be well. But under favor, I am persuaded
this is a great mistake and evil, in regard that hereby men do place a virtue
in a means of their own to convert sinners from their evil ways. It is
true, when men are duly admonished, convicted, and censured as they ought, then
is there the virtue of an Ordinance which may be expected to reduce them; for
God has appointed his Ordinance of discipline for this purpose to bring men to
repentance.

On the contrary, for men to make a business only of keeping people away from
this part of Gods service, without discipline, how can any such fruit be
expected by it? Can men ordain or set up themselves a reclaiming Ordinance? If
they do, How shall they give a power and promise to it for this effect? Let
those Ministers consider that have kept never so many away, even whole
congregations from the Sacrament for many years together, what are the fruits
they have reaped by it. Are their people indeed ever the better for it? Does it
not rather serve only to breed indignation to themselves, make their Suspension
to be flighted, the Sacrament it self to be neglected; so that the most of
their people care not at all to come thither? If this indeed be the fruit, then
will I thus argue. The Ordinances of God, as exclusion from the Church and
Sacrament is one, are to be used only for Edification, and not destruction. But
to exclude men the Sacrament without discipline, without a due legal conviction
and authority, does not tend to their edification, but in all this, to their
destruction. Or thus, The Lord Jesus commands us expressly not to give holy
things to dogs and swine, (as before.) But to use suspension without
discipline, or a due authoritative sentence, as should put a reverence on it,
is but likely to cast it to such, as will trample upon it, and turn again and
rent the doer. And consequently therefore, unles Ministers will purposely go
about to make men dogs and swine, that else would not be so in the sense of
this text, they are bound directly (at least, when they see plainly this is
like to be the issue) by this very precept of Christ (which is that happily
scruples them mainly to the contrary) to forbear Suspension, till they can use
it to edification.

SECT. 14.
THese two questions being laid down, with my judgment thereof, there will
remain two things only for the completing my mind in this controversy. The
one is, whereas I hold in the first question, that no argument from the nature
of the Sacrament alone, without discipline, will be of validity for Suspension,
it may be required that something be condescended to the tenderness of most
men's spirits and practice herein before censure. The other is, whereas I hold
in the second question, that those arguments alone are valid for exclusion from
the Sacrament, that respect it only as a part of Church Communion, and
consequently that a person must be excommunicate, or excluded Church Communion
in general, or else he cannot be legally excluded the Supper, it may be
required that there be some (...), some salve found out here also for the
abatement of so much rigor in censure, that a person may be permitted some of
the Ordinances, as the Word, while he is debarred the Sacrament, and no breach
be made on excommunication.

If these two things can but be done with reasonable satisfaction, I hope it
will serve to take away the prejudice of many sober and moderate spirits from
my opinion; the drift whereof is not at all to do the pious Ministry any harm
(let not my brethren think so) in obstructing their care and inspection over
their flocks, but to bind up their broken hearts with a grounded support, that
in what they do, and cannot but do, in admission of their people, (the most
whereof are unregenerate persons, and so in their sense unworthy) they may do
with a sure foot and safe conscience. My great business, I may say truly (with
pious Mr. Blake, Cov: Seal. chapter 7. sect. 15. p. 247. in what I have written
about this matter together with him) has been for their comfort and
encouragement that give admittance, that their benefiting is possible, that are
thus admitted.

And yet by the way I would not be taxed for the opinion of a promiscuous
admittance, which I do not own, without the distinction thereof into Erastian
and orthodox, as before; An Erastian promiscuous communion I declare against,
as much, and I think something more than Mr. Blake; but for an Orthodox
Free-admission, the end whereof is to advance discipline, not depose it, I
confess it is what I think should be maintained, being bold to say this one
thing in reference to that worthy man now named; that an Anti- Erastian
free-admission will be found I believe at last to stand a great deal better,
both with the Churches peace and consonancy of Scripture, than a kind of
Erastian, indisciplinary Suspension.

SECT. 15:
FIrst then for some condescension in the former question, how far those that
are more tender in their spirits and practice may go toward withholding the
Sacrament from such they conceive unqualified, as ignorant or scandalous,
before censure, I have touched at in my Rejoinder, p. 82, 83. 111, 112. where
distinguishing between what is to be condescended to as prudential, and what to
be yielded as necessary; between what is done by way of advice, and by way of
compulsion; between forbearance and exclusion: I do acknowledge it is a rule to
be allowed in affirmative precepts, that though they do bind semper, they do
not bind ad semper, at all times. Upon which account I take it to be lawful
for a man that is obliged, and has a right to an ordinance, to forbear the
same upon a just occasion; which (I think) may be, as upon other matters, Numb.
9.10. so much more upon pious ends regarding preparation, Mat. 5.24. Upon this
same ground then I humbly conceive, that a Minister looking into the state of
his flock, and finding some ignorant and scandalous amongst them, though he
cannot take upon himself to exclude them the Sacrament before censure, he may
proceed so far toward it, that besides the rebuking of them sharply, he may
admonish or advise them to forbear the ordinance at present, so long as he
judges it in prudence to be a means to make them come the more prepared to the
next Sacrament; what hinders but the Minister may stretch himself even to the
utmost end of his line of doctrine, when he stands there, and knows that he is
still without the line of jurisdiction? And this I conceive may satisfy the
conscientious in this thing, putting into their hands as much advantage as a
single pastor can have to the following them with instruction for the good of
their souls, which is that I suppose they only aim at in this matter; and if it
were any thing else, it is fit they should never obtain it.

Only I must add here that I suffer not in my principles; It is not because I
think receiving is no duty unto such, for this, I conceive, were evil to hold;
Nor because I think it not appointed for edification unto such; for those
arguments that reverend Mr. Blake has put in, to prove the Sacrament a means
of grace to the unregenerate within the Church ( Cov. Seal. chapter 7. sect. 13.)
must needs reach, and be cogent for these also, as they are Churchmembers,
although he would not have them; Nor because I think that such are in an utter
incapacity to be edified by it, as infants and the distracted are, (wherein the
formentioned learned man places his whole ground of dissent he has from me in
this point) seeing the Sacrament through the word (and the word goes along with
it) does teach as for the one, and convince of sin as for the other, as is said
before, and granted by him. That it is a teaching Ordinance, mediante verbo,
even at the present for the ignorant; I pray let me but propose this one thing,
Were not those words of our Lord to his disciples [This is my body broken for
you, This is the New Testament in my blood which was shed for remission of
sinnes] teaching words, informing forming them of his death, and mystery of our
redemption? Who can deny this? And were not the disciples ignorant at that
time, of his death, and mystery of our redemption? Compare Mar. 9.31, 32. Lu.
9.44, 45. with Lu. 24. 7, 8. Io. 20.9. and what then will follow for the
ignorant, is clear. That it is a sin-aggravating Ordinance, and so a
soul-humbling, heartbreaking Ordinance for the sinner, Mr. B. and I so well
agree, Rejoynd. p. 235, 236. with Cov. Seal. p. 204. that it needs no argument;
and then what follows for the scandalous is as clear likewise. It is not
therefore, I say, for these causes, that I allow thus much; but it is indeed,
because I think that no less can be denied to belong to the Minister upon the
score of prudence only. That there is a possibility (upon what is said) of
edification unto all intelligent Church Members, though scandalous, ( Cov.
Seal. p. 240.) or ignorant (p. 233.) Mr. B. cannot ingenuously deny: and that
there is not that moral probability or likelihood hereof, as upon their further
instruction and preparation, I do grant; From both which then the plain reason
will arise, why such may in prudence be advised to forbear the Sacrament at
present, when yet it must be held fast, that there is no necessity on the
conscience, simpliciter, for the ir exclusion.

To speak a little more my thoughts freely, I conceive it to be a Magnale in
the wisdom of the Church, which has ever kept up some more solemn times for
the putting in mind of her members to shrift or address their souls to God in
a more peculiar manner at some seasons above others, to make use of the
Sacrament to this end; insomuch, that though the primitive Christians broke
bread every week, and sometimes daily, yet has it been the use of after Ages
to celebrate this Ordinance more rarely, that the solemnity and rarity (those
expressions in 1 Cor. 11. giving help hereunto) might have this desired work
upon the people. Upon this same score I do conceive this condescension may take
place in allowing that a forbearance of the Lords Supper be advised many times
to unprepared, unfit persons, when we judge it in Christian prudence conducible
through a more solemn address thereunto, toward a farther improvement thereof
for their souls; And so may the same be asserted happily (as I judge of it) Ex
quadam conveniontia, Ob majorem reverentiam, as the Schoolmen speak in some
other cases about this Sacrament; When as I am persuaded otherwise there is the
same outward privilege, aed the same inward qualifications held forth alike in
the Scripture unto this and other Ordinances. And this for my first concession.

SECT. 16.
SEcondly then, for some (...) or condescension in the latter question, that
the excommunicate person may not be so turned out from all the Ordinances,
(though he be turned out from them, and that alike too, from one as well as the
other, in a sort) but that he may have admittance to some of them, upon an
account which may be justifiable, for the gaining of his soul and yet without
the introducing of this lesser censure of suspension, into the discipline of
man, which is not in the discipline of Christ, or the Scripture I have spoken
more at large in my Rejoynd. part. 2. sect. 1. See particularly p 87. and 149.
Where having shown that Church-censure or Excommunication does reserre to
Church Communion in general, and consequently that a person excommunicate is
cast out from every part thereof, and so from all the Ordinances as well as the
Sacrament, I do humbly offer this distinction, of a Real, and Relative
exclusion. A real exclusion is an exclusion of a man from a thing, so that he
cannot by any means participate of the thing; A relative exclusion, is the
exclusion of a man from his relation to a thing, or his right of privilege in
it, whether he yet otherwise possesses the thing or not. Now that which we
admit Heathen to, in receiving them into the Church, I think we cast them out
from, in excommunicating them; But we admit not persons to an actual hearing
the Word, or participating such ordinances as they did, and might attend
before; but we admit them into a state and relation, whereby the ordinances
belong to them, with a difference of privilege from the world, and as they
partook of them while they were without; They were then indeed admitted to the
Word, and it may be Prayer, to bring them in, as they ought, yet neither one
nor the other Ordinance did belong to them by way of advantage, Romans 3.2. or
propriety, as externally in covenant, in Christ, redeemed sanctified, etc. as
they do, being members. Consequently therefore, my thoughts are, that though
Excommunication cuts off a person Relatively from all the Ordinances (from one
alike as well as the other, in the sense now spoken) and does cut off a man
really from that Ordinance, the actual participation whereof is peculiar to
that relation, as the Sacrament; Yet this Relative exclusion does not
necessarily infer a Real exclusion of a man from those other Ordinances, as
the Word and Prayer, which may be partaken of out of that relation. And so here
will arise that, which may give contentment; to wit, that upon this it shall be
left in the Churches hands by way of Mitigation, to admit the Excommunicate
hereunto, whether one or more (or none) of them, as she sees it fit to use
severity or indulgence to bring the sinner to repentance.

It is manifest, that the Primitive Christian Church was wont to permit an
Heathen, or those that were without, to be present in their assemblies at the
Word if not at Prayer and some other Ordinances, for their conviction, as
appears, 1 Cor. 14. According to this president, it is my opinion then, in
short, that a person excommunicate may be admitted to an Ordinance, or
Ordinances, as an Heathen (into which condition he is expressly cast, Mat. 18.)
when yet he is cut off from all his privilege and interest in them as a
member. And this, I suppose, will even serve the turn of my very adversaries,
and yet be no dishight or prejudice to that latitude of Excommunication which
the truth dictates, and must be maintained, according to my opinion.

In fine, two things are objected against me by my Opposers, which methinks do
even quite take off one another. In the former question it is objected that my
doctrine is loose, in that it admits of every intelligent Churchmember to the
Sacrament, before censure; To which I answer, That doctrine about admission
that maintains Excommunication, in point of offending, cannot be loose toward
the offender; and if a man have not offended, I mean so far as to deserve
censure, the Minister can but admonish and advise, he can go no further; and
here how much I allow upon the score of pastoral discretion is declared, And
why should any more be desired? In the second question it is objected, my
doctrine is too severe, bloody, and cruel, in that those persons which it cuts
off from the Sacrament, it cuts off from all other parts of Church Communion
also; To this I answer, It is true, it does do thus indeed according to the
Scripture; but let this be understood aright and heartily of this Relative
exclusion, (here declared likewise) and then I hope all will be reconciled and
satisfied.

And thus I have now finished my purpose, endeavoring to keep in a way of
moderation, that I might avoid the extremities of others. I have not in any
thing, I suppose, departed from the Scripture as my Guide; and yet in every
thing come up as near as I can to those that are against me, to content them. I
do not know how it may be taken, but it shall suffice me that I have in the
sincerity of my intention (so far as I can judge of my own heart) proposed my
thoughts, leaving others to their own. The Churches peace is the thing I have
aimed at, without hindering (but happily furthering) her reformation. If I have
done well, and as is fitting to the matter, it is that I desired, if I have
done but slenderly and meanly, it is what I could attain unto.

Deo gloria.
J. H.

FINIS.
A POST SCRIPT.
Courteous Reader,
THere are yet some things I shall make, bold to trouble thee to read in this
place, because I would not have the Discourse it self to swel any bigger tha^
it has don. If thou think the^ long, thou may let them alone if thou will.
I know well that this controversy is not about any fundamental, but that, as
brethren, we may bear well enough with one another that differ in it,
nevertheless, in regard of practice, it is even necessary at least for most
that are of the Ministry to be established concerning the same, or else perhaps,
it might have been long enough before some should have thought it fit to meddle
any more with it. What I have done here in this last book, I offer to them
chiefly, and thee that have studied the point; what I have done in my first
book, to the many.

[1.] Whereas in my undertaking this Subject, I chose those words, Do this,
Drink ye all of it, And they all drank of it, in that text Mar. 14. 23. for my
ground, which many think might have been more soundly chosen: I desire the
strength thereof may be laid in those two things which have been touched Sect.
10. but I am not satisfied without speaking a little farther thereof, with thy
leave to have it noted by such. The first is, that we have here, as in the
other Evangelists, the institution of the Sacrament, wherein there is a direct
precept to the Church, Do this, with the extent thereof expressed, Drink ye
all of ir. The words are directed in general to the disciples, as disciples,
and consequently all that are disciples (suppose them in a capacity of reason
to use it) come under a right of Obligation to use the same. It is objected, By
all, is meant no more than All present. But this is too overly, the precept I
hope, does so concern the disciples present, as that St. Paul makes these very
words of the institution obtigatory to the Church of Corinth, and to us all as
a standing Ordinance till Christ come, 1 Cor. 11. 26. It is manifest then that
these words, as the precept of Christ, are delivered to the disciples in bebalf
of the Church, whereof themselves were a representative part. Now then I ask,
whether as Representatives of the Church invisible, or visible? if you will say
of the Church invisible to make the command only to the regenerate and elect,
it is unreasonable; for all the Ordinances are delivered to the Church as
visible, Heb. 9.19. Romans 3.2. and we suppose Judas was amongst them. But if
they were here Representatives of the Church, as visible, it must follow, that
all those who are of the visible Church, (and in capacity of the obligation)
are berchy obliged to this Ordinance. It is not argumentative to say here, none
of these disciples were ignorant or scandalous (which yet I think is untrue)
because they were representatives of the Church, not as men unspotted with
ignorance or scandal, any more than as Apostles, but as they were members
thereof, visible members, disciples, Christians. Id veio concedimus, says
Bezs, (De Presb. and Ex. p. 27. with 23.) quod Christus inter suos discipulos
coenam instituens manifest oftendit coenae celebrationem illis convenire
(which is inciuded in solis illis) qui Christi se discipulos profiteantur; and
Mr. Perkins (Case cons. B. 2. c. 10,) lays this down for his first rule, Every
man of years living in the Church, and being baptized, is bound in conscience
by the commandment to use the Supper. Now whiles my adversaries are forced to
fly off here, and confine the precept to the regenerate only, we may easily see
both where our bottom lies, and also how firm it is. The second thing I build
on in this text, is, That together with the precept, we have the example of
Judas, who is sat down with the twelve, Mat. 26.20. and his hand at the table,
Luke 22.21. It is objected, that Judas was a close hypocrite, his villainy
secret and unknown, and so this president will make nothing to our purpose. But
under favor, such as say so, are mistaken, for though this answer should
suffice (which I think it does not) as to the part of the admitters, in regard
Christ acting (say they) as a Minister, was not to take notice of what he knew
of Judas as he was God: yet it is apparent, that it reaches not the matter at
all as to the receivers themselves, who neverthless for all this, as for their
own parts, will be bound to receiving. though they be such as Judas was, that
is, at least unregenerate, if not scandalous also. It may be replied, as to the
part of the admitters, that Christ knew of Judas compact (which no doubt was a
high scandal in its self, being inductive of sin and ruin to the Jews, with
whom he dealt) not only as God, but as man likewise, because as man, he was a
Prophet, Deuteronomy. 18, 15. and that Godhead that dwelt in him bodily, revealed this
to him; Now I argue, if it was Christ's duty to have excluded Judas from the
Passover, if a man had revealed this to him, how much more must be have done
it when the Godhead revealed it to him, whose testimony is above all men's in
the world? But I shall choose to lay my strength here (as I say) as to the part
of the receivers, and that from Christ's acting, not as a mere man, but as
Mediator. As the Lord Jesus does institute the Sacrament, and give the precept,
he must do it unquestionably as mediator; It is God only can give laws to bind
the conscience: Now in the institution and giving the precept, he directs the
same to all present, and so to Judas amongst the rest, from whence arises an
obligation from the Lord irrefragably upon Judas, as well as on the others, to
actual receiving; what Christ bids him expressly do among them, must be his
duty; and consequently, while a man is a disciple, though unregenerate, as
Judas was, that does not unduty him to use the Supper. And then let us hear
what Dr. Diake himself, who herein thoroughly looks to the foundation, will tell
us. Let but Mr. H. (says be p. 116.) prove that actual receiving is a debt on
the part of a natural man, and he will yield the cause to us.

[2.] Whereas it is denied, notwithstanding this text and others by us
alleged, that there is no precept nor president in Scripture for the
administering the Sacrament to all, (Mr. Coll. chapter 5.) I desire these two Trules
may be laid, 1. that Giving and receiving being Relata, all those texts that
prove it the duty of any to receive the Sacrament, does eo nomine oblige the
Minister to deliver it to them, or admit them, because Posito uno relatorum,
ponitur alterum. 2. That we are to look upon all the Ordinances of God unto his
Church, as universal, obliging every member in particular to wait upon them,
unless where the Scripture it self lays some restriction or limitation; the
reason is, because it is presumption in any to limit that which Gad has not
restrained. And then I do assert hereupon, that there is as many
Scripture-precepts and presidents to deliver the Sacrament to all, as to any,
supposing them within the Church, and neither unintelligent, or excommunicate,
as we entend the question; for such as are Heathen, Exodus 12.43, 48. or have
not reason and discernment, 1 Cor. 11. 28, 29. or are under censure, 1 Cor. 5.
13. are debarred (we all grant) by the Scriptures quoted. There are two
instances only, besides the precept and president in the former text, I will
here mention. The one is, the instance of the Passover, where all the
congregation of Israel, every man, Ex. 12.3, 47, 50. from Dan to Bersheba, 2
Chr. 30.5. all their males every year, Exodus 34.23. Deuteronomy. 16. 16. All the
children of the captivity, to name that text, Ezra 6.21. because by some it is
alleged against us; that is, all the Jews that returned, without exception,
and all such as had separated themselves unto them from the filthiness of the
heathen; that is, all their proselytes also (the filthiness of the heathen was
their idols) did eat, and were so commanded. There is nothing, which I would
chiefty have observed, that made any Israelite incapable of partaking thereof,
but that which made a godly man incapable, and such, no more incapable of this,
than of other the holy things. And this was Levitical uncleanness, whereof
while the question is proposed to Moses, Number. 9. whether such should eat of it
or no, it is plain (in the chapter) that for the rest to eat thereof, was out
of question. The other instance is that of 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4. as I have
pressed it in my first book. They all eat of the Manna, and drank of the rock,
which was Christ. The main answer given by Beza, Gillespy, Philip Goodwin,
Rutherford, Dr. Drake, and which all have, is, that all the Israclites were
admitted here, because this water and manna was their corporal food, without
which they could not live. But herein lies the force of what we urge, to wit,
Why should the Lord make that ordinary food of theirs, without which they could
not live, to be Sacramental, if to eat and drink of Christ sacramentally, was
not a privilege in common to the Church? The main thing alleged against
Free-admission, is the holiness of that, whereunto Sacramental sigus do relate,
and the indisposition of the visibly unworthy to partake thereof; Now says the
Apostle, the Israelites all of them, yet many of them unworthy (in our
adversaries sense) did drink of the rock, which was Christ, and it was the
Lords will they should do so, for therefore he made that food (I say) which all
were to live by, Sacramental. Besides, if it were such a grievous sin, as
murdering the Lord of glory, or being guilty of his blood, to drink of Christ
symholically, without such and such qualifications, as some do still speak,
then should these Israelites (as I have said in my Rejoynd.) have rather
samished their bodies, than have eat and drank the damnation of their souls;
whereas we find that the sons of Aaron, Lev. 22.23. were not to eat of the holy
things during their Levitical uncleanness, though it was their appointed food,
which Gillespy himself notes, p. 97. Exemplo Israelitarum (says Musculus, in
Ps. 105. v. 39.) Apostolus admonet, usum externorum Sacramentorum, talem esse,
ut neminem justificet, possing; ab omnibus promiscue exerceri.

[3.] Whereas it is laid down, by my adversaries, as their main hold, that
visible worthiness is the rule of admission, as visible unworthiness or
unfitness the rule of Suspension; I shall think sit to propose, or oppose these
three things. 1. Take all the visible worthiness in the world, it can amount to
no more than an external covenant relation, denominating the subjects quoad
homines, Saints, Believers, Christians. Now who shall define us these
covenant-relatives, either this judgment of men, or the open plain
determination of the Scriptures? 2. If we go on this ground of
covenant relation, we go on a certain judgment, every one knows who are
externally in covenant, or Church Members, but if we go on visible worthiness,
as a third thing (between this and truth of grace) distinct here from, we must
go on continual uncertainty, as without Scripture. 3. This rule of visible
worthiness, is bottomed on real worthiness, which it supposes in the receiver,
as necessarily antecedent to the Sacraments. Now then I argue, either the
manifestations hereof (for visible fitness or worthiness being their rule of
admitting people, that fitness must be tried, and that by evidence) upon which
the Sacrament must be administered, are either infallible or certain, and then
no hypocrite can ever receive, or be admitted, which is doubtless untrue; Or
probable only, and conjectural, and then none can in faith administer to
another, because he cannot he assured by all those evidences or manifestations,
that the party has that in him which is necessarily and essentially held
pre-requisite to receiving. The Sacraments cannot be administered according to
rule, unless they have their necessary pre-requisites, or essentials; nor in
faith, unless the Minister be assured they have their essentials. And therefore
it is not real worthiness, or truth of grace, as to the receivers own part; or
visible worthiness as to the admitters part, but covenant relation in both, is
the very ground indeed both of administering and receiving; always remembering,
that our question truly is not concerning what is required of the receiver in
order to other ends, that he may be saved (so truth of grace and final
perseverance too, is necessary) but what is necessarily antecedent to the
obtaining the external Ordinance, and to the validity thereof. I desire the
Reader to observe this well, that be may know clearly how to put a sound
difference between these two things, to wit, between what is required of the
receiver in his coming, or that comes to the Sacrament, and what is so required
to receiving, as that else be must not come. As to the former, we are to press
upon men all those Sacramental qualifications which are laid down ordinarily by
Divines, as being necessary to the obtaining the effectual benefits of Christ
held forth in the Sacrament. But as for the latter, we must take heed what we
press upon any, lest we press them only to the omission of their duty. Even as
we are to press upon men who hear and pray, that they pray and hear with
understanding, faith, love, humility, and other graces (as they are to receive)
and that if they do not, they sin in their hearing and prayer; Yet must not we
press this so, that if they have not these qualifications, they may not hear
nor pray; this were to press them to iniquity, for the avoiding of partial, to
run into total disobedience. By this distinction then we shall understand, both
how to press the Sacrament on our people that neglect it; The man that brings
not the offering of the Lord in his appointed season, shall be cut off, Numb.
9. and how to press our people to a worthy behavior, that come to it. And both
these, I think, ought to be pressed together, the rather, because the
Ordinances are the means if any have not these graces, to excite their hearts
unto them; for whatsoever some of our late Divines may say, when those two
great Reformers Luther and Swinglius met at the Synod of Marparge, however they
differed otherwise about the Sacrament, they agreed perfectly in these two
things; both that the Sacrament was necessary unto every Christian man; and
that the use of it was to the same effect with the Word, ordained of God, that
thereby infirm consciences might be stirred to belief, by the holy Ghost. See
Book of Martyrs, Vol. 2. p. 87.

[4.] Whereas there are certain places urged by many for the seclusion of the
morally unclean, from the Passover, which Mr. Coll. has in part heaped up, p.
101. from Gillespy, B. 1. c. 9. to wit, Isa. 1.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Jer.
7.9, 10, 11. Ps. 50.16. Ps. 118.19, 20. Ps. 15.1. Ezra 6.21.2 Chron. 23.19.
Deur. 23.18. Hag. 2.11, 12, 13, 14. Ezekiel. 22.26. Ezekiel. 44.7, 9. Ezekiel, 23.39. I
shall think fit to speak something briefly to these Scriptures. For the 3
first, Isa. 1.10 -- 15. Jer. 7.9. -- 11. Ps. 50 16. It is plain that these
texts speak of Prayer, the Word, and the whole worship of God generally in
their solemn assemblies, as well as the Sacrifices, and therefore must be
understood so, as that though the manner of their coming be reproved in such a
patherical vein, a DESC="foreign", as it is, the matter nevertheless in the
substance was not to be left undone. The rule is this, when an action has evil
in its own substance, it is to be omitted; but when the action is of it self
the matter of a precept, and has evil externally cast on it by the agent that
does it, here the action is not to be omitted, but the agent to be reformed.
See Reinolds 3 Treat. p. 248. and Mr. Pemble in Fol. Vind. Gov. p. 82. To the
two next texts, Ps. 118. 19, 20. Ps. 15.1. I answer, as to the former, that on
the contrary hand the righteous here are spoken of as such only that could come
to the Lords house with acceptance of their persons in their services, but it
does not follow therefore that the unrighteous must not come to do any service
at the temple. To argue thus, This is the gate into which the righteous shall
enter; therefore the unrighteous were never to come there, is methinks just
like the Jews, Mat. 5. who when the Law commanded, Thou shall love thy
neighbor, collected, and hate thine enemy. For the text following, Ezra 6.21.
I have mentioned it in the second thing before, as full and plain for us. To
the next, 2 Chr. 23.19. I have answered in 4. or 5. particulars, Rejoynd. p.
45. Only whereas in the last of them I am acquainted from Mr. Coll. (p. ibidem)
that though the Passover was eaten in their houses, yet it was killed in the
Temple. I should have thanked him for his learning, if he had not neglected to
acquaint me also out of the same Doctor he quotes there, that the Jews being
distributed at this solemnitive into their Paschal societies, it was but one
only of every society that carried the lamb to the temple to be killed, and
then the question, I hope, remains still as for the rest, that is, the
generality, how could the setting porters at the gates of the temple be any
hindrance to them in eating the Passover, that was eaten in their private
houses? For the text ensuing, Deur. 23.18. I think but few are like to be much
moved by it. It follows not, because the hire of a harlot was not to be brought
for a vow into the house of the Lord, that therefore the harlot her self might
not come thither upon other service. It is plain, that the Pharisees brought
the woman taken in adultery to christ in the temple, Jo. 8.2, 3. It is
answered, By the temple we must understand the intermural, or outer Court only.
But I pray who was there, to say so? Again it is answered, she was brought
thither ad poenam, to be judged, well, but I pray then how could the morally
unclean be thought to defile the temple, when their place of Judicature unto
which they brought their capital offenders, was in the temple? The Priests
would not receive back Judas money into the Treasury, but they refused not
Judas himself to come to them within the Sanctuary. To the next text, Hag. 2.
11. -- 14. I answer, Though moral uncleanness is compared here with levitical,
yet did it not defile the holy things, as legal did, nullum simile est idem,
but in some other consideration, to wit, every thing is unclean morally to the
unclean, according to Tit. 1.15. in this sense, that so long as the best
actions proceed not from a sanctified heart, they are sin, there will be sin
in dominion as (...) the manner of performance of them. See my Rejoynd. more
fully, p. 115, 116. Now in this sense however all the ordinances and all a man's
duties become unclean to him, this text forbids not, but they must be done; for
else, so long as a man is unsanctified he must do nothing, because all his
services, all the works of his hands, as every holy thing, is polluted (as to
this sense) and profaned by him. In short, There is a defilement of a man's
service, so as to cause them to be omitted, or so as not to cause them to be
omitted; Moral uncleanness may be said to defile the Ordinances, as all things
are said to be unclean to the wicked, Tit. 1.15. yet so, that these services
are not to be omitted, and a man to do nothing. ( See Pemble before-quoted.)
But it does not defile them so as legal pollution did defile the Sanctuary,
that was, so as such might not do their service in the Sanctuary. The Sadduces
were grossly wicked persons, as to their opinions, and yet did not the
Pharisees ever question their coming to the temple for the service of God; and
when the Jews looked on Paul, as a most vile notorious person that did live,
yet they find no fault at all with him for his own coming into the temple,
Act. 21.24. -- 29. (nor could they sure upon this supposition, because it is
not likely the Apostles then would have advised him such a way to avoid their
fury) while they made such an intolerable stir only upon supposal that he had
brought some Greeks into it. For the two next texts, Ez. 22.26. Ez. 44.7.9. I
conceive they are palpably wrested i^ Moral uncleanness. By the holy, is meant
the Jew, or circumcised, Ezra 9.2. Deuteronomy. 14.2. (who are again divided into the
clean, and unclean, that is, levitically) and by the profane stranger, the
uncircumcised. This stranger was their proselyte of the gate, who might not
come into the Temple before his circumcision, and therefore he is called
uncircumcised in heart, as well as in flesh, that being yet uncircumcised in
flesh he durst offer to do it. I know Gillespy, p. 88. stands much on the word
Nor, Ez. 44.9; But what if this ^sjunctive Nor, prove to be the conjunctive And
in the Original (the words directly rendered running thus; Every stranger
uncircumcised in flesh, and uncircumcised in Heart, shall not enter, etc.) what
then shall we think, to see not only Gillespy, and Rutherford, (Chapter Gov. p.
246.) but even the Provincial Assembly of London (Vind. Presb. Gov. p. 54.) to
take up things thus on trust, one after another? For the last text, Ez. 23.38,
39. It seems to me that the defilement in this place (as in the other) was by
their legal, not moral uncleanness. For whereas in v. 37. God has expressed
their Idolatry and murder, he adds in v. 38. Moreover (or besides that) this
they have done unto me, to wit, defiled my house, that is another crime; then
in v. 39. he explains how, For when they had slain their children to their
idols, they came the same day into my Sanctuary to defile it. Now it cannot be
doubted, but in the slaying their chilren to their Idols there must necessarily
be a touching something that was unclean by the dead, which was Levitical
pollution, Number. 22.4. and so herein lay this third crime added to the rest,
that being thus unclean, they came nevertheless into Gods Sanctuary in the
same day, to profane it. That this is the meaning, these words In the same day,
make it clear. I pray mark them, they are twice repeated, both verse 38, and
39. that you may not escape the meaning. Moreover they have defiled my
Sanctuary by coming into in the same day. Now why the same day? what if it had
been the next day, or another after? it had been all one to Moral uncleanness.
But because of their Legal uncleanness, the Law in this case expressly
commanded, that who so touched any thing that was unclean by the dead, he was
to be unclean til the Even, and not to come into the Sanctuary (upon pain of
being cut off) before his purification, Lev. 22. v. 4. with v. 6. I will cloze
these texts with an observation here, to avoid misconstruction; It is this,
that there are two things seem (...), or incompatible, and are not so, but are
both to be held as plainly true. They are these, That a person though he be
ungodly or wicked, may and must wait upon the Ordinances, it is his duty that
he is bound unto; and yet that such a person too may and must (upon conviction
and censure) be excluded; that is; there is nothing in the nature of the
Ordinances, but that such may come to them, being appointed of God for the
working grace and reformation in the comers; Yet has the Lord set up a power
in the Church, whereby these persons upon a due account, shall by way of
punishment be cut off from them: such being the wisdom of Gods appointments,
that both their commiag before censure, and their exclusion upon censure, are a
like means to be used, one after another, for the bringing them to repentance.
To this purpose I cannot pass in the way, those Texts which Gillespy mentions,
p. 106, 107. to prove that scandalous sins do pollute, not only a man's self,
but the people of God that are in fellowship with them, 1 Cor. 5, 6. Heb.
13.15, 16, 2 Pet. 2.13. Jude 13. whereunto I answer, that this pollution, I
take it, is not, 1. any kind of outward pollution, as under the Law. 2. Nor any
intrinsecal pollution, which cannot be, while a man's own conscience is not
defiled. 3. Nor is it only a bare pollution by evil example, imitation or
infection, for so the good are not defiled; though in part indeed, it is this.
But 4. under favor, that pollution or defilement wherewith the whole Church
and fellowship thereof is said defiled or leavened by a scandalows sinner,
insomuch, that he is to be cast out from it (especially in the primitive time,
when they had their gathered Churches amidst the heathen) is a pollution of
discredit, disgrace, and disreputation which is brought upon the Church; in
suffering such among them; In regard of which report (It is commonly reported,
1 Cor. 5.1.) such as these, are leven, spots, blemishes to the whole, besides
the evil inclined following their steps. And so though I would maintain the
Ordinances free from any such pollution by wicked men (as was by the
uncleanness under the Law) that should necessitate all such never to come at
them: Yet I do not at all infringe discipline; but in the taking off what
opposes Free-admission, I leave the grounds still firm (even this also from the
keeping Church Fellowship pure in a right sense) for Excomunication.

[5.] Whereas it is commonly urged by the most from what is spoken, The morally
unclean are worse than the levitical, if the one were to be kept from the
Passover, then much more the other, and so from the Sacrament. I do humbly
conceive, if I may speak freely, that Erastus has most elaborately satisfied
this argument (Confir. These. lib. 2. cap. 1.) for all what Beza, Rutherford, or
Gillespy, have replied to him. They indeed do prove, that legal uncleanness was
a type of our moral uncleanness, which Erastus denies not, but they do not
prove that their exclusion was a type of our Excommunication, which he stands
upon, much less of Suspension, as distinct from it, which serves me. The type
and the thing typed, are not to be made the same. Quod praecipue intendebamus,
says he, est immunditiam legis non ita praefigurasse scelera, ut in his
terris, eodem modo, eademque poena coercenda esse concludi possit. For my part,
I think that this bar of Levitical uncleanness is not to be looked upon as any
censure for a crime, (it was a calamity, not a sin to be a leper) but as a
Mandate only for the keeping up that ceremonial outward holiness, on things,
places, persons, which God was pleased to enjoin under the Law, for what
reasons that infinite wisdom only knows best, that has now abolished the same.
That a man who had sworn, lied, deceived, or committed a like sin, might come
the same day to the holy things and not defile them, and yet that the most
pious Jew that had but touched any thing unclean, could not come without
defilement of them; it is to be resolved only into the will of God, that would
have it so, and to inquire farther into the reason of this will, (as Mr. Coll.
does, p. 100.) is not to be wise unto sobriety. The force then of this argument
as Erastus has it, will indeed be all one with this, as if a man neatly dressed,
should thus argue; A thief or a drunkard is worse tha^ that man who carries
lime or coal; but I must take heed of coming near that man, lest he pollute or
smut me, therefore I must much less come near a wicked, or scandalous person.
It is therefore an ingenuous acknowledgement of that Presbyterian Author,
whosoever he be, that wrote the Vindication of the Antiquaerist against Mr.
Prynne, p. 7. where confessing some arguments indeed used for suspension to be
weak, For instance (says he) those arguments brought from the Ceremonial Law
seem to me but Ceremonial, not substantial arguments, and if they prove any
thing, I conceive (pace tantorum virorum who make use of them) they evince
rather a seclusion from spiritual and eternal privileges, than from outward
Gospel Ordinances. And unto this Dr. Drake himself against me, agrees
perfectly, p. 20, which is according to Erastus, and the truth, in this
particular.

[6.] Whereas the foundation I stand upon in the main of this dispute, is duty,
which must n needs be a sure bottom, in regard that man's impotency or iniquity
cannot evacuate Gods authority, but the will of God must stand against all
consequence; and hereupon those that write against me, are necessitated to
assert, that it is the duty of none to receive the Sacrament, but the
regenerate only, which are happily here and there one in a congregation. I
shall appeal to the consciences of those that fear God, to judge between us,
with what equity can these men revile me and my opinion for loose, profane and
ungodly, whose only design is to set up Gods Ordinance amongst us, that men and
women may hereby acknowledge themselves professors, and disciples of Christ, as
they ought, by observing his institutions, (If you be my disciples, keep my
commandments) and in the mean time justify themselves in their own opinions,
as most conscientious and godly, that does but directly herein, as to the
generality, go about the making void the command of Christ by their tradition.
Whosoever shall break one of these least commandments and teach men so, shall
be called least in the kingdom of heaven. It is strange, and to be admired
(says judicious Timson in his latter book, p. 263.) that our pressing to
Christian observance, should have such a hard sense put upon it, as to be
branded with looseness, when in all other duties, pressing to obedience
according to rule, is accounted godliness, and holy strictness. When Erastus (I
find) is affirming that legal uncleanness only debarred the Jews from the holy
things, and not moral, (which he said was to be punished otherwise, as with
prison and death) Beza answers, At iniquissima lex Dei fuisset quod tam severe
externum contactum puniret, ad scelera vero manifest conniveret, as Erastus
quotes him with those words following, Exhorrui cum ista tua legi, Conf. These.
146. when others with Erastus understand by Cutting off in the Law, an untimely
death, to be inflicted by the Magistrate where the crime was open, or by God
himself where it was secret, or the Magistrate neglected his duty, Lev. 20.4,
5. Gillespy answers, Then might the Mosaical laws in such texts, as Ex. 30.38.
Lev. 7.20. Number. 19.13.20. no less than those of Draco, be said to have been
written in blood, p. 53. (whereas indeed by the way, where the escape was so
easy, the greater severity threatened herein, showed but the wisdom of God, that
none might wilfully ever offer to incur it:) So when I here fix my self on
the command of Christ, Do this, to his Church, which consists of regenerate
and unregenerate, and my adversaries can come off here no way else, they make
no more ado, but deny the command of God to all but the regenerate only. A sad
thing in my apprehension, that men so pious, eminent, and worthy, should even
be ready rather to fall foul on the very Laws of God himself, than to cross or
lay down their own conceptions. And yet I remember when Erastus is showing many
plain convincing differences from Scripture, between legal and moral
uncleanness in reference to the matter last mentioned; particularly, that legal
uncleanness was such, as by the appointment of God should be liable to defile
the holy things, and so debarr men from them, but there was no such Law for
moral: Mr. Rutherford takes him up thus, often, This is to dispute with God,
All this is mere cavilling at the wisdom of God, Chapter Gov. p. 288.283. etc. But
whether there be any ingenuity or righteousness in such replies; those that
read these contrary passages in his opposers, will judge and see easily (if men
may have liberty to speak freely) who they be herein, if there be any, that do
but cavil indeed, and dispute with God. As for my part, I conceive that
judgment which has been given long since upon the dispute between Beza and
Erastus is good, that neither side is altogether in the right, but that they
have divided the truth between them; which truth, so far as concerns me in this
controversy, I have endeavored to find and lay down impartially in the
preceding she is, let others do the like in other things that shall concern
them.

[7.] Whereas it is doubted whether Judas was present at the Sacrament, for
which there is no argument commonly urged, can be considerable (this being
matter of fact) but that only from Jo. 13.30. where it is said he went out,
There are two things, I conceive, convenient to be asserted here, in reference
to the 6 Chapter of M. Coll. which he rightly styles a digression. The first is,
That Jesus Christ according to the received opinion of the Latin Church, did
eat his Passover on the same night with the Jews. This is irrefragably proved
by those texts, Mat. 14.12, 14, 15. Mat. 26.14 Lu. 22.7, 9, 11, 12. where I
observe, 1. It is said to be the first day of the feast of unleavened bread,
which Strictly began the night they kept the Passover, after Sunset,
continuing til Sunset the next day: but Largely in our Saviors time they
called the fourteenth day (because it began at the evening thereof ensuing) the
first day of the feast, as the disciples speak here. 2. It is likewise said
expressly that it was the time the Passover ought to be killed, and was killed,
so that there is no room for evasion, whereas those texts then, Io. 18.28. and
Io. 19.14. are objected, that Christ was brought under Pilates judgment before
the Passover, there must on necessity be some ambiguity in these Texts or the
other; But when Luke tells us it was the time the Passover ought to be killed,
and Mat. and Mat. the time it was killed, there can be no evasion here in the
texts. I have quoted, without denial of the truth thereof, and therefore the
ambiguity is in the other objected; to wit, the Passover there which they were
then preparing, is to be understood of the Passoever of the Herd or Bullock,
Deu. 16.2. 2 Chr. 30.24. and 35.7, 8. and not of the Lamb they had already
eaten over night. See Lyra on the place, and Dr. Eightfoots Temple Service,
Chap. 14. Sect. 1. and Hand Glean. out of Exodus sect. 18.3. It is said, the
disciples on this day came to Jesus, saying, where will thou that we prepare
for thee to eat the Passover? Now how should this be, if they punctually knew
it not to be the day of the Jews? 4. Those disciples he sends to town to
prepare it, find a guess chamber already furnished according to Christ's word;
Now how should that good man of the house have his room already furnished and
prepared for the Passover, that knew nothing of Christ's coming, if it were
not now the time thereof according to the Jews? 5. It is said, At the feast
Pilate used to release to them a prisoner, and he asked them, if they would be
should release Jesus; therefore it was not before the feast, but at the feast,
Mat. 27.15. Lu. 23.17. The second thing is, that this being convinced, it will
follow that this Supper in Jo. 13. was not Christ's last Passover Supper, for
these reasons, which I remember Dr. Lightfoot once showed me in part of 0734 0
his Harmony yet in Manuscript, or very much to this effect. 1. Because it is
expressly said so, v. 1. Now before the feast of the Passover. 2. Because when
Judas went out here, the disciples thought he had gone out to buy something
against the feast, v. 39. and therefore it was not at the feast. 3. Because
when the even of that day was come (and it is said to be night here when Judas
went out) wherein they eat the Passover it was holy, Ex. 12.16. and there was
then nothing to be bought or sold, How then could the disciples think Judas had
gone out to buy something against the feast, if it were that night it self
wherein nothing could be bought? 4. The devil entered into Judas to set him on
his villainy, while the Passover drew near, Lu. 22.1, 2, 3. that must needs be
before the night it self; but the devil entered Judas at the sop in this Supper,
Ergo, the Supper in John was before Christ's last Supper. 5. Because there are
many different passages (though accounted the same) at this supper in John, and
Christ's last Supper in the other Evangelists, which every one may easily
multiply, that will be pleased exactly to read them. 6. Because there is not
here one syllable mentioned of the institution of the Sacrament which was at
Christ's last Passover Supper. 7. Because the exact reckoning we may find in
Scripture of Christ's last week before the Passover may do much to inform us
herein, which I conceive appears thus. Six days before it, Jesus came to
Bethany, Jo. 12.1. On the next day, he rides in triumph to Jerusalem, v. 12.
and returns to Bethany at night, Mar. 11.11. On the morrow, he went again
thither to the Temple, Mar. 11.12, 15. When Even was come, he comes back as
before, v. 19. In the morning next, likewise he goes to Jerusalem, v. 20.27.
and at night returns to the Mount of Olives, Luke 21.37. where he lodges, we
may conceive, in Bethany, as he was wont, for the next day, being now two days
before the Passover, we find him there, comparing the Text following, Luke
22.1, 2, 3, 4. with Matt. 26.2 -- 14. and Mark 14.1, 3. And hereabouts, I
conceive, for the two days following he shelters himself, in his addresses for
death, having departed purposely from the City to hide himself from them, Joh.
12.36. Now during this time of his retirement, whereof the other Evangelists
record nothing, we have the relation of John of this Supper, and many heavenly
passages, in no less than 4. or 5. Chapters, which cannot be thought one
continued Speech or Sermon, as is commonly said, if the words in chapter 14. v.
ult. with chapter 18. v. 1. (likewise chapter 16.20.) be considered. These discourses
then, meditations, transactions in chapter 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. (to proceed) taking
up these two days, the Passover comes, Christ sends two disciples to the City
to prepare it, Luke 22.7. Himself follows with the Twelve, Mar. 14.17. They all
eat thereof, v. 20. After the hymn they go out, v. 26. Judas steals away to
fetch the Officers, v. 43. Christ is apprehended, v. 46. The Jews sit up all
night upon him consulting, (which appears by Peter's Cocks crowing.) Early, as
soon as it was light, Mat. 27.1. Jo. 18.28. Pilate is called up. The judgment
hastened and dispatched. At As for that text, Jo. 19.14. Diserte legitur (...),
apud Petrum Alexandriae Episcopum libello quem scripsit de Paschate (...).
nine a clock in the morning he is fastened on the Cross, Mar. 15.25. About
twelve there comes the Eclipse, Luke 23.44. After three, he gives up the
ghost, Mar. 15.34, 37. is taken down and interred: In the grave he lies the
remnant of that day, all the Jewish Sabbath, being the next, and part of the
third, which by a Synecdoche of a part for the whole, is reckoned 3. days,
Mat. 16.21. Then he arises, being their first day of the week, Jo. 20.1. Is
seen of his disciples for 40 days, Acts 1.3. and so ascends to heaven, v. 9.
Blessed be his name for ever.

[8.] Whereas I have recorded a certain president from a neighbor, (Rejoynd. p.
240.) in confirmation of that point, whether the Sacrament be a means of
conversion, unto which others might be added, of some men eminent for the good
they do in their places, who have told my self the l^ke, as to the experiences
of their own souls, which is much satisfying: I do think fit to take notice of
those two stories which Mr. Coll. mentions in opposition hereunto, p. 14. Of
two Women, the one under a Minister of his acquaintance, the other under Mr.
Simmonds, who dying under carnal security, attributed both their hardening to
these men's admitting them to the Sacrament. Now these two stories, and the
like, I judge may be worthy very serious consideration, something contrary, and
more likely, than that for which he brings them; for these Ministers, I
believe, were congregational men, or such at least who were more strict than
others as to their admission, and it is this; (I pray God it may be judiciously
laid to heart, whether it be so or no) that, while men pretend to have more
pure communion, and so be more careful of separating the vile from the
precious, than others ordinarily, especially pressing that this Ordinance
belongs only to the regenerate, so that men must think themselves so, when they
come thither; It need be no wonder, unto any, that are but little acquainted
with the fancies and temper of folks Spirits, that many weak people should
think well of their estates, that they are better than others being under these
forms, and so grow secure, and harden, so long as such holy Ministers that
refuse others with such cautiousnes, do receive them (as worthy persons, and
visibly regenerate) to their Communions: whereas our former Ministers, and we
that say with Paul, Know ye not that all our Fathers were baptized in the
cloud, and drank of the rock, which rock was Christ? Know ye not that there is
a common right, as to this outward privilege of Ordinances: so that we esteem
none of you better than your neighbors for your partaking hereof, we are of
the circumcision that worship God in the spirit, and have no confidence in the
flesh, or externals: I say, while we teach thus, we have no occasion to fear
that any one should grow spiritually proud, or fall into security, thinking
themselves better than others for our admitting them to the Sacrament, any more
than to other Ordinances, where we teach, and call upon them alike, to make use
thereof unto repentance, and acceptance of Christ, and not suppose them
converted already, which lays the groundwork of folks hardening, if herein
there be any. Whereas then Mr. Col. from Gillespy would fain know what fruit
any godly Ministers found of their former promiscuous administrations? I
answer, besides the peace and quiet of their people, which they now may wish,
this fruit thereof they might have, that none of their congregations could
bless themselves in any supposed condition better than their fellows, for their
outward participation of what was to be in common to all of them, the contrary
whereof would by these men be fastened on us; Even as all things (say the wise)
have two handles, and every reason, a contrary reason.

[9.] Whereas many worthy and pious Ministers do think it would do well to
bring their people to the giving some account to them of their faith and
knowledge before the Sacrament, as a means for their future reformation; and
there are some of their people that have taken, or be ready to take an occasion
from my opinion, to oppose their pious endeavors: I shall humbly declare thus
much, for the sakes of these people, that, Although I will not justify any of
these Ministers that are more tender and fearful about the doing, than
neglecting their office, and am persuaded, that there is no Examination but of
a man's own self, can be pressed as necessary to the Sacrament, yet do I both
allow and reverence the piety, zeal and pains of many Ministers, that
prudentially take occasion hereby to look into the state of their flocks, only
for their admonition and instruction, without driving them from their duty; And
I do bewail the frowardnes and offwardness of most unto so easy a submission,
utterly disliking at the bottom of my heart the spirits of such Christians, who
either out of consciousness of their own ignorance, or haughtiness of their
minds, will be contented to be deprived the Sacrament, rather than give an
account of their faith to those that ask it in the spirit of meekness, for
their edification. Nay I do profess for my part, were I under the Presbytery, I
should most freely subject my self to their trial, as being afraid to grieve
the spirit of my Pastor, (supposing him to require it merely out of the
tenderness of his conscience) and give example of obstinacy to others; As also
most easily believing that the people may do ill in refusing examination, when
the Minister does but ill too, in refusing them therefore the Lord's Supper.
Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves; for they watch
for your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy,
and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you. I speak not this for
s^tting up any power over men's consciences, that are to be left free; but that
I may so plead for Free-admission, that I may not hinder any men's piety or
reformation. To this end I could wish, that for the Ignorant, there were
Catechists in the Church, and some prudent kind of Law for the bringing all
such to submit to be catechized; and for the scandalous, that there were some
authoritative way for the exercise of that most yielded, and least practiced
duty of fraternal correption; let a man be profane, malicious, and injurious, I
am persuaded one half hours serious rebuke of him before grave men, that should
awe him, would do more toward his repentance, than many years keeping him
from the Sacrament. If after this, the party does continue obstinate, let him
in the name of God be proceeded against by Church-censure or Excommunication; A
thing doubtless, which if the main truth in my books I drive at first, were
well established, would have its season to be pressed.

[10.] Whereas I find that many of the most holy Christians have their faces
set against our mixed Communions, and that general way of Unity I look at, the
pantings and breathings of whose spirits after holiness and purity, I cannot
but reverence, though I think them led more by their present affections, than
soundess of Judgment, It is my purpose and resolution, having now proposed my
thoughts, rather than grieve and exasperate them any more, to leave the
Controversy; so that without some more than ordinary urgent reason be to the
contrary, which is not live to be, I shall not engage personally with any of
them again about the same, but shall commit my cause to the Lord, humbly
beseeching him to pardon me all my failings that have been in it, and
persuading my self that if there be any thing useful for the Church in what I
have written, some one or other that are friends of truth, will stand by her in
a time and season fitting for it, And farther by these my Son be admonished, of
making many books there is no end, and much study is a weariness to the flesh;
Let us hear the conclusion of the matter, Fear God and keep his commandments,
for this is the whole of man.

From Froome, May 26. 1656: J. H.

FINIS.

