The humble PETITION OF The Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
LONDON in Common Council Assembled, concerning Church Government: Presented to
the House of Peers upon Friday the 16. of January 1645. With the Answer
thereunto.

Die Veneris 16. Ian. 1645.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That this Petition, with the
Answer thereunto, shall be forthwith printed and published.

Ioh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.



LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 17. Ian.
1645.

To the Right Honorable the LORDS now Assembled in the High Court of
PARLIAMENT. The humble Petition of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons of the
City of London, in Common Council Assembled.
Shows;
THat in November. last the Petitioners made it their humble request to this
honorable House, that Church Government might be settled; and are most humbly
thankful for your favorable interpretation thereof, proceeding from the good
intentions of the Common Council, who are resolved, according to their duty,
to have a tender respect to the Privileges of Parliament, whereby the
Liberties of the City and Kingdom are preserved: That in December last, at the
choice of new Common Council men for the year ensuing, the Inhabitants of
most of the Wards in this City petitioned their respective Aldermen in their
Wardmote to move your Petitioners to make their further address to the
Honorable Houses of Parliament, for the speedy settling of Church Government
within this City, and against Toleration, as by Copy of one of the said
Petitions annexed appears.

That private Meetings, especially on the Lords Day, (of which there are at
least eleven in one Parish) are multiplied, whereby the public Congregations,
Ordinances, and godly Orthodox Ministers, are very much neglected and
contemned, as if they were Antichristian, and our present times were like the
Primitive persecutions, or as if we were still under the Tyranny of the
Prelaticall Government; and by reason of such Meetings, and the preaching of
women and other ignorant persons, Superstition, Heresy, Schism, and
Profannesse, are much increased, Families divided, and such Blasphemies as the
Petitioners tremble to think on, uttered, to the high dishonor of Almighty
God.

That the Petitioners are informed that diverse persons have an intention to
Petition this Honorable House, for a Toleration of such Doctrines as are
against our Covenant, under the Notion of Liberty of Conscience.

The Petitioners therefore having no power of themselves to suppress or
overcome these growing evils; Do, according to their Covenant, reveal and
make the same known to this Honorable House, and for timely prevention and
removal thereof due humbly pray that the Premises may be taken into your most
serious consideration; And that Church Government may speedily be settled,
according to our most Solemn Covenant with the most High God, in such manner
and form, as to Your Wisdoms shall seem most agreeable thereunto, before we
be destroyed one by another through rents and divisions; And that no Toleration
be granted, either of Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, Schism,
Prophannesse, or of any thing contrary to sound Doctrine and the power of
godliness; And that all private Meetings, contrary to the said Covenant (the
rather in regard of the sad effects thereof) may be restrained.

And the Petitioners shall pray, etc, MICHELL.

To the Right Worshipful the Alderman and Common Counsell-men of the Ward of
Farrington within at their Ward-moot; A representation of the Humble desires of
the Inhabitants of the said Ward.
THat Church Government may speedily be settled within the City, before we be
utterly ruined with rents and divisions.

II That this Government may be that which is agreeable to the Word of God, and
example of the best Reformed Churches, according to our solemn League and
Covenant with the most High God.

III That no Toleration either of Popery, Prelacy, Schism, Heresy,
Superstition, Prophannesse, or any thing contrary to sound Doctrine, or the
power of godliness may at all be yielded unto, as being against the Word of
God, and contrary to the very letter of our Covenant.

And these our most humble and earnest desires, which we are obliged and
encouraged also to make, by reason of our said Covenant, we entreat the Right
Worshipful the Alderman, and Common Counsell-men of this Ward, to represent to
the right Honorable the Lord Mayor, and the Honorable Court of
Common-Counsell at their first siting, that they would make their further
address to the Honorable Houses of Parliament, for the obtaining of these our
just and necessary desires.

The Answer to the said Petition, pronounced by the Speaker of the House of
Peers.
THe Lords have always had great experience of the care and good affections of
the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London, for which
they are glad of any opportunity to express their great sense, and to return
their hearty thanks, and more especially upon this occasion, wherein the
Common Council have manifested so great Zeal and Faithfulness to the true
Worship of Almighty God, and care for the Peace and well Ordering of the City
of London, in which the whole Kingdom is so nearly concerned; The Lords
therefore upon consideration of the Petition now presented unto them, and the
expressions of that worthy Alderman made unto their Lordships, have commanded
me in their names to give ye further and larger acknowledgements for your
great care and endeavors to prevent so growing a mischief, giving ye this
assurance, That as they have been very forward formerly to do what in them lay
for a settlement of Church Government, so they shall still continue to advance
and perfrom Work so much tending to the glory of God, and to the settling of
the Peace of the Kingdom, holding themselves thereunto obliged by their solemn
(...) and Covenant; and they (...) care of the Lord Mayor, and such as are in
Office in the City, to suppress and prevent such great Offenses by you
mentioned, which are so much to the dishonor of God and the disturbance of the
present and future good Government of the City of London. And wherein ye shall
find your selves wanting in power, the Lords will be ready to contribute their
authority for your encouragement and assistance.

FINIS.

