TWO SPEECHES DFLIVERED On the Scaffold at Tower Hill on Friday last, by Mr.
Christopher Love, and Mr. Gibbins, being the 22. of this instant August, 1651.
With the manner of their Deportment and Carriage at the place of Execution: And
Mr. Love's Declaration and Propositions to the Citizens of London, touching the
King, Scots, and Covenant.

By G. H. An Ear-witness on the Scaffold.



London, Printed for William Lo, servant to the Commonwealth of ENGLAND, 1651.

The two Speeches of Mr. LOVE and M. GIBBONS on Friday last, on the Scaffold at
Tower Hill, being the 22 of this instant August 1651.
ON the 22 of this instant August, about two of the Clock in the Afternoon, Mr.
Love was brought from the Tower of London, (attended by Colonel West
Lieutenant of the Tower, Sheriff Chiverton, and Shrief Titchburn; with many
other Gentlemen) to the place of execution on Tower Hill, where Squire Lee (the
Executioner) (By Order from the Sheriff's of London) attended with Ax, Block an
Bag of Saudust: And upon his coming up the stairs to the Scaffold; he saluted
the Lieutenant and the two Sheriffs, which being done, af^^r two or three paces
on the Scaffold, he moved to the North-end thereof, and laying his arms over
the Rayles (greeting the people with his Hat off in his hand, upon the first
delivery of his Speech) began to express himself as follows.

Beloved Christians,
J Am this day brought to the Scaffold to pay the wages of Death, for which I
am not in the least sorry, but before I insist upon the work of the day, for it
so falls out, and the will of the Lord be done therein, give me leave I beseech
you, to let you understand the true grounds and cause thereof.

Upon my Trial before the High Court of Justice in Westminster Hall, I had my
Charge read (in presence of many Gentlemen and good Christians) containing
matter of High Treason against the State and Commonwealth of England, for which
end witnesses were sworn, and their attestation recorded in the Court that I
was Guilty of sending of Letters to the Queen, the King of Scots, and the rest
of their Adherents, and also, that I had held correspondency with them, for the
ayding, abetting, and assisting of them both in men and monyes* Touching which,
I endeavored to declare my innocence therein, protesting likewise before the
presence of Almighty GOD that I was not in the least guilty, and (as a dying
man) do here declare in the presence of God and Angels, that I never sent any
letter to the Queen or King of Scots; or received any from them; but thus much
I do confess, that I have both sent and received Letters from Col. Massey, yet
never endeavored the involving of this my Country of Nativity, either in
distractions or commotions, but always desired the welfare and happiness
hereof. And whereas there are many in this City (as I am informed) that does
presume to take liberty to utter many unchristian-like expressions, concerning
my former proceedings, and say that I am a Turn-coat: in answer thereunto, I
desire you to take notice, and seriously to meditate upon these three
Propositions.

First, as for the person of the late King I never thirsted after his blood,
but according to the Covenant) desired nothing more then his restoration to
Honor and Freedom. Secondly, I never engaged against the person of the King,
but only against his followers, endeavoring the true settlement of a firm and
lasting peace. Thirdly, As for the Presbyterian Government, I do affirm, and
desire you to take notice, (being the words of a dying Man) That it is the only
and best reformed Church in the world; and I do profess unto you (dear
Christians) that I desired nothing more then the establishing a true, firm, and
Gospel union amongst the Sons of Men.

I desire that the Ministry may flourish, and that the Gospel may take its
glorious splendour in its full latitude and circumference; and as for this
sinful and poor distressed City, my prayer is, That the Lord will be pleased to
humble and chastise the Inhabitants thereof; and more especially my late and
dear Congregation, whom nothing could have separated me from, (during life) but
the Block and Axe here upon the Scaffold; which many account an untimely end;
but I rescent it as a great glory and work of the Lord: For truly, I bless God
I value not my death, and I shall as willingly lay my head upon the block, as I
ever did upon my Pillar, when I went to take my natural rest; for it is not
death I fear, and blessed be the name of the Lord that has taken the sting of
death from me. And again, I must ingenuously confess, ( I beseech you consider
my words, they are the infallible expressions of a dying Man,) That formerly I
have been in more terror and fear for the drawing of a Tooth, then I am at this
present, being in a moment of time ready to have my head severed from my
shoulders: But I beseech God to forgive my enemies, as I freely do; and I
beseech you all (dear Christians) to endeavor to walk in the ways of Truth
and Holiness, that so you may be able to give a faithful account of this
transitory stewardship, I cannot insist no longer upon this discourse, by
reason my time is short, and the glorious Angels have summoned me to appear
before the Throne of Majesty. Therefore beloved Christians, I desire you to
join with me in prayer; being the last that I shall ever breath more upon
earth: And so putting off his Hat, he kneeled down, uttering these words.

Most Eternal and glorious Lord God, I thy poor servant here prostrating
himself before thy divine Majesty, do humbly beseech thee, that thou would be
pleased for the merits of thy Son Jesus Christ his sake, to pardon and forgive
me all my sins, and to strengthen me with thy blessed spirit, to undergo the
fatal blow that is now ready to be given; and so Lord Jesus receive my soul,
After which, rising up, he again spoke to the people, saying,

I am now ready to be offered, and the Vine of my departure is at hand: I have
fought a good fight, I have finished my course, have kept the faith, 2 Timothy 6,
7. And so peace be unto you all. Then turning himself about to the Executioner,
he said, Friend, are all things in readiness: Yes sir: Replied the
Executioner: whereupon, he unbraced his Doublet, and gave it to a friend, and
than pulled out a Red Scarf out of his pocket, and gave it to the Executioner,
saying, Dispose of this upon the block as thou think convenient, which
accordingly he did, spreading it upon the Sawdust, and laying it upon the
Block: Then Mr. Love put his hand in his pocket and took out 3. l. wrapped up in
a white paper, and gave it to the Executioner saying; Friend, here is three
pieces for thee, do thy Office, and I beseech God to forgive thee, as I freely
do: then Mr. Love kneeled down and laid his Neck upon the Block; and rising up
again said, Friend, upon my next lying down, when J lift up my left hand do
thy Office, which accordingly he did, and at one blow severed his head from his
shouldiers and immediately the head and body were both put in his black Coffin
together, and so carried off the scaffold, Mr. Calamy (the Minister) came upon
the Scaffold with the said Mr. Love, and attended there, till the time he was
carried off.

No sooner was his corpse carried down the Scaffold stairs, but immediately Mr.
Gibbins (formerly Secretaay to Colonel Hollis) was guarded up by some of the
Sheriffs Officers, who deported himself with a great deal of resolutenesse and
gallantry, and after an indifferent copious Speech, to thi^ effect, That he was
inocent of what he was brought thither to, did so, but yet notwithstanding
would not chang his condition from the Block for any Emperors throne, if he
might get ten thousand worlds by it: then immediately going to prayer, (having
ended the same,) he unbraced himself and gave his Cloak, Doublet, and 2. rings
to his Uncle, and 2. l. to the Executioner, and then laying his neck upon the
block, the Executioner did his Office by receiving the sign, and lifting up
his left hand, and severed his head from his shoulders at one blow likewise.

THE END.

