THE SPEECH AND Confession of Capt. Brown-Bushel, at the place of Execution on
Saturday last, under the Scaffold on Tower Hill: With the manner of his
deportment, and his coming from the Tower in a Scarlet Cloak; as also his
Prayer, and Desires to the People. Together with the manner of his Trial; and
the Articles and Charge exbibited against him. Written by G. H. an Eyewitness.

depiction of the execution of Brown Bushel: a man lies across an
execution-block on a scaffold with a man holding an axe above him and two more
men, one holding a pike, standing close by; a fifth man stands on the ground
beside the scaffold Lord Jesus receive my soul.



Imprinted at London by R. W. 1652.

The Speech and Confession of Capt. Brown-Bushel, at the place of execution
under the Scaffold at Tower Hill on Saturday last, being the 29 of March, 1651.
READER,
HAving been an Eyewitness of the manner and deportment of Captain
Brown-Bushel at the place of Execution on Saturday last at Tower Hill, I could
do no less, than demonstrate to the world, his true Character and Emblem, And
by reason that I may not leave the world unsatisfied, touching the cause of
this his Execution, give me leave, I beseech you, to present you with (in the
first place) his Articles of Impeachment, and his Trial, before the High-court
of Justice in Westminster Hall on Tuesday the 25 of March, 1651. a Narrative
whereof follows.

On Tuesday (as aforesaid) He was brought to the Bar, and then charged with the
betraying, surrendering, and yielding up of the Castle and Town of Scarbrough in
the County of York, the Command whereof he had taken upon him for the
Parliament before.) And for levying War against the Parliament at Beverley and
Whitby. To which he pleaded, Not guilty. And the proof against him of his Fact
stands thus. Being brought to the Bar again the same day, The Witnesses for the
Commonwealth brought up from Yorkshire were present, and gave their Evidence,
That Sir Hugh Cholmley Revolt^ng from the Parliament 25 March, 1645. And then
holding out the Castle of Scarbrough for the late King, Bushel the Thursday
before Easter came to Scarbrough to the Bailiffs and desired their assistance
to keep the Castle, which that night he did, and pretended he would hold it out
for the Parliament. But Cholmley next night, being Good Friday, coming against
the place with Forces dr^wn out of diverse of the Kings Garrisons, Bushel
surrendered it on the next morning without making any resistance, or discharging
any shot against Cholmley, although the Townsmen and Soldiers in the Castle
would willinglg have resisted. And after this, H^ coming to Hull to Sr John
Hotham, was there impri^oned, and by Cholmleys means exchanged and so took up
ar^s with him, and came with 600 or 700 Cavaliers in August, 1644. against
Beverley, and there was in fight against the Parliaments forces, and from
thence went to Whitby, where he was also in arms, and there seized upon
several Vessels of the Parliaments side, and rifled and pillaged them of their
moneys and goods, and imprisoned one of the Masters in Irons. Thus standing the
Evidence, Bushel confessed his being in arms at Beverley and Whitby, and that he
delivered up the Castle because he had not force enough to withstand Cholmley;
but made no proof of any thing. Upon the whole matter the Court adjudged him
guilty of Treason and denounced Sent^nce, to have his head severed from his
shoulders at Tower Hill London, on Saturday the 29 of March, (being the day of
the week on which he betrayed the said Castle and Town.

And accordingly on Saturday last, about 5 of the clock in the Afternoon, he
was brought from the Tower to the place of Execution, being accompanied by Col.
West, Sheriff Chiverton, and others. He came in his Scarlet cloak, smiling upon
the people; and so soon as he had entered under the Scaffold, saluted the
Lieutenant of the Tower; then turning himself about, and espying the Ax and
Block, said, I thank my God (putting off his hat) I do not fear these
Inst^uments; and blessed be his Holy Name, (casting his eyes up toward Heaven)
that has taken away the sting of Death. Then taking two or three paces on the
ground, and espying a multitude of people, said, Well I something is expected
from me before I die, I hope (Mr Sheriff) I may have liberty to speak my mind,
being a dying man. Sh. Yes Sir. Cap Bushel. I thank you Sir. But by reason of
the pressing in of the Spectators so near him, he was a little interrupted,
uttering these words, Gentlemen, pray give me a little room, I shall not desire
it long. Whereupon the Sheriff, Officers and Soldiers forced them to retire to
a further distance; Then, urning himself round, with his hat in his hand,
declared himself to the Spectators as follows.

Christian People,
I Am brought hither to die, and to pay the wages of Death, for which I am not
in the least sorry; but rather conceive it a great mercy from Heaven, that God
has been pleased to use this means, for bringing me so much the nearer and
sooner unto him: Yet I desire that the world may take notice, and understand,
the true cause and grounds of this my untimely Death; Good people (putting off
his hat) I served the King of Spain 10 years with faithfulness and integrity;
but hearing of the distractions in England, I was desirous to do service in my
Native Country, and in order thereunto took shipping at Dunkirk, and landed in
the Northern Parts, where I first engaged for King and Parliament; but
afterward being convinced (both in Conscience and Judgment) of the
unlawfulness of that Engagement, I then deserted the Parliament, being
heartily sorry, that ever I drew my Sword for such -- Masters; And (truly) had
I as many lives, as I have hairs upon my head, I should freely and willingly
adventure them all for my second Master the King (putting off his hat) As for
my sufferings they have been great, having bin confined to a very small
allowance, to the value of two pence a day sometimes, which did not a little
trouble me; considering, that I have kept as good a house, as any Gentlemen
here, excepting Mr. Sheriff; But God forgive my Enemies, as I freely do, and I
desire my blood may be the last, that is to be shed upon this account. Touching
my Religion, it is apparently known, that I have been, and here die, a true Son
to the Church of England, a loyal Subject to my Master the King, and a cordial
friend to the Land of my Nativity; for all which, I hope, through the great
merits and precious blood of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to receive a
Crown of glory, and the pardon and remission of sins, from the most great God,
and omnipotent Jehovah of Heaven and earth (putting off his Hat, with his hands
lifted up, looking toward heaven.) Then turning himself about, and espying a
great many people on the tops of Houses, said, Alas poor Creatures, you may
behold a sad spectacle, but a loyal subject; and so God bless you all. Then
turning to the Executioner, said, prithee show me the Block, I will Sir, He
kissed it: where is the other Instrument? Executioner, here Sir, and showing him
the Ax, he said, Is this the Block and Ax which my late Royal Master received
the fatal blow from? yes Sir, these are the same: well, (smiling) Gods will be
done, I bless my God that has brought me hither this day, I am ready: Then,
casting off his Scarlet Cloak, gave it to his Kinsman, there present; which
done, with undantedness of spirit, he unbrac'd himself, and threw off his
Doublet; then he pulled a white cap out of his pocket, and put it on his head;
and calling to the Executioner, said, Is there any thing else to be done?
Executioner, yes Sir, your hair must be put up under your cap: prithee help me;
then the Executioner put up his hair: Cap. ^nshel, well done, is all well now?
Executioner, yes Sir, Then he kneeled down, and desired the people to pray for
him; and after he had said the Lords prayer, rose up again, lifting up his eyes
to Heaven, saying, To thee O Father and thy blessed spirit, be all honor and
glory, both now and for ever, Amen. And then coming to the Executioner, said,
come honest friend, give me thy hand; the Lord forgive thee, I do, here is 20
s. for thee, and God bless thee; had I more, thou should have it; but truly
here is the mite of a loyal Subject, and a dying man. Prithee how shall I lie,
I will show you Sir, kneeling down, said, it will do very well: here is a
skarfe for thee, prithee lay it upon the block, I will Sir: then kneeling down
the second time, and saying, Lord Jesus receive my soul, and holding up his
right hand, (which was the sign) the Executioner did his Office, and severed
his head from his shoulders at one blow. So soon as he had done this he took
him by the arm, and laid him upon his back; and then took the Red Scarf from
under him, which covered the Block and all the Saw-dust: the said Scarf being 5
yards in length, and 3 yards broad.

The manner of this Gentlemen at his departing, will cause many (especially
those of his own fraternity) to eternize his Name; but it is bisput^ble,
whether conscience or courage, armed him with this Resolution: Let us look back
into former Ages, and we shall find many the like presidents; for the Cr^eks and
Med^s being at war one with the other, the Grecians took a courage and oath,
protesting, that each particular man would rather change his life into death,
then their Laws for the Persians.

So whether out of envy to this present Government, or love to the precedent,
wrought most in ^he heart of this man, I leave it for the charity of those that
read these his dying words to judge.

Finis.

