A LETTER WRITTEN To a Gentleman in the Country, touching the DISSOLVTION of
the late PARLIAMENT, AND THE REASONS THEREOF.

Senec. Troad. Quaeris quo jaceas post obitum loco?
Quo non nata jacent. --
LONDON, Printed by F. Leach, for Richard Baddeley at his Shop within the
Middle Temple Gate 1653.

A Letter written to a Gentleman in the Country, touching the Dissolution of
the late PARLIAMENT, and the Reasons thereof.
SIR,
YOurs of the 27th past came safe, and with it your admiration of this great
change which has happened in the dissolution of the late Parliament, which I
not at all wonder at; for as this Island has afforded the greatest Revolutions
that I think any memory affords us, of any time or place, so I believe this to
be the greatest of them; and so much the greater, as that it was done, in a
manner, in an instant, without contestation, without effusion of blood, and,
for any thing I can perceive, without the least resentment of those whom it
generally concerns. But when I shall put you in remembrance of what I have
often enforced to you, or to say better discoursed, for the other is needless,
that the ways of Providence are inscrutable, and such, as, though they seem to
us unexpected and temerarious, yet are carried on with such a strange and
supreme kind of design, it will be easy for an humble and an acquiescing mind to
see, that by several invisible degrees, they bring forth their last and
proposed intendments, yea with those instruments which seem and intend to do
the contrary. What man could have supposed, after the dissolution of the
Parliament preceding this last, to have had another so soon? and for this last,
who could have imagined that by Act it should have continued, much more
gloriously have undertaken the defense of an injured people by open arms
against an Oppressor, and that these undertakings, with admirable variety of
success, should have been crowned with the extirpation of Tyranny, and the
decollation of the person of a Tyrant; that that great Omniscience should so
bless the endeavors of a Commonwealth, now as I may say in its very
swadling-clouts, as by them absolutely to reduce those dominions in 3 years,
which a series of proud and lusty Monarks could not in 6 Centurys do? Besides
that navall opposition so fortunately and gloriously made against the greatest
Maritime enemy in Europe, or to speak with due acknowledgment, in the Earth.
Yet are these men, after all these vigorous and happy actions, suddenly
dispersed like Down blown off a Thistle, and their power devolved into such
hands, which a God has made isntrumental in these strange Emanations of his
Divine Will, so we may humbly conceive, he intends to make further use of to
the finishing of that great work, which by such visible signs, he has mad
appear he has in hand for the glory of his name, the felicity of these
Nations, and I believe for the blessed alteration of all Europe.

I am neither Stoic to believe that all things are linked by such a strong
chain of Fate, as that there is nothing left to man but Mechanically to act;
nor yet can I resign my self to an absolute belief of that saying of Plato,
that To pray or fear is needless, it being out of our power to prevail by
either, but I shall modestly affirm it, that as I ever use to send up my prayers
for the best things I could, upon the emergencies of the several times, so
upon the breaking out and discovery of every hidden Council of above by some
illustrious accident, I have thrown my face upon the ground and submitted to
it, never examining the means by which it was brought to pass, but the end to
which it was brought; for I cannot deny unto you, that I have that reverence,
and resignation to my great Lord and Maker, that as I believe every
dispensation affords to me in particular, (be it bitter or be it sweet) a means
of that grand consummation of felicity, which I am hereafter to endeavor and
expect, so even in politic bodies, wherein so many dear to him are concerned,
he suffers not any Turn or Revolution, but his Omnisciency directs it, to the
bettering or more happisying of that people.

And truly in my apprehension this is done at this season, and though you seem
to stare at it, as being unwilling to acknowledge that his hand is wise and
powerful, yet methinks it were an argument wortheir of an Atheist, to say,
that irregular actions proceed from a carelessnesse above, than for a Christian
to imagine that his designations in the altering the affairs of any State should
not tend to a bettering of that State, and that that power into which he puts
it, is not, in his mind, more fit and proper to manage it than that from which
he took it; for if a Fly fall not to the ground without his consent, I beseech
you what shall we consider of his care in the disposition of Millions of men,
things of his own image, without a high disbelief and contempt of his
providence?

Though I am not ignorant what some people ignorantly, or peradventure
splenetickly and maliciously say, that he may suffer such things for the
punishment of a people, and for their reduction, yet when I seriously consider
it, that as nothing but good can flow from that pure and simple Fountain of
goodness, so are his ways of Providence, so far as purblind We can see. He
chastises private men differently from public bodies, some that he dearly
loves, he afflicts, purges, and refines, gives them heaviness for a day, that
they may hereafter have an everlasting weight of glory. States he sometimes
afflicts for their own sins, sometimes for those of their Governors, but still
out of his mercy he considers those that are dear unto him, and searches out if
there be ten good in Sodom, which if there be, he carries them out of their
Captivity into the Land of Promise.

Out of these considerations I for my part humbly submit to this mysterious and
sudden action; and because I perceive you not so well satisfied with it, am
content with what present reasons I can, and out of my little intelligence, and
small understanding of things, to give you an account.

And therefore we are to consider,

First, The manner of Government by the last Parliament;

Then the right of obedience to Superior Powers; And

Lastly, the effects, or events, that may come upon the late change.

For the first, I confess they were a people of miracles, God made them
gloriously instrumental in the rescuing of his people from bondage, yet many of
them were content to self-centre, or to say better, lay little designs for
their own greatnesses; so that, while they seemed to look direct upon the
public Interest, their business was to look asquint upon their own: as if
they had been employed by their Country not to make up public, but private
Breaches. Besides that, the House being by the last purge made thin, and few in
a capacity to sit, and fewer active, (unless some that only trudged at
Committees) there was an opportunity given them to become so familiar with one
another, that what by their Ordinary at Whitehall, and what by their
conferences at the Speakers chamber before the sitting of the House, little was
determined but out of design and faction: Oppositions and Conjunctions were
laid, private interests intervened, (and these commonly by way of exchange,)
needless things mightily insisted upon, whilst thousands of poor Creditors and
Petitioners starved at their door with their printed Papers, unheard,
unregarded, unless a crasty Solicitor had undertaken (for it is a term I hear
as common as practice among Lawyers) to make some Members, and this with great
expectation, and with such success, as commonly taught them what it was to
trust; whilst all this time the House, under whose hand this work lay, were
laboriously content to sit four times in a week, and that much about the rate
of 2. or 3. hours a day, whereas the whole week had been time little enough
for their work. And as for Committees, unless they were either very standing,
or some Great Men notably engaged, there have been some men have attended nine
or twelve months to bring one together, and this possibly for an adjournment
of as long a time. And I beseech you, Sir, consider, that though some wholesome
Laws they made, and many happy actions have been done under them, yet God has
some precious Instruments still overruling these odd designs and combinatons,
which are otherwise privately hatched by some corrupt ones among them. What
these men have done as to Establishment and Liberty, I am to confess they have
altered the Titles of Writs, they have told us we have a Commonwealth, but for
any essential fruits thereof, a man may (drolling) say, they have cut off the
head of a King, and set a Commonwealth upon his shoulders, which like Epistemon
in Rabelais (who was beheaded in a fight) are so finely sewed together, that
they return out of Hell, and tell things that they did there.

For to speak freely, what they did for us was very inconsiderable, and with
such a Spanish slownesse, that unless either some particular Interest, or some
immediate Necessity enforced them to have, it was a common difficulty of a year
or two to get pass an Act. If this had been out of grave consideration, or any
laudable and politic providence, the present Age might have been content, and
Posterity made happier: But it was either their work, or made it appear their
work, to spin out the time, wast the day in the tossing of a Feather, and then
came in some motion of an old Grandee, who had so much a year given him for
resigning up an illegal Office; or stood up some other, who brought old
arrears, (which it may be the poor Soldiery was never satisfied for) and for
this, he must have such a sum of money out of Discoveries, by which some
Countryman or other must be brought into vexation, and forced to compound; The
public business in the mean time was commonly pre-disposed on in the Speakers
Chamber, and ordinarily at the speaking of the Cue, (which was the usual
business of some shallow Fellow put upon it) confirmed and transacted. And as
for Petitions, they had such a rare and excellent faculty of dispatching them,
that I believe there have been 10000. Petitions offered to them, that could
never be read, half as many read, that received none but delatory answers at
Committees, and I doubt as many more were deterred, out of the mere
consideration of the success of others. But you will say, they set up a
Committee for Petitions, I grant you they did, but it was with such Rules, and
such Restrictions, that I believe it very impossible to make any person appear
that was thereby benefited.

Thus much to them as a Body, to break it in pieces, and look on it in the
individual, he were a dis-ingenuous man that would not confess, that there
have been among them as brave men, as wise and worthy Patriots, as any Nation
ever had. But yet if you will take into your Remembrance, that there have been
many Lands sold, first the Bishops, then the Dean and Chapters, then the
King's, Queen's, and Prince's, then the Fee-farms, (the Forest Lands too coming
on) then the Delinquents, and all these to be doubled upon (a touch whereof I
shall give you anon by way of digression) and all this to be dispatched by
Trustees nominated by the Parliament; you must needs think there was very
notable carriage in this Business, as to the Profit of the Commonwealth. For
first, 3 d. per pound must be allowed in point of purchase; then you had
Registers (who constantly dispatched by Deputy) at high Fees, and their
Underofficers as cunning and as ravenous as those of the old Courts. Then must
march forth an Army of ignorant and unlearned Surveyors, and these at 20 sh.
per diem, to return Surveys sometimes low, in the favor of some noble
Gentleman, in whose eye it was to purchase, and sometimes excessively high, for
to overbalance the other; (besides the Kings Lands, which being allotted for
the payment of the Soldiery, were commonly over-valued by one half,) whilst in
the mean time a single Mathematician did properly all their work to their
hands; and all this, besides a pestilent sort of people called Messengers, etc.
who entangled rights, disturbed the people, and carried on the business so
excellently well, that possibly much about one half might by their endeavors
be brought into the Coffers of the Commonwealth.

After the return of this Survey, so laudably performed as I have described to
you, an honest Member casts a sheeps-eye at such a Manor. Marry then he goes
to Gurney-house, sends in his name, and tells them he was to attend the
Parliament immediately; upon that he is called in, though other people had been
designed, and other business directed for that time; and by his authority, or
friends at the Table (for he that had a hand in placing them there, must needs
have favor from them) makes a Contract as low as possible, gets it may be so
long time, as that he may pay for the Manor out of the Mansion House, or the
Woods; and by this means it is incredible to what Estates some have raised
themselves. One of them who was a Brewers Clark, his man was heard to say, That
he thanked God his Master had now 800 l. a year. Another Gentleman having not
an over-considerable Fortune before, has made it 10. or 12000 l. a year, and
has been heard to say, (as I am informed) That he had more Land than any man
in England. Another coming out of a Draper's shop at York, has conveyed
himself into an Estate in Possession and Reversion of above 5000 l. a year. But
examples of this kind are innumerable.

This brings me on to tell you, That the Commonwealth has been as just and as
unjust in point of their debts, as it is possible for men to be; just they were
in providing satisfaction for their Creditors; unjust they were in delay of
time, and the little satisfaction they received by it. For was it not an
unreasonable thing, that 20 l. really lent out, or (which is as good) earned,
should be reduced to so many Twenty-pences, or Two-shilings's? yet the
Commonwealth pays it to the full, with Interest, whilst the needy Creditor
happly is glad to preserve life by that means; whereas men that had money,
doubling thus, (a way indeed at first thought on for better advance, but since
proving to the destruction of the Creditor) and traffiquing with accepted Bills,
either made a shift to make 70 or 80 per cent. of their moneys, or if they had
any hearts for the Parliament (which was not common) were content to take
improveable Lands as 5 years purchase, or thereabouts: So that many people of
very inconsiderable Fortunes, have now prodigiously arrived to vast Estates. I
know one, formerly not worth 16 score pounds in all the world, now by valuatio^
of the Country where he lives, worth 1600 pound a year. Others I have known
worth nothing at all, that now can reckon to 5 and 600 pound per annnm. But you
may tell me again, that this is no Argument against a Government. I say it is a
good one against the Governors, since they are so palpably engaged in it.

By this time I conceive you to be of opinion that things were not so admirably
well governed, yet many things being matters of private sufferings, many honest
hearts were content to sit down, and groan under their own misery, rather than
interrupt such public proceedings, as they saw God so eminently glorified in.
But when we had reduced our enemies abroad, and brought them upon their knees,
and began to entertain hopes of a future peace, and established liberty, we
were diverted by other designs, and the business was, how to continue a lazy
unactive power, not to remedy the sufferings of a Nation. This brought the Army
into Consulation, a sort of men whom God has so singularly owned, and crowned
by so many remarkable successes, that it was easily perceivable that God
intended by them to do strange things. These as free people first declared,
that they would assert our liberties, and since did not only rescue but protect
the Parliament, and assist them in the late grand Negotiations. without them,
they might have been exposed to the affronts of the multitude, and as
in-effective as against the Prentises when they shut up the door; with them
they have done marvelously. Now the case stands thus, The Liberty of the People
being recovered by the Sword, that is to say by the Army, this Army continuing
as a Mediator, or (if a man may say so) a Supervisor of the Peoples Liberties,
it must be proper for them to see that no encroachment may be done thereupon.
But here comes the pinch, the Parliament have not satisfied the People, neither
by effectual Laws, nor vigorous proceedings, the People are discontented; the
Army want not their resentments, they are moved for a new Parliament, (but
irregular motions move slowly) they trifle it off two or three years, and
frivolously debate it into a necessity, and at last provide the business so,
as that their Kingdom may stand, and others sit with them upon the Throne, that
is to say, like Theseus his ship, perpetually to be peeced, and made into the
same. But this neither stands with the fundamental right of a Parliament, nor
established Liberty. For if you will allow a Commonwealth, you cannot allow
any thing more destructive to it, than the Continuation of many men in the same
power, especially unlimited and supreme. For otherwise knowledge of Faces,
Acquaintance, Familiartty, and those little intrigues men will make, though
they hate one another, will bring all to Ruin.

But yet such a design as this were they about, and when they saw that a
necessity was upon them for to break up at last, they then came down to the
third of November this year, but the Act which had been 3 years a hammering,
was so warily provided, that what in point of Electors and Elected, we should
have been within a month after the new Parliament in a worse condition than we
had been during the sitting of the old. They that were to be Electors, were
People that had not forfeited their Liberty, which in English is rendered thus,
People it may be un^ble, incapable, malignant, and malicious enough, though
such as never offended the State, but in their Ale; these to be Elected, men
that had constantly been true to the Commonwealth. This if the malice and
cunning of men can do any thing, will amount to as much as to say, that many
Malignants who from their very hearts and souls hated the Cause, and all its
Dependances, yet in point of Interest and profit, having engaged in it, might
have been brought in. Besides that the Presbyterian Party (which is merely a
Jesuit in a Genevah cloak, but somewhat more insupportable) may by this rule
all come in. For they may have vigorously acted at the first, whilst they
thought the Beer which was a brewing might be their own mornings draught, but
seeing it was provided for others, they took snuff, and forsook the House, nay
and are become enemies; so that upon this account, instead of bringing a select
Company of honest Gentlemen to debate together, we should have brought so many
Bandogs to have traversed Factions. For what other could we expect when men of
such humors and tempers should necessarily meet?

This you will say, might be prevented by examining the returns of the Writs.
Suppose it. But here is first, an impossibility to that end, as who can
discover a man's heart? who a man's ways? who can judge that a Convert is real,
or absolutely assure himself, that another man is not an hypocrite? for things
of another man's bosom is matter of the nicest scruple in the World; and an
exact hypocrite may deceive the most cautious and nice Counsel that can be
made among men. Yet supposing this business feasible, here arises another
question, Whether the Peoples right or no, in point of Election, be not
extinguished by this supervising? (for as yet I cannot find any other word for
it.) For either they have a right of liberty to choose, or not, but both
Parliament and Army have declared they have; therefore their election is good:
But if there be a power paramount to allow or disallow of this Election, (which
supposing an examination of the returns of the Writs, you must needs grant,
otherwise it will be in vain to examine them) then that Election of theirs
signifies nothing; For if I in a Case of Law choose my Arbitrator, and the
Judge, or a third party has power to allow or disallow him, I cannot properly
be said to have a choice, because choice is an effect of Freedom, and Freedom
and Controlment are things that cannot consist together. So that hence it will
amount, that this provision was weak and not of assurance enough to our
purpose, and if two inconveniences were to be run upon, it were much better to
run upon the less.

This is an Hypothesis, I see not how it could be salved otherwise than by
choosing such idoneous persons, and that in such a number as might carry on the
work; for though multitude of Counselors is strength and safety, yet in
distempered and turning States it is weakness and distraction; And these such
kind of men as are fit to have the reigns of a Nation in their hands, and such
as by a swift and due prosecution of Justice should satisfy the people, what
it is to be free. This is a business either to be done by the Parliament, by
the People, or by the Army. The first like cunning Brokers would not do it; The
second like troublesome Idiots cannot do it, and the third as wise Guardians
must do it.

And therefore though this change may carry much in it as to appearance of fear
and terror, yet when a man will consider these two things, that the Liberty of
his Nation ought to be the dearest thing to him under Heaven, and that without
these men and means it cannot be preserved, (for take away the force that
protects us, all our enemies shall flow in upon us) he must necessarily grant a
submission to what they do. For he that has power to command, has also power
to guide, theone without the other being insignificant.

And therefore since we are in a Tempest, let us come to this Rock (to speak at
the harshliest) rather than perish. For you cannot conceive but the worst
Government in the world is infinitely better than none at all; or to speak a
little closelyer, an ill Government well managed, may be much better than a
completer form of Government ill managed, people still judging by their Safety,
or Liberty, or Civil advantages, the effects not only of their Government but
Rulers.

For matter of change of Government, lest you may be dissatisfied, I have thus
much briefly to say, that considering the actions of the late Parliament, and
their dissolution, we are to remember by what means they were called, and for
what end. They were called at first by a Writ of the King, and that by the
ordinary summons of a Writ, and that on the Kings part compulsively. But God
that has a mind to do much out of little, so prospered them, that by an Act of
the whole Parliament as then it stood, they were enabled to sit till they
should dissolve themselves. It Is a question worthy the resolution of a Lawyer,
whether these men sitting by that Authority, were not tied to follow exactly
the Rules of it? For certainly every Law or Commission ties according to the
Intent. They thought fit to throw out the Lords spiritual, alias Bishops; they
manage a War against the King upon their own Authority, and by virtue of that
Act; they were purged of Malignant or Illaffected Members, by the Army, (whose
duty it was to interpose in so dangerous a time) and at last declared and
established a Commonwealth. Thus did they act, and that to the eternal Renown
of the Nation, for four years together; But, when dieases grew upon them (as
all sedentary Bodies are slow and unactive) there appeared such a laziness in
the execution of that power, such a Lethargy as to Act in the right of the
Nation, that these immortal persons, whose blood had been stirred or spilled in
their Cause, began to awake, and remember for whom they had done so great
things, that is to say, for the People. And therefore, they being (as I have
said) Arbitrators, men whose eyes were open, and Consciences not branded, rise
up, and begun to look and consider in what condition the People was, whereof
they were a part; and therefore, when neither Addresses, Reasons, proposalls,
nor Petitions, of a long time could prevail, it is not strange at all if they
were forced to that of the Physician Ure and Seca.

I know your Objection before hand, that the action of the Lord General in the
Dissolution was somewhat rough, and Barbarous, and I shall not trouble you with
a long Answer, That, as to his Person, as he has in the Field declared himself
one of the Noblest assertors of our Liberty, and as great an enlarger of our
Territories as ever was, so as for any particular designs of his own in point
of Government, it must be a scrutiny greater than humane that can discover, how
he either intended to invade us, or to make us a prey to any ambition of his.
And therefore if upon this grand Revolution, he might appear to his enemies
passionate, yet considering the extremities that great minds fall into, and the
great trust committed to him, it will appear nothing but the discharge of that
duty that lay upon him. To have done such a thing as a single General, wants
neither example nor president (but I would not injure an argument in a Letter
by the by, which I could make good in a whole Treatise.) For you may remember
that of Caesar to Metellus the Tribune, Young man (says he) 'twas easier for
me to say this than to do it, a speech (says Sir Francis Bacon) both the
proudest and the mildest that ever came out of the mouth of Man: For at that
time he was breaking open the Sacred Treasury, which by* the Laws was not to
be broken open. But it is otherwise here, this was not a rash precipitate Act
of his, but a Trust, and Result of those under him. It Was fit he that was the
most eminent should appear, and he as civilly without noise or disturbance did
it. And therefore Acting by their Votes, and by their consents, it was their
action as well as his; and it was no more his action than it is the action of
the Head moved by Tendons and Muscles which are parts of the Body, and without
which the Head it self could not possibly at all move.

So that here it comes to a Question, Whether it be better for us to be in
Slavery under the name of Liberty, or in Liberty under the effects of Slavery.
I have told my thoughts before, in what condition I conceived our Liberty was,
and I repeat it once again, that I think this present is the better expedient.
For supposing that the several Counties should withdraw their several Members
(for I suppose they could not of late pretend to sit by Writ) certainly they
would never have made a Quorum in Parliament; and suppose they should call them
to account, where had one Authority without the consent of all the Counties, or
rather all People capable to demand it from them? And if you will say that the
Liberty of the People by this means is stifled, I must tell you again, it is
only suspended, it is a Sword taken out of a Mad Man's hand, till he recover his
senses; and therefore, till we be S^lted, Coagulated, or Centred, (call it what
you please) it is Tantum non impossible for to lose such a Liberty of choosing
a Representative as a Rational Man may expect good from.

It is a scruple that has vexed many People, how and in what manner, or
whether or no, we are to obey new Governments, (this is the second point I
proposed) and this comes by reason of Oaths imposed by Governors, who think
thereby to chain Men to them, whereas if we consider it, promissory and
obligatory, Oaths tie private men, Semper and ad semper, (as the Schoolmen
tell me) whereas obedience to a Sovereignty (which being placed in one or more
is the same) extends, nor can extend no further than during the protection
thereby received. For to put the Case at the worst, I am among a Company of
Thieves commanded upon my life not to discover, the Casuists say, that this
secrecy of mine, though they be Outlawes, and persons under the heaviest
censure of Justice, ought to be performed, for this is but a price of my life
(besides my promise) and in that consideration I ought to forbear it. But I Will
take it at the best sense, instead of falling into the hands of Thieves, I am
under the protection of those that protect me from them, and then I must say
that I owe these Men the very same obedience, but much more Religiously and
with a greater deal of honor and veneration than the o- other. The first may
take away my life if they please, the second cannot only secure me, but avenge
my blood upon the Murderers. The first are unaccountable, unless by their
private punishment, These responsible. For I remember a thing that Bodin said
excellently, that The King though he make Laws, it tied to those Laws; and
therefore accountable. They are invisible, These visible. And therefore a man
would rather choose his security of such as he knew where to repair to, and by
whose means he might be redressed, than such a one as could not own it self.
For let men imagine what they will, yet upon largest consideration, and deepest
experience, they must find, that Allegiance and Protection are so related that
they cannot be separated one from another, and that the absurdities of the
contrary are such as cannot rationally be avoided.

For I must necessarily swear either to Person or Place; by the Person I
understand a Man Governing, or claiming to Govern, either by himself or
Successors; by Place I understand a particular Man's Vassalage, Liberty, or
Privilege in any one Country. As to the first, it concerns not me by what name
any Man is distingnished, the determination of his power determines my
obedience, which (as I have said) is correlative to protection. As if Charles
Stuart should enjoin me a Command I should perish in, I ought not by any Law of
God or Man to obey, unless he could protect me in the execution ^hereof. Or
suppose the King of France should command me to Proclaim the same person King
here, I should be so considerate as to remember a Hurdle and Tyburne, and
therefore disobey. For if the Civilians allow it, and that Generally, that a
stranger doing a misdemeanour in another Country, though properly he is not
tryable by the Laws of that Country, yet thereby ought to be punished; I say
it is as much reason that a Native, doing against the Laws of his own Country,
be they in whose hands they will, should be ten times more punished (if it were
possible) as a breacher of Faith, and a desertor of that protection by which he
lives. Honest men may dissent in little things, and it may be their ways of
reasoning are not the same, but for any man under what pretense soever, to act
against the grand design of the happiness of his Nation, is such a matter, as
whoever would tell me, that a Man were a peaceable Man, and withal assaulting
me with a Stilletto.

There is yet another thing that may stick in your Stomach, (which is the last
thing proposed by me) which in respect you have urged with a little
earnestness I am content to clear you of, and that is, the great loss of
Reputation which you suppose we may receive from our Neighbors and
Correspondents abroad. Certainly, Sir, if you would but remember, that in
matter of public Treaties, Persons are not dealt with, but Nations; (for our
late King Treated with Don JOHN of Portugal, and yet this was no breach of the
League between him and Spain) it can signify no more than the Alteration of
the Title of their Credentialls; For all Treaties between States, are between
the Powers of those States.

And though Usurpation or Election appoint one Name, yet still it amounts to
this, that the State is concerned, and that only. Friendships in private men
are different from those of Princes, and that as much as the Marriages of
Princes one to another: Princes are Married by Interest and Pictures, private
Men by acquaintance and affection, and no doubt if Boccalini were alive, and
should hear any Man affirm that they did otherwise, he would say they were
Tramontani, and not allow them Portar la dottrina sopra le spali.

But this does not come home to my question, that which I would particularly
insist on is this, that I believe this change or event will contribute more to
our happiness than if we had still languished under our former sufferings. I
have told you what the Head of the Army is, to tell you of the rest were a^
vain flattery and inconsideracy; but since God has owned them as such
Excellent and Worthy persons, and made them glorious in their several
Generations, I must be content to look up and reverence them. It Is true, great
Births are hard in the Labor, and many Glorious men have been cut out of the
Womb, Therefore wonder not, if the account that they may give you be slow, or
possibly slower than you expect. I am no Member of their Councills and by a
late infirmity less able to attend them, yet if I can believe any thing; or
understand Men when they make the clearest professions, they intend all noble
things, both as to the glory of our good God, the making happy of this poor
Nation, settling the Liberties of it, and reducing of us into one mind, and one
way. But these are not only wishes of mine, but hopes, and certain
expectancies, and I believe they will convince these men to be liars that speak
against them. But now I think I have put you to all the trials of your
patience, which if my infirmity had not been, which confined me to my Chamber,
I could not have done, but I rely so much on your Candor, and I believe you
think so well of my veracity, as I want not the impudence to affirm my self
(however you take it)

Your affectionate Servant N. LL:
London May 3. 1653.
FINIS.

