The humble PETITION OF The Lord Major, Aldermen and Commons of the City of
London, In Common Counsel assembled, PRESENTED To the Right Honorable, The
LORDS and COMMONS in Parliament assembled.

WITH THE ANSWER OF The Commons to the said Petition.

Die Mercurii, 9 Augusti, 1648.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the City Petition, and
the Answer thereunto, be forthwith printed and published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
August 12. 1648.

To the Right Honorable, The Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled:
The humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
London in Common Council assembled;
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioners being deeply sensible of the sad, miserable and
deplorable condition of the King, Parliament and Kingdom, by the long
continuance of a bloody and unnatural War (whereof they had great hopes to be
freed) after the common Enemy was subdued, the Army of our Brethren of Scotland
withdrawn, and the Kings Majesty placed at Holdenby, by consent of both
Kingdoms (in order to a happy composure of all differences both in Church and
State) But contrary to expectation, your Petitioners, to the great grief and
sorrow of their Souls, do find the Government of the Church to be still
unsettled, Blasphemy, Heresy, Schism and Profaneness increased, The relief of
bleeding Ireland obstructed, The War (to their great astonishment) again
renewed, The People of England thereby miserably impoverished and oppressed,
The blood of our fellow Subjects (spilt like water upon the ground) Our
Brethren of Scotland (now entered this Kingdom) in a Hostile manner, His Highness
the Prince of Wales commanding at Sea a considerable part of the Navy, and
other ships under His power, having already made stay of many English Ships,
with Merchandises and Provisions to a very great value; by reason whereof,
Navigation will be destroyed Seamen desert us, Merchants enforced to leave off
reading, clothing and other manufactures of this Kingdom fall to the ground,
Wool, which is the staple commodity of the Land remain unsold, The Mint stand
still, Customs and other Profits by Merchandising will be very much abated, if
not utterly destroyed; Corn, Salt, Cole, Fish, Butter, Cheese, and all other
provisions brought by Sea to this City and Kingdom stopped, The innumerable
number of the poorer sort depending only upon manufactures, wanting work and
bread (as is greatly feared) will in a very short time become tumultuous in all
parts of the Kingdom, And many enforced to remove themselves and families into
foraign parts, and there setle the manufactures of this Kingdom never to be
regained; all which will unavoidably (in a very short time) totally ruin the
people of this Kingdom.

Your Petitioners humbly conceive, no visible way can prevent the apparent
ruin of these Kingdoms, but the speedy freeing of His Majesty from that
restraint wherein He now remains, and by a Personal Treaty, restoring to the
King His just Rights, to the Parliament their undoubted Privileges, to the
People their Native Freedoms and Benefit of the Laws (being the Birthright of
every Subject) and by the due attendance of the Members of Parliament, in
discharge of their trust to the Kingdom, and in observing the self denying
Ordinance.

The^^ remises considered, your Petitioners do humbly pray, That the Kings
Majesty may be speedily freed from that restraint wherein he now remains, and
humbly invited unto a Personal Treaty, for the settling of a safe and well
grounded Peace; And that therein the Union between the two Kingdoms may be
preserved; That in the interim, all acts of hostility both by Sea and Land may
by command of King and Parliament cease, And Trade free without interruption,
That the Government of the Church may be speedily settled according to the
Covenant, Distressed Ireland relieved, The People of the Land (by disbanding
all Armies) may be eased of their intolerable burdens, The Liberty of the
Subject restored, The Laws of the Land established, The Members of this
Honorable House enjoined to attend the service of the Kingdom, That the
self-denying Ordinance may be effectually observed: And that this Honorable
House would be pleased, speedily to take into their serious consideration the
sad condition of such Merchants, whose ships and goods are under that Fleet,
which is now with His Highness the Prince of Wales, and suddenly to find some
expedient for their releasment.

And your Petitioners shall daily pray, etc.
9 Augusti, 1648.
THe House of Commons have considered of the Petition of the Lord Major,
Aldermen and Commons of the City of London in Common Counsel assembled,
presented to them August 8. And upon serious Debate had thereupon, they have
thought fit to acquaint the Common Counsel,

That they have passed an Ordinance for the settling of Presbyterian Government;
and therein (upon review of all their former Ordinances) they have perfected
and compiled the same in one entire body.

And for the obtaining a safe and well-grounded Peace, They have resolved upon
a Treaty with the King in the Isle of Wight, upon the Propositions formerly
agreed upon and presented to the King at Hampton Court, and for taking away of
Wards and Liveries; and also upon such other Propositions as shall be
propounded either by His Majesty or both Houses of Parliament: And that the
King make choice of what place He pleases in that Island, to be there with
Freedom, Honor and Safety, to Treat personally with the Commissioners of
Parliament; And the Committee which they have sent to present this offer, are
now with His Majesty.

Concerning the seizing of the Ships and Goods of the Merchants of the City of
London, and the decay and obstruction of the Trade of the Kingdom by the
Revolted Ships that lie in the Downs, The House is deeply sensible thereof, and
have done what lies in them for reducing those Ships to their due obedience to
the Parliament, by offering them Indemnity for their Offense, and payment of
the Mariners Arrears upon their submission; and by sending the Earl of Warwick,
Lord Admiral, with power to command the rest of the Navy to reduce those Ships
by force, if they refuse the pardon offered them; which might have proved an
effectual means before this time, to have prevented the loss already suffered,
and to have secured the Trade of the Kingdom, had not the going out of the
Fleet been retarded by the backwardness and treachery of diverse who have
secretly complied with the late defection of the Navy. And that the House may
manifest their earnest Desires to entertain any further means for the more
speedy and certain effecting of this work, of so necessary importance to the
Honor and Welfare of this Nation, They have appointed a Committee to Treat with
the Merchants (that are most concerned therein) to receive their Advice, and to
know what ayds they will contribute to the clearing of the Seas; and their
readiness therein, as it will return abundantly to their own advantage, so it
will be embraced (as a most acceptable Service to the whole Kingdom) by this
House.

As to the Scottish Army which have in Hostile manner invaded this Kingdom, are
possessed of Barwick and Carlisle, contrary to the Treaties betwixt the
Kingdoms, and do join themselves with the Popish and Malignant party in the
North, The House of Commons have Declared them Enemies to this Kingdom; and
that all those English or Irish as voluntarily adhere to them, are Traitors and
Rebels, and to be proceeded with accordingly. And they resolve (by Gods
assistance) to adhere to and prosecute this their Resolution; and upon the just
and necessary grounds thereof, They do expect the hearty concurrence and
assistance of this City of London, as of the rest of the Kingdom,
Notwithstanding all the secret Plots and Endeavors of the Scots Emissaries, or
the Agents of the Popish and Malignant party of this Kingdom to the contrary.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D Com.

FINIS.

