The humble Petition of us the Parliaments poor Soldiers in the Army of
Ireland, whereof many are starved already, and many dead for want of
Chirurgions.
portrait of destitute soldier
Shows,
THat we the poor distressed Soldiery under the Parliaments Service in
Ireland, having heretofore served the Parliament under the Lord General Essex,
valiant Massey, and noble Sir William Waller, and the rest, etc. did in all
faithfulness, hardship and desperate service as ever any, hazard our lives
and fortunes, and did according to order obey and disband then not so much as
doubting of all our Arreares, and now have almost served you two years in all
integrity and faithfulness both Winter and Summer, wet and dry, frost and
snow, having no other bedding then the bare ground for our beds, and the skies
for our covering, and when dry in the day and night, no other sign to drink at
but the Sun and Moon, and nothing but water, having no plenty, but cold backs,
hungry bellies, and puddle water, and when sore wounded, not a Surgeon to
dress us, or if a Surgeon, no chest, nor salve, nor ointments; and for bread
many times not a loaf of two pence under six pence, and rotten cheese sent not
fit for a dog, and for butter it went from London to Dover, and mistook Dublin
and went to Dunkirk, and for our new clothes all made of the French fashion,
and being too little for any of us, were carried for France to cloth them,
hardly hats to our heads but what our hair grows through, and neither hose or
shoes, doublet or breeches, tearing our Snapsacks to patch a hole to hide our
naked and starved flesh, and our swords naked for want of scabberds: Thus with
our backs without clothes, and our bellies without food, and not a penny to buy
any thing, and the Kernes having burnt the corn and destroyed all fit for
succor, we forced to march bare legged and bare footed, having neither fire
nor food, we perish in misery, and our Commanders being in a manner in the same
case, having nothing but good words to pay us with, showing us often your
Orders upon Orders for our pay, plentifully promising but not performing; and
thus we dropping down dead daily in our marching, and so feeble and so weak,
being not able to fight or do any more service without some supply, but all
like to starve and die in misery, when all means is anticipated, and the Tax
of 60000. l. wholly engrossed by your Army from us, and your Soldiery
quartered in Kings houses, and clad Gentile like, and fed in Free Quarter to
the full, and lie in good beds, and take their pleasure and ease in rest and
peace.

We humbly desire our hungry bellies may once be filled, and our naked backs be
clothed, and our legs and feet be hosed and shooed, and our Surgeons once more
fitted, and all recruited with food to supply us once more, that we may go out
again to finish that work we have begun, and not to lie like Drones to eat up
others meat, and we do not doubt, but with Gods blessing, to give you a happy
account of the Conquest of the whole Land, and shall ever pray for a happy
Parliament.

DUBLIN: Printed by W. B. 1648.


