The Humble REMONSTRANCE AND RESOLVES OF Col. Overtons Regiment in his
Excellencies Garrison of HULL;

Subscribed by the Officers in the Name of themselves and their Soldiers, and
presented to His Excellency the Lord General Fairfax.

Wherein is remonstrated their Integrity to their Trust, and their own
Vindication against the late Aspersions cast on them, as if they had declared
for Thompson's Party, and other late irregular Actings.

Together with Colonel Overton's Letter to the General.

LONDON, Printed for Lodowick Lloyd, and Henry Cripps, and are to be sold in
Pope's Head Alley. 1649.

The humble Remonstrance and Resolves of Col. Overtons Regiment, etc.
AFter so many miraculous deliverances and victories given unto us by almighty
God, the consideration whereof has not only interessed us of this Garrison to
act our parts in the stations we are in, by a full resignation of our selves to
what has been foreremonstrated by the Army, but also truly touched and united
out hearts unto your Excellency in your late goings against that seduced part
of it, whose proceedings we do not only disown, but disavow and deny, as a
thing so weakly grounded, and to unseasonably sought, as we cannot but confess
our fears, that either some Jesuitical and projecting pates have hereby gone
about to retard the intended and timely relief of bleeding, dying Ireland; or
otherwise, some secret, close, envious and undermining adversaries have again
endeavored to fan the fire of Faction, whereby fresh storms and ^^oubles might
be renewed to keep open the wounds of England, and to multiply the miseries of
Ireland; or otherwise to put forward their Positions, who are Enemies not only
to Peace and Propriety, but also secret and underhand Actors for Atheism and
Anarchy. Wherefore lest we the Officers and Soldiers in your Excellencies
Garrison of Hull should undergo so unjust a Calumny, as either secretly or
openly to consort our selves with such in our practices, We do hereby humbly
demonstrate unto your Excellency, That we not only disown and sadly resent the
preposterous and spurious projects of the late Defectors from the proceedings
of the present Parliament, your Excellencies interest and authority; but also
do mutually combine and agree, never upon any pretense, or pursuance
whatsoever, to betray or give up the private Entrustments of this place to any
other Interests on earth. And we do further declare, That we neither had, nor
will hereafter in that way have ought to do with any such Dissentors, either in
their works or writings, whereby poison dropped upon paper corrupts the Texts of
Truth or weak Intentions, and mounts Mischief upon an hill to raise an Edifice
of Discontent, or make an eternal monument for Misery. We do further
unfeignedly bless almighty God for the several good successes in this kind
given your Excellency against the evil Intentions of some, and the over easy
credulity of others, whereby the Nation might have become a field of blood, or
a Chaos of confusion.

And for a fuller obligation upon our obedience, we do hereby re-engage our
selves, with whatsoever is near and dear unto us, to abet (maugre all secret
suggestions to (...) contrary) the supportation of every just power of
Parliament or Army, acting in and for the Interest of the Freeborn People of
England, wherein we shall cheerfully give up our selves in a full resignation,
to be ordered and commanded by the supreme authority of Parliament, and your
Excellency, from time to time; so that our obedience may ever attend upon your
intentions and undertakings in pursuance of the peace and prosperity of this
Nation, together with the good guidance or government of the Army, without the
least inclination to treachery or Agitatorship: In which kind we conceive our
former compliances was a forced put, and had only the virtue of necessity for
its warrant; and has left, we are confident, such a character and face of
Confusion stamped upon it, that we shall not easily hereafter incline to throw
into that hazard; where once the good intentions of some sped better then could
possibly have been expected from such popular and multiplied proceedings, as,
for the most part, make a jar in business, which, put into the weilding of
common hands or heads, is like a Jewel in a Chest, which cannot be beheld, nor
made use of, because the key is lost. For like Achilles his Armor, this massy
weight of State-admanagements suits not their weak shoulders to presume upon,
except they would with Phaeton, attempt to overturn the State, or set the frame
of the whole Universe on fire.

Kingston super Hull, June 5. 1649.
My Dear Lord,
I Am glad that my Letter (though accidentally) came so conveniently for the
wiping off those occasions so causelessly cast upon our care in this Command,
who (for ought J know) at free from all sinister Engagements, and as firmly
united in our obedience to the Parliament, and your Excellencies Jnterest, and
the Discipline of the Army, as any other: For my opinion of former and latter
proceedings, as to parts and persons, J have not been sparing both in public
and private to express my self, yet ever with such due Reservations as tended
to the keeping sacred and inviolable my particular and private Trust, which J
assure your Lordship from him (who hates treachery as hell) J purpose never to
part withal; and whosoever in this kind are my accusers, let me, Sir, beseech
you to believe that J doubt not but the justice of that cause which gives
others comforts in their Commands, will also continue me obedient even unto the
death in my deputation; and though malice may in the interim bespeak me
suspicious, yet J doubt not but my endeavors shall at length shame their
aspersions, whose sharp teeth have blistered their envious tongues with such
biting and base Reports; J confess J do often sadly consider and recount the
disasters which divisions and distractions have entitled us to, yet find
occasion ever from those changes and chances to acknowledge the goodness of that
great and glorious God, who keeps us from that confusion of tongues, whereby
the furious violence of some, the secret subtlety* the innocent and honest
easiness of others, would have undoubtedly destroyed us in England, and have
left our Friends in Ireland to have languished and dyed by degrees under the
irrepairable oppressions of those really cruel and blood thirsty Rebels. God
grant a further Jndignation goes not out against us for our insensible
slownesse to their Assistance, whilst we go about to raise structures of
brainsick and Eutopian Governments after our own inventions, striving like
giddy Copernicusses both by Sea and Land to turn all things topsie turvy, as if
we meant to cast the universe-into its former Chaos: But this, my Lord, J
insist upon more to assure you of my self and service, then out of any purpose
to put any further trouble upon your Excellency, then what your pardon for this
present presumption may importune on his behalf, who, Sir, in despite of all
indeserved distractions devotes himself

Hull, June 6. 1649. Your Excellencies ever obedient and faithful observant
Servant, Robert Overton.

FINIS.

