THE HUMBLE REPRESENTATION OF SOME Officers OF THE ARMY, To the Right
Honorable LIEUTENANT GENERAL FLEETWOOD.

November I. 1659.

May it please your Lordship,
AS we are Englishmen and Christians, as we have been embarked from the
beginning of the Wars, have born our share in the burden and heat of the day,
are Commissioned by the Parliament, as other Officers of the Army are; and look
upon our selves, and our Families as concerned in the Weal, or the Woe of the
Land of our Nativity, we cannot neglect any means that may prevent, or be
parties to any thing that may promote the destruction of this poor Nation: And
therefore beholding with sad and bleeding hearts, the late renewed Breach made
upon this Parliament, the Consequents whereof will be in more then probable
Conjecture, not only the rendering of all the blood and Treasure shed and spent
for the deliverance of poor England, fruitless; but also the bringing of these
Nations into Blood, Destruction and Confusion; Than which nothing can be more
advantageous to Papists, and all bloody enemies to Justice and true Godliness:
so that we cannot with just Peace and satisfaction to our own Consciences sit
down altogether in silence, but as in some measure, we do pour out our hearts
before the Lord, so we think it our Duty to present you with some of our
serious Thoughts, Apprehensions and Fears, As also our desires, that you would
consider in time before the Lord, what a Floodgate is opened for a Deluge of
miseries to be poured down upon this Nation, and how much you are concerned, as
you tender the honor of God, the Vindication of Religion, the Credit of the
Gospel, the Recovery of your own Reputation that now lies at stake, the just
satisfaction that all sober Christians and true Englishmen may challenge from
you, and the Relief of your native Country that is now sinking in her dearest
concernments, and cries out for help, That you would (before it is too late)
improve your utmost Interest and Power, to put a stop to that destructive
Cariere that the Army now is engaged in, to obviate the too great advantages
that foreign and domestic enemies have now put into their hands, and
seasonably to hinder these new Counsels that have no Parlimentary Sanction, and
so must be grievous to the free born people of England in any thing they do. We
address our selves to you, not only as being of eminent interest, but because
you have professed Religion, and strictness of Godliness at a high rate, and much
tenderness of spirit. Many sober Christians have had great hopes of you, and we
are not without confidence our selves, yet we know that you are in a very great
Tempration; the Lord grant that your Temptation may not be seconded with a
divine Desertion, we are jealous over you; many are at a stand what to think of
you, it was believed that when English Liberties were in late years so much
infringed, that you did rather bewail them, then fully consent to what was
done, give us leave in faithfulness, and with breakings of heart to tell you,
that present Actings do seem more transcendently to strike at the Liberties of
the English Nation, and there is none now upon the stage of Action, that can
pretend to the same advantages the former Protector had. Let not our hopes as
to you be fruitless, nor our desires altogether rejected, if you will not hear
the cries of the condition of this poor Nation, the Lord will in his time, and
believe it, there are thousands of precious souls in England (whatever some may
think of them) and will be found precious at the day of Christ's appearing, who
are at this day weeping in secret places for the unwarrantableness of these
undertakings, and therefore let us speak this once to you, enter into your
Chamber, yea into the Closet of your own heart, come with your heart in the
sight of that God whose cies are a flame of fire, and whose eie-lids try the
Children of men, and then labor to give to England Scotland and Ireland a
through proof of your faithfulness, humility, self denial, and public
spiritedness by timely retracting of late unjustifiable actings, in violating
that authority whom we have all lately owned, and by whom we have lately been
entrusted by Commissions. The good people of this Nation have been formerly
deceived by good words and fair promises; Setting days a part for seeking God
in fasting, when the way is not good, will not hereafter blind English eyes,
doing things unwarrantably, and then intituling God to them, as they will never
the more be owned by God, so they will be never the more acceptable to
decerning men; He that does Righteousness is righteous; The fear of the Lord is
to depart from evil: and true Godliness cannot be without a denying of self in
all ungodliness and wordly lusts. They are just indeed who have opportunity and
power to be unjust, and yet dare not, because of the fear of God; they are
truly faithful, who when they are tempted and provoked to be treacherous, yea
and have opportunity and power so to do, yet will not, dare not wound their
Trust; They have the name of God written in their hearts who stand in awe of
his Precepts, and dare do nothing merely because their sword is long enough to
do it; and if this be according to the rule of Truth, the question will be,
Whether the late and present actings of so many Officers of the Army be
suitable yea or no? The Parliament is interrupted, and that by a great part of
the Army; and what Parliament? is it not the long Parliament? under whose
Counsels, the Army (by the blessing of God) has won so many glorious Battles
in the field, both in England, Scotland and Ireland; That Parliament which
through the Mercy of God, together with the subordinate Concurrence of Land and
Sea-Forces, was a Terror to Enemies both abroad and at home: That Parliament
which was so constantly, willing and ready, both to satisfy Public Debs and
contracted Arreares, and to provide constant pay for the Army and Navy: That
Parliament whose former interruption was found to be no ways advantageous to
the Nation. Have not the Affairs of England both abroad, and at home been
declining ever since? And was not this Army brought into such a perplexed
condition by an overruling hand of Providence that it was forced to profess
before God and Man its sense of backslidings, and its duty to take shame to it
self even for that force it had offered to this Parliament? Did not this Army
acknowledge this Parliament, the only visible Authority of this Nation? And
thereupon solemnly desire and invite them to the discharge of their remaining
Trust, promising all Faithfulness and assistance therein; Is it not to be
considered, that this Parliament, notwithstanding they could not but see that
they must sit again under great difficulties and disadvantages because the
Treasure was exhausted, vast debts were contracted, and the Soldiery and
Seamen unpaid, yet being invited, how did they break through those
dis-couragements, and undertook difficillimam Provinciam, who were no sooner
assembled, but a general, desperate and deep laid-plot, stares them in the
face, and in many places breaks forth upon them; and can it be denied? that the
Lord was pleased in every part of the Nation where the plot brake forth to take
the honor of the success chiefly to himself, and we may truly say, that by
Grace we were outwardly saved least any man should boast: and can any be so
injurious as not to acknowledge that by the late sudden Calming of the storm,
God was pleased afresh to own, and that signally the Counsels of this
Parliament? Yet this Parliament must again be interrupted, and that by those
who had several ways engaged solemnly to them afresh, and in the late
Petition, how many times do the Officers engaged therein seem to take a
pleasure in styling themselves the faithful servants and faithful Army of
this Parliament. Yet now, with what reality, we shall with grief of heart
consider, and the world will judge; especially because already there are so
many at work with Tongue, yea some with pen to bespatter the Armies
acknowledged Masters, and consequentialy to bring Parliaments out of credit, if
possible, so as to besool people into a belief, that Parliaments will not do
the work, but the eyes of Englishmen are not so easily put out: We have not
forgotten that it was an old Court design, not only to allure, but to affright
Englishmen out of their love to, and their very discourse of a Parliament; yet
there was a Parliament at last which found work enough for all the Courtiers in
the Nation: We are not ignorant how that there have been Attempts of later date
to wean this English Nation from love unto their Parliament; and fair things
have been promised, and some good things have been endeavored to have been
done by another hand, yet there was still a necessity of calling Parliaments;
and when an entire house of Commons would not do, a part thereof shall be made
use of; and when a part would not serve the turn, it also must take its turn
to go off the stage; and when now Parliaments seemed troublesome, the long
Parliament (styled by the Army the famous long Parliament) must be called
again; which is not an obscure evidence that the spirit of the freeborn
Englishmen (notwithstanding Parliament interruptions yet) is still working
toward a Parliament, and that old Maxim will not easily be obliterated out of
the Tables of English hearts, Quod omnes tangit, ab omnibus tractari debet:
This English Nation will be loath to lose their Hereditary and Birthright
privilege of making their own Laws by which they shall be governed: We have
had such experiences of a Parlamentary States-Physitians that have attempted in
an uncouth way to heal the Nation, and this with so little success, as that we
(and we do believe that there are many thousands of our mind) do know no
help under God like that of a Parliament: But now we are told, that as there
is noe Authority in the Nation, so all Authority is devolved upon, and resides
in the Army, that is, in the Officers, and our Government must be a
Sword-Government; And shall this be spoaken by any that shall preesume to take
the name of an holy just God into his mouth? Is Englands Dear bought freedom
come to this? Our hearts would sink, but that we know the Lord does reign, and
if it were possible for to prevent it, we would say, Tell it not in Gath, and
let it not be published in the gates of Ashkelon, lest the Daughters of the
Philistims triumph. Have men been beheaded, banished, and slain in the Field
for doing things contrary to English Laws, and shall this Army bury English
Laws and the Legislature it self all at once, and take all into their own
hands? But no question some will say, there shall be just things. It is not the
doing of some seeming righteous things, that will satisfy the just
expectations and Claims of this English Nation, when they see that all that
they have lies at the mercy of their Fellow Servants. We have not forgotten
what was once told to the late King, and that by a Parliament, That it is
better to rule in the hearts of men by love and justice, then to rule over them
by force and power. An Arbitrary Sword may tyrannize over men's persons and
estates for a time, but it does never conquer Spirits. We would have hoped that
no part of this Army that professes so much for Christ and his Kingdom, would
have ever so much as coasted upon the course of the Egyptian Mamalukes, or the
Roman Pretorian Bands. But let men make sure of this, that what God did seem
to wink at amongst ignorant Heathens that were no better taught, he will not so
easily overlook when acted by those who should have better learned Christ: For
Christ has said it, That he that takes the Sword shall perish with the Sword.
And for certain, what was lately acted and now acting, will come under the
judgment of Christ who is no respecter of persons, and before whom all the
power and force of this world is as nothing, but as the drop of the Bucket, and
as the dust of the Balance. We are not ignorant of the great Argument why this
Parliament was interrupted; What? Must nine Families be undone at once? Far be
it from us to desire the undoing of any, much less of those for whom we have so
great a respect: And we could heartily wish, that affairs might be composed to
mutual satisfaction, and we are apt to fear that all good men will at the
long-run find the smart and inconvenience of these unhappy Divisions. But what?
are Military Commands so essential to the well being of men, if not to their
beings, that they shall count themselves undone, if their Commissions be but
vacated by Parliament? If vacating of Commissions be an undoing, how many
hundreds of Families have been undone time after time at the pleasure of the
Parliament? Did not the Parliament in the year 1645, think fit to lay aside
these General Officers ensuing, namely the Earl of Essex, the Earl of Warweck,
the Earl of Manchester, Ferdinando Lord Fairfax, Sir William Waller, Major
General Massey, Sir William Brereton, Colonel Ressiter, and many other
Officers? Yea how many Commissions have been vacated lately by the Committee of
Nominations, and the former have for many years sat down in silence and
peaceably at home, who have been known in their time to have done as good
service; and happily diverse of them might be thought to deserve a Military
trust, as well as some others: But let the utmost be granted, which cannot be
imagined, that it were a kind of outward undoing: must the Parliament be broken
up? Must the only Authority of the Nation be trampled upon to prevent such an
undoing? Nay more, must the saving of nine Commissions be of such weight in the
Balance of Consideration, as that the undoing of so many Millions of Families
in these Nations shall be put to open hazard? but it may be presumed that all
will go well, because there is such a seeming compliance: we well remember that
general Subscriptions and often Addresses, have in very late experience,
proved but a rotten prop or sandy foundation, to some who have either leaned or
built too much upon them: we call to mind, that at first, that as the War
was, so it was asserted to be, defensive on the Parliaments part; and we do
believe, that when we formerly with such heat and activity did prosecute the
Cavileere, as the declared Enemy to English Freedoms asserted in Parliament,
and when we were in the days of our extremity amongst Garments rouled in
blood, and many times expecting our entrance into eternity by some instruments
of death; that it was not then judged by any to be part of the good Old Cause,
to wrest all Power and Authority out of the hands of the peoples
Representatives in Parliament, and to fix it in an Army. We have the rather
taken upon us the liberty thus to express our moans unto your Lordship,
relating to these Affairs now in hand, because some of us were desired (which
we took for a command) to withdraw from the Council of the Officers, though we
are Commissionated Officers by Parliamentary Authority as well as others; and
therefore we cannot willingly Subscribe to the freedom of those debates, where
any without any just allegation are secluded or suspended: and then we did
desire that we might not be concluded by, or looked upon as Parties to any thing
which should be there concluded on. We are Englishmen born and bred, and have
adventured our dearest blood with others for our freedoms, and by the mercy of
God, the common Enemy could not withhold them from us; we shall not willingly
by any act of ours give them away: If any of our fellow Servants will (because
they can) by force take our freedoms from us; If we have no appeal on Earth,
yet our eyes shall be toward him that judges righteously, and our Prayers
shall be, Lord help us, for thou art the helper of the oppressed. We have not
much further to say unto your Lordship but this, we must lay before you, that
in what you now do, you run three Nations into most desperate hazard, all lies
at stake, and all lies a bleeding. The Question now is, Whether it be not more
honorable upon a Christian account, and safe for you and others, to sound a
seasonable Retreat, then to March on in ways which one day will not be
justified before him who is a consuming fire. The Parliament of England never
raised or maintained Soldiers to be Lawmakers, but to defend this Nation
against those who were Law-breakers. Let not, Oh let not any who have any
stirrings of Conscience, justify that in their own practice which they have
fought down in others; Religion and the Gospel should be, and we hope will be
dearer to us then our lives, our Liberties and Estates which in their place we
must value. We know that the Lord of Heaven is he alone upon whom (for the
maintenance of these) we must chiefly depend. But according to humane
consideration, and as we are English Freemen, and in this age have been beaten
into the knowledge where our English Freedoms may be most safely lodged, so we
must in all humility bear our open testimony to you, that we know, nor can
willingly own no safer means for the securing of all these, then in the
Parliament, the people of England Assembled in Parliament by their
Representatives, we must own to be our proper Lawmakers, and to have
Legislative power, and to have power Legally to levy Taxes upon the People. We
must own it that the Militia and standing Forces of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, ought to be subordinate to, and to be disposed by commands of
Parliament, and of such Powers as are delegated by Parliament. And therefore
again it is the earnest desire of our hearts to your Lordship, that you would
lay Englands sad condition and the interest of Christ in the world to heart,
and consider the hopes of all sorts of enemies by the late sad breach, and lay
to heart the sad sighs, tears, and groans of thousands of precious souls in
this Nation, as also the fears of many, that the glory is departing from our
Israel: and also consider your own danger and the danger of the Army, in the
ways they now are; and that you would effectually endeavor the removing of
the present force upon the Parliament, that they may sit in safety and without
interruption, for this we judge (as the Army not long since have done) the most
likely expedient to make way for Englands settlement, and therefore why should
you not interpose? it will be your honor, that by your means the door be once
more opened, that this Parliament may take some effectual course, for as
comprehensive an election of a succeed (...) Parliament, as the safety of the
Cause will bear. (...) to common enemies themselves we can truly say, that we
wish them equal benefit with our selves under Parliamentary Laws. We only
desire, That provision may be made, that the Parliament and well affected of
the Nation may not be at the Enemies mercy. In this our address to you, We have
desired in faithfullness to bear our testimony, and when we have done, we must
leave all to the dispose of Him that rules all the world, and lay it before
your serious and retired consideration. We remain

Your Lordships most humble Servants This Letter was signed by these Officers
Col. Herbert Morley. Col. Thomas Sanders. Col. John Okey. Col. Matthew Alured.
Col. Henry Markham. John Streater Comptroller of the Ordnance. Liut. Col.
William Farley. Major Arthur Evelyn. Major Nathaniel Barton.


FINIS.

