Comprehension with Indulgence.
Nihil est jam dictum quod non suit dictum prius. Terrence.
IT has pleased His Majesty, by several Gracious Overtures, to commend a Union
of his Protestant Subjects to the Consideration of Parliament. A Design full of
all Princely Wisdom, Honesty, and Goodness. In this Achievement there is a
double interest (I apprehend) to be distinguished and weighed: that of Religion
it self, and that of the Nation. The advance of Religion does consist much in
the Unity of its Professors, both in Opinion and Practice, to be of one Mind,
and one Heart, and one Way (in Discipline and Worship) so far as may be,
according to the Scriptures. The advance of the Nation does lie in the Freedom
and Fluorishing of Trade, and uniting the whole Body in the common Benefit, and
dependence on the Government. The one of these bespeaks an Established Order
and Accommodation: the other bespeaks Indulgence, Liberty of Conscience, or
Toleration. For, while people are in danger about Religion, we dare not launch
unto into Trade (say they) but we must keep our Moneys, seeing we know not
into what streights we shall be driven; and when, in reference to their Party,
they are held under severity, it is easy for those, who are designing Heads,
to mould them into Wrath and Faction; which, without that occasion, will melt,
and dissolve it self into bare dissent of Opinion, peaceably rejoicing under
the enjoyment of Protection.

The King, we know, is concerned, as Supreme Governor, and as a Christian,
Protestant Governor. As he is King, he is to seek the Welfare of the Nation;
as he is a Christian, the Flourishing of Religion: and the Protestant Religion
particularly is his interest, as this Kingdom does lie in balance, (He being
the chief Party) with its Neighbor Nations.

The Judgment now of some is for a Comprehending Act, which may take in those
who are for our Parochial Churches, that Severity then might be used for
reclaiming all whosoever separate from them: The Judgment of some others is,
for a Free and Equal Act of Grace to all indifferently, (the Papist with most
excepted) whether Separatists or others, abhorring Comprehension, as more
dangerous to them, upon that account mentioned, than all the Acts that have
passed. Neither of these judge up to the full Interest of the King and Kingdom,
as is proposed. It becomes not the Presbyterian, if his Prinriples will admit
him to own our Parochial Churches, and enjoy a Living, to be willing to have
his Brethren, the Independent, given up to Persecution: and it becomes not the
Separatist, if he may but enjoy his Conscience, to repine, or envy at the
Pesbyterian for reaping any farther Emolument, seeing both of them (supposing
the latter may do so) have as much at the bottom as can be, in their
capacities, desired of either. It is an Act therefore of a mixed Complexion,
providing both Comprehension and Indulgence for the different Parties, must
serve our purpose.

And to this end (as we may humbly hope) there is a BILL at present in the
House, A BILL for the Ease of the Protestant Dissenter in the Business of
Religion. Which that (upon this present Prorogation) it may be cast into this
Model, I must present the same, yet in a little farther Explication.

There are two sorts (we all know) of these Protestant Dissenters. One that own
the Established Ministry, and our Parish-Congregations, and are in capacity of
Union upon that account, desiring it heartily upon condescension to them in
some small matters: The other, that own not our Churches, and so are incapable
of a Conjunction, who do not, and cannot, desire it, or seek it.

For the One, that which we propose is a farther latitude in the present
Constituted Order, that such may be received; and this we call Comprehension,
or Accommodation. Let us suppose, that nothing else were required of a Man, to
be a Minister of a Parish, than there is to the Parishioner, to be a Member of
a Parish Church, as part of the National: If a person baptized will come to
Church, and hear Common Prayer, and receive the Sacrament, and does nothing
worthy of Excommunication, he is, he may, he must be received for a Parochial
Member: In like manner, if a Minister first ordained (and so Episcopally, or
Classically approved in his abilities for that Function) will but read the Book
of Liturgy, and administer the Sacraments according to it, and does nothing
which deserves Suspension (we appeal to all the indifferently sober) why should
not this suffice a Man for the enjoying his Living, and exercising the Office
unto which he is called?

For the Other, there is indeed nothing can be done to bring those in, and join
them with us in Parochial Union; yet is there this to be proposed, that you
bear with them, and not let any be Persecuted merely for their Consciences; and
that we call Indulgence, or Toleration. If the Presbyterian now may be
Comprehended, he will be satisfied, to act in his ministry without endeavoring
any Alteration otherwise of Episcopacy: If the Congregationalist be Indulged,
he will be satisfied, though he be not Comprehended; for that he cannot submit
unto, and so shall there be no Disobligation put on any, but all be pleased,
and enjoy the Ease of this BILL. Let but the Grounds of Comprehension be laid
wide enough to take in all who can own and come into the public Liturgy (which
we suppose as yet to be the greater weight of the Nation), and when the
Countenance of Authority, and all State-Emoluments are cast into one Scale, and
others let alone to come of it, without Persecution to Inflame them, or
Preferment to Encourage them, (especially if one expedient be used, which shall
not pass unmentioned in the close, that such as come in may find it really
better to them, to be a Priest to a Tribe, than a Levite to a Family,) we need
not doubt but Time, the Mistress of the wise and unwise, will discover the
peaceable issue of such Counsels.

And here let me pause a little; for methinks I see what Icesicles hang on the
Eeves of the Parliament House at this Motion, what Prejudices, I mean, and
Impressions have been laid on the Members by former Acts. There was a Speech
delivered, by the then Chancellor in Christ-Church Hall in Oxford, to the
Parliament there, and the Scholars assembled, wherein the Glory of contriving
the Oxford Oath, and consequently of the like former Impositions, was most
magnificently, as well as spitefully enough arrogated to its proper Author. It
was, it seems, the designed Policy of that Great Man, to root those Principles
out of men's minds, upon which the late Wars (as he supposed) were builded, and
he would do it by this invention, to wit, the imposing upon them new
Declarations, Oaths and Subscriptions, of a strain framed contrary to those
Principles. I do remember now the Sentence of Esdras to the Apologue of the
Anglel, where the Woods and the Seas would encounter one another. Verily (says
he) it was a foolish puopose; for the Trees could not come down from the Hills,
nor the Waves get up from the Shoars. I must say the same of this Policy. It
was really a great vanity to think that Folks should be made to swear away
their Thoughts and Beliefs. Whatsoever it is we think or believe, we do think
it, we must think it, we do believe it, we must believe it, notwithstanding any
of these outward Impositions. The honest man indeed will refuse an Injunction
against his Conscience, the Knave will swallow it, but both retain their
Principles; which the last will be the likeliest to put any villainous Practice.
On the contrary, there is nothing could be advised more certain, to keep the
Covenant, and such Principles alive in men's hearts, and memories, than this
perpetual enjoining the Renunciation of it. Nor may you wonder, if that Lesson
sink deep into men's flesh, which you will teach them with Briars and Thorns, as
Gideon taught the men of Succoth. Besides, it is the most unpolitick thing that
ever could have been, for such Contents, as are of that dangerous consequence
to Majesty and the Government, to have them once disputed, or brought into
question, to be put into these Declarations, Oaths and Subscriptions, which
necessitates the examination of them to so many. It was the Wisdom of the
ancient Church, instead of Contention about the Jewish Ceremonies, to take care
they might have an honorable Burial: and I dare say, if that Great Lord
Chancellor had but put off his Cap to the Covenant, and bidden it a fair adieu
only, he should have done more toward its Extirpation, than by all this
iterated trouble to men's Consciences. And if it shall therefore please the
succeeding Ministers of our State, instead of going to root out the Principles
of Innovation which are got into people, by this means (which is no means to do
it, but the means to rivet them more in us), to endeavor rather, to root out
the Causes from us, which make men willing to entertain such Principles, and
desire change: I suppose their Policy will prove the sounder. The way to
establish the Throne of the King is this, to make it appear, that all those
Grievances, and all those Good things which the people in the late times
expected to be removed, or to be obtained, by a Commonwealth, or a change of
the Government, may be more effectually accomplished by a King in the Acts of
his Parliament.

I am sensible how my Theme rises upon me, and that I begin to shoot wide: I
take my aim therefore again, and two things, in earnest, I would expect from
this BILL, as the sum of what is necessary to the End of it, our Ease, if it be
made to serve the turn. The one is, that Bishop Land be confined to his
Cathedrals: and the other, that Chancellor Hyde be totally expelled our Acts
of Parliament. By the first, I mean, that the Ceremonies in the ordinary
Parish-Churches be left to the liberty of the Minister, to use, or use them
not, according to his Conscience, and Prudence toward his own Congregation: and
by the latter, that all these new devised Oaths, Subscriptions and
Declarations, together with the Canonical Oath, and the Subscription in the
Canons be suspended for the time to come. If that be too much, I shall content
my self with a modester Motion, that whatsoever these Declarations be, that are
required to be Made, Subscribed, or Sworn, they may be imposed only as to the
Matter and End, leaving the Takers but free to the use of their own
Expressions. And this Expedient I gather from my Lord Cook, who has
providently, as it were, against such a season, laid in this Observation. The
form of the Subscription set down in the Cannons, ratified by King James, was
not expressed in the Act of the Thirteenth of Elizabeth. Instit. p. 4. c. 74.
And consequently, if the Clergy enjoyed this Freedom until then, in reference
to the particulars therein contained, what hinders why they might not have the
same restored, in reference also to others?

It is true, that it may seem hard to many in the Parliament, to undo any thing
themselves have done: but though this be no Rule for Christians, who are
sometimes to repent as well as believe, if they be loath to Repeal any thing,
what if they shall only Interpret or Explain? Let us suppose then some Clause
in this BILL, or some new Act, for Explanations. If any Nonconformist cannot
come up to the full meaning and intent of these Injunctions rightly explained,
let him remain in statu quo, under the state only of Indulgence, without
benefit of Comprehension; for so long as those who are not Comprehended, may
yet enjoy that Ease as to be Indulged in some equal measure answerable to his
Majesty's Declaration, whether Comprehension be large or narrow, such terms as
we obtain are pure advantage, and such as we obtain not, are no loss: But if
any does, and can honestly agree to the whole Sense the Parliament intends in
such Impositions, why should there be any Obstruction for such a man, though he
delivers himself in his own Words, to be received into the established Order
with others? Unless men will look on these Injunctions only to be contrived for
Engines of Battery, to destroy the Nonconformist: and not as Instruments of
Unity, to edify the Church of God.

I will not leave our Congregational Brethren neither, so long as I have
something more that may be said for them, not ordinarily considered by any. It
is this, that though indeed they are not, and cannot seek to be of our Churches
as they are Parochial, under the Diocese or Superintendency of the Bishops: yet
do they not refuse, but seek to be comprehended within the Church as National
under His Majesty. I will explain my self. The Church may be considered as
Universal, and so Christ alone is the Head of it, and we receive our Laws from
him: or as Particular, and so the Pastors are Heads, Guides, or Bishops over
their respective Flocks, who are commanded therefore to obey them in the Lord:
or as National, which is an accidental and external respect to the Church of
God, wherein the King is to be acknowledged the Supreme Head of it, and as I
judge no otherwise: For thus also runs the Statute, That our Sovereign Lord
shall be taken and reputed. the only Supreme Head in Earth of the Church of
England, called Ecclesia Anglicana. Now if it should please the King and
Parliament, to allow and approve these Separate Meetings, and Stated places for
Worship, by a Law, as His Majesty did by his Declaration, I must profess that,
as such Assemblies by this means must be constituted immediately integral parts
of the Church as National, no less than our Parish-Congregations: so would the
Congregate Churches (at least those that understand themselves) own the King
for Head over them, in the same sense as we own him Head over ours, that is as
much as to say, for the Supreme Coercive Governor of all (in this accidental
regard), both to keep every several Congregation to that Gospel Order
themselves profess: and to supervise their Constitutions in things indifferent,
that nothing be done but in Subordination to the Peace of the Kingdom.

Well, let us suppose then a Liberty for these Separate Assemblies under the
Visitation of His Majesty and his Justices, and not the Bishops; I would fain
know what were the Evil you can find in them. If it lie in any thing, it must
be in that you call Schism. Separation then let us know, in it self simply
considered, is nothing, neither good nor evil. There may be reason to divide,
or separate some Christians from others out of Prudence, as the Catechumens of
old from the fully instructed, for their greater Edification; and as a Chapel
or two is added to a Parish Church when the People else were too big a
Congregation. It is not all Division then or Separation is Schism: but sinful
Division. Now the Supreme Authority as National Head, having appointed the
Parochial Meetings, and required all the Subjects of the Land to frequent them,
and them alone, for the acknowledging, glorifying, or National serving and
worshipping the one only true God, and his Son, whom we have generally
received: and this Worship or Service, in the nature of it being intrinsecally
good, and the external Order (such as that of Time and Place, and the like
Circumstances) being properly under his Jurisdiction, it has seemed to me
hitherto, that unless there was something in that Order or Way prescribed which
is sinful, and that required too as a Condition of that Communion, there is no
man could refuse his attendance on these Parochial Assemblies, without the sin
of Disobedience; and consequently his Separation thereby becoming sinful,
proves Schism: but if the Scene be altered, and these separate Assemblies made
Legal, the Schism, in reference to the National Church, upon the same account,
does vanish. Schism is a Separation from that Church whereof we ought or are
bound to be members: if the Supreme Authority then loose our Obligation to the
Parish-Meeting, so that we are bound no longer, the iniquity (I say, upon this
account) is not to be found, and the Schism gone. Lo here, a way opened for the
Parliament (if they please) to rid the trouble and scruple of Schism (at once)
out of the Land. If they please not, yet is there something to be thought on
for the Separatist in a way of Forbearanee; that the innocent Christian, at
least, as it was in the time of Trajan, may not be sought out unto Punishment:
Especially when such a Toleration only is desired, as is consistent with the
Articles of Faith, a Good Life, and the Government of the Nation.

And now I turn me to the Houses. My Lords and Gentlemen! I will suppose you
honest Persons, that would do as you would be done unto; that would not wrong
any, or if you did, would make them recompense. There has been very hard Acts
passed, which when the bills were brought in, might happily look smooth and fair
to you: but you saw not the covert art, secret machination, and purposely
contrived snares against one whole party. If such a form of words would not,
another should do their business. By this means, you in the first place your
selves some of you were overstript: Multitudes dispossessed of their Livings: The
Vineyard let out to others: The Lord Jesus the Master of it, deprived of many
of his faithful Laborers: And the poor sheep (what had they done) bereft of
their accustomed spiritual food, to the hazard of their eternal Souls. Among
many Arguments therefore for Liberty in other Papers, from Policy, Convenience,
Reason of State, and Reason of Religion, I have this one to offer you of a more
binding nature, an Argument from Justice, Rigtheousness, and Restitution to the
Displaced. It is true, that the Places they once had are filled, and disposed:
but there are others enough. There are many of those who possess theirs, do
also keep their own, and keep more. There are many, who are Canons, Deans,
Prebendaries, that are also Parsons, Rectors, Vicars; who have Benifices and
Honors by Heaps, and by the Bushel. If it shall please You therefore in this
BILL on the Anvil, or in another, to take cognizance of Pluralities, that for
the preventing an idle, scandalous, covetously overgrown, unprofitable
Ministry, every man who has more than one Cure of Souls, or one Dignity,
shall give them up into a public stock, or to a general Distribution, you
shall do the Church right, and the Ejected right, you shall give such Drones
their due, and God his due, and strew the way by this means for the making
your Grace intended in this Bill, of signification. In the name of God Sirs,
let me move you to this, if it were only Hac Vice, for a present needful
conjunction of us at this season. We see the jaws of Popery and the Sectary
opening upon us, if the sober Protestant interest be not united, we perish. I
know who will be ready to stamp here and throw dust in the Air, for it is these
Sons of the Horse-leech whose voice is still Give Give that will never be
contented with a single Portion. A Dignity therefore with a Living, let them be
allowed: but one Dignity and one Cure of Souls should be all, though they cut
themselves with Lances. It is this damned hard objection at the bottom, the
Priests covetousness and corruption, rather than their dispute about things
indifferent, that really hinders the Churches Peace and Prosperity.

To conclude. According to what every man's mind is most upon (the Public
interest, or his Own), such is his value more or less.

The End.

