A REJOINDER TO Mr. DRAKE, OR A REPLY Unto his Book Entitled, A Boundary to
the holy Mount. Which being approached, is found so dreadful, that the people
do exceedingly quake and fear, lest they be consumed.

By John Humfrey Master of Arts, and Minister of Froome in Somersetshire.

The Wrath of Man works not the Righteousness of God.

JAMES 1.20. LONDON, Printed by F. L. for E. Blackmore, and are to be sold at
the Sign of the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard 1654.

The Author to the Reader.
IT is man's nature, or his fortune, in the turn of Opinions to run commonly
toward extremes; for while he struggles to get out of the clutches of an error
on one hand, the very force of his own striving, with a little trip of Satan,
letting him loose upon the sudden, throws him quite down upon the other. We
have very sad experience hereof in our times, which makes the day of
Reformation, between the animosities and excesses of two parties, and the mouth
of Separation, to be as if a man did fly from a Lion, and a Bear met him, then
going into a house, and leaning against a wall, a Serpent bites him.

The great unhappiness of our dawning Government, next to the laying the
ground of our divisions in her own bowels, has been the entrusting her pious
designs to the managemen of over-eager spirits, who finding no other hold-fast
on the hearts of Godly men, havr pressed too hard on a Trial to the Sacramen as
if they built alone on this foundation; whereas the divine right of
Church Government stands firm on its own basis, as discipline is distinct from
worship. Indeed it is a pious office of those the Holy Ghost has made
overseers, to look into the state of their flocks, according to prudence and
convenience, and if they take occasion at this Sacrament to do part of that
office (if they have opportunity) upon these grounds, who can gainsay them? And
indeed had men held forth in this trial only a christian prudence, and pastoral
duty, the people would be willing to lay burden enough on us; but when a power
must be estahlish'd, clothed with a divine right, and that urged with the
terror and danger of censure, and damnation: No wonder if tender Christians,
fearing a bondage bringing upon them, rise up for their precious Liberty; for
Christian conscience, which is the seat and tributary only of the infinite God,
abhors to become a servant of men, and while it trembles at every word of holy
Scripture, as ready to be turned with a twined thread, will never be brought to
bow, stoop, or abate a jot, to all the powers in the World.

A certain Governor of the Jews having set up Trophies, covered with Armor
and such Ornaments, in honor to Caesar, the people were all in a mutiny, as at
an indignity to their Religion; upon this he calling the chief of them
together, points to the Trophies, asking, what they thought they were, they
began to exclaim, Images; He seeing their zeal, causes their coverings to be
taken off, and underneath they were stocks of wood; The Jews seeing that, were
presently turned, and all their fury hushed into a submission. I humbly judge
thus of our Reformation, if she will set up her Examination, under such
Ornaments, as pretend Divinity, we shall be afraid of it as an Idol, but if she
would take off the Armor and dreadfulnesse of it, and let it appear but an
humane Ordinance for instruction, there are few, happily, but might bear with,
or submit to it. If thou be kind to this people, and speak good words to them,
and but please them in this Free Admission, they will be thy Servants for ever.

I do acknowledge the spirits of many the most holy Christians, have their
faces set against a mixed communion, and I do humbly reverence the many
pantings-and breathings of their hearts, after a fellowship of the Saints on
Earth, as near as may be to the Church in Heaven, which will ever cause it to
be no otherwise with us, so long as any zeal in men's affections shall prevail
over their judgments; Yet do I tenderly believe, that Christ's example enclines
not their way. Indeed there is no argument sinks so deep in my heart, as to see
the winding of such inclinations, against which I have Christ's own life alone
as satisfactory. My Savior Christ was holier than them all, he was the
godliest man, and the sweetest and humblest man that ever breathed; He never
says to any of us, Depart from me, I am holier than thou, unless at
Judgment; He never spoke such a word, I warrant you, in all his life. The most
holy, and the most lowly, the most separate from sinners, and yet a friend of
sinners. Truly methinks the consideration of this gracious temper of Christ in
that meekness of his, and accessablenesse to poor sinners, enters most nearly
into the embraces of my soul, and claspings about him, when I acknowledge my
self most undeserving all his benefits; Nay, if I may confess my very heart
(for such an untoward thing it is) I do more sensibly (according to those poor,
small, wretched affections I have) love him more for his sweetness of
disposition, amidst the doubts of my condition, than in my best assurances
(they are so fainting) for his dying in particular for my salvation. We never
read of any he turned away, but if they will come quite home to him in spirit,
they shall be welcome to all his entertainments; If they will come but to a
profession, he has even some love for them also, Mar. 10.21. they shall not be
grudged the benefits of that profession, Whosoever comes unto me, I will in no
wise cast out.

Now that doctrine that has so fair a countenance from the holy Jesus, that
goes the way of humility, and tends to peace, which if it may be Religiously
embraced, would have kept us from, and might end our divisions, and yet do no
more harm unto the main, than to forward it, is not unworthy more willing
contemplations. There are some have thought the World was made by a concurse of
Atoms, I think, if ever the multiform opinions of men, which like those
Atoms, fly up and down, about Church Government, do concur in one, they must
have their confluence and coagulation at this Ordinance.

It is observed of some diseases, that the fear of having them does bring them;
we may observe it here in pious men; the fear of Church-levelling, has leveld
us; their own Tenants have served to do it; the frights of our Mother, brings
her travel upon her.

There are four principles amongst us, Episcopacy, Presbytery, Independency,
Erastianism. Some are for Martin, and some are for Luther; But is Christ
divided? Might not one Jesus serve all parties? We know the perfect temperament
of natural bodies is of the four Elements; and it may be in our Government, if
the prime qualities of either of these were well disputed and allayed, they
might unite, and educe a form of the richest extract for our mixed Churches.

When Herod, to his great renown, promised the people, to re-edifie the Temple,
and was beginning upon it; they came and besought him by all means to forbear,
till he had provided the materials, and could assure them he was able to build
it a new, before they plucked down the old; which when he had taken some three
years time (if I forget not) to do, then they joyfully went about it, and
accomplished it. I humbly Imagine, this would have been good policy among us,
that the House of our Reformation, while it was building, had been made ready
before it was brought thither, that there might not have been heard the noise
of the Hammer and the Ax, in any of these clashings, while it was rearing.

As for the Presbytery, I verily believe the spirit of zeal, and fear of the
Lord breathes as eminently in most of them, as in any of the Saints on this
side Heaven. I heartily wish their moderation were known unto all men, as their
piety; though I doubt not too, but some very precious of them gather with us,
whilst others scatter abroad; some cannot but see, and feel, and pity our
perplexities. The Lord knows truly what it is that makes the hearts of many sad
that should not be sad, and strengthens the hands of our separations. For my
part otherwise, I could be contented to lie in the dust, for I am nothing, and
can let the world know, while Mr. Drake calls Mr. Humfrey one of the number of
Core, a Kain, a Deceiver, a boaster, so monstrously proud, that he even takes
the judgment seat to my condemnation; I thank the Lord, if I may acknowledge my
present temper, that Mr. Humfrey thinks Mr. Drake a very zealous servant of
Jesus Christ; and I do advise the Reader that the harshnesse of his passion may
not prejudice his cause, but that he will embrace the truth wheresoever he
finds it, pitying his weakness, especially in these four particulars.

1. Because the Sacrament is not to be Administered without the Church, unto
Heathen, to convert them to the faith, therefore it cannot tend within the
Church to any unregenerate Members edisication.

2. Because that Infants, Distracted, and Excommunicated persons are not to be
admitted, therefore there is the same reason for all ignorant and scandalous
persons; The often repetition of this, is a dead fly in his Ointment.

3. His manifold unsavory catchings at my words only and expressions, which is
pursuing my shadow, and not satisfying my Conscience, as p. 15. to 21.
especially p. 92, 93, 94. which is too unworthy a tender Christian.

4. His sharpness of spirit, and sore language; His words are very Spears and
Swords. I must confess they often wound me to my heart, and make me think
sometimes what profit is there in my wounds? If it will do him any good, he may
take the blood of them. O my Savior! though he get no good in the making, let
me receive good in their healing, let me have one drop of thy blood poured into
those wounds, and how sweetly will it heal them! let me find Oylin my good
Samaritan, while I fall amongst them, and thy balm of Gilead under the reproach
of Sion.

There is one passage I may not omit in his Presace, When I weigh his loose
Principles with his being so favorable to the looser sort, it makes me and
other to suspect his practices, etc. For my Principles, I hold thus; It is the
duty of all Church Members of age to frequent the Sacrament; A man must examine
himself and so Eat, he must come, and come worthily; If he be not worthy, that
will not excuse him from his duty, he must do both, as in other Ordinances, and
there is no escape otherwise. Mr. Drake holds, If a man be not worthy he must
abstain, and that is his duty. Let the righteous judge, if this take effect,
which will prove the looser doctrine. As for his censure of my life; let me
excuse him with his own words, p. 2. where he waves it with this reason. For
who am I, that I should judge my Brother? Good man! he is here afraid to sin
against God in the judging of me he knows not; but should he know me in all the
secrets of my heart, and whole life, from my youth up, Alas! he does not think
of me half so bad as I do; I am verily, and in my own eyes, much worse than he
dare judge of me (to wit, in his sober, not rash, indgement.) I heartily
beseech him to spend as many prayers unto God to make me better in his sight,
as he has done words to make me vile unto the World; and that while he says
unto my Soul, Bow down that I may go over, I may lay my body as the ground, and
as the streets, and let him go over.

Now as there are some of these, who are precious and godly, may be displeased,
for which I am sorry; there are others, with whom my Book, or subject of it,
has found acceptance. I find 4. sorts of them.

The first, are a humble lowly sort, that love to serve God, and be quiet; that
follow their studies and devotions in a still voice, and make no more noise of
Religion, than a sigh can do, and the soft droppings of a tear; These can meet
no body, but they are ready to bless God for them, as seeing something in
them, that makes them esteem them better than themselves; They can think every
one penitent, when they come to the Sacrament, as they are themselves. When
Zeal is ready to say, I only am left alone, Humility thinks, there are seven
thousand besides me. These are Nathaniels, true Israelites indeed, in whom
there is no guile; I bless God for a taste of some such spirits, whose sweet
encouragements herein, have as it were brought water to the thirsty, and
prevented with their provision, him that fled.

The second sort, are most of the old way, amongst which, there may be indeed,
too many of the looser sort, whom nevertheless we must not exasperate, but
meekly admonish to repentance, and be contented, with Rebeccah, when we open
the well for Abraham's servant, not to let the Man drink only, but the Camels
also.

The third, are part of the most judicious, of free and unprejudiced spirits;
who judge the main body of my Work necessary, though mingled with the Authors
weakness, and are ready, As the Shepherd takes out of the mouth of the Lion
two legs, and a piece of an ear, to rescue some parts of it, some passages, as
useful, and fit for better Meditations: Even as amongst those Votaries, that
were met withal by Ishmael, and about to be put to death, there were found
certain of them, saying, Slay us not, for we have treasures; so they forbear,
and slew them not among their brethren.

The fourth and last sort, to whom I owe most, are many unsatisfyed doubtful
Christians, either through tenderness of conscience, or search of
understanding, while the former, poor souls! look in their hearts, and find
some good desires, but not a prevalency of resolution in them; while they feel
sin, and a love unto their sin, and yet a hatred of that love; while they
have some signs of grace, and want others, no wonder they so greedily embrace
the Sacrament as a means to beget that in them, they are in doubt of, or else
must come upon their certain ruin. I must confess it is a notion has entered
my heart, and runs through this Book; Let the poor sinner come, as condemning
himself, and apply Jesus Christ in the sense of his condition; Let him come
with a rope about his neck, for our King is a merciful King. If we would judge
our selves, we should not be judged, 1 Cor. 11.31.

For the latter, the wise and more piercing, as they may not be so strict in
their apprehension of this solemnity, they do mainly enquire into the nature of
grace; how the Spirit works it, by way of moral Swasion only, or Infusion, and
that at once, or by gradual preparation; they know not whether special grace
differs from common any otherwise, than the same seed cast in diverse grounds,
in regard of root and continuance; and conceive this Ordinance with others, to
be means and helps for the rooting of it, or for the begetting those farther
degrees, which make that grace, that before was not, to become saving, and so
they can allow a proportionable latitude in their admission. It was the famous
Tyranny of one Procrustes toward strangers, to lay them in his own bed, and if
they were shorter, to stretch them out to the length of it if longer, to cut
them short to his Stature. I heartily bewail the extreme rigor of too many of
those we hold Orthodox, that would have all other judgments cut even with the
model of their own, especially in these first effectual workings of Gods
Spirit, which are secret to reason, various in experience, and unsearchable; as
to the way and means whereof, Jo. 3.8. there is none may limit him. For the Bed
is shorter than that a man can stretch himself on it, and the coverings
narrower than that a man can wrap himself in them.

To conclude, There are two kind of Readers into whose hands my lines will
come, my bare Readers, or my Judges. For my bare Readers, I do heartily
fore-warn you, not to trust to my judgment, but to stay and see what others
will write of it, counting of me only as one that have proposed your minds,
that you may be satisfied. In the mean while, I beseech you Brethren, in the
Bowels of Christ, be submissive to your Pastors, and grieve not the more
knowing and pious souls of those, that so indulgently watch ever you. For my
Judges, I only wish them to be moderate, unprejudiced spirits, and humble men,
and I shall submit unto their censures. If I have built Wood, Hay, or Stubble,
on Christ the foundation, let my work be burnt, but my self saved; I sacrifice
it to the flame, where it shall dye, though Truths malefactor, yet a Martyr, as
to the innocence of my intentions, and to testify my repentance, turn to ashes.

John Humfrey.

A REJOINDER TO Mr. DRAKE.
slightly affected; and to speak freely, seeing I know him not, I rather judge
it to be out of zeal, though overborn indeed too much with some distemper, that
makes him so hot and desperate in his Exceptions. He is afraid that the temper
of my Book, which is free and hearty, is so suited to the spirits of honest
people, that it will draw them after my opinion, which he judges to be
dangerous, and may do hurt to them, and therefore labors (in his discretion)
to deface in it, whatsoever has but the appearance of humility, or ingenuity. A
man may be more froward many times, than wise. As for the many revilings then,
wherewith he so often blesses me, in the scatterings of his indignation, I
profess they move not me so much (though they grieve me too bad otherwise) in
regard of the disgrace, for I am beneath it, as they they do please me in two
respects, 1. That this zealous man, I count, is so much the more in my deb^,
which I desire him to pay for me at the throne of Grace. And2. That if I should
be in any error, (which the more I doubt, the less I know) here is some salve
for it, to heal it in others, and expiate in me. For this censure, I trust in
the kindness of my Savior, shall be all the punishment he will lay upon me
for my failings* and while I receive my evil things here, I shall hope for my
good things to come, where my reproaches shall be turned into a reward, and the
Book my Adversary has wrote against me, be bound to my shoulder, and made a
crown to me, by being sanctified of God for a furtherance to his mercy.

When I read Mr. Drake at first, of all his expressions, it was that Text, Ez.
13.22. that went to my heart: Methinks I could almost wish I had never been,
rather than do any hurt to the Church of God; and it were better a millstone
were about the neck of my Book, than that it should offend any of Christ's
little ones; for though I were thrown into the Sea, thy mercies, O Lord, is
even there also! This made me look the narrower within my own breast, to see
what token the Lord would show me for good: Methinks I always see much
infidelity swimming over my heart, which may give some rise, and secret
occasion of my overpity to such perplexities I perceive in many about the
Sacrament, when others can rejoice to see their pious tears, and lay more
strictness on it; I do ever suspect the worst by my self: Now while in my
addresses unto the mercies of God, and all those billows of my soul that beat
me to this shore, I found nothing lay so deep at the bottom of my heart, which
kept me in some weeks suspense, as the making my account hereof at the great
day; I bless the Lord for some refreshings amidst my sorrows, persuading me,
that there is some true fear of God in my inward parts, though evil be present
with me, To. 7.21. which I think once wrought in me in the days of my youth, if
I remember right the love of my espousals, when I was going after him in a Land
not sown, but since have been straying in a wilderness of sin, wherein I were
lost without his mercy. O Lord, if in reading thy servant Drakes Book, (...)
have not feared thy righteous judgment more than man's, and been more troubled
about the good or hurt of men's precious souls, than the regard of my name, let
my honor lie in the dust, and my soul in ashes; Let my repentance be
conformable to my sin, for it is great, O Lord, even where I see it not, and
may be greater, in being hid from mine eyes till others find it: for as for
those many passages, wherein I am accused of pride, and censoriousness, Thou
know my conscience is ready to acquit me, yet will I not acquit my
conscience, which may take part with my sinful nature, but desire thy mercy to
cleanse me, and it, from all my secret, as known corruptions.

For the making my Apology, or defense against my Opposer, I shall humbly crave
the liberty he has taken, not to trouble my self too much about it. It Is true,
some bid me give him no answer, His language deserves no answer, but yet he
shall have as good a one as I can give him. I shall only requite the freeness
of his words, by being as fre^ from tying my self to any smoothness of style,
or form of language, but what comes easiest to my thoughts; wherein I will
deliver, as God assists me, my very heart in this controversy, being ready
even to fall down and beseech a tenderness of spirit, in the undertakers
thereof; for I am quite over whelmed with the fears that have got within me; On
one side, lest I should hurt the Church of God; On the other, lest I should not
endeavor the healing of the hurt, others I judge) have made, in the daughter
of my people. It would be sad to me, to make others sad, though they should not
be sad, if I did not make some rejoice, that should rejoice. But it is much
sadder to lie under fears, we should not fear, and have the bones broken, that
should not be broken. I have seen the tears of friends, I know the
difficulties of some spirits, and my own scruples, and I do fear, there is no
soul deeply tender, and doubtful of his condition, can ever solidly have peace
at this Sacrament, unless it be allowed a means of Grace to examining
Christians, that find as yet they savingly want it. They came to the pits, and
found no water, they return with the vessels empty, and were ashamed.

Before I begin with Mr. Drake, it will be requisite to consider in the way,
how he is pleased to judge and deal with me, as if my whole book were only in
opposition unto them, whom it least thought of in many parts of it. Those whom
it orderly concerns, are, 1. All tender Christians in general aggrieved about
this Ordinance.2 In particular, the more scrupulous, that wholly neglect to
administer or receive, only for want of discipline; which I take, is doing evil
that good may come of it, whose disallowance is just.3. Weak Consciences, made
so by others strictness, that judge the Sacrament defiled to them, if they eat
with any but the Godly; I have seen some experience hereof, I pity.4. The more
heady zealous Christians, that cannot be quiet without separation.5. Then in
the last place, it is against any forms to be set up as necessary to our
worship, which is but arbitrary and prudential, lest it bring a burden on some
Consciences, which like the poor, willing, humble Camel are even stooping on
their knees to take upon them. Now a right distribution only of my Book, in the
several passages to these several persons and comportments, will turn the body
of it so aside to the blows of my opposer, that the most part of them may pass
by empty, and do it no harm. For thou Lord, art a strength to the poor, a
strength to the needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from
the heat, when the blast of this terrible one is but as a storm against the
wall.

Now to come toward the work; In the entrance of Mr. Drake's Book, I meet with
a censure; I am sorry to see it. I will not say it is a piece of childishness
or incontinency, in a man of his title, nor that it is a mark of modesty in the
forehead of it; but I do think that while he is so forward to be known among
the Elders in the Gate, the more humble of his brethren are so ashamed for him,
that they may afford him Scarlet in their blushes. I could have wished him first
to have spent a few leaves in a due examen, that a conviction might appear
before his suspension, which might have cooled him a little perhaps; even as
the Romans were wont to bind up their instruments of punishment into bundels,
which they called their Fasces, that the wrath and passion of the Magistrate
(before whom in honor they were carried) might be assuaged something in their
giving judgment, while the Lictors were unbinding them.

After the Frontispeece, to omit the Preface, he begins his four first pages
with a quarrel at the Title of my Book, An humble Vindication, etc. and then
produces four passages for the World to judge of them, whether they savor not
of pride, etc.

Answer, I am content, let the World judge, and think upon Christ; It is no
wonder he cannot find in his heart to afford my Book its due Title, that is a
going about to crucify it. However, if any pious men are offended at me. I
think it safest to crave their pardon, professing in the presence of God, that
there was not one of these passages that came from me to my utmost memory, with
the least bitter reflection upon any, but were the mere harmless daughters of
invention; nevertheless, if the Mother be froward, the Child must do so no more.

And now I appeal to every godly heart; to take off from me, as to their
assent, this rash Censure, seeing there is none can be judge or witness herein,
but God and my conscience, who as to these particulars do clear me; yet though
I know nothing by my self herein, but my own fears, am I not justified, for
there are many others may condemn me, without flying to his mercy. If my heart
had not warmth, or zeal enough for some passages, nor establishment for others,
nor worth enough to suffer some things in my Prefacer. Forgive, O Lord, the
iniquity of thy servant, who is more ashamed of his sin, than to confess his
shame, which none eyes see, but thine. And let not these scruples of my weak
soul come in derision, but let me be contented yet to become more vile, while
all applause of men, and vainglory, fall down at thy feet, and give up the
ghost unto thy glory.

Mr Humphrey's subject is Free-Admission, his ground is Mat. 26.27. with Mark
14.23. Christ's precept, Drink you all of it; and example, in admitting Judas.

Ans. Sir, I acknowledge it, this is my ground, and it is holy ground, while I
see the prints, and kiss the footsteps of my Savior in it. Against this, he
first lays down reasons, that Judas did not receive, and then supposing he did,
that it is not a sufficient ground for my admission. I will answer both; his
Reasons are five that he did not receive.

1. Because Christ knew him to be an hypocrite, reprobate, etc.

Ans. Compare this with p. 9. and It was not fit, says he, Christ acting as a
Minister, nay, he could not p. 11. be both judge and witness, etc. Note it, and
put them together; in one place, Christ cannot give Judas the Sacrament, and in
the other, he cannot deny it him.

2. Because Christ's blood was shad for remission of their sins that received.

Ans. And not for our sins only, says one of the Receivers, 1 Jo. 2, 3. but
for the sins of the whole World, and so for Judas. Both these come under the
point of Universal redemption, which we may safely hold, as to the visible
Church, so far as reaches to the tenor and tender of the Conditional Covenant,
though not of the Absolute, or Election.

3. Because Christ promised to drink Wine in his Fathers Kingdom with those
that received.

Ans. But it is not said with All of them. This reason is as good as Didimus's
Christ did not appear to his Disciples, because he also was not with them. Who
knows not that a thing may be predicated of a company in general, which yet is
not applicable to every individual, as in 2 Thessalonians. 1.3, 4. with 2 Thessalonians. 3.11-1
Cor. 1.5.7. with 1 Cor. 3.3. etc? which likewise reaches the second reason.

4. Because Judas Went out, Jo. 13.30.

Ans. The Margin of your Bibles upon the first verse, points you to Mat. 26.2.
that this Supper was two days before the Passover, which I have stood upon;
yet will not be the more confident, because he is so ingenuous not to disprove
it. I shall here only take notice (that no just offense may be taken if I say,
some men bear a good will to this opinion) how for the exclusion of Judas, the
most make a Dimissory Supper, after the Passover, whereas some can find in
their hearts (whom he approves) to have a Common Supper before, to do it for
them. But how unlikely is it, says our Godwin, when they had a whole Lamb to
eat between twelve of them, that they should have besides, one, or two other
Suppers?

5. Because all Christ's gracious expressions were allayed with exceptions while
Judas was present.

Ans. What, All? Did Christ never speak graciously to Judas amongst the rest?
Pray see at leisure; and as for those Texts of Io. 6.10. Io. 13.10. he compares
with the passages at this Supper, I shall say as Joseph, It is not in me, God
shall give an answer to these texts in peace. In the first, Christ tells them,
Judas was a devil, yet says he, I have chosen him. In the other, he says, All
of them were not clean; he spoke it of Judas, yet he washes his feet. So here
he tells them he will betray him, yet communicates with them: See how sweetly my
adversary makes for us. So gracious is the temper Jesus Christ, he refuses none
so far as they come into him, in reality, or in profession.

And thus having answered Mr. Drakes five reasons, which, p. 5. he tells us seem
to him very weighty and convincing; Now you shall have Mr. D. himself answer
them, p. 97. Judas being 1. An Eminent Professor,2. A very knowing person,3.
Not legally convinced of scandal, I do not see how he could be denied the
Sacrament. If he see no reason why he should be denied it, his first reason
then, Christ knew him to be a Hipocrite, (depending only on this ground, that
he might not be admitted because such) is no reason; and his other four no
reasons; but in effect he does as good as tell us thus. There are reasons indeed
brought to prove that Judas received not the Sacrament, but for his part he can
see no reason in them.

Page 7. He reckons up many Authors (quoting Gelaspi) for this opinion; to
which I Answer, as the Philosopher being persuaded to believe in the God
Neptune, by one showing him those many votive tablets were hung up to him in
memorial of those that had escaped Shipwreck, answered, but where are the
relics of all those that were drowned? So say I, the Reverend Gelaspi reckons
up here these Authors that were of opinion, Judas received not the Sacrament,
but what are these to all them, that were of opinion he did receive it? I
reverence Mr. Gelaspi, I respect Mr Drake, I much more reverence those many
Authors, but I do not value them at the rate of Saint Mark, or that one text,
They all drank of it.

But All he says, p. ibid. is put for all present, and twelve for eleven,
quoting for it 1 Cor. 15.5. where it is said, he was seen of all the twelve, by
Roundness of number.

Ans. If All be put for all present, then it is put for the whole twelve, for
the twelve sat down with him. But that twelve should be put for eleven, I
think there is none that can but tell twenty, will believe him. His argument is
this, because twelve is put for eleven, when there was but eleven, therefore
twelve must be put for eleven, when there was twelve.

Page 8. He cannot but acknowledge the force of Saint Luke 22.21. where you may
see how easily one text can confute ye, his five Arguments, and six and twenty
Authors. Behold the hand of him that betrayeth me, is at the Table. He Answers,
1. Judas might be present, and yet not receive, but this he Will Not stand upon.
Alas! what pity it is, which would stand him in so much stead and he cannot make
it good,2. He is very peremptory, that S. Luke Writes per (...) who was not
present as Matthew was, etc.

Ans. Though Luke was not present, yet was he guided I believe by the same holy
Spirit, that knew what he wrote. And pray look on Matthew and Mark, both, we
find this story brought in with the Copulative And, And as they were eating,
And as they did eat, which manifestly conjoyns these two things together, to
wit the giving the Sacrament, and telling of Judas treason, at the same Supper.
Matthew and Mark may be true, whether Luke write (...), or no; but Luke can
never be made true, unless Judas hand was at Table, what Table? the Lords
Table, the Supper, where was the Lords Supper, in the foregoing verses.
Although the Scripture sometimes puts a whole story after another, which in
order of time was before it, yet where shall we find such an Hysterologie, as
takes a piece of a former story, and joins it to another, as a part of it, to
which if it be taken to belong, it becomes a manifest falsehood? we will not
abate one jot or tittle of the truth of St. Lukes Gospel.

P. 9. But suppose Judas was present, and received, 1. The Apostles scarce ever
suspected him, though discovered.

Ans. What then? It is manifest by this, that Christ and his Disciples did not
judge it necessary, to look into Judas, to find out whether he lived in any
known sin. They examine themselves, and say, Is it I? Now how will Mr. Dake's
trial, that is a means to vex hypocrites (as he words it) by prying into
others, and uncasing them, p. 49. and 117. be suitable to this humble temper of
the Disciples, and practice of Christ?

2. Judas had not yet actually betrayed Christ, and it is absurd to punish any
for a future sin.

Ans. Compare this with p. 102. where he tells us the rule he goes by, and keeps
men away (he says) to prevent scandal, also the sin of the unworthy receiver,
who would else murder Christ, etc. Mark it, Christ may not keep away Judas,
because he had not actually betrayed him, but Mr. Drake must needs keep men away
for fear they should betray him. It is absurd to suspend any for a future sin,
and yet he suspends all, to prevent the sin they have not committed. Nay,
this supposal only of a future sin, is the very ground of his
Excommunication, when he debars them nothing but actual receiving in any
ordinance.

3. Christ acting as a Minister, It was not fit, It would have been an ill
president, etc.

Ans. I am sorry to see, that prejudice, and interest of opinion, should ever
raise men to this high degree of imagination, That it was not fit for Jesus
Christ, the great Master of Discipline, to take so much power over his
Disciples, as the Presbytery over their Congregations: This is a sad passage,
to see what a fluce this man has opened to let in the streams of contempt come
in upon them.

It is far otherwise with us, seeing none are suspended, but 1. such as suspend
themselves, by refusing due trial.

Ans. I will ask him, Suppose a religious man, nay, suppose twenty, upon
grounds of conscience, or prudence, will not submit to his Trial, yet offer
themselves at the Sacrament, Dare he refuse to administer it to them, and knows
nothing else by them? If I should do so, seeing I am called to speak my
conscience, I should fear it were a sin. Alas Sir! Will you not let men serve
God, and save their Souls?

2. Such as upon trial are found unworthy, etc.

Ans. But I pray, have you any thing first to allege against them? If you have
not, how will you bring them to trial? If they come willingly, and you find
them unfit, and so suspend them; then you go about to punish them again for a
future sin. The truth is, if you are really so tender in this business, you may
repair to your people in that humble way of admonishing them with tears, and
from house to house, Acts 20.20. I say not you are bound to this, de jure, that
you necessarily sin else; but de facto, I think it might be done with more
profit (if that be all you intend) and good will, as unto them. I would rather
allow you twenty Elders to watch over, and instruct men for the Sacrament, than
two only to turn away any from it.

P. 10. He argues Contra; None of the Apostles were ignorant or scandalous;
therefore Judas and their receiving cannot warrant any such others.

Ans. This is not true; for indeed we shall find both ignorance in the
Apostles, and scandal in Judas. Here the Lion and the Calf are down together,
and a little Child may lead them.

For the disciples ignorance, it is manifest; The true saving knowledge of
remission of sin, lies in Christ's resurrection, To. 4.25. 1 Cor. 15.17. but
they were so wholly ignorant even of this grand point, that they knew not the
Scripture that he must rise again, Io. 20.9. Nay, what think you, if they
understood not the point of his death neither? Judge impartially, what
knowledge could they have, at, and of this ordinance, if they conceived him not
as crucified, 1 Cor. 11.26? Now I pray compare Mark 9.31.32. Lu. 9.44.45. with
Lu. 24.7, 8. and it is said plainly, They understood not the things Christ
taught them about his death, and remembered them not till he was risen. Add
hereunto, we find no mention of the Sacrament, or forewarning of Christ, before
the institution; so that whatsoever they did understand of the nature and use
hereof, it was only what the present words did afford them. From whence we may
resolve, that though people are but little knowing even in some fundamentals,
and have but a rude implicit faith (I mean the word orthodoxly) and good
affections, they may be admitted to this Supper; and I think moreover, that our
preparation Sermons, and present Exhortations (which should be about the main)
with our prayers and solemnity, may clear our own souls in this pattern of
Christ, as to the sufficiency of their instruction, for edification; though
where prudence directs to more, if without bondage, I humbly commend it.

For Judas scandal be pleased to look in Mat. 26.2.14, 15, 16. Mar. 14. 1 --
12. and you find it apparent, that Judas made his bargain with the high Priests
about betraying Christ, two nights before the Passover, so that, that line of
his where he says, Judas had not yet betrayed Christ, any more than Peter had
denied him, is a very untruth; And as for the knowledge or divulging of it,
Christ himself did (I think more than once) reveal it. But now, if there had
been any Examination requisite, as Mr. Drake pretends, about their visible
worthiness, to search whether any of them lived in a known sin, would not
Christ have been as exact in doing his Ministerial duty, as this Man? Could not
he have sent but two of his disciples unto the Priests to find him out, and
witness against him, and might not John and Peter (who call themselves so)
serve for Elders? And I pray now, is it visible worthiness upon trial, or
visible membership, that Christ went by in his admission? You may even pity the
lamentable case he here has brought himself, that he has nothing to help it,
but confess, It Is true, Judas had betrayed Christ in purpose, and compact
already, but Christ charges him not with that, but foresels his actual
treachery; that is, Judas indeed was actually a scandalous person, but Christ
did not charge it on him as as bar to his admission. He did not, that were
enough, therefore it is not necessary. Yet farther, I pray take notice of the
words in Matt. 26.24. Lu. 22.22. and they are spoken in the present tense, we
must not yield a jot of the truth and purport of Christ's words, when Christ
says, One of you shall betray me, and Verily the Son of man is betrayed, they
are both true and about the same treachery; Shall, as to the apprehension, and
Is betrayed, as to his fact past in his agreement, which is said therefore
(while Christ will yield to it) to be in effect done. What is here wanting now,
but an opening this, and proceeding against him? and yet in the very nick he
leaves it, Is not our cause plain? Besides, what man will not judge, that Judas
treason (which Christ tells them of) consisted in his contrivance, bargain,
taking money, and selling Christ, as actually, as his coming with the Officers
into the garden? So that it will be in vain to strive against the truth: If
Christ's example herein be a sufficient rule for our walking, we must be
content, and willingly embrace the humble peaceable way of Free-admission.

P. 11. He only repeats the question, Whether Judas ought to be suspended? (for
as for St. Peter, he wrongs him much, to join him with Judas, ones sin being
by design, and already on foot; the others, un-imagined before, and merely out
of present infirmity,) and he answers, No. 1. Because his sin was not
committed. Ans. I say that is not true, unless Judas selling Christ, be no sin
with him.2. Because Christ could not be both witness, Judge, and Executioner,
etc. which we had before, and again more fully, p. 90. Christ as a Minister had
no juridical power, to turn him, or any away, etc. Nor any, it is bravely
spoken; you may read forwards, and the sum is this; The Lord Jesus could not
turn away Judas from the Sacrament, because the Presbytery was not settled.
Selah!

He that at the great day shall be Judge and Party, and tells us Io. Though I
bear witness of my self, my witness is true, that is, is both Witness and
Party, may, I hope, be both Judge and Witness, without absurdity.

As for the question, Whether he acted as a Minister, or Mediator? it is vain;
for he acted as both. He could not institute an Ordinance for his Church, but
as he was Head and Mediator, nor could he administer it, but as a Minister; the
same numerical actions were both the institution, and the administration. So
that, let us but look these passages full in the face, and fix wistly on them,
they are quite out of countenance, and I shall need no more to put this man to
a mild rebuke, than the gracious words of our Savior Christ; The servant is
not above his Master, nor the disciple above his Lord; It is enough, that the
servant be as his Master, and the disciple as his Lord.

As for Christ's temporal refusing to condemn the Adulteress, it is impertinent
as to this his Ecclesiastical command, institution, and example. And for his
administering only to Ministers in an upper room, it proves we may so
administers; too, if need be; as his admitting Judas, proves we may admit of
our Chruch-members; but if he argues therefore we must do no otherwise, here is
a clear negative from an affirmative, which is no consequence.

Whereas therefore he tells us in the issue, State the case aright, (when he
plainly states it wrong as to Judas fact) Mr. Humphreys has made a wide and
wild inference, and entreats him to take a more pertinent Text, or else he
shall scarce prove himself, as he is styled, a Master of Arts. I do appeal to
men's hearts, whether as they are inclinable to Judas receiving, they find them
not generally, standing or wavering to this Free-admission. I shall quote only
our learned Hammond, Prac. Cat. mihi. p. 334. where asking the question, What
we gather from this circumstance of Christ's admitting Judas? answers, That
those that are Christian professors, may be lawfully admitted, though their
hearts are full of Villainy. They indeed, he says, are to repent before they
come, but it shall be no sin to the Minister, or Communicants. So that, for the
sufficiency of my ground, you have not only (pardoning such dullness) the
opinion of a Master of Arts, but a Doctor of Divinity; and if you look into Mr.
Prynne (that worthy Gentleman) a bunch of Fathers, They All drank of it.



P. 12. For the managing his cause, Mr. Humphrey premises, That in the Church
God has set up his Ordinances, of the Word, and Sacrament: Of these Ordinances
some are capable, and some incapable; Those that are incapable, are either so
by nature, (as Infants, and distracted persons) or the Excommunicate, and no
others, etc.

Before I pass, for the fuller opening this, I must desire you to consider
these particulars;

1. I say Within the Church, in opposition to Heathen, because it is
Church Membership (limited only with this capacity) I hold, that give; our
right to this Ordinance, as other outward privileges. The Sacraments may be
considered Precise, precisely in themselves, and it is Church Membership, I
say, or an external Covenant relation, that suffices to the validity thereof;
or Complexe, complexly, with the entire fruits and benefits of the Covenant,
and so indeed there is no less than a justifying faith required for the
obtaining of them. Our question, truly, is not concerning what is necessary in
order to other ends to the Receiver, that he may be saved, (so final
perseverance is necessary) but what is necessarily antecedent to the external
Sacrament. And between these two, A Covenant relation visible, and truth of
Grace, which is invisible, there is no middle thing in the Scripture enjoined
for the rule of our admission. A visible member of the Church, and a member of
the visible Church are but the same.

2. I explain those that are incapable in the first sense, in saying, by
nature, and, that can discern no meaning hereof; (as I have added) which I do
clearly to distinguish, Infants, the distracted, and natural fools, from the
barely ignorant of age, who are capable to learn, and having the present means
of knowledge, if it be not sufficient herein for their edifying, it is merely
their own fault, and upon their own account. And there are two plain reasons
for the distinguishing of these, as to this Ordinance, wherein the body of the
Lord is to be discerned; First, Because this very discerning cannot be the duty
of the former, who are naturally incapable, it being an undeniable rule thus
far, Nemo tenetur ad impossible. And Secondly, Because signs cannot work upon
the un-intelligent (which they wholly are) to receive any Real effect by them.
It is otherwise with the latter; for, 1. It is their duty both to get
knowledge, and to come. 2. They have an understanding capacity, that they may
be wronght upon by it, and if they be not, it is their sin. These reasons I may
tell Mr. Drake, are so ordinary and solid, that they will be as two gravel
stones in the teeth of his arguments, while he champs upon them.

3. For the incapable in the second sense, (which word is not so proper here,
but you may excuse it) The Excomminicate, I do humbly allow two sorts of them;
ipso jure, or De facto. The Excommunicate de facto, are such who are both
convicted, and have legally sentence passed on them. The Excommunicate ipso
jure, I count, All such, though not juridically sentenced, whose crimes are
open, notoriously offensive, and actual, so that there needs no proceeding
secundum allegata and probata, while the conviction is manifest, and they can
plead no repentance. If you will not allow me my terms, I pray abate none of my
sense, and I care not. Such was the uncleanness of Zimri and Cosby, persons
stark staring drunk, as he mentions; Such are Incestuous Marriages; Those that
come newly reaking out of open enormities; Such I think are any that shall
publicly renounce Christ, or say they will not believe in him; And it may be
those, who being in not orious malice, will not forgive, but profess their
obstinacy. Upon this account only, I am apt to take it, Our Church has held
such might be kept back by the Minister, when he saw it fit in his conscience,
to do good by it; that is, if the shame were like to move them to repentance,
satisfy the godly, and be a good example unto others. Otherwise I do not hold
the Minister or Church is always bound to take cognizance hereof, for what has
been shown already so plainly in the pattern of Christ, And this I speak, 1. To
intimate a difference between those that are excommunicable upon trial, which
the un-convict may be; and the ipso jute excommunicate, that are convict, not
sentenced. For so long as the case is dubitable, and needs disquisition, 1. We
are to incline on charities side.2. We cannot act in faith to turn them away.3.
To say you do not deny their right ( de jure, as members,) yet de facto suspend
them, seems to me a wrong, and a flaw to be made up.2. To show my self
reducible at the least beck of the Church, so long as she forbears to set up
her thresholds with Gods thresholds, and her posts with Gods posts. And here I
must complain of my opposer, Was not these words (unless excommunicate ipso
jure, or de facto) p. 24. in all three Editions? and why then does he so overly
and contemptibly bring an odium on me, by being willing not to see, or
understand them? Truly this is a very wrong; for while he takes things still in
the worst interpretation, he uses my book like another Hanun, He cuts off the
half of the beard, and its carments in the middle. so sends away the poor thing
bare, and greatly ashamed.

For those that are capable, I consider this capacity in regard of the Church
or Ministers Admission, and this I undertake, or in regard of the receivers own
coming, which is more questionable. In fine, the sum and scope of my opinion
came to this; As for the Receivers part, I durst not be too forward to
determine; Let every man look well what he has to do; But as to the Church or
Minister, I held, and do hold, that all Church Members that are neither
Unintelligent, or Excommunicate, ought freely to be admitted to this Ordinance;
Some cases in spiritual, and temporal prudence, being considered.

Against this position of mine, he has some 5. exceptions, which I will note,
and answer in their order.

The first is, That Infants and the distracted, as deaf persons, are to come
unto the Word, therefore they are not incapable of the Ordinances, p. 13, 14.

Ans. For the deaf he speaks miraculously well. For Infants, without question,
it were better they were kept at home, than to disturb the Church, but only for
the sake of them that tend them. His texts Deuteronomy. 29. etc. are good to prove
their convenanting by their Parents in baptism, where there is only a passive
reception, and the benefits relative; but as to the ordinance of hearing, it
must be actual, and they are incapable of any Real work by it. So that for
conversion (if he was out of his charm) which is of unwilling to be made
willing, in such a passive sense of his, (speaking of it, Really, not
Relatively) as to be wrought on the untelligible, I think himself will dislike,
when he has better thought of it. For the distracted, if he will needs have
them come too, I would wish him to Preach over his book to them; but to take
heed of tender consciences, lest it make them so. And now whereas he doubts
not, but the judicious will easily reach him, it is very likely the height of
his understanding herein, may be taken, without a Jacobs staff.

His second is, That Infants and the distracted are as capable of the
Sacrament, as the ignorant are, though of age. We will take this in his own
terms. Next for the Lords Supper, I ask Mr. Humphreys, why are Infants capable
of Baptism, and not of the Lords Supper? If he say because they cannot examine
themselves, nor discern the Lords body, etc. Then I answer, No more can grossly
ignorant persons, etc.

Ans. Sir, you must excuse me, I shall not answer you altogether so, but 1.
Because Infants are naturally incapable: In Baptism there is required only a
passive, but in the Supper an actual reception.2. Because it is not their duty
to examine themselves, and discern the Lords body; Let members of age be never
so grossy ignorant (and not Idiots) they are bound to get knowledge, examine
themselves, and be fit for receiving, and so come worthily, though not
unworthily; but Infants are not bound to be fit for receiving, to know,
discern, or so to come at all. And this I dare say is such an answer as will
put him quite out.3. Because signs cannot work really upon the un-intelligent;
Relative grace is conveyed to Infants, suo modo by Baptism, but Real grace
cannot be wrought by any Ordinance, upon those that can discern no meaning of
them, which yet is here, as at the word, prayer, etc. required of us, that it
should be wrought and acted in us. I would have some men know, the Corinths sin
of not discerning the Lords body, was more of carelessenesse or profaneness,
than bare ignorance. There is as much difference between Infants and Ignorants,
as between a Do not, and a Cannot; If the one does not, yet they ought; but the
other cannot, and are excused; Ignorants may not, but Infants cannot be wrought
on by it. If the man had not been too slighting of me, he would never have run
himself into the contempt of so many repetitions of this Infant-passage. I will
reckon them as I go. Here is once.

His third Exception (waving what is in the way to its place) is against these
words, 'And no others. If none others (says he) must be kept away, what thinks
he of persons infected with the plague, etc.

Ans. Truly I think M. Drake might have been more serious, and that it may be I
have been happy to leave out such impertinencies, that he might have something
to put in. Who knows not if men be in a journey, or sick, they keep from the
Church on a civil account? with the like. Thus does his silver become dross,
his wine mixed with water, and instead of an Amphora (currente rota) you have an
earthen pitcher.

For his other instances I am willing to grant (as I have but now expressed my
self) where there are scandals, 1. Notorious, that they offend the
Congregation,2. So open, that they need no proof or debate,3. In the present
fact, so that no repentance can be pleaded, such may be dealt withal, as ipso
jure Excommunicate. If you shall demand of me a substantial proof, for yielding
thus much, I must answer you, the Church is of age, ask it. What she in
prudence has allowed, I am ready to think, there may be good reason for,
though I know it not; We are to make the fairest construction, and it may be,
she would hereby teach her Children to account; revere, and dread the ground or
cause of Excommunication, no less than the censure of it. Yet if any here
shall make use of this confession of mine to the tenderness of others, so
poorly as Mr. Drake does of the un-intelligent, to plead against me only what I
yield to them, as it will be an argument of their weakness, so shall it
fortify me with one proviso more, which Christ's example does afford, that,
though I grant that such as these (thus strictly set down) may be kept off for
the present, yet are we to choose to do that still, in Christian prudence, which
is like to tend most to the parties reformation, the peoples good, and the
honor of God.

His fourth is upon these words of mine, If any come in as professing, etc. p.
16, 17, 18. Here he overreaches the word, As; I say not All that come do make
me profession, I think there is no necessity of it, much less, that the
Minister is to seek after an Evidence of their sincerity, which were a burden
to break his heart; but I say, Every one that comes in, comes as a professor,
His very coming is a profession of his covenanting with Christ. Even as the
Soldiers repairing to his Colors is an acknowledging his Captain, and Office:
So is our repairing to Christ's Ensigns, our profession of him, the pledge
whereof is the Sacrament. For his appeal to my self then, I answer, I stand not
on a verbal, but a vital profession, and this is either Real, the search
whereof I leave only to God; or Visible, and such is their coming.
Church Membership (without this incapacity) is all the evidence we can look
after. To admit any Heathens into Church Membership, requires their declaration
or confession, but as for Church Members, I say this is their profession, to
wait on their duty.

I do acknowledge a profession, and a signified profession, (our Church was
wont to secure this by the Creed, which I think were good still to be used) yet
dare I not say any other way of that signification is absolutely necessary,
than this coming only; for I desire to know where in the Gospel, after
initiation into the Church, there is any other signification of men's being
Professors, than their bare meeting, or assembling themselves together at the
Ordinances? So that if pious sober men shall yet think it necessary to press
some trial, and declaration of the faith of their Congregations to them, it can
be urged, only upon the account of laying a ground for Reformation, and then,
for ought I see, they must begin at Church Membership, and not at the Sacrament.

For Mr. Drakes own undertaking, it is notable, Let the people but maks their
profession before the Eldership, and we shall undertake to fit them for
the-Sacrament, etc. See p. 58. and there he adds unto this, In a few months,
our end being the preparation of all sorts, we dare undertake to fit the
meanest. Now I pray compare this, with his language of me, p. 92. where I
having said, I endeavor this only, Does he not know (quoth he) that one fit or
worthy, must be, 1. Converted,2. Unblameable,3. Actually prepared? Lay this
together, and you shall see the feats of this man, that will regenerate you a
Congreation, make them unblameable, and actually prepare them (of all sorts)
within a few months: At least he will warrant you, before he has done with
them, if they will but submit to be rulea by him.

His last exception is at my doubtfulnesse on the part of the Receivers, p. 16.
His words indeed are too Masterly, but the difficulty is serious. I perceive in
his judgment he makes this no question, but that while a man finds himself
unregenerat, he must keep away, though he has examined himself and prepared for
it. I dare not run down this stream with him. Our rule is this, let a man (not
only, let the regenerate man) examine himself, and so let him eat, (not, so
let him abstain.) Some interpret the words Ita probet, ut abstineat; Let him
examine, that if he be not worthy, he must forbear; Others, it a probet, ut
etiam edat, Let him examine, but so also that he eat. I incline to the last; my
ground is this, If a thing be evil, because it is done, it must be avoided; but
if it be not evil in the substance of the thing, (as no precept can be) but for
the defects of the Doer, the thing still must be done, and the Doer reformed.
If to avoid this, Mr. Drake say, this is not his duty, I pray God forgive me,
or forgive him, for I think it a grievous presumption, to make void a command
of God, through his tradition.



Now if we must hold the Sacrament to be a means of grace only to the
Regenerate, and that none may come without these Sacramental graces, or thus
habitually prepared, we cannot approach to this holy Table, but the terrors of
the Lord must fall upon us, as trembling to be guilty of the blood of Christ,
and eat our damnation. O sir! It may be the Lord has cleared your interest,
that you can lay the hand of your faith upon Christ's shoulder, and say he is
mine; and in the confidence of David, Gilead is mine. Ephraim is mine, Manasses
is mine, this mark is mine, and that Evidence mine, here is my new name, and
here the white stone. And now you may think it easy to answer these
difficulties, not knowing the fears and doubts of others, when they cannot lay
to heart the commonest signs, as Universal obedience, and Pure love of God, but
instead of obedience, they find universal corruption, and instead of living
only to Gods glory, in the best of their actions. they suspect hypocrisy; So
that they never hope to see the face of one Sacrament more in peace, unless
they may come to Jesus Christ, as wholly unworthy of him. Thou have ordained
peace, thou have don all our works in us and for us. O my Savior! thou know
this is an argument not fetched from mere invention; this is an argument is sown
in men's tears, and it is fetched from the sighs and bleedings of many
thousands that are made sad, that should not be sad, whilst they have received
their wounds!, in the house of their friends. Alas! let us but seriously
consider, either we must put this business over with a slight Examination, and
connive at our failings, being ready to presume these graces are in us, because
we dare not open our eyes to look fully upon them; and if we do thus, we shall
bring security upon our selves, and the blood of our own souls; or we must deal
impartially, and conclude against our selves, we have not these evidences, if
then we come unqualified, the blood of Christ will be upon us. Nay if a man
should be regenerate, yet doubts, and judges himself unregenerate, so long as
he hold there is none may come hither but the regenerate, He that doubts of his
eating, is damned if he eat. So that there is nothing left for poor doubting
Christians, but an everlasting gulf to swallow them up. And are any of us
Ministers, that are not in a capacity to abstain from this Ordinance, what will
become of us? The Lord knows, how few of our people are truly regenerate; and
shall we think every one that is not, must necessarily become guilty of the
murder of Christ, (as he uses that term) and eat his own judgment? What a sad
apprehension, what fears, and afflictions, must this bring on our spirits,
whilst we do but as it were gather our poor people, to receive their
damnation. Good Gods! What a deal of blood shall we bring on our own souls? Who
can lie under that terrible guilt that is necessarily brought on us, by this
dreadful opinion? Neither have we any way here to stand up for our lives, and
the lives of our flocks, but to allow this Ordinance, as well as others, a
means of regeneration, to examining Christians. For my part, should I believe
otherwise, I should set my face against my Congregation, and bid them take
heed, Here be these marks; and these upon them; and these upon them upon those;
Cannot you find them in you? Beware, touch not a crumb, upon pain of your
lives; Come you not hither, there is scarce a man of you but will be sure to be
damned. Now let this but effectually enter into their hearts, and we shall
leave the Sacrament, as the Jews did the Woman, alone with Jesus Christ, and
while every one is conscious of his own corruption, we must even go out most of
us, one by one, and be contented to have our names written in the dust.

For some ease then of those perplexities, I shall humbly venture to look over
that text of 1 Cor. 11. from the 17. verse to the end, which I think is the
ground of them. And in the delivery of my thoughts, I beseech the Lord to guide
me by his grace, that I may do no hurt, nor offend any; and I advise my Readers
not to trust to my judgment, for I have no might to go out against these
difficulties, I know not what to do, but mine eyes are upon him. Now there are
7 or 8 things, unto which I have a little to say, upon this Scripture.

The first is, concerning the scope or argument of it, which is open. The
Apostle is reproving them, among other vices, about their disorder at the
Sacrament, which, while they mingled with their Love Feasts, they were ready to
be drunken some of them, as at an Ordinary. Upon this he tells them of the
Sacred institution, the sin, and danger of such doings, and rectifies them in
it, etc.

The second is, concerning such high expressions, which we find not lightly in
other places. And there are two grounds, I conceive, in pressing certain
precepts, sometimes above others. Either the Eminency of the duty, or defects
of the doers. For the former, I would not have men think St. Paul advances this
ordinance, which he speaks but lowly of, 1 Cor. 10.4. above others, as Prayer,
the one being only instituted, the other natural worship. But the latter is
manifest; Here is a Church-sin, that sin is making that common, which was
sacred, the using this Sacrament but as their Love Feasts, which were not
divine, and this profanation brought down temporal judgments on them. Their
carriage was so notorious, that it makes him speak so deeply of this sin, and
danger thereof, to reclame them from it, attempering his language to his
occasion. For I am persuaded, if he had been to write this Epistle to many of
the Church of England, as to Corinth, he would not have set it down so
dreadfully, but rather fore-warned us of superstition.

The third is, Concerning the nature of this Sacrament, and that we find
clearly to be a Memorial of Christ's death, or the new Covenant made by it,
which we acknowledge, and show forth in our receiving. Here may be two notes,
1. Whereas the Apostle undertakes to deliver down to us whatsoever he had
received of the Lord; There are many poor souls may discharge themselves of
some trouble about the notions of sealing, and the like, when they sink too
deep into them.2. Whereas a Remembrance is of something only that is past; It
is a question (I am not assertive) how the Sacrament is a token of the
Covenant, any more than as to that most free, absolute, general act of Grace,
in Gods so loving the world, that he gave his Son for a Covenant, Jo. 3.16.
This cup is the New Testament in my blood, or that there is a new Covenant made
in my blood. So that on Gods part, it may be A testimony of Grace, in this
universal act or grant thereof; and on Man's part, a Note of his profession,
that he believes this, and looks for salvation only in his name. Neither in
leaving the nature of the Sacrament open, need we abate any thing from the holy
improvement of the use of it.

The fourth thing is, What is this Eating and drinking unworthily? which phrase
Paul himself opens in another I will speak next of. I shall now distinguish
between a Worthy Receiver, and Receiving worthily. A worthy Receiver I shall
account him only, that is habitually qualifyed with the Sacramental graces, or
finds the condition of the Covenant actually in him: A receiving worthily, lies
mainly I think in coming with reverence; This reverence I will conceive both
in regard of the dignity of the institution, and due consideration of our
selves, that we make our address to it according to the state of our souls.

To open my self, I will suppose (though what I last spoke may put it to a
quaere) as others do, that the Sacrament is a seal of the Covenant, even in
application to single persons. Now then there must be two things, or parts of
it sealed, salvation to him that truly believes and repents, and damnation to
him that does not. Promissio (says Calvin) non minuus ir a^ incredulis minetur,
quam gratiam fidelibus offert. Mar. 16.16. Now if a man finds true faith and
repentance in himself, he receives worthily, in applying the benefits promised
to him. But if a man finds not his regeneration, and that he does not sincerely
repent of his sins, he is then to come in the fear of God, applying to himself
that part of the Covenant that belongs to him, being ready to lay to heart his
sad estate, and certainty of damnation, without a true and total submission
unto Christ, who only is offered to him on that condition. In the application
of the right part of the Covenant to a man's proper estate, lies the very
essence of that conviction, which the Spirit works in us at our conversion.

The fifth thing is, What is the meaning of that phrase Not discerning the
Lords body; and it is the not putting a difference between this sacred, and a
common table. I pray mark it, v. 29. and it is plainly exegetical of the
former, as if he should say, by their eating and drinking unworthily, I mean
this profane regardlessnesse of theirs, that they have no more respect to this
Bread and Wine, than their ordinary meals.

And this is farther clear by that illative Wherefore, v. 27. while the Apostle
argues from the end of receiving, which is to show forth Christ's death, against
their receiving unworthily, that is, without consideration of that end. He
enquires not into the estate of the person, whether regenerate or not, but
looks to their manner of receiving, because they came not to the Sacrament as a
memorial of Christ, as a sacred thing, and holy institution. If the meaning of
either of the phrases were to come without faith or regeneration (as some too
harshly press it) then the Corinths, that were punished for this sin, must
have been not only chastened, but condemned with the World, which they were
not. v. 32. The very direct sin then of this place, is their irreverence, and
monstrous profaneness, which I am persuaded ought not to be laid to the
charge of every unregenerate Christian, if he comes humbly hither, in the sight
of his condition.

The sixth thing is, The import of that saying, He shall he guilty of the body
and blood of Christ; and it is no more than if he should say, if you receive
these holy signs so regardlessely, you offer an indignity to the things
signified; As you commit a crime against your Prince, in defacing his Arms, or
Royal Statue, wherein, there is a latitude considerable in the sin, according
to the more or less evil usage thereof; and I do not approve the drawing out
these words, to that harsher language of Murdering Christ, or the like, seeing
there is a vast difference between being guilty of Christ's blood in the
unworthy Receiver, and those expressions of crucifying the Lord of Life, and
trampling under foot the blood of the Covenant, Heb. 10.29. etc.

The seventh thing is, What is that duty, Let a man examine himself? Some read
it, Let a man approve himself, and take it as to these particulars only in
reforming them. I have been apt to think, Let a man examine himself; and so
eat, is as if he should say, Let him so eat, as considering with himself his
own estate, and purport of this Ordinance, in suitable meditations, and
applications of it. But I willingly lie down unto the labors of our Divines,
who generally make this self-examination to be a searching into our hearts, and
our estates; about our sins, in looking over the Commandments, to repent of
them; and about our graces, in looking over our evidences, that we come with an
habitual and actual preparation. Only I must lay down three cautions. 1. Take
heed of standing too much upon this, if you find it in you. When you come as
one worthy, you may challenge the benefits of the Covenant, upon bringing the
condition; but if you do so, look well to that condition, for if you appeal
unto Caesar, to Caesar you must go; there are some might have been saved, if
they had not appealed to their condition.2 If you find not these graces, and
are grieved in the want of them, let not that stave you off from Christ; But
humble your self, resolve against sin, and think I shall be so much the more
beholding to my Savior, not only for his benefits, but also for my condition.
Though it be faith only can receive any thing from Christ, yet is the sense of
our unworthiness, a proper qualification to bring us to him, both to receive
that faith, and the benefits of it.3. If thou find thy self wicked, and
living in sin, thou art to repent, and may defer thy coming upon resolution
to prepare against next Sacrament; But if thou think to go on in thy course,
and so forbearest, I tell thee (as I judge) thou must come, and apply to thy
soul, that part of the Covenant that is properly thine. Thou art to eat, and
say with thy self, As this bread and Wine holds forth Christ and his benefits
only upon condition, so it shows what I shall lose, and as sure as I eat and
drink I shall be certainly damned, unless I repent, and leave these courses,
for here is the seal unto the truth of Gods word, and I yield unto it. Deuteronomy.
27.26. All the people shall say, Amen.

The last thing is, What is this Eating and Drinking damnation? and it is the
incurring, either with some, a present temporal punishment, (and so the word is
(...), not (...), and sense too, v. 32.) or, with others, the merit, desert, or
guist of eternal. Both which, nevertheless, a due judging our selves, through
Gods mercy may prevent, v. 31. And here I must give you two distinctions, which
you are to receive, as you intend to have peace in this thing.

The former is, between a general, and particular receiving damnation. In
general, Divines say certainly, Every unregenerate man receives his damnation
as he reads, hears, prays, and works his damnation in every thing he does, Tit.
1.15. which things nevertheless must be done. The meaning is, I take it, that
nothing he does, or can do comes up to the condition of the Covenant, but there
is some failing and sin, which must be accounted for at the great day, and so
it is said to increase their damnation, though their account would be yet
greater (we must conceive) if they should not do these duties at all. But for
this particular, Eating damnation, which is the effect of the unworthiness of
this place, incurring a more peculiar, or deeper guilt upon a person, may not
be charged, I think, upon any, but upon those that come so irreverently,
without respect to this holy institution, that they sin in the very fact, in
using it as common thing, which ought not to be done. An unregenerate man may
come Christianly, though but in an outward conformity to this Ordinance, it is
our duty; but he may not come presumptuously as to a common Table, and profane
it.

The other distinction I must commend to tender spirits, is between Eating
damnation, and Sealing damnation. The one is the effect of irreverent
unworthiness provoking God; The other is only a confirming, and attestation of
the truth of the Covenant to every man according to his condition, which is
much for the honor, and owning of God. Methinks my heart is enlarged, and I
must tell you, these two things must be separated as far as Heaven and Hell; I
wish there were some further distance, that the plague of the one might never
trouble you under the notio^ of the other, which has eat unto our very hearts,
that I am afraid men will not receive this manifest truth. It is a most precious
sweet mercy of God when he denounces judgment upon an impenitent sinner, to
awaken his soul, and bring him to repentance; It is the very like, or same
gracious act of his, in sealing to his word to set home that conviction, as it
were using all means (as Christ did with Judas) to work upon him. Now it is
likewise every man's duty (while God shows us the way, it must be so) that lives
impenitently, to apply these threatenings, to assure and seal them upon himself,
and so to take that part of the Covenant (as I express it) that belongs to
him. So that this thing, which has appeared so terrible to drive men from the
Sacrament, that they do but seal or apply damnation to themselves, is the only
thing of concernment for them to do in this estate, as they ever look to be
converted and saved. O that every sinful Christian would but do this with due
reverence, and a serious conscience, and I would assure him this sealing his
damnation, is the only way to eat his salvation in the use hereof. If you ask
here, But how then is Christ offered to such a man? I answer, Very well, as
truly as he is preached in his threatenings; Christ is never offered to any, but
as wrapped up under the tenor of the Covenant, which contains both wrath, and
life. In the Word and Sacrament, there is necessarily shown forth to the
hypocrite what he shall lose, unless he will become sincere, as to the sound
believer, what he shall have in the partaking of them. There is something
sealed actually, and something potentially to every man; Actually the
regenerate has life sealed to him, but Potentially damnation, if he fall away
from his faith; which though we believe he never shall, in respect of Gods
grace, yet as on his own part he is frail, this is a means to make him stand.
An unregenerate man has wrath actually sealed to him, but potentially, all
Christ's benefits, which is as it were a voice behind him, that though he be in
this present fearful estate, yet if he will but repent and believe, he may get
out of it, and be saved. Thus do Judgment and Mercy interweave their forces to
bring in a sinner unto Christ.

And here may be removed that dreadful scruple of some poor Christians, who
apprehend they have been unworthy, and there damnation has then been sealed,
now the seal being sure, how can what is sealed ever be reversed? I answer, The
alteration is made only in us, the Seal is the same, and what is sealed is the
same. A man walks in one place, and is in the shade, he turns into another, and
is in the shine; yet the Sun is the same: The Sacrament seals the Covenant, Man
seals to his condition; while he walks not accordingly his damnation is sealed,
when he repents and does, his salvation; Actually and potentially both are
sealed, and according to his walking, he has the influence thereof, whether of
the light of life, or shadow of death.

There is one Iron only entered my soul, and it was this: If the Sacrament be a
Seal, it does exhibit and convey something to the Receiver, and that to the
unregenerate must be dangerous. Here then let us know, and arm our selves, that
Sacraments being only Moral Instruments, cannot convey any thing that is Real
unto the soul by way of Obsignation, but only that which is Relative, making no
change but as to our Estates, and relations to God; the very end or proper
effect being chiefly to assure us thereof, I mean, make us more believe,
consider, and lay them to heart, if good, for our comfort, if bad, for our
conviction. Now this very assurance, as farther degrees of faith and love in
the worthy Receiver, and hardness in the unworthy, which are Real things, are
not externally exhibited, I say, by this sealing, but internally wrought or
effected according to the acts and exercises of our Souls on those objects,
that may be said thereby to have an influence on us. Now then, let an
unregenerate man so come to the seal, that he lays close to heart his damnable
condition, being the more humble and sensible of it, it has its very right
effect upon him, and is a help toward his conversion, while it does not
Physically conveigh Gods wrath, for that it cannot, but Morally work only the
sense of it on his Spirit, which if he lets wear off again, without amendment,
his sin of hardening will lie therein, and not in his coming.

And now for my part, if I have fallen on the truth, yet am I nothing, for it
has been my fears and doubtings have even brought me to it, who must sadly
confess my self to be such a truant to the proficiency of grace, that I am
justly turned down unto the lowermost form of such poor sinners that are
jealous, and do even question the sincerity of it. Amongst these, I have
thought it safest, in coming to this Ordinance, to condemn my condition, and
while I do so, methinks the Apostle speaks comfortably to me, If we judge our
selves, we shall not be judged. Poor souls! Is not this sweet to you? Let it
enter into your hearts, when you come in your tears, as it were weltring
hither; the very same place that has made you tremble in speaking so dreadfully
of unworthiness, does yet assure you, but if you condemn your selves as
unworthy, you shall not be condemned; I would not for any thing that passage
were left out. The meek Jesus will never spurn at thee, when thou lie down
before him. O my soul! whiles others are even embraced in Christ's arms, let me
have but a hold of the hem of his garment; whiles they are as it were ravished
with the kisses of his mouth, let me be but so happy to lick up the very dust
that is at his feet; the least hem of his righteousness, the least dust of his
mercy, shall have virtue enough in it to save me. For the cloze of this
business, as to the part of the Receivers, which I must yet leave to be judged
of those that are more able, I do humbly beseech some moderate Spirit, that is
good at a broken bone, to speak some words in season for the refreshment of the
weary, and deal not so roughly, as this man has dealt with me; for why should
you break a bruised Reed, cast down by the troubles of his soul? Why should you
call a man Marah most despitefully, because the Lord has sent him bitterness?
And amidst the reproaches that are fallen on me, will you throw more on me? If
you will, I will go tell my Savior of you, I will heartily pray him to forgive
me, for fear I have deserved them, and will be contented to be made conformable
to him, though I am reviled in my agony, and have Vinegar in my cross.

which I think are clear and open for us. The first proof was from the
Passover, Ex. 12.3.47.50. 2 Chronicles. 30.5. Speak unto Israel, Let every man, all
the Congregation, the whole people, etc. unto which I will add Judas, who
cannot be doubted to be at the Passover with Christ. The force of this proof
to the Sacrament, lies not only, that there is the same grace signified and
consigned in both, but the same ground for the applying both, which is,
external Covenant relation with them as Jews, with us as Christians. Against
this he has four things, page 19. to page 25.

1. He alleges my own text, Numb. 9.7, and confutes my plea. If Mr. Humphreys,
says he, plead, that only Legal uncleanness excluded men from the Passover; I
ask him why? He will answer, Because it defiled the holy things, etc. But so
did Moral, etc. page 18.19.

Ans. Here Mr. Drake is miserably mistaken, Mr. Humphreys intends not to answer
him so sillily, but because it was Gods positive command, that Levitically
unclean persons should be separated from the Camp, but there was no such law
for Moral uncleanness at all, but the contrary, that all the Congregation were
to eat thereof. And thus you see how by unpinning one pin, there is about two
of his pages quite undrest, yet the naked innocents are not ashamed! As for his
proofs then Lev. 18. Ez. 23. etc. they are busily vain, about what none need
deny; but as for his words upon this, Where was Mr. Humphreys eyes? Did he not
read? Did he not mind? etc. One would verily believe this man had clearly the
truth of his side, and some plain manifest Text to show me, where the Morally
unclean were to be debarred; But, would you think it? that for all this there
is not a tittle or show of any text to this purpose. So that these petulant
expressions do put me in mind of that lively invention of the Tailors wife,
that would still call her Husband Lousy Fellow: Such a womanish obstinacy is
there in Error, that when it is even drowned in the depth and weight of the
plainest Scripture, will yet persist reviling, so long as there is left it but
the nails, and gesture of an argument.

P. 19. That all unclean persons were to be suspended the Passover, is evident
by 2 Chro. 23.19.

Ans. For shame do not say so. 1. Does that place speak of the Passover?2.
Does that place speak of suspension?3. Does that place speak of Moral
uncleanness? Is it probable that the Levites at such a time did, or could, in
such a concourse try and examine them concerning Moral cleanness or
uncleanness?4. Might not the Morally unclean, as well as the Excommunicate and
Publican by Mr. Drakes own Doctrine, p. 202. come into the Temple?5. And what
is Jeh^iadahs setting Porters at the gates of the House of the Lord, as to the
very point of eating the Passover, which we know was done in private houses?

2. He excepts, Because Infants eat the Passover. Indeeed we read of such
Children being there as were capable of Instruction, Ex. 12.26, 27. but whether
their Infants were to eat thereof, I refer to others, and shall only score it
up, Twice. See Ainsworth, on Exodus 23.17.

3. He pleads Excommunication was a bar to the Passover, and that this was
for scandalous sins, not Levitical pollutions, p. 20, 21, 22, 23.

Ans. To save labor, who will not be willing to grant this in the main? But
what follows then, only as I hold, That men must first be Excommunicate, before
they be kept from the Sacrament. And who would think so grave a man should let
the world see him, playing with his own shadow, some four leaves together? His
Exception at my word [Type] in the way, if strictly taken, is not amiss;
Whereupon, I will note firmly against himself, that the Exclusion of the
Legally unclean from the Congregation, is no proof for him to plead, to keep
the Morally unclean from the Sacrament, but a type indeed, that such, in whom
the leprosy, bloody issue, or death of sin reigns, shall be excluded heaven,
where nothing shall enter that defiles, Rev. 21.27.

4. Having told us of 3 degrees of Excommunication among the Jews, and 4 among
the Greeks, which happily were originally the way of receiving in Penitents,
rather than the degrees of casting them out; He tells us, It is evident that
Nidui was a bar in particular to the Passover.

Ans. I pray mark it, Nidui was an Excommunication for 30 days; Now if it were
a bar in particular to the Passover, a man could never be excommunicate by his
account but at Easter. The truth is, Nidui was no more in reference to the
Passover, than any society, for it was a separation from all communion both
civil as sacred, for four paces. And as for the question, Whether such a one
might eat of the Paschal Lamb at the same distance of four paces, as he might
hear, pray, and come in other company, it is not worth the searching, seeing it
is twelve to one throughout the year whether it ever happened to concern the
Passover.

To cloze up this proof, let us turn again to that text Numb. 9. and consider,
1. That every soul here was enjoined to this duty upon pain of being cut off,
v. 10.2. That if a man were unclean, it kept him off but a month, v. 11. which
could not therefore be of Moral pollution.3. That the ground of this bar in
Levitical uncleanness, v. 7. was merely the Law of God in reference to the
Camp or whole Congregation, Numb. 5.23. Levi. 13.46. not peculiarly to this
Ordinance, and therefore whereas some do prevaricate, and make use of this
Text, (which is a sign they have nothing else to say) against the daylight of
Free-admission in other places to this Passover, and yet urge it so often,
with such eagerness of belief, as if they would convince all others by it,
they seem to me, as men Baptized into the old Sextons Spirit, that will have
their own clock be right, their own opinions true, howsoever the Sun goes.

My second proof was from 1 Cor. 10.17. These Corinths were scandalous many of
them, and yet says the Apostle, We being many are all partakers of one bread.
Against this M. Drake has three exceptions. p. 25, 26, 27.

First, He extenuates their crime, and counts it no bar to their Receiving.
Secondly, He confutes this himself, and proves they were guilty of gross sins,
by 2 Cor. 12.21. and so will not allow them to be admitted. Thirdly, He
supposes this too, and questions only Paul's allowance of it. Thus you see how
playfull the man is, that at one breath he can blow his bubble out, and in, and
out again.

For the First, it is manifest, that these Corinths were Fornicators, 1 Cor.
5.1. Contentions, 6.1. Carnal, 13.3. Unchristian, Uncharitable, Disorderly, c.
11. etc.

For the Second, the Text is full to the point; St. Paul says they were all
partakers of this bread? Mr. Drake says, But how will he prove notwithstanding
they were admitted? Mr. Drake says, They had only a right to it, in actu primo.
St. Paul says, they all partook of it; whom shall we believe, Master Paul, or
Saint Drake?

For the Third, That he allowed of this practice, that is manifest too, 1. In
that he does not forbid it, which if it had been sin, he must have done.2. In
that he urges their very coming, as a means and argument to reclaim them from
Idols.3. In that he does as it were even give his assent in a plain precept for
it, 1 Cor. 11.33. Wherefore when you come together, tarry one for another;
Hereof I appeal to the judicious for this meaning, that their coming was good,
and their disorders to be reformed.

A tender Christian may here object, v. 20, 21. against our mixed Communion, I
would not have you have fellowship with Devils, you cannot partake of the
Table of the Lord and the Table of Divils. I answer, the Apostle speaks not of
diverse persons (in the whole Ch.) going to one Table, but of the same persons
going to diverse Tables, and he plainly reasons from their partaking of the one
against the other. From whence I argue, Those that were engaged from going to
Idols, partook of the Lords Supper; but it was not the regenerate only, but
all their intelligent Members were hereby engaged from Idols; Ergo, All their
intelligent Members partook of the Sacrament, and were to partake of it, if the
Apostles argument be sufficient.

As for his mollifying the word Drunken, I, disapprove not; and if any man be
quite so; I hold him unintelligent, and fit for the present to be turned away
from all Ordinances.

My third proof was from 1 Cor. 10.3, 4, 5. which, I think, if it be well laid
to heart, might ease us of our scruples. Read Calvin Inst. l. 2. c. 10. sect.
5. 6. who agrees with my explication of it. His objections are two, p. 28. 29.

1. He says, I speak gratis in saying they were admitted to our Sacraments.

Ans. I pray see the words, does Saint Paul speak gratis? They did all eat the
same spiritual meat, and drank of the same spiritual drink, and Rock, which was
Christ. Mark it, he says the same, not only the same thing signified, but the
same symbolls, the same meat and drink, or the same Sacrament. So that Mr.
Drake is mistaken, and his arguing from their Elements being not the same, is
very low, as if because we have sometimes Sack, sometimes Claret, we had not
the same Sacrament. Calvin tells us, they enjoyed iisdem symbolis, as the Text
does, which I conceive herein, that there was specifically, the same
Sacramental union, between the signs and things signified, in their, as our
Elements. They all drank of the Rock which was Christ, they did not all drink
really of Christ, but symbolically, and so do we, symbolically then they are
the same, that is, the same symbols, or Sacrament.

Whereas he urges here, The uncircumcised and Infants, again (which is now
thrice) were admitted, his Argument will but ever come to this, because our
Scriptures sometimes seem to prove more, therefore they cannot prove the less.

2. He brings in the ordinary shift, That this was necessary to preserve their
lives, and so they were admitted, etc.

Ans. This I prevented, by showing that to this very scope and purpose does
Paul parallel these Sacraments of theirs with ours, to let the Corinths know,
that they had no other than the same privileges with the Jews, in their
Fre-admission. If he should say I make no more of your coming freely hither,
than of the Jews, all drinking of the Rock, it were no plainer to me than what
he has spoken. He does acknowledge it so, in finding such a large instance to
compare with it.

For the difference he makes between our Elements and theirs, which he says is
manifest, namely, theirs was to nourish their bodies, as well as their souls,
etc. It is gross, and fit for none to say but the Papists, that hold there is
left only the qualities of bread (that cannot nourish) in transubstantiation.

And whereas he says, They must have choked and starved else, I say, if it be
necessarily, sin to Eat of Christ Sacramentally, unless men are regenerate (as
Mr. Drake holds) there is no doubt but they should have rather dyed than be
guilty of the blood of Christ; (which he phrases murdering him) and have sooner
famisht their bodies than damned their Souls. If it be not a sin but
accidentally; Here is a good reason indeed for their eating and drinking All of
them: but what reason is there St. Paul should parallel our eating and drinking
with theirs, unless it be true likewise, that we are to eat, All of us? it is
not his bare saying The parallels do not run on four feet, will serve, for you
may see he will not let the Apostle so much as stand on one, if he denies our Free
admission.

Before I pass, I have two things here for tender Christians. 1. That to Eat
Christ Symbolically, is no such dreadful thing as is made of it (I mean above
other Ordinances, it is as sinful to use them unworthily as this) for Paul
makes no account to say, they all drank Sacramentally of him, provided always
you come with reverence, both in regard of the nature of the institution, and
your own condition.2. That the want of grace is no just hinderance or excuse
from our profession. There is a general profession of God in opposition to all
Idols, in which sense I take it, the whole people only could so commonly be
said to enter Covenant, With all their heart, and all their soul, in some
places. So there is a general profession of Christ, that salvation only is in
his name, which every Christian may profess truly, though he be no true
professor. It is a great weakness of some that think for fear of hypocrisy,
an unregenerate man may not do his duty. Hypocrisy, is either opposed to truth,
which is dissembling, such an action that is evil propter fieri must be
avoided; or to sincerity, and such an action that is evil only through
accident of the doer, while in the substance it be good for all his evil
disposition, the thing still must be done. A Christians profession, (a pledge
whereof is this Sacrament) may be hypocrisy in one sense, but not in the other.

My fourth proof was from the Parable of the Feast, Lu. 14. Mat. 22. which I
judge has more force in it than some think, though less than others. Mr. Drake
here is in a straight; if he allow it applicable to this Supper, it is clear
against him. The Servants bring in All both good and Bad. If he will not allow
it, he does not only go against the stream of Divines, (and that not solidly)
but wrests out of their own hands their main argument from the exclusion of him
that had not the wedding garment, which being the act of the Lord, is not well
applied neither. The truth is, the Feast does not signify particularly the
Supper; but it is as true it does it in general, as other Ordinances. The Feast
is Jesus Christ, set out in his Ordinances, and outward privileges, unto which
there is a free access, and interesse of the Good and Bad within the Church,
so that for the main, we have our full weight, that the Servants, whose office
it is to be the Dispencers of the mysteries, have not any power for
discrimination of the guests in their admitting them to the Feast; and
therefore, unless they can prove it by some warrant otherwhere, are not to
judge of the worthiness and unworthiness of their Church Members, as to the
offer of Christ, in this Supper. It is true, If men be scandalous, they are
liable to censure, but who does not see this upon another account, I mean of
discipline, to satisfy the Church, amend them, and warn others. But if you do
it upon this ground of setting up a discriminating Ordinance, I must speak my
Conscience, I think it not according to the mind of the Lord of the Feast.
Again, As for the unintelligent, as Infants and the like, who does not see,
that the Feast is still free, but they are incapable? they make no excuse, but
God does excuse them, and so they cannot be compelled. But if you set up
Visible worthiness for a rule of Admission, you assume a power of
discriminating the guests; You may call it your zeal, your care, and piety, yet
is it a power (as well as a burden) even over Gods Ordinance, and differs as
much from our Ministerial instruction, Catechism, and admonition, as a
separating the vile from the precious by the word of Gods mouth, and the doing
it without, until you prove it.

And now for his four particulars, p. 30, 31. First, He distinguishes between
the feast, which is Christ, and the dishes wherein he is served, which are the
Ordinances. This is something ingenuous; but whereas he applies this, that a
man may be invited to a feast, and yet not to the dish in the feast; it is very
fine if we should serve him as the plain man did his Son, that pretended he
could prove two eggs to be three, by his Logic; Well, says he, I will take the
one, and your Mother the other, and now do you prove the third, and take it for
your self. Let us have the dishes, and what will become of Mr. Drakes feast?
Thus hungry, and hardly bestead, does he pass through it.

Secondly, He urges, Then should Heathen be admitted. Ans. And so they may, if
they come in in an orderly way, 1 Cor. 14.40. they must first have a right by
Church Membership, and then being once within the Church, they are alike
admitted to all privileges.

Thirdly, He adds, How were the unthankful guests also excluded ( Luke 14?)
and answers himself, Because they would not come.

Fourthly, He tells us, Wordly business sometimes may detain a man from the
Sacrament, Numb. 9.10. Ans. Who doubts it, and yet the feast not neglected, if
the business be indispensible? But as for the strength of his reason here, it
is as good as the Fathers, that would have his Child excused to his Master, for
not coming to School, because he was dead.

In the way, For my quoting that Text, Lu. 12.42. with 1 Cor. 4.1, 2. Acts
20.28. Mr. Drake need not have given me such ill words: I make no
interpretation of them, but that it is the Ministers duty, duly to dispense the
Ordinances, which if he does do, they do not touch him, but may convince those
that think it their conscience wholly to omit it, and this I hope may turn the
edge of his rebuke. For my part I do not think my self fit to be compared with
Mr. Drake, or the least of the godly, but with the greatest sinners, and bow
down my practice at the feet of Gods mercy. Forgive, O Lord, my failings, for
they are even more than the hairs of my head! Yet do I think, that both those
that exclude all, and they that exclude any (who are neither Vnintelligent, or
Excommunicate) come short in the importance of these Scriptures.

My fifth proof was from John's Free-baptism, even of those he calls Vipers,
Mat. 13. upon that ground, Adultis eadem est ratio utriusque Sacramenti. See
Mar. 1.5. And they of Judea went out, and were All baptized of him, that is,
All that went out to him for Baptism were admitted; and yet Mr. Drake, as he is
wont, answers me thus overly, He says, but proves not that John baptized all
comers, p. 32. he should say, He does not prove it, but only brings Scripture
for it.

This axiom (which I think I had of Pemble) he denies, p. 33. 1. Because,
Heathen may be admitted to Baptism.

Ans. I had thought when men had been converted to the faith once, they had
been Christians. 2. Because it makes for him, seeing there was an outward
confession at Baptism.

Ans Who would think it, he should fly for shelter to this Sanctuary, even
while he pollutes it. You must take the meaning thus, There is Eadem ratio, but
not in omnibus. It holds in the main, that the same faith which will admit one
of age to be Baptized, will also admit him to this Sacrament, and that is an
Historical faith only in profession; yet as for making that confession, though
it he needful at Baptism, in admitting them to be Church Members (as we are
willing to know whom we enter into our society) seeing we have Scripture for
it; yet not at this Supper where we have none, for when men are Church Members
already, their very coming is their profession.

My sixth proof was Act. 2.41, 42, 46. Which Text he leaves out, you may
conceive it has silenced him. For while we find thousands admitted thus freely
and equally (not omitting his phrase of Pell-mel) in their breaking bread (I
say even wholly alike) as in doctrine and prayer we dare not fall down to that
Sacramental Rule upon trial he would set up, if it be once held as necessary
and divine (though we acknowledge the prudence and piety of others) seeing it
has not one word to speak, or the least argument left it concerning this
Scripture, that it should open the mouth, or move the wing, or peep against it.

My seventh text was Act. 10.28. which I say, I apply only as to the
expression. Yet does he pursue it with four pitiful exceptions, p. 34, 35. For
the first whereof it is untrue, St. Paul says not Tit. 1.15. the unbeliever is
unclean to us, but all things are unclean to him.

For the second I shall satisfy after I have proposed this question, in answer
to his two other; Whether do you think him more pierceing in the third, to find
only the unintelligent left out, or ingenuous in the fourth, to speak so
eloquently, when he has done? I have heard of one, that would undertake ye, to
confute all Bellarmine in two words (Mentiris Bellarmine) by Mr. Drakes
language and confidence, he may be the man.

And now for the force of these words, I told you in the beginning, we must
distinguish of passages unto their right parties; there is a sort of weak
Christians that think they shall be defiled if they Communicate in our mixed
Churches; this text may be full and solid for them, though it reaches not
others. Mr. Drake should be more tender, than to debilitate their supports.
Dear souls, I have seen some of your tears, and let this dry them up for you,
you are not to account them common and unclean that receive with you, If your
selves be clean, all are clean to you. The soul many times, that is not taken
with a reason, may by an expression. A man may be common and unclean three
ways, 1. Levitically, and this is abrogate;2. Morally, and this defiles a man's
self, and not another;3. Faederally, as appears in 1 Cor. 7.14. Now while
persons are Faederally clean, as all Church members are, being separated by
external Covenant to Christ from the World, we need not doubt but they may be
communicated withal without any pollution. Indeed Mr. Drake says here, such
and such are Morally unclean, but what then? It is not Moral cleanness, but
Faederal cleanness is the ground of our admission, and a man is not Faederally
unclean till excommunicated. He objects, wicked Christians reject Christ, p.
35. and answers himself with me, p. 84. Though they transgress they do not
renounce the Covenant as Turks do, and are Church Members till excommunicated.

And these were my Scriptures to establish us, in this sweet truth that leads
us unto peace, and though he has done his endeavor to hinder you of the
benefit of them, yet for all his opposition there is not so much as the girdle
of their loins loosed, or latchet of their shoes broken.

For the cloze hereof I gatherd up some Texts, Io. 6.37. Rev. 22.17. etc. that
do set forth the most free offers of Jesus Christ, which though Mr. Drake makes
but light of, p. 36. do pathetically enter the spirits of others, that have but
a little embraced this sweet notion, that the Lord Jesus is proportionably
gracious in his external privileges to a Christian profession, as he is in his
internal saving benefits to the sincerity of Christianity. Here he says three
things, the one is, With what Conscence can I keep off Infants? This is now
four times. The other two are the same, which in their naked sense comes to
this: Though Christ be offered freely, yet it must be to such only as we judge
truly receive him. The truth is, the word and the Sacraments are but the same
public instrument, delivered as a sealed writing for the use of the Church,
and are equal privileges (if I may call the same equal) to all the Members of
it. I do even pity mortality, to see what a few words, a few enfoldings, can
hide Truth from us; what sense is in this? Jesus Christ is to be freely showed
forth, to bring men home effectually to him, and yet must the Receivers make
out their right unto the Minister, before we dare offer, or conditionally apply
him to them.

I do humbly conceive, here is the false notion that perplexes the many. We
that are Ministers (they think) are sent by our Prince Jesus to our Flocks, as
Rebels, to offer grace and salvation; if they come in and truly accept him, we
are to seal their pardons; if they do not make this (visibly) appear, we may
not apply the seal, without being guilty of the blood of Christ. Now this is a
very ill apprehension (which we shall rectify as we go forwards) for we must
not make the notion of sealing so dreadful, and bring so much blood upon our
souls. I think this is true indeed, in reference to the heathen, whom we need
not fear to judge visible Rebels, and they must come in and profess Jesus
Christ in opposition to all other Religions, before we can seal the Word to
them. The Word is no sealed Word (even outwardly) but to the Church; and when
they are made Members once, it is then sealed; we seal them an equal right to
all Ordinances, and Privileges, and whatsoever is exernal we confer to them.
But being received into the Church, and professors already, we cannot compel
any trial of them more (unless by way of Catechism and instruction wherein yet
there is no man too old to learn, Lu. 14.) but it must be, as to the truth of
their profession, or effectual sincerity, which for to do (where no scandal
calls them in question (it is to go about to judge men's) hearts, and to enter
into the seat of God, and make our selves dispensers, not of the mysteries
only, but of the grace, while we take a power to judge of men's worthiness, and
according to visibility, seal them their pardons. This is a business of sad
consequence to give occasion, and some hold-fast to those Antichristian
Scandals, are cast on our Ministry by them that would undo us.

I must confess I belive it was only the zeal and piety of good men, that made
them thus to rise up against ignorance and sin, without intending to enter upon
Gods Throne, but if we have erred, and must be laid down, it may be in the
dust, I hope we shall acknowledge his hand, and if he shall return our
Captivity from the Rivers of Confusion, where we have sat down and wept, we
will remember again our Jerusalem, and when thou have restored us, our Harps
now hanging on the Willows, we will sing of thy goodness, in the wonted songs
of thy Syon.



My First Reason was from the Nature of the Sacrament, It is the showing
Christ's death, a visible Gospel, and so a firm ground of Free-admission. Unto
this, the sum of what he says over and over, from p. 37. ad p. 52. comes but
to this, All may be present, but not actually receive, granting the foundation.

I shall begin with the last, His words are these, The Word, and the
Sacraments, it is true, must go hand in hand together; but the Covenant of
Grace, or the Word, is not (visibly) applicable to all, therefore not the
Sacrament:

For my answer to this which is all his weight, with but a very few grains
more; we must know, The Ministers of Christ are the Ministers of the new
Covenant to be revealed, and that is not of the Absolute, Heb. 8. which is
secret, and belonging to Election, but of the Conditional Covenant, (or the
Covenant in its conditional capacity) which is tenderable to all the world, and
that more especially applicable with a distinction of outward privileges or
interesse to the Church. Now look what is the tenor of the Covenant, the
Sacrament seals, and nothing else, for we both hold it is the same with the
Word. Now I pray what needed such a torrent of words in this plain case? May
not I say to all, and every intelligent Churchmember, If thou believe thou
shall be saved? and may not I seal to such, what the Word says? which he
grants. And do not all understanding men know, we cannot seal Jesus Christ and
his benefits to any, but on the Covenant terms, which is conditionally? Would
one think Mr. Drake should ask me such a question, p. 42. Dares Mr. Humphrey
say to a person in the state of Nature, Sir, Be assured All the benefits of the
Covenant are actually yours? The language of every actual giving is, Christ is
thine in particular.

I answer, This is a manifest error, The language of the Sacrament, is the
language of the Covenant, and that is not, Christ is thine, but Christ is thine
if thou will believe. And who doubts but I dare say so to one in a state of
Nature, conceiving we know it not, and cannot judge thereof; even as unto one
in a state of Grace; Christ is thine upon the same terms, as he does to one
visibly worthy, yet really unworthy; that is, If thou do now resolve to accept
of him. For, Let me ask him again, Dare Mr. Drake say to the visibly godly nay
to the most really holy, Sir, Christ is thine Absolutely, as in particular, I
assure thee of it. If he dare, he enters upon the absolute Covenant, and the
Ark of God, and says what no Mortal may say; But if he can say only Christ is
thine in particular upon the condition of the Covenant, Here is no more than
may be said unto others.

If this will not suffice, but you still think, though where a man is visibly
to be admitted, you can safely say to him, Christ is thine in particular,
whether he be in the state of Nature, or the state of Grace, seeing indeed you
know it not, yet you dare not say so, when you find (which thing I utterly
renounce to be visibly undertaken) that some are yet in their natural estate; I
answer, In my opinion, for all this, you may only take the language of the
Covenant wholly aright, which is thus, Here is Christ, If thou sincerely
acceptest of him, to save thee, if not, to condemn thee, unless thou
repentest, and all is safe nevertheless.

The solidity of this answer, may appear the more by this man's weakness to
salve that objection, p. 48. which otherwise cannot be don. It is this, Does
not the Minister seal to a Lie, if he seal to the unworthy? He answers most
miserably, He does but seal to an untruth, not to a lie, so long as he comes in
to the Elders, and is thought visibly worthy by them; Well, But what if the
Elders should admit one visibly unworthy, and the Minister judge him so to be,
yet the major part carrying it, What shall become of him then? Here his untruth
must be a lie again; It is not his pleading an admonition, or that he cannot
help it, will serve him, if it be possitively a lie, or a sin to admit any that
is visibly unworthy, he may not offend his conscience, and presume upon God,
though he lost his place and life too. So that he must on necessity come over
to us, and then he may know how neither to commit an untruth nor a lie neither,
by saying, He offers or applies Christ but conditionally, or upon his own
terms, and then the door is open for our Free-admission. The truth is, seeing
that the Minister is Gods Ambassador, and what he does, is by his Commission,
we may as soon say The God of Israel can lie, as that the Minister ever seals
an untruth, or lie either, in doing his office; but you may sit down by my
Expression hereof, p. 49. The Sacrament seals generally the truth of the
Covenant (freely and absolutely) to all engaging them unto it, but the interest
of single persons in the benefits (as in the threats) is always conditional, or
according to the tenor of the Gospel.

With my Readers leave, though this be both what is partly received, and
sufficient, I shall speak a little more. The very body of our Religion,
consists in the knowledge of the Covenant, and Application of it. Under the
Covenant, comes in the knowledge of our selves, our states, our Mediator, and
what he has done for us. And under the Application, the Spirit, and his office,
The Ministry, and the Church. For what concerns us here; About the Covenant,
we are to know the tenor of it, and the seal of it. The tenor of it is
apparent, Mark 16.16. For the seal, Let us consider, It is either the Real,
true, effectual Seal, that ratified this Covenant between God and Christ; and
that is his blood, Heb. 9. or the Symbolical, External seal, which is only a
representation of this unto us; and that is the Sacrament. Concerning the
Application, we must know two things, the Applyer, and the Subject to whom it
is applied, Both are likewise External, or Internal. The Internal Applyer is
the Holy Ghost, whose work is therefore called the seal of the Spirit, This
glorious person cannot be called a seal otherwise (but by a Metonomy of the
effect) as he is the inward Minister, to apply the Covenant both in working the
condition, and sealing thereof. The External Applier is our selves (the
Ministers) who are but his Earthen Vessels, while the Excellency of the power
we must leave freely unto him. For the subject to whom it is applied, It is the
Church. This is manifest, Christ Jesus did lay down his blood for the Church,
Acts 20.28. Ephesians. 5.23, 25. The Church then likewise is either the invisible,
which consists of such members that are truly in Christ; or the visible, of all
such as do profess him, as outward members thereof. Now by the blessing of
God, our work may be done, if we do but rightly sort these things together; The
Internal effectual seal, with the Internal effectual Application; and the
External seal with the external application. The Effectual seal of the precious
blood of Christ is in the hand only of the Internal Minister, to apply it to
the invisible Members, in whose hearts he both writes the new Covenant, and
seals it. The Outward seal of the Sacrament is in the hand of the Outward
Minister, to apply it to the visible Church, and the Members thereof. Now let
but the External Minister take heed of entrenching on the Internal Ministers
office, as he would look to his life, in not meddling with Gods Ark, and I hope
the fear of God may end the controversy between us.

For his other thing here, He grants We have proved that All may, or are to be
present, but that must be all, If it be applied so, it is death, etc.

Ans. I am very sorry to see what a frivolous thing man is, how every little
trick and trifle can put us off.

1. If there be such a stresse to be laid on Actual receiving, (which the Lord
forbid) yet may the Minister be Free in his offer, in delivering the Sacrament
in general, as Christ says, (...), Take, Eat, in the plural number, and while
he sat at Table. There are 4 or 5 reasons given by others for this way; but
that which moves me most, is this our own reason, that it is a visible word. Let
the Minister then deliver it in general to his Congregation as he preaches the
word; And while he declares to the whole Church This is the body of Christ
which was broken for you, the Receivers make application to their own parts.
Now if any Receiver who judges himself unworthy, should wave his very Taking
only unto the rest, it might seem a kind of tender confession, and act of
humility. And so let but the business lie there, and the offer of Christ shall
be free, yet no guilt on the Minister; and the administration free, and no
guilt on the Receiver. The Minister do his office, and the people their duty,
and both pleased.

2. This I speak as to men's scrupulous suppositions, but I must confess
(though I like a delivery in General, rather than particular) I can no ways
endure the rending these sacred actions one from another; When Christ has said,
Do this, this thing, or Do thus, as it seems the Syriack reads it, that is
after the same manner, Drink ye All of it, and they all drank of it, I think it
an injury to the holy institution, to separate what Christ has joined, as the
Papists do, in withholding the Wine from the Laity. I must confess this is a
device ingenuously framed to serve the turn, and I fear it has got it self
reverence in the hearts of some godly men; yet does it seem to me a thing but
of sad consequence to us, and indignity to God. For either this presence must
be held necessary, as our general duty, or left at our liberty: If we hold they
may be present only, and bind not any to it as a duty, who does not know, that
there is the confluence of the Word, Prayer, Singing, Meditation, in the
administration, which to lay wast is open impiety, and unbidding those things,
which are questlonlesse yielded to be means of conversion: But if we hold it
(as certainly it is) to be our duty, not to neglect such occasions, so that we
must come to the Sacrament, yet if we offer but to take and eat, this Actual
receiving only, shall be our damnation; The sinful adoration that was brought
on the Elements, by the conceit of Real presence corporally, had not so much
dread in it, though more supenstition. Nay, let us consider a little, shall
profane men, while they stay the administration, think themselves secure from
guilt, so long as they do not eat and drink, only, as if the Covenant and the
Seal was not otherwise applied to them, What hardness on their hearts? What
sensual apprehensions will this bring on them? Nay, what unholy and
contemptible thoughts of the God of Heaven, that looks on us, as if he regarded
our very eating and drinking more than our spirits? Not that I am so moved at
Free-presence (let the prudent judge of it) but that actual receiving is not as
free to our intelligent members. Indeed if persons be Excommunicate, (as the
Primitive Church did punish such with bare presence) or men have their gathered
Companies, if they do not communicate with those that are present, and hear,
their reason is open, they own them not as their members; but as for us that
are not yet convinced by them, either we must maintain, or new mold our mixed
Congregations.

This for his crop in general, there are some Ears yet standing to be cut down
in particular.

P. 37. If the Sacrament have the same latitude with the Word, then a Heathen
may receive it as a Christian.

He has here left out my main caution [Within the Church.] Let us know, the
Gospel may be considered as the Bare word, or a Sealed word; As an instrument
in the writing to be declared, and read over to all, or as a sealed instrument
delivered to peculiar use. Or the Word may be considered as to the publishing
the contents and tender of the Covenant, or to the appropriation of privilege
we have in it. To the Jews belonged the sacred Oracles, and the Covenants; The
contents might be preached to bring in proselytes, yet are they said truly with
distinction of outward privilege, to belong only to them. If you like not my
phrases, you may make better, but here lies the point; The blood of Jesus
Christ does peculiarly belong, by way of appropiation, to the Church, Ephesians.
5.23.25. This blood seals the Covenant, the Sacrament represents that blood:
Now as the Spirit applies the Effectual seal only to the invisible Church; so
the Minister can apply the outward seal only to the visible. Though the Word
then may be declared to Heathens, It cannot be sealed to them, but when they
turn Christians. The Covenant is a sealed Covenant only to the Church. There is
this distinction of privilege as it belongs to us, that it is sealed in the
outward application thereunto, that so every Member (without a just forfeiture)
has a public right, in the use of it.

P. 38. There are some righteous persons in their own conceit, many
self-Justiciaries, etc.

Ans. Of all men I think that such as these had need most of conviction, but I
find not the Scripture sends out any spiritual Hue and Cry, to make search for
them; if it did, I will not for any thing say who are the men; but sure some
Ministers, upon certain marks, might begin with their own Elders: nay I think,
upon the main known mark of I thank God I am not like other men (if you see Mr.
D. p. 90.) some Elders might take up their own Minister, upon suspicion.

P. 39. All may be present at the administration, as at Preaching, and Baptism,
but that All ought Actually to partake, -- will lead thousands into utter
darkness.

Ans. Not to mention his unhandsom language, where the sense is so dreadful, I
answer,

1. If a man swear by the Temple it is nothing, but the gold of the Temple
makes him guilty. If a man partake of the whole administration besides, it is
nothing for all his unworthiness, but if he actually receive, he becomes a
debtor. Which is greater, the bare eating and drinking, or the whole sacred
institution and consecration, that sanctifies the action?

2. It is not his instance of Baptism, will wash off this superstition, wherein
this good man has taken a deadly conceit, for there are no actions here to be
repeated; the weakness is clear as its own water. But I argue, if a man is
bound at this Ordinance to make inward application (together with the Word) of
what is represented, though the outward sign is forbidden, as to be twice used;
How shall we deny both the inward and outward application also in the Supper,
where both are commanded? The truth is, the very sealing the Covenant, applies
wrath to every impenitent, and life to every one that has true faith, whether
we should see it only, or receive it. And if it be not eating commends us unto
God, I do not stand upon this outward receiving, as any thing considerable, in
comparison of the reverential application of the Covenant, in a right use of
it, according to our condition.

3. For admission of all intelligent Church Members, I am free; but as for
their own coming, I have spoken more tenderly, than his speeches. Yet will I
confess my present inclination is thus, I hold, A man must examine himself (I
place much on this) and so receive according to his estate. God commands John
to destroy Ahab; John his disposition is evil in it, and does but commit
murder, which God will punish, Hos. 1.4. yet nevertheless must the thing be
done, and as commanded, it is both approved, as good, and rewarded, 2 Kings
10.30. Christ Jesus says to his Church, Do this; Mr. Drake says, If an
unregenerate member does it, he shall (I must say only he may) become guilty of
Christ's blood in the action. Nevertheless it is not his disposition being not
right, that can nullify Gods precept, but that he must both examine himself,
and so eat.

4. Whereas then, He thinks my opinion will lead many thousands to Hell, I am
humbly afraid that his will do it; I do professedly charge every soul, that
they look well into their conscience what they embrace, and the Lord be their
direction. For my part, I am thinking, when Jesus Christ shall call us both to
account at the great day; he will say to me, Why have you brought in all unto
my feast? I shall say, Lord, even as thou have commanded, Thou have said, Do
this, Drink ye all of it, and I must not mistrust the goodness of thy word,
and thy gracious efficacy to go along with it. I durst not for my life make
void thy blessed command. And what then, if he shall say to Mr. D. And why have
you, contrary to my express words, taught your own Commandment for the
precept of God, that it is an unregenerate man's duty to abstain? When I said
Do this, you have said Do it not, unless you be sure you can also so do it;
whereby you have strengthened the Careless, hardened the impenitent, and
afflicted tender Consciences, laying waste this Ordinance of mine in many
places, whereas one ought still to be done, and not leave the other undone: Let
me seriously forewarn this pious man, that while he has laid that text, Ez.
13.22. so heavy on my soul, that he provide himself to answer unto it.

P. 40.41. He brings in my Simile, but takes hold of it by the left handle; We
must not think as we are Ministers set over Christ's flock, we are sent to them
as Externally Rebels, that they must come in and profess before us, to be
admitted to those privileges, which they have a right to already, as well as
we. No, the main point of the Simile lies here, that the Instrument of peace,
committed to us, is a sealed Instrument, the word of reconciliation is a sealed
word to all the Church, Every member has an equal right to the Seal, as the
writing, and we cannot pluck off, or put on, our Lords seal at our pleasure. It
is a weak conceit, that we are sent to our Members, as it were with their
pardons unsealed, to try whether they truly submit, and according to our
judgment, to seal them. We must conceive our Seal is set by Christ himself to
his own Proclamation, and we have no other than what belongs to the whole
Church; But if we look any further than Church Membership, we enter the office
of the inward Minister, and take a power of meddling with the inward sealing,
which does not belong to us. It is the want of discerning between these inward
and outward things, has mislead Mr. D. who has not yet considered how the
Covenant is a sealed Covenant, to all that are but Christ's external people, and
that this Seal is a standing seal, and both Covenant and Seal make up one
public instrument for the use of the Church. We may see this in Circumcision
(from whence we borrow the notion of a seal) Genesis 17. I will establish my
Covenant between are and thee, and thy seed after thee in their generations.
Every man child among you shall be circumcised. Here you see how it is a
standing seal set to the Covenant, and both established with the whole seed, so
that by this one act as it were, of public delivery, Every Churchmember (that
was then any one of Abraham's seed,) had a right to the seal without any more
plea, as other public privileges, for ever after in their generations.

Now whereas he puts the case, that some who come to the Sacrament are but
Rebels, and how shall we seal unto them? I answer, we cannot judge of the
hearts of any that they are inward Rebels, and we may not judge that they are
outwardly so, when they outwardly come in, unless we have something to allege
against them to prove their Rebellion, and then if it be such as deserves it,
they may be Excommunicated, but while they are Church Members, we cannot deny
them their common privileges. But for his expressions, Of their seeming to
submit, yet carrying Daggers, and Poison about them to murder their Prince, and
therefore they must be searched, etc. Besides the vanity of the words, I must
tell him, 1. There is no Scripture that warrants his pretended trial of Church
Members, about their coming to the Sacrament, that is flat.2. Much less, that
he may take a power of search as to the truth of grace, which is an entering on
Gods Throne, and the Spirits work.3. This is clean contrary to Christ's example,
who set up no Sacramental trial for Judas, at least for any thing we can find
of it. But alas, that is nothing to Mr. Drake, he has found out a way to turn
this off with a wet finger, p. 9. and 90. Which if you confer with this
passage, he tells us, That they who are the Servants, by all means must needs
try, examine, and keep men away, for fear of some secret Treason unto Christ in
coming hither; but Jesus Christ the Lord himself, must not have power to make
trial of, or suspend Judas that really intends to murder him, because the
Presbytery was not settled.

To p. 44. I answer, Godly Parents and Maesters instruction of their Children
and Servants unto the Lords Supper, may be good, as the Ministers Catechizing
them, without this ill language he here gives me. I would willingly allow a man
some Salt in his discourse, but his is brinish; there are some ingredients to
be in ones Inck besides Gall.

To that question, what Christ sealed to Judas, p. 46, 47, 48. without regard
to the rest, which is amiss, I judge he speaks well herein, The word and the
seal both go together, and assure particular mercy or judgment to the
Receivers, as they are worthy and unworthy, that is, according to the
Covenant-tenour, and their own condition. This is good, though his comparison
of the bitter water following this, and that the Sacrament can never do good to
any, but such as are good already, seems to me such a slander of that precious
Ordinance, I would not be guilty of for all Mr. Drake is worth. But I pray
consider this really, whatsoever Christ does in his Ministry, must be a
gracious act, and be capable of gracious ends, so that this action must be in
its own nature a means to have done him good, if he had made a good use of it,
and it is accidental to the thing, he did it not. Yet did Christ, in this actual
estate of his, Mr. Drake says truly, seal to him judgment, (you must conceive
it, as to his own part in Receiving, for the Minister seals no interest but
conditionally.) Now the truth is, as the Word is a sweet savor to God, and a
means of salvation, in his threatenings as well as its promises, because it does
but still declare the Covenant, whereof they are parts of it; so is the
Sacrament, while it seals judgment, or while it seals life, seeing it does but
seal the Covenant equally in both. Here then I humbly conceive still
(submitting my self unto mercy) lies the main upon the Receivers, to examine
their hearts, and so to come in their addresses to Christ, that they rightly
apply the Covenant unto themselves, according to their condition. Always
carrying in mind these two things; First, That thou put far enough asunder the
blessed work of sealing the Covenant, though it denounces thy judgment unless
thou repentest, (for it does it no otherwise) and that cursed sin of thy abuse
hereof (if thou do not lay it to heart) in eating damnation. Secondly, That
what the Word denounces, and Sacrament seals, they conveigh not Really, but
only Relatively, for they are not Physical, but Moral instruments, (which Mr.
Drake did not think of in his bitter comparison) so that while they assure thee
of damnation, they do thee no hurt, if thou make a good use of them for thy
conviction, but if otherwise, as all means else, they serve but to increase it.
You may happily say this notion is strange, but is it not true, and as for the
ingredients, what every one yield? who will deny the Sacrament is a visible
word? Does not the word say, he that believes not, and repents, is damned? that
is, is in a present state of death. Must not every one lay this estate of his
to heart? Does not the seal assure the same thing only with the Word? Is not
our Receiving, the application of what is sealed? And is not the application,
or setting home the right part of the Covenant on a man's soul, the very
business (by the grace of God) of his conviction, and conversion? What then
remains, but that man have the information, and God the glory?

He repeats often, Where the word is not applicable, neither the Sacrament.
This is his strength, and I cloze with him, and urge, But if every man is to
apply the Word; and while he is impenitent, he is to lay to heart the
threatenings, and wrath of God, as the only way to mollify, and work him to
repentance; then it is clear the seal may be applied so likewise. The Seal and
the Word (he speaks fully) must go together. If you offer to say it seals not
this part of the Covenant, but only the promise and grace, then you take away
all danger, as it is sealing to the most unworthy, and make our admission more
free; though if any dare say it seals not the whole Covenant, you may as well
believe it is no seal at all.

P. 51. He has Infants up again, which is now five times, but for his words,
Shall the Supper be free for Blaspemers, Murderers, etc. (which, who doubts but
may be excommunicated, if not put to death) and his undertaking to prove his
rule of visibility to the Sacrament, to be as orderly as Baptism, it is like
himself, to say all day, and prove at night.

For his answers to my 4 Considerations, I reply as briefly. To the first, An
historical faith suffices unto Baptism, Acts 8.13. To the second, Acceptance is
either in sincerity, which we cannot search; or outward only and visible, and
that for Church Members, is their receiving. As for any other, the Scriptures
he pleads as abundant enough, are none at all; but if ill words will do it, he
has authority enough. To the third, where are many things, I say, 1. Though
conviction is not enough to convert without grace, what then? Is it not a means
therefore with it?2. His implicated errors are his own, for conviction of the
truth of the Covenant, does come directly by sealing it, and conviction of the
general offer, by the applying it to every single person. I think some nicety
between offering and applying (which as to the Minister is the same) troubles
the man, But3. Conviction, that Christ is mine in particular, as to a faith of
particular evidence, as he expresses it, comes not at all by the Sacrament;
Because 1. The Sacrament seals nothing but the Word, which speaks not
particularly, I believe,2. What is common to the Hypocrite, with the true
Believer, cannot bring any evidence to me. So that this arises only from the
testimony of my own conscience, and Spirit of God. If this man were less
confident, he might come to know more, and be better informed.

To the Fourth, It is true, the Gospel may occasion divisions, as the Bridge
does the tumults, and noise of the Waters, but I think it no way of the Gospel,
that goes about to make them. Let the wise, peaceable and godly, mark the
cause, and avoid it. As Factions are in State, Separations are in the Church;
you shall never unite, so long as you maintain the ground of them. ^t is a
little thing will raise up the spirits of men, when we know not how to allay
them again, and you shall sooner divide them into more Schisms, to ruin both
the Minister and the Church, than reduce them to what they were: For the spirit
of Division being once up, will be still fetching in more and more fuel to our
opinions. Even as the Magician (in the Fiction, Camerarius Hist. Med. lib. 3.
c. 15.) that was wont to take a stake of wood, and speaking certain words to
it, it would become a man, he bids it fetch him fire and water, and when it had
done his work, with some other words turns it into a stake again. A certain
Friend over-hearing these words, would needs do the same: He takes a stake,
speaks those Words, It turns to a Spirit, fetches him fire and water, when he
had enough, he bids it cease, and bring no more; but having not the Words to
charm it back into its self, that continues; He fearing, takes an Ax, cuts it
in two: upon this, instead of one, there is two men fetching fire and water,
never leaving, till they had almost brought both him and the house unto
confusion.

Nos asserin us (says Calvin) Ecclesiae formam non externo splendore, sed long
alia not a contineri, nempe pura verbi Dei predicatione, and Sacramentorum
administratione. Now what does competere essentially to the Church, as visible,
must competere to every Member, in status quo, so that so long as a man is a
Churchmember, he cannot be debarred this profession in the public marks of
these Ordinances. Only, let me here desire my Reader once for all, whenever
I speak of Church Membership, as our ground and common right to the Sacrament,
whether before or after, to take it always with the known and yielded
limitations of our admission, that is, unless men be unintelligent (as Infants
and the Distracted, etc.) or excommunicate (whom for the present I account no
Members) and to avoid all future cavil, unless there be also some manifest
occasion on a civil account, as sickness, infection, or the like, that are
granted impediments to it.

Upon this he has four particulars, p. 52, 53, 54. 1. He adds to this
description, a combining to Church ends, which indeed is virtually included,
but does suppose it to be my meaning, though not expressed so well as he has done
it.

Ans. A discreet Lady being upon Marriage to a worthy man, but not rich, and
persuaded against it by some interest friend, in the words of the Apostle, It
is good to marry, but better to be unmarried; Truly says she, I have always
studied only to do well, and must leave it to you that can, to do better. So
say I, I have endeavored to set down only what serves my turn, and is to my
purpose, but leave it to Mr Drake to be more curious (if he please) in his
additions.

2. He asks me, Whether all Professors or Saints by calling, may be admitted to
the Lords Supper? I answer directly, and eo nomine, with our due cautions, they
ought; for they are herein only called Saints, as separated from the World unto
this very Communion in Gods Ordinances. And now you may expect some weighty
Argument to convince us to the contrary, let us heart it. If so, then why does
he shut out Infants, and Distracted persons? Its apparent then, etc.

Ans. Would you ever imagine this same six times repeated thing (and ever
provided against) should be all now he has to say, and yet tell us it is
apparent, when as to us poor mortals, it seems nothing at all? Let me therefore
here certify you once again, that when St. Paul enjoins us to examine our
selves, and discern the Lords body, it does not excuse any of age, but they are
both to do so, and come, both to prepare and eat: We must do what we can still,
when we cannot do as we ought, and if we receive no good by it, it will be our
sin; but as for Infants, etc. we manifestly know, there is no such thing, it is
no sin of theirs if they are not fit to come. For ignorance then and scandal,
if it be not such as makes us forfeit our Church Membership (that is become
excommunicate) it cannot contradict our outward profession; for a visible
professor and Church Member, I think are terms convertible, and that very
Church Membership and profession, lies in the communion of these Ordinances.

3. He grants my Notes, but objects the keeping off Children and Servants till
they can give some tolerable account, etc.

Ans. There is a difference between what is done juridically, by compulsion,
and what is done only as prudential, by advice; Between forbearance, and
exclusion. I think a man may conscionably forbear his coming sometimes upon
many occasions, and much more upon pious ends regarding preparation. My ground
is, because affirmative precepts oblige us semper, but not ad semper, so that
there may be much of Christian prudence used in the ordering our more solemn
duties; upon which account only, I take it, are Godly Parents and Masters to be
commended in this thing, so long as they follow them with instruction, and so
may those Spiritual Fathers, that go no farther in the like admonitions.

4. He would have the World think I go to deceive, because my Syllogism should
run thus, The Word and the Sacraments are essential notes, ergo, without them
there is no true visible Church; but this concludes nothing against him.

Ans. Not to return evil words, I humbly answer, if this do not conclude
against him, yet does it conclude against them I more intended to convince,
than him; when some cannot afford the Sacrament at all to our mixed Churches. I
may truly tell Mr. Drake, it was no intent of mine to dispute with him, or
offend any, but that we might sit under our own Vines, and drink of the Wine
thereof with our people in peace, without these sour grapes being put into it.

P. 55, 56. He instances the Rubric, and Exhortation in the Book of
Common Prayer, which I believe little thought to be made use of to this purpose.

Ans. For the Rubricks allowing the Minister to suspend some notorious evil
livers, I take it upon the account of ipso jure Excommunicate, the end being
expressed to satisfy the Congregation. For the Exhortation, [whereas it mentions
only heinous sins ( If any of you be blasphemers, adulterers, in malice, or any
grievous sin, etc.) we may distinguish happily between sins that cannot stand
with sincerity, which no wilful sin (we hold) can, or with profession, as
Church Members; it may be it reaches not the first, but the last, upon the
former account. While a man is guilty of that deserves a censure, if convicted,
he may humbly sentence himself, unto a more solemn repentance, before he comes,
and give no offense. But if you apply it to all known sin] I am willing to take
it, as matter of prudential advice only (with godly Mrs before) in this sense,
If any of you are actually in some sin unrepented of, (as malice, etc.) you may
forbear this Sacrament at present, so long as you resolve to prepare your
selves against the next; But if you shall wholly refuse to come, you are to
know how sorely you offend God upon these terms, to neglect his Ordinance. But
for Mr. Drake now, methinks he should blush to produce me this authority, which
himself despises. I would wish him seriously to ponder their former Exhortation
with this, and therein weigh these words, as given us from their experience.
Whereas you offend God if you do refuse his holy Banquet, I admonish you, that
unto this sin you will not add any more, by standing by as gazers, and not
partaking your selves of it. This makes the fault much greater, and is a
farther contempt, having the mysteries of Christ in derision. Is it not said,
Take ye, and Eat, Take and Drink ye all of this? With what fate then shall you
hear these words? Will not this be a neglecting, despising, and mocking the
Testament of Jesus Christ?

P. 56. He acknowledges this practice of his were against the well-being of a
true visible Church, if the Lords Supper were a privilege due to all members.

Ans. I think herein his cause is yielded (to all clearly, but what we have
excepted) for there is an Inward right or privilege to this Ordinance, which is
invisible, we here speak not of; and Outward, or visible right, and that is
Church Membership. As for the subdistinction of this, to be more remote, or
immediate, found out by some, we cannot receive without warrant from Scripture.

I pray look unto the Passover, what gave a man right to that? See Exodus 12.
Every circumcised person shall eat thereof. There was nothing but a man's
entering into the visible Jewish Church, was the ground of his admission. Turn
to Acts 2.42. What gave those 3000 right to continue in breaking of bread, as
doctrine, but only that they were added to the Church by Baptism? and
immediately this fellowship belongs to them. See 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. The
Sacrament is the Communion, or token of our Communion in Jesus Christ; Now I
argue, If every Churchmember in statu quo, is in Christ Io. 15.2. externally a
partaker of his blood, so as to sanctify him, Heb. 10.29. and redeem him, 2
Pet. 2.1. then he has, I hope, an immediate right to that which is but a token
hereof; So long as he is in communion, how can he be debarred the Communion?
These outward things must go together, and you must cut him off Relatively from
communion with Christ, or the Church, be you can deny him the outward pledge of
his profession. While he is in the body, he may partake of the body, The Church
is the body of Christ, and so long as we are one body, we are one bread, and
partakers of that one bread. There needs even nothing here, methinks, but
drawing the curtain, and you see it day all abroad.

P. 56. Good Government lies in the Geometrical (not Arithmetical)
administration of censures, etc.

Ans. Mr. Drake does well to speak for himself, for if there be any thing in
this good Government he means, hangs by Geometry, it is this suspension, while
he places it in the air between Admonition and Excommunication. As for his
argument from the greater to the less, we know it holds not, but in things of
the same kind: Now Excommunication is of divine institution, but where will you
find his suspension? so that his Reason truly, is this, Because he may exercise
that which is a Church censure allowed in the Word, which is the greater;
therefore he may set up that which is no Church censure, which is the less.
The casting scandalous persons out of the Church, with due caution, is I think
of Divine right, but the Excommunicating a man from one Ordinance, so that he
is still a Churchmember otherwise, is to me an opinion upon the hearth
unturned. The lump is the Church, and I see not how the leaven can be said
purged out, while it is a part of it. Excommunication therefore, I judge, does
properly respect Church-society in general, or Church Membership; and all the
Ordinances Relatively, as I take it. An Excommunicated person I doubt not may
be admitted to some Ordinances, as the word (and it may be prayer, as the
Church thinks fit) to do him good, while he is kept from others, as the
Sacrament, yet is he not to be accounted hereby a Churchmember. He may come to
hear in the state of a Heathen, as the word is published to all, Mar. 16.15.
But as the Word is a Sealed Word, and belongs with distinction of privilege to
the Church, he is Relatively cut off from his interest in it. So that he is to
reckon himself (for all this common favor) as one externally cast off from the
Church, and all her Privileges, that the terror thereof may drive him to
repentance, and bring him home. And upon this account only of being
(Relatively) out of the body, do we juridically debar him (as I hold) communion
of the body.

Page 57. Because suspension is not mentioned in Scripture, therefore Mr.
Humphreys will have it expunged; as if because a man will not be gained by
words, there were no other way but presently to knock him on the head.

Ans. 1. I pray, let all tender Consciences take notice, that this thing
(distinctly) contended for, with such strictness, is confessed in terms, not
to be in Scripture2. Whereas the whole business of Excommunication is placed
by him, in actual receiving, from which he suspends all that refuse to submit
unto his way; it follows that this man, before he does so much, as go to gain
some by words at all, he presently knocks them on the head, and yet would be
thought very favorable, that he does no more to them than he can possible. As
for the commendation of his own way, as a means to purity, instruction of the
ignorant, good conversation of the Members, etc. I answer, These are indeed
commendable things, to be pursued, without these terrors, and burdens upon the
Conscience, in reference to this Ordinance.

Page 58. He tells us, My support from Christ's Parable of the Tares and Wheat,
Mat. 13. is feeble.

Ans. But is is strong I hope to maintain our mixed Churches against separation;
when the Net is drawn, then shall the fishes be separated, and when the Harvest
comes, then shall be gathered out, all things that offend, v. 41. And if herein
it be invincible, it would serve me, had Mr. Drake let me alone. But seeing he
begins with me, let us try him; the ground on which he stands is visibility; if
any man be visibly unworthy, he must not admit him upon any terms. Now see how
directly this is against the words of the Parable. v. 26, 27. The Servants come
and tell the Lord of the Tares, they discern them, they are apparent, they are
visible Tares, yet the Lord commands to let them alone; I think Mr. Drake must
shut his eyes upon this Text, if he will yet persist in making visible
unworthiness the rule of excommunication. But now what has he to say unto
this? 1. He says, Its apparent the Tares were sown, when men slept, v. 25.

Ans. But what is this question, how they were sown, to their growing together?
I remember Erasmus brings in two men, as very conceited to have others think
they could hear well enough, when they were both stark deaf, and thereupon
discoursing together; methinks Mr. Drake while he speaks so notably to the
purpose, might serve ingenuously to make a third between them. 2. He says, He
forbids them on this Proviso, lest it should hurt the Wheat, but he can do it
(he thinks) so curiously, it shall be much advantage to it.

Ans. I pray mark it, The Lord judges the plucking up the Tares will hurt the
Wheat, (shake, unroot, grieve the tender) Mr. Drake says it will do the Wheat
much good. The Servants take their Lords proviso, to forbear, Mr. Drakes takes
it to do the contrary; you must think Mr. Drake a little wiser than these
Servants.

As for his terms, of Negative, and positive suspension, we may approve (if he
will) under their own notions of admonition and Excommunication; but whereas he
objects, If the Lord will have the Tares let alone until the day of Judgment,
what will become of this Excommunication? I answer, there is no doubt of
Christ's reconciling his own Ordinances.

P. 59. Christ's converse with sinners makes for us, who publicly profess
their repentance, but not Pharisees, etc.

Ans. 1. Sir, Public Confession will hardly down, and Auricular we do not
approve.2. Christ sometimes conversed too with the Pharisees, I hope to do good
upon them.3. I had thought Christ had often companyed with sinners, to bring
them to repentance, and not with such only as were penitent already, and that I
think, applied here, makes little for you.

P. 60: He brings in some expressions of mine with amazement, the sense
whereof, (as harmless as the words) is but this, I judge Christ's act of
admitting Judas, has been generally prevalent with the Church, for
Free-admission, and that it might yet be sufficient, but that men are not now
so willing to receive it. For my part, I do but declare herein, according to
our former Church, with the practice of Mr. Perkins, and such godly men that
have gone before us. And as for such that are now otherwise minded, I reverence
them, I have no evil thoughts of them, the Lord knows it, Mr. Drake need not so
unjustly, and so direfully, first accuse me, then condemn me for what he
forges, as if I deserved to be more than suspended, which in his sense, makes
me tremble, it should enter into his heart Ah Lord! Is this the temper of holy
men? Judge me, try me, (though I am vile otherwise, and most unworthy) if
herein there be any iniquity in me, why I should be thus devoted to the pit of
Hell, even irrecoverably, if thy mercy did not exceed this man's infirmity. Thou
see, these censures are things too sharp to be put into the hands of such
Children of thine, who have so little discretion for to use them, and it may be
the effect of thy Fatherly wisdom, to keep their knives away from them, when
they are ready to do such shrewd turns with them. It may be the Lord will look
on my affliction, and require me good for his cursing this day.

without judging, every one esteeming others better than themselves, etc. Now
if men will go to set up a discriminating Ordinance they cannot keep themselves
from intrenching on these duties, and occasioning divisions. Our sad experience
has made this argument too weighty for Mr. Drakes particulars, which are not
worth the naming, unless he could first prove it the Ministers duty, to
discern between the worthy and unworthy, as the rule of admission. When Moses
saw two Israelites fighting, he parted them, and made them friends, but when he
saw an Egyptian striving with an Israelite, he saved the Israelite, without any
regard to the life of the Egyptian. If this rule of visibility had any
foundation in the Scriptures, we should certainly endeavor to reconcile these
texts to it; but when it has not any at all, and yet is striving against our
peace and unity, humility and charity, we must save the Israelite: these duties
must be preserved, whatsoever becomes of this opposite thing that contends with
it.

Not that I hold all judging unlawful, for I doubt not, but there may be both
a Public, and private judging; Public judgment is either in Civil causes, or
Church Censures, both which are sufficiently warranted in the word upon due
conviction. Private judgment, is either upon ones self, or upon others, I
think sometimes the one may be sinful, as the other without sin, and that not
only, in case of outward actions which are apparent transgression, but in some
charitable suspicions upon occasion (as Job over his Sons) tending to
admonition. This I do speak, that I may not abate from the zeal and piety of
any over their relations, though we allow a free-communion.

For his 9 things, p. 62, 63, 64. I return briefly, 1. A judging ones self as
worthy, and unworthy unto the Sacrament, is private, but sound judgment. A
judging others as to the truth and sincerity of grace, though public, is not,
I think, a warranted judgment. But a judgment of probability, as to a visible
fitness, and unfitness, upon a charitable jealousy, may be solid, as to
advice and counsel, but not, as to be a rule of admission, or suspension.

2. The censures of the Church upon Heresy or scandal, after due admonition
and conviction, will stand firm (as they have ever done) without this judging
at the Sacrament.

3. Ephesus is commended for her trial of the false Apostles, as to their
doctrine, not for a trial as to the Sacrament. She could not bear those that
were evil in the Church, it were a wretched interpretation, to say, she could
not bear them only at the Lords Supper.

4. The Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.7, 12, 13. speaks of the like Excommunication from
the whole lump, that the evil report of such a notorious action (I take it)
might not leaven their Churches reputation, by his being reckond of their
company.

5. The trial of the Ministers at our Ordination, has express warrant for it,
but there is no Scripture sets up a trial of our members unto the Communion.

6. The gentleness required of an Elder, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. will hardly stand
with Mr. Drakes spirit, which makes him the more unfit for this trial, if it
were meet in others.

7. The word (...), does not allow us to suffer men in their sins, for there
is a reproof in the spirit of meekness, but it does allow us to suffer, and
invite them (unless excommunicate) unto Gods ordinances.

8. It is a censure befits only Mr. Drake to judge it out of pride in the most,
and ignorance in the best, that they do not conform themselves in this thing
unto him, when it may be the lamentation of their souls, to see the miserable
effects already of it.

9. As a man cannot note a fault with more mildness than in Scripture-terms,
and bring himself in it, as I have done in these words, Preferring our selves,
Phil. 2.3: so there cannot be expressed more bitterness to a fellow-Minister,
ordained as he (if he would know it) by the Presbytery, than to number me in
the company of Corah, Sanballat, and Tobiah.

And now should I return him his own language, p. 61. See you not here how the
vizard of piety falls off, and his breath and pen savor quickly of pride?
Should I say, If this do not smell strong of sublime Pharisaism, I beseech you
what does? as he has it p. 93? Or rather should I heartily advise him to take
heed there be not a guilt herein upon his own conscience, that so galls him to
the heart, (in a hatred of the remedy, instead of the disease) I should be
justified by his words, but do not know whether I shall be approved by God, in
making it a means to show him his sin, and humble him for it. For my part,
while he can even wish the earth might open and swallow me up, I desire the
Lord to open his eyes, that he may see the rents he helps to make, to swallow
up the Church: And though he obtain not his wish as to the Earth, yet has he
prevailed much as to the waters, which have overflowen my soul, and even been
ready to swallow that up, with the sorrows and woundings of my heart under
these his bitter accusations. The Lord executes judgment and righteousness
for the oppressed.

Alas Sir! Is it any advantage unto me to see our Church in her ruins? can I
repine at that double honor you would get, in ruling well, as in laboring in
the Gospel? Do not I rather deplore the burden on your selves, and indignation
of others in lieu of it? Would it not be as much happiness to me as my fellow
brethren, to have that Government established, which is thought most conducing
to our own good? And can I take any such pleasure in the dis-orders,
dis-respects, and contumelies, of an unwieldy people, as much as any, for want
of discipline, that I should be against it? No, it is the unwarrantablenesse in
Scripture, the unsuitablenesse with men's Spirits, the improbability of the
effect; it is the desire of peace, unity in the Church, and the taking away the
root of our divisions, especially it is the infinite account on the Ministers
Soul, the many grievous wounds, and perplexities of tender Consciences, that
have engaged my soul^, and interess'd my spirit for a freedom at this
Ordinance. And now, if it shall please the Lord, to make me a poor instrument,
to bring refreshment to any of his people amidst their afflictions, concerning
themselves, or our mixed Communions, I shall be contented to be reckoned by this
man, for a Sanballat or Tobiah, if I may be accepted of my God in the words of
Nehemiah, Remember me heerin O Lord, according to thy great mercy, and wipe not
out the kindnesses I have done to the house of my God, and the offices thereof,
but wipe out all my failings, and my offenses, with thy goodness, and the
precious blood of Jesus Christ.

Page 65. His note is good (though words bad,) We are more apt to take notice
(of what men do ill, than what they do well) of their sitting to reject a few,
than of the many are admitted to their mutual comfort, etc.

Ans. I know not which is more comfort, to have all visibly worthy, or to have
charity enough to make all so, I am sure, the seeing the vilest may have a good
use on our hearts, if it humble them, and makes us look on our selves, as them,
without the difference of Gods mercy. It is indeed a comfortable thing, to be
with our brethren round about our Father, with none but His Children, receiving
our portions of the blood of Christ, yet need it not deject, but enlarge our
devotions, to see an attendance of Servants also coming along with his Sons, in
their due profession of a like outward dependence on him. While the Glory of
the Lord fills the Temple, his Train may be suffered to reach unto the Earth.

Page 66. to p. 70. He brings in my 3 passages of our Savior. The first was
about the Pharisee, Lu. 18. Which I have expressed with that tenderness, and
caution in the showing the fault, and not grieving the faulty, that I commit it
farther to their consideration, pitying Mr. Drakes poor excuse, That his
judgment was private and without trial, as if a thing for being more public,
were the less evil; and when he judges himself worthy, and many unworthy, he
asks the question, Yet how do we think our selves better than others?

The second was in Lu. 5. where Christ entertaining so many Publicans and
sinners at Table with him, gives us the reason, that he came to call them to
repentance, that is, to convert them; and yet Mr. Drake says, What is this
against them, Who will admit none unto Christ's Table, unless converted
already? For his interpretation of I come not to call the righteous, he wrongs
Christ to say, 1. He would not have all admitted.2. Rejects the Righteous, for
this must be taken in regard of the effect, not tender of his grace. 1 Timothy
2.4. Christ rejected not the Pharisees, but they rejected him, Mat. 23.37. He
offered his grace as freely to them, as any others, but the fault was their
own, they would not come into it. Whosoever comes unto me I will in no wise
cast out.

The third was a sweet place in Io. 8. where, who does not see how impertinent
Mr. Drake is, about opening that Text (though he does it well enough) as if he
could not distinguish between a proof, and illustration. My sense is this, the
tender consideration of Jesus Christ, in setting the Iows to the sifting their
own hearts, when they came with intents of judging the Woman, might be a good
allay for many amongst us, that are so forward about the censuring others, and
indeed, is so taking, Mr. Drake fre^s at it. For my part I can patiently bear
with his terms, of Ignorance, Instability, Prejudice, Perversion, so long as I
find a complacency in my spirit, and comfort in this passage above most I have
writ. Methinks I have some passages are not so fit for me, I can even mourn
over them, that they seem too pious for the writer; but this is an Argument,
may be my very own, an Argument that becomes such a poor sinner as I am; the
very prevailing thing at the bottom of my soul, and not so much an Argument, as
the very confession of my heart. Indeed I was afraid that this acknowledgement
of my Conscience would have turned to my shame, but I have found it my peace,
and whilst I have confessed mine iniquity, my God I hope does forgive me, and
answer my reproach. For when Mr. Drake tells me, I am proud, a Pharisee, a
Corah, I can but turn to this place, and I hope I am not so. For my answer then
to him, his error is open, in taking his Sacramental judging for warranted,
which is the thing in question. It Is true, men cannot bring this passage against
the Magistrate, nor to take away our censures which God has commanded in the
Church, yet is it sufficient, I hope, to make us take heed, and be very loath
to set up any censures (as of visible worthiness) which Christ has not
commanded us. So that to cloze, as I said at first, if this were once proved a
precept of Christ, I would yield to Mr. Drake in every particle, but seeing men
are assured there is no such thing, it is in vain to conceive chaff and bring
forth stubble, which his own breath serves but to consume, while of all his
particulars, he that is now so hot, shall not have a coal left him, to warm at,
nor fire to sit before it.



Look we unto the Church as it was amongst the Jews; The whole Nation, Deuteronomy.
12.2. is said to be a holy people, a peculiar people, Ezra 9.2. Dan 8.24. In
Deuteronomy. 26.16, 17, 18. there is this reason, because the Lord had given them his
Statutes. Compare it with To. 3.2. and 9.4. To them belonged the Oracles, and
the Covenants, etc. I pray mark it, as the Jews were separated from the World,
in the acknowledgement of the true God, and profession of his name, they are a
holy, peculiar, adopted people, insomuch that Moses says expressly, God did
hereby avouch them to be his people, and they him to be their God. Now unto
whom the Covenants belong, the seals of the Covenant do belong; but the
Covenants we see manifestly belong to them hereby, as professors, or members
only of the Jewish Church, and that we must know too, by way of privilege, so
as that they are interested in the outward benefits of it, and reckoned
externally in Covenant with God, even in cases of very grievous transgressions,
if you seriously ponder Ex. 32.7, 8. with 11.13. Ps. 106.39. with 45. etc. In
Eze. Idolatrous Children are said born to him; and Christ calls them his own.
Io. 1.11. who were unbelievers, and received him not. And hence therefore did
Circumcision, and the Passover, belong to them on that account, for we find
their whole seed to be Circumcised, and counted holy, To. 11.16. and when they
were once Circumcised, Ex. 12. there was no need of proving any other right
unto the Passover. There is a place here in prevails much with me, Exodus 24.8.
where we find Moses upon this very respect, making no distinction, in
sprinkling the blood of the Covenant in general upon the people, with these
words, Behold the blood of the Covenant God has made with you. I pray pause a
little, and think, what do we more in delivery of the Sacrament?

Look we again as we are Christians; We shall find there is no privilege
belongs to the Elect, but in an external relation, it is frequently attributed
to the visible Church, in the New Testament. There is an external Vocation,
Sanctification, Adoption, Redemption, etc. The Apostle calls the Hebrews Holy
Brethren, and partakers of a Heavenly calling, Heb. 3.1. when yet there was a
heart of unbelief ( ver. 12.) he fears in them. The Corinths were very vicious,
2 Cor. 12.21. and upon this account he at first wrote to them, 1 Cor. 1.11. yet
does he style them, as they are of the visible Church, Saints by calling,
Sanctified in Christ, 1 Cor. 1.2. And even those of them that were given to
Fornication, 1 Cor. 3.17, he says they were the Temples of the Holy Ghost,
using that as an argument to reclame them from it; Even as he tells them, all
were in communion with Christ, and partook of one bread, wherefore they should
flee Idolatry, 1 Cor. 10.14, 15, 16, 17. There is then a double Christian, and
Jew; An outward Jew, and Christian, and an inward Jew and Christian, Romans 2.28,
29. Even as there are these outward and inward privileges and relations. Now
that which makes a Christian or Jew to be inwardly a Jew or Christian, gives
him an immediate right to the inward privileges, which is truth of grace: And
that which makes a man an outward Christian or Jew, gives him immediate right
to the outward privileges of the Jew and Christian, and that is
Church Membership, or profession. And this business, methinks, is sweetly
decided for us by Christ himself, when he sums up the whole visible Church
into these two heads only, Many are called, and few chosen.

As for what Mr. D. has to say against this, p. 71, 72, 73, 74. it is barren,
as a field already gleaned. In general he says, 1: In the rule of admission,
they are not to go by the truth of grace. It is well he is brought to confess
this, which so often otherwhere he thinks himself bound to pry into. See Page
117. His trial there, is to uncase many outwardly pious, that live in some
known sin, and discover them to be hypocritical, yet here it is not the rule he
goes by. It is pity but the Lawgiver should be Lord over his own rule. His
reason is, because Infants, etc. which is now seven times.2. Nor by visible
profession, or Church membership, which way the Scripture goes, because it is
too loose for him. The godly, forsooth, must not go the ordinary road of
Christians, lest the wicked come along with them. His argument is as good as
this, I must not go the horseway, because I am a man.3. He has found out a
medium, a middle way, which before these times our Church never knew, and he
may be famous for the discovery, seeing there is scarce a trace or footstep in
the whole Word, any else can find for it, besides him. We have had one Drake
already famous for shooting the Gulf, you shall now have another, for cutting
the Streights in this business of Admission.

In particular, Page 71.72. Could not all the Art Mr. H. has, think of a
medium participationis?

Ans. 1. The whole Art Mr. H. professes, is to be a humble follower of Jesus
Christ, who tells us of no medium here, while he divides all his guests (as I
have said) into the called and chosen, Matt. 22.14. Which cloze being brought
in unto this Parable, may happily serve both to check Mr. D. that will be wiser
than his Lord, and help to direct us in the rule of our admission. The servants
can look but to the one, who are Saints by calling, as the Lord to the other,
who are Saints by Election.

2. I doubt not but if Mr. D. finds out one medium, there will be enough to
find out more, for if ever there were any Sects or Schisms in the Church, they
run upon this same account, that they have found out the true medium as well as
he. If we maintained our profession, we might have kept out our divisions, but
in the yielding the one, we are lost in the other. Mr. Drakes words here are
but vain, when we see these sad effects. There is a wound made in our very
bowels, which the Church has received by her own sons, while they have given
the occasion of separation from her. This is the whirlpool wherein she loses
her Children, whom as soon as she has fostered under her wings, and with long
travels gotten but out of the shell, they presently leave her; Even as those
Ducklings that are hatched under a Hen, let them but come once to see the
waters, they regard not at all the cluckings of their Mother, but run
themselves in the depths of their own imaginations.

P. ibid. We look at his rule of Church Membership, or profession, as a very
loose principle etc.

Ans. And what does he think of Christ's action, in admitting of Judas, was that
a loose action? and are the Scriptures loose Scriptures? what reason has he for
this? Because it will open a door for Infants, etc. Alas, good man I, Is this
it? and I pray what else? As also for the wicked, etc. He should say in plain
terms, It is a loose principle, because it is not his principle, and then he
had hit it.

For his instance of children, which we have had now no less than eight times
over, merely out of penury, in having nothing else; Methinks I may only answer
him, with the Philosopher, when he took another a-bed with his Wife, that was
extremely ill favored, O miserable man (says he) what necessity has brought
thee hither? O poor Mr. Drake! what wretchedness is this, that he should have
no other argument to make use of? For his other instance, if profession be Mr.
H' s, ground, how dare he Excommunicate any Baptized person, though most
wicked? I answer, As the Priest durst shut up the Leper from the whole
Congregation; because of Gods special command, 1 Cor: 5.13. Indeed if the
Priest would have kept him from the Ordinances, when he was not to be kept from
the Camp, he had no warrant for it. Though I dare not exclude any
Churchmember, in statu quo, while his right is good, yet I hope I may, where
he has forfeited that right, and is made no Churchmember by Excommunication.
Because I must admit of him that is a professor, therefore may not I exclude
him, that is for the present in the state of no professor? It fares with
children here, as it does in their lands, it is not for want of a right, but
want of a capacity, they do not enjoy it; but it fares with the Excommunicate,
as in men's forfeiture of their Estates; Their whole right to it is lost for the
present, until there be a recovery by their repentance.

Page 74. Does not Mr. H. know, a man may be habitually worthy, and yet not
actually, etc. Dia he never hear of Real and Visible worthiness. etc?

Ans. For the former, I do know it is a good distinction, as applied to the
Receivers, though I believe it no ways concerns the rule of our admission. But
for the latter, I must confess I have heard of the Visible Church, Saints by
calling, Professors, etc. but this Visible worthiness, as distinguished
therefrom, I have not lightly read of, but in him, though I willingly in
opposing him, make use of the terms as brief, and very significant of his
meaning, that is as Exotic to the Scriptures, as the expression.

And now methinks I see many pious men, conscious of their own uprightness, as
so many Iobes, ready to stand up and justify themselves; behold therefore, I
shall be as another Elihis, formed out of the Clay; I have heard you say we are
innocent, our way is righteous; But where are your Scriptures? Where is any
precept for it? or example in the Word? does it seem good to you to put a yoke
on the Brethren, when you are not sure, it seems good also to the Holy Ghost?
Is there any thing worthy all your labors, watchings and pious designs, that
has not clear Authority from Christ? Or is there any such thing, worthy our
Churches troubles and alterations? Have ye been so tender of your own
consciences, about some circumstances at this Table formerly, that you should
not now leave the substance of the duty free unto others? And have you in the
issue found any such fruits, and blessed effects, as you have expected in
laying this foundation, whereof our spiritual enemy takes advantage to bring a
burden upon our own Souls, perplexities to tender Consciences, displeasure on
the general, and accidental danger to us all* in opening the door to our
endless separations? How has the Lord Covered the Daughter of Zion with a
cloud, and cast down from Heaven to Earth the beauty of Israel? Reproach, and
Division has broken our hearts, we looked for some to take pity, and there
was none, and for comforters, and have found none. Turn thou us unto thee, O
Lord, and we shall be turned, Renew our days as of old.

Page 75. Upon that allusion of mine, about the Onion, out of pleasant, he
brings bitter; whether the man be more flat or spiteful, let others judge; I am
sure, the Emblem of the Spider, sucking venom out of those flowers the Be
does honey, is lively represented in this place. For the sense of his words,
which are a censuring of all us that hold for a free offer of Christ at this
Sacrament, to be opposers of the Church, and the Wicked, and his party only the
godly; I answer him humbly in the words of Christ, Luke 9.55. You know not what
manner of spirit you are of. It is not so easy a thing, to discern, between
the right hand and left hand of Jesus Christ; It is not your part to sever the
Sheep and the Goats, to write Doomsday, and the book of Judgment. It was a
kind question of Joseph to his brethren, How does the old man, is he yet alive?
I will ask my virulent opposer, the same question, Sir, What think you of the
ancients of our Church, and their former practices? How have they done a long
time? Is your Father well, the old man, of which you speak? Are they all of
them of the wicked? Is this your kindness to them in their age? to bring down
so many gray judgments with sorrow to the grave.

For the manner of his expression, with his dagger of that text, Ez. 13.22.
(though used by roat before to Mr. Prynne) I must confess it is very grievous
to me; Mine eyes cannot look upon it, but they affect my heart; O Lord! Do thou
bow down thine ear, and hear, open thine eyes, an behold, for me, the reproach,
he has spread here with p. 92, 93, 94. etc. before the world; See Lord, if thou will allow such language, and such spleen in one of thy children, and not
reprove him for it; Rebuke him, O Lord, yet not as a Son of Ashur, but as a Son
of Judah. Let all bitterness, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking, be
put away from you, with all malice, and be you kind one to another, tender
hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you.



There was no Nation like the Jews, unto whom the Lord gave his Statutes, says
Moses, it was the whole people, the whole Church, to whom the Statutes were
given; Amongst these Statutes, they had the Passover, which you may see to
whom it belongs, Exodus 12.3. Speak unto all the Congregations; Mark it, is not
here a general institution, as of any other ordinance? so that the whole Jewish
Church, or all the circumcised, is the adequate subject (if I may use those
words) of this duty? Compare it with Numb 9.3. and God says, he that did not
keep it, should be cut off. Will any man now imagine (unless Mr. Drake) that
none but the regenerate were to eat thereof? Turn then to the Gospel, and do we
not likewise find the Sacrament instituted thus for the whole Church? The Lords
words are, Do this, Drink ye all of it, a standing precept to all the Twelve,
as representatives of the Universal Church, as visible, while Judas is amongst
them; and it is expressed, They all drank of it. Out of Sion shall go forth a
Law; upon this obligation, we find the whole number of Professors, breaking
bread every week, Act. 20.7. and daily, Act. 3.46. but we find not a word about
any discrimination at it: Is not this then a general command for the visible
Church? and was not here the practice common? Again 1 Cor. 11. you have the
whole institution repeated, and enjoined till Christ come, ver. 26. And then
ver. 33. he concludes directly thus, When you come together to eat, tarry for
one another. He speaks, no doubt, unto the persons he reproves, which we may
see how vicious they were, and yet their coming he holds to be good, that must
still be done, but directs them to carry themselves better there, which
likewise ought not to be left undone. One would never think it should have
needed to come under proof, that this is a duty belonging in general to the
visible Church, or that any should hold, that it is a precept only for the
regenerate and Elect, if we did but consider that Saint Paul is so far from
making distinction of these Corinths at it, that he brings it in the Chapter
before, as an ordinary privilege, without any dispute, even as freely as the
very Manna, and the rock, which rock was Christ.

Unto this I will add only those words, Genesis 17.10. This is my covenant you
shall keep, Every man-child among you shall be circumcised; from whence it
appears, the condition and keeping of the Covenant is either inwardly in the
grace, or out wardly, in the administration; If a man be not inwardly in
covenant to keep it effectually in the grace, yet so long as he is externally
in covenant, he must keep it still in the administration, that is in the
Ordinances.

It is therefore, as I am afraid, very dangerous to hold with Mr D. (let the
pious judge between us) that it is only the regenerate (for so he speaks it)
not every man's duty to receive; for this opens a door unto neglect, making man's
impotency, a sufficient reason to nullify Gods precept, and to justify one
sin with another. I shall therefore here produce you Mr. Perkins (for we must
be plain herein) in his Cases of Conscience, whose authority I hope will go, he
lays down these three rules.

1: Every man of years living in the Church, and being baptized, is bound in
conscience by Gods command, Take, Eat, Do ye this, to use the Lords Supper.
You see here Church membership is the rule this Eminent man went by, and yet I
hope was not one of the wicked, for all Mr. D's censure.2. Every man is to
receive it often, 1 Cor. 11.26. considering it is nothing but the showing the
Lords death. He comes up to our very ground herein, as a visible Gospel.3.
Every man is to receive, and use the Lords Supper, according to the laudable
custom of his own Church, etc. Nothing can be more full and honest. Indeed it
is true, if a man live in any known sin, he ought to repent before he come, he
must come, and come worthy, he must come worthily, yet he must come, whether he
be regenerate or unregenerate, he must obey still; our necessity of sinning
cannot evacuate Christ's authority, or man's duty. When an Action has evil in
its own substance, it is to be omitted; but when the Action is of its self the
matter of a precept, and so has evil externally cast on it by the Agent that
does it, here the Action is not to be omitted, but the Agent to be reformed.

For Mr. D's answers here they are trifles, p. 75, 76, 77. 1 He brings in
Infants again, which is the ninth time, and he is confident to extricate
himself by the same ga^. But he is a little mistaken, for I have put him in two
such thorns, that he shall sooner prick himself to the bone, than fairly get
out of it.2. He says six parts of time are common, yet not the seventh.3. He
says on.4. He is very fine. The whole Ordinances he distinguishes into parts,
they are not applicable universally, and so the Sacrament. Where if the man be
serious, I answer. 1. Mr. D. must not part those actions Christ has joined.2.
Moses makes no doubt of applying the Covenant universally to the people, and it
is in my mind that that passage may do much.3. The Word it self, or covenant,
is applicable to all, in the whole parts of it upon its own terms, that is,
conditionally.4. If this will not serve, Take but the language of the Covenant
aright, Mar. 16.16. Here is Christ, If thou truly acceptst of him, thou shall
be saved; If thou do not, the Word declares, and the Sacrament seals to thee,
unless thou repentest, thou shall perish; and then all the difficulty is over,
and our scruples done.

P. 78. If do this be universal (leaving those two other things like the rest)
then it were a sin to persuade any to forbear, though a Zimri, Actually drunk,
etc.

Ans. 1. His instances are ipso jure Excommunicate.2. As Christ says, Do this,
Paul says, Put away from you such a person. We do not deny from Christ's
universal, Paul's exception.3. Though there is no occasion that may make us
commit a sin, yet are there many occasions sometimes of forbearing a duty. A
man may leave his gift at the altar, and go and be reconciled, but he must not
take away his gift from the altar: The business may be deferred, that must not
be wholly left undone. If I know my brother evil, I think I may admonish him to
repentance* and give him instructions of preparing himself better against next
Sacrament, so long as I do but bind the obligation more on him; but if I advise
him upon such reasons as will wholly keep him away, my advise is evil.
Affirmative precepts do bind universally, as well as Negative, but not ad
semper, against all occasions. I may in prudence, I think, advise my brother of
such an occasion, for the advantage of his soul; but if I tell him it is not
his duty, I make my self Lord over Gods command. As the Church has always
attributed much unto prudence in the ordering this solemnity, especially as to
her more seldom and frequent administering, so may her Members happily take some
example, as to their receiving. Forbearance on necessary ( Numb. 9.10.) or
pious grounds ( Matt. 5.23.) reaches but to the ad semper, and may be lawful;
but for to hold, it is not a man's duty while unregenerate, this reaches the
semper, and looses the bands of Gods command. Let this zealous man take heed,
it be not laid to his charge.

I will add, If the man be careless, and regards not his coming, but being
conscious of his evil life, he thinks he shall eat his damnanation, and so
lays it by, which is the case of thousands, I think we are here to set our
faces against such, and to let them know, that it is not man's wickedness can
void or annihilate the authority of Christ: so that they are still for to come,
and the obligation lies on them, to apply the Covenant for their repentance. O
my vile soul! why do thou fly? This shows the guilt that is on thy
conscience, and would thou hide thine own eyes from it? Come man, and see what
thou have done; Here is Christ's blood, which thou do shed with thy
transgressions, and will not this melt thee? See how the corpse does as it were
bleed at the presence of the Murderer, and will it not melt thee? if it does
not, it shall rise up against thee. Behold here is sealed to thee eternal
condemnation, unless thou repentest, and sincerely come in to Jesus Christ;
Lay it well to heart, man, and think on it, there is no way besides left thee
for to escape it.

Page ibid. He grants, though an unregenerate man sins in all his duties, yet
must he do them; But says, There is not par ratio in order to receiving, 1.
Because it is not his duty,2. It cannot convert him.

Ans. The former of these I have spoken to all this while, and shall thus
enforce it: If the Sacrament be not the duty of an unregenerate man, then must
regeneration be a qualification required in the precept, as necessary to
receiving, and so be essentially antecedent to the Sacraments; but regeneration
is not essentially antecedent to the Sacraments. For 1. Then Baptism was not
administered validly, and according to rule to many by the Apostle, Acts 8.13.
John 6.66. with John 4.1. Acts 20.30.2. Then such as were baptized before they
were regenerate, supposing they came to be afterward regenerate, were to be
baptized again, because their former baptism had not its essentials.3. Then can
no man administer either Sacrament to any but himself, for he cannot act in
faith, seeing he is not sure others have the essentials.4. Then can no doubting
Christian himself receive, for he cannot act in faith so long as he is not
fully persuaded of his own regeneration. The truth is then, though regeneration
is a qualification necessary to the receiver, in regard of other ends, to wit,
for the obtaining the entire benefits of the Covenant sealed, yet not
absolutely necessary to receiving; Even as saving faith is necessary to the
hearers of the Word, for the obtaining the effectual benefit of salvation, yet
not absolutely pre-requisite to hearing, for faith may come by it. If it be an
evil to set up our posts with Gods posts, what is it to remove Gods posts, to
set up our own? The Lord Jesus says plainly, Drink ye all of it, but Mr. D.
says No, It is not every man's duty.

The second follows necessarily upon this, if it be every Church members duty
of age, as Mr. Perkins, and Divines commonly tell us, then it may tend to his
good, as sure as all Gods Commandments are good; and if it does him not good,
it will be his sin. For my part I am very sorry to see how men for the sake of
this are forced upon it, to deny the other. When Christ says, Believe, there
goes a power with his precept, as when he said, Lazarus, Come forth; Else it
were vain for us Ministers to act, that are but earthen instruments. And shall
Christ say, Take, and we make nothing of it? Is this it, men so earnestly
contend for, to make the word of Christ an empty word, as if it could not
quicken us? Alas Sirs! this is nothing but mere distrust. A pious soul may even
bleed to see his Saviors command laid wast, because we have so little faith in
it. Christ is not a Minister of the letter, which kills, but of the Spirit,
which he conveys through his commands. The good Lord pardon, and help in us,
this great evil of unbelief. And as for all the injuries this man out of his
zeal has done unto me, Accept thou now, O God, from a melted heart, and wet
eyes, this poor prayer of mine for him, that his own bitter words may not sink
so heavy on his soul, as they have on mine, when he comes to see how much he
has done amiss.

Before I pass, methinks we have need here of some (...), upon this truth,
which seems harsh, that the unregenerate sins in all he does.

There is therefore a doing good or evil, either Simply, in regard of the
matter of Gods precept; or Relatively, in regard of the Sanction of it to its
end, as it comes under the condition of the Covenant, whereby we expect life:
In the first sense, a man though unregenerate may do well, and that which is
right in Gods eyes, and be rewarded for it, 2 Kin. 10.30. yet sins in the
second. There is a faith only, that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them
that seek him; and there is a true justifying faith in Jesus Christ. The
actions of Moral men, that have proceeded out of the first only, I dare say in
the behalf of Gods goodness, are so far accepted as virtuous, that they shall
be rewarded (according to their trust he will not fail them) either Positively,
with some temporal blessings, or Privatively, with some degree of mitigation,
in their eternal punishments; so that It shall be well still with those that do
well, that none may want sufficient encouragement to do good. But yet I say
whatsoever actions do not proceed from that other faith too, which is truly
saving, they are said to be sin nevertheless, in that they come not up to that
perfection or sincerity, Genesis 17.1. required in the Covenant, as the condition
its self, Ja. 2.20. or rather testimony thereof, unto justification of life, or
everlasting salvation.

Page 79. He throws his glove first to the Independents, then to the
Presbyterians, etc.

Ans. In those words of mine, Let men on one side answer, Let some of our
other, etc. I must confess they fell from me at first without the least
thought of Engagement. I know that every one is not fit to take up the Gantlet
for truth, and I am one, as Mr. D. says truly, that am not yet scarce out of
the shell of learning, or Divinity; and therefore let not the host of Israel
come out, to seek a fleae, or hunt a partridge upon the Mountains.

For the one side, I think our difference lies only about the Church, for as
for their own Members, they scruple not at a Free-admission, no more than I,
and whether they turn away any before Excommunication, I cannot say, but guess
so. So that if there be scruples among themselves, they that are humble, may
make some use of me, they that are not, need not be offended, seeing Mr. D.
tells them, they are beholding to me, for my too favorable opinion of them.

For the other side, ( p. 80.81.) My question is to some, and it may be but few
of them, How they can baptize the children, (as Members of the visible Church,
being born of Christian parents) and yet turn away their parents from the
Sacraments? I will not infringe what Mr. D. has said here, p. 82, 83, 84. at
the very largest for Infant Baptism, seeing as to my question it falls beside
it. For if any will say, they do not baptize their Children, as born of
Christian parents, but by stipulation of others, or upon account of (...), I
say nothing against them, I wish it may be maintained; but as for those who
never took notice or not approved of any other ground of their Baptism, but as
they are immediately born Christians of such as visibly profess Christ,
according to my terms; The right which the parents derive upon their children,
unto Baptism, must be acknowledged to be in themselves unto the Sacrament; They
cannot give, but what they have. So that, unless there be a manifest
impediment to retrench that right, or the present enjoyment of it, by
Excommunication, Distraction, or Infection, their Church Membership is
sufficient, and the argument valid, from the one to the other.

Against this p. 81. Mr. D. brings in the old business again, which is now
about ten times, with a second thing like it; And p. 85, 86, 87. (for that
which is between, p. 82, 83. 84. I wish it may pass) he has 4 particulars
more, the substance of the whole comes unto this, That the parents must have a
farther right to show, than what they have common with their child unto this
Ordinance. And here indeed lies the very point of our difference, I hold it is
Church Membership (where there is none of our former yielded impediments) that
gives an immediate outward right unto the Sacrament; He holds, A man must be
first tried if he be visibly worthy, and it is that alone can give him
admission. For the one now, look over Mr. Drake and you shall find still
whenever he falls upon this thing, he has nothing against it, but that silly
reason (from the untelligent) so often repeated; Had he any thing else, would
it not be alleged? and has he nothing else, and will you be captivated? For the
other, look over the Scripture; This is the thing lies on him to prove, and see
if he can produce you any precept of God for it; if he has none, will his own
word go? While he has so little against us, and no Text for himself, his
skirts are discovered, and heels made bare.

Let the prudent judge, If our argument from Church Membership is even the
chief and most solid ground upon which we do baptize our Children, as the Jews,
by being born Jews, had a right to Circumcision, although we cannot lightly
find in Scripture that any were admitted without a profession of faith unto
Baptism; what weakness shall we bring on our selves, if the same thing shall
not be held sufficient (without a known cause) unto the Sacrament, whereunto we
find no confession any where required, but as soon as they were once
Church Members, Acts 2. 42. this fellowship immediately gave them a privilege
to it?

The Sacraments serve for two things, for our faith toward God, and profession
one with another; Though our Church Members do not all come with that faith,
whereby they should receive the effectual benefits of the Covenant, yet do I
not see how they can be so easily debarred their profession of Christianity, in
opposition to all other Religions, as the Jews did often, freely, and
universally, enter into Covenant with the true God.

P. 87, 88, 89. He brings in my argument of Christian liberty, from Ordinances
of men, Col. 2.18, 19, 20. which must not be suffered to creep into the seat of
God, as necessary to our worship. And this, I take it, does prevail much with
many that fear God.

Against this he says 4 things, 1. Let the Readers take notice, that in Mr.
Humphrey's judgment, the putting a bar to Free-admission, is an humane, not
divine Ordinance, etc.

Answ. I doubt not but they will take notice that I do willingly yield to all
our known Bars (under the Unintelligent, and Excommunicate) the Church has
allowed; but am fully persuaded, that this bar Mr. D. would set up otherwise,
has no foundation in the Scriptures, and must wish him to take heed, that while
he sets up his visible worthiness upon trial, as the rule of our admission,
which Christ has not set up, his own words (We like not the pressing of humane
inventions upon the conscience, especially in Divine worship) do not rise up,
and fly upon him. I pray God give him a sight, how he professedly maintains,
what he dislikes, and of those sad evils his opinion has done.

2. He asks, By what Scripture and consequence I can keep off Infants, and the
Distracted? and he will by the same exclude all persons visibly unworthy, or
else he will be of my Religion.

Ans. Seeing he says so, I will express my self once more. My ground is 1 Cor.
11.28, 29. Upon this ground I draw this consequence, That those whose duty it
is not to Examine themselves, and get knowledge to discern the Lords body, are
not to come; Such are all Infants, and the Distracted, it being naturally
impossible. But can Mr. Drake now say the like here? That it is not the duty of
all visibly unworthy, to get knowledge, and examine themselves, that so they
may come? Dare he say so? If he dare not, I hope he will perform his promise,
and yield to the truth. Besides, as I have said, they that have an intelligent
capacity may receive some good impressions by it, (and the more weak, sometimes
are more affectionate) but as for Infants, and the Distracted, we know signs
cannot have any real work on them.

3. He says, If his bar were only prudential, I should do better to submit,
than dispute against it.

Ans. If I should do the Church service, in submitting to this way only as
humane, then shall I do God service, to oppose it as divine, and not let it sit
in his seat, as a necessary antecedent to this Ordinance. And I doubt not but
Jesus Christ, that has shed his most precious blood to purchase our liberty,
will be jealous over it, and not suffer our Consciences to become the servants
of men, nor yet these pious men to become servants to themselves. Indeed I know
we have good distinctions here, as to the obeying of men, between the obedience
of the outward and inward man, and that simpliciter, necessitate consequentis,
and ex hypothesi, necessitate consequentiae, but I fear what in it self may be
prudent, the sad effects will make otherwise.

4. He brings in the Distracted (or unintelligent) again, and so in the issue,
would be justified.

Ans. Methinks it fortunes pretty happily, for seeing this is about the twelfth
time, it is a fit Jury to do it for him. And whereas I remember he brought in
my Onion, in the close of the last reason, Had we (says He) the peeling of it,
we would make use of the pulpe, either for food, sauce, or medicine; I will
advise him by all means to keep it for the secon^, for while the cold meat of
this his even tainted passage, comes so often to the board, it may stand him in
some stead to help to hash, or stew, and serve it in with it.

p. 89. unto p. 97.

1. I do but my duty. He answers, This is to be proved. Though Christ speaks in
general to all Ministers of his Church Do this, or Do thus as he did that
admitted the twelve. Though St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11 delivers down the same thing to
us without any limitation; Though we are engaged in our Ordination to the
administration of the Sacraments; Though we are Stewards to dispense, and not
retain these sacred mysteries, 1 Cor. 4.1, 2. Pastors, to feed the whole
Church, and not keep their bread from them, Act. 20, 28. Servants to give the
whole Family their meat in due season; yet does he say, This is not a general
rule for all Ministers. If it be special, let him show the Text for it, where
be his exceptions? Has he any place to prove that none but the visibly worthy
are to be admitted? when these commands are general, it lies upon him to prove
the limitations. This reason must allow, but if he will say it, though he
cannot prove it, and deny us though he cannot disprove us, I doubt not, but he
may be too hard for any body upon these terms, while he keeps two such mastiff
Arguments unmuzzeld by him, as ill words, and obstinacy.

2. I have no power to turn away any. (I speak of such as are in questions)
This he accounts most true, see what interest will do; but as for the use he
makes of this, which I have formerly quoted, it is to be lamented. Yet is it no
wonder, it is so like his own self. When Christ says Do this, He doubts not to
say, It is not a general rule for us. When Christ says, Drink ye all of it, He
says, It is not the unregenerates (that is, the most of men's) duty. When the
Evangelist says, The twelve sat down with Christ, He will have it but eleven.
When Paul says, All the Corinths were partakers of one bread, He says, They had
but a right to it in actu primo. When the Scriptures have not a word to say for
him, He tells us, They are abundant enough; and where indeed they abound, he
counts them nothing. So here, when we hold that Christ had such full authority
over his Church, that we make his precept and example our only rule to conform
our selves to, he boldly and openly tells us, Christ had not so much power to
turn away one of his Disciples, as he and his Elders have over his people; And
yet does he here as it were applaud himself with an (...). Such is the nature
of this selfish conceit. Plutarch compares it to a Hen, that leaves a handful
of good grain, which is cast out to it by others, and g^^s ascraping for some
single rotten corn, some poor dirty Notion, in its own invention.

3. I hope the best of all. He says, So did Ephesus, Revel. 2.2, 4. but he may
mistake, while the Church hoped well of them, It might bear with them, to do
them good; but when there was no hope to do them good otherwise, it was time to
censure them. For his other Scriptures, they are answered in their places; and
for the Magistrate what follows? The total consequence is this; where we have
no ground to Excommunicate any, we must Administer, and hope the best of it;
where we have, we must hope the best, and do that. The best is to be hoped in
doing what we ought, but the worst is to be feared in doing what we ought not,
or cannot prove.

4. I know God can turn the worst, even at this Ordinance, if he please. This
he counts true, but he questions his will; and requires of me some promise or
president for it, For promises we have sufficient. Am. 5.4. 2 Chr. 15.2. Mat.
7.7. etc. We find every where God has promised in general, that he will
vouchsafe grace to those that wait upon him in his Ordinances, Seek ye me, and
ye shall live. Now then let any show me an exception in particular against this
Sacrament, or else these promises stand good.

Truly Sirs, You do not deal justly and honestly with this Ordinance, to detain
from her that portion of grace and power the Lord has ^^uchsafed, in
co-partnership amongst her fellows, and put her to the charge and labor of
suing for it, when you might as well serve Prayer, and some of the rest so, but
that the keeping their stock in your hand will hardly turn to any advantage to
you. The common Law here we will try her right by, is this, Quicquid
praedicatur de praedicato, praedicatur etiam de subjecto. While she is a fellow
Ordinance with others, she must have her share in the general nature, as they
are all appointed the means of Gods bestowing his grace; so that here it
manifestly lies upon you, to show some special text to the contrary, where
Converting grace is denied to it, or else in justice you are cast. For a
President, I humbly bless God, I am not wholly neither left without witness,
but we may have one to produce in its place. And I could wish, that searching
men would enquire a little, and seek after these things, and I doubt it not,
but they would find such experiences, and effectual impressions on many at this
Ordinance (when unmoved at others,) that as the Jews wondered, when they heard
the Gentiles also received the Holy Ghost, so should we, at such clear
convictions of the Sacrament, being a means not only of the regenerate, but
unregenerates edification.

5. I endeavor my utmost (de jure) that all come prepared. Upon this he
reviles two or three pages, whether spitefully: against conscience, or
ignorantly, himself knows. It Is true, de facto, as to his whole course and
series of actions, as he has it, No man can say he does his utmost, and Mr. H.
as he note well, less than any; but I say De jure, to exhort men to examine
themselves, and forewarn them of the danger of neglecting their duty, is all
the Minister can do, which himself grants, where there is no Presbytery. Yet
herein I say not neither, I do this, (which every one commonly does) but I
endeavor it only, and in the very next lines too acknowledge my many
Omissions. But if it be Mr. D's design to make me seem vile, and proud to the
world, and he dare take upon him to become the searcher of my very heart, even
in such confessions to the contrary, Be thou O Lord, my Witness, while he
takes the throne, and will be my Judge. And though he be so extreme against me,
to mark what I have done amiss (in what never came yet once into my thoughts)
yet be not thou so extreme against me, or against him, but cover all my
failings, and his injuries, with thy Mercy, and my charity.

6. I humbly confess all our sins ( as Hezekiah) desiring true repentance, and
a pardon for all our omissions. This, he says, he cannot but approve in me,
after his heavy reproaches, but would have you note here a contradiction. If he
have done his utmost De jure, what needs he desire pardon for his omissions?

I answer, for my failings De facto in particular, though I should have done in
general what De jure I ought to do, which yet I dare not assume to my-self,
without flying to ^^ds mercy; if you carp at the words, I value them not, take
my own meaning, (which I have truly told you) and Christ himself (I humbly
bless him) teaches me to satisfy you, When you have done all, (or your
utmost) say, you are unprofitable servants.

7. And so lastly, I venture the issue all on God, knowing his Ordinances are a
sweet savor unto him, whether we are saved, or perish by them. He excepts,
this is not enough, A Physician may not give Physic that may kill or cure, and
venture the issue on God.

Ans. But if the Physician, 1. saw a necessity,2. and had no other way,3. and
hoped it might do good, etc. then he might conscionably do it without question,
or else I believe he would be hardly able to answer himself, what some
Churchyards may have to say against him. Mr. D. must take these seven
particulars together, as bound up in one reason, and then they will hold him,
but if he goes to pull out the single sticks, there is no doubt but they may be
broken. It is not enough to trust in God, confess our sins, hope the best
alone, who does not see this? but if it be also our duty, and we have no power
otherwise, etc. Take all together, and they are irrefragable. And therefore I
pray compare himself hither, p. 47. and see how willing the man is, to take
exceptions; I think if he saw his own face in my glass, he would be ready to
quarrel at it. His own confession is this, By a particular forewarning the
Minister may clear his own soul, I conceive, where no Government is settled,
etc. And do not I suppose we have no Government, and the Minister forewarn all
(though as to particular cases there must go much prudence, and I hold no
necessity) according to his Conscience? and therefore why should he lay such
vile expressions on me, for what he allows? Does he say, he may clear his soul,
and may not I say, he is innocent? Should I return now, no mortal man can say
he is clear, and so fall upon him in his loose terms about justifying himself,
which he does often, would not every one see how weak were that cause has need
of such supportments? and would it not render me flat to those that fear God?
No, I shall rather bless God for what is yielded, and think it worth both our
labors, (as it was a main scope of mine) if this be but satisfied. I shall
reverence the care, zeal, and pains, of Mr. D. wherein (he says) he does so far
exceed me, in fitting all sorts by examination, counsel, and prayer; yet must
not approve his ground, on which he does it. If he will tell his people, As you
are Church Members, I cannot deny communion with you, though in Christian
prudence only, I would humbly thus and thus advise you; I accept his piety, Let
our Consciences be free, Let our needless scruples, our wounds, and terrors be
healed, and I have done. Let the Sacrament be returned, like the Ark, again,
unto our Israel, and I shall be content, to have the new Cart that brings it,
to be cloven into Wood, and the two Kine, offered with it* as a sacrifice unto
God.

From the command and good of coming; from the evil of omitting this Ordinance.

For the command, I did but name here because included before, as I have now
opend in my fifth reason, (...) on the strength of (...) He objects, p. 97.
(...) Receive, because Mark, Luke, and Nathaniel were not there* (...) is he
much prettier over (...) where he that is so much against this command of
actual receiving, will ye have (...) and the Distracted come to the sight, to
be converted at it.

His grand argument which runs through his Book, is this, ^he Word (and Prayer)
is the instrument of conversion, so not the Sacrament, therefore natural men as
well as others must hear that, but may not receive this.

Ans. This arguing is palpably weak and gross (besides the matter untrue) It
is not an unregenerate man's duty, because it will not convert him, as though it
were man's benefit were the ground of duty, and not Gods precept; whereas a
thing is not our duty therefore God wills it, but God wills it, and therefore
it is our duty.

For Judas, it is already answered. For, 1 Cor. 11. it is manifest, after St.
Paul has convinced the Corinths of their unworthiness, yet their coming
together he approves, and that not to look on, but to Eat, v. 33. The case is
clear, if men be without prejudice, the duty was still to be done, and their
carriage to be amended. But whereas he adds, Why should Mr. H. put th^se
asunder which God has joined? I answer, how comes Mr. H. to be accused, and
Mr. D. be in the fault? I say, a man must examine himself, and so Eat, he must
do both, I join them. He says the unregenerate must examine himself, and so
abstain, He separates them. Nay he says, he must be present too, but not Eat,
which is even another Schism in the actions. His words then, Mr. H. says, let a
man Eat though he does not examine himself, are a slander. I place very much on
this. There are two things I hold an unregenerate Christian is still to do, to
examine himself and to wait; to wait, and to examine himself. He must consider
his own condition that he may pray according to it, when he has prayed and goes
about his duty, he must examine still, what influence God has on him by it. He
must likewise, when he comes to hear, and especially to receive, try his own
heart, that he may apply the Covenant, according to his estate, and when he has
done, he must look over his soul still, what he has gained in waiting on God.
Readers, I do here in the name of Christ, as you look for good at his
ordinance, commend to you this duty, and if you shall dare to come with
careless hearts, and secure spirits, may the terrors of eating and drinking
your damnation seize upon you, and frighten you from the danger, into the arms
of repentance, and bosom of Christ.

For the good of coming, he objects p. 98, 99. The Sacrament must not be
attended on as the word, in order to conversion, but edification, etc.

Ans. We must not receive this doctrine without Scripture, which will wholly
dis-people this Ordinance, though I think his own distinction may serve the
truth, if ordered aright, seeing the word Edifying, as in our frequent use, so
ordinarily in Scripture, is attributed in common to the visible Church, 1 Cor.
14.3, 4. There are therefore (though this might have been respited yet to its
place) two ends, unto which the Word is instituted, To convert the Nations unto
the faith, and to Edify such as are brought in to the profession of it. Now it
is true, the Sacrament is instituted but for one of these ends; It is not to
convert the Heathen, for the Word is no sealed Word unto them, but it is to
edify the Church, wherein the most being such as are not yet effectually
wrought upon, as it tends to Edify them, it must be a help or means to their
regeneration. And thus shall his strong hold become as a forsaken bough, and
uppermost branch, unto which, we may climb up by his own terms, and not leave
on it, so much as the shaking of an Olive tree, or as the gleaning Gapes, when
the Vintage is done.

For the evil of Omission, p. 100. he distinguishes between a not receiving,
and neglecting; which may be allowed, I think, on a just occasion, so long as
we resolve on better preparation against the next Sacrament; But otherwise, it
is a poor answer to my instance of the Passover, where the bare omission of
not bringing an offering in the appointed season, which in the forbearance, was
allowed to none, but for a Month, Numb. 9.13. was such a sin as did endanger
them to be cut off. His exceptions p. 101. against the Parable, Matt: 22. are
vain things; Those that murdered the servants, were a part of them that were
invited, and not to be opposed, for the contempt of the feast is the main
business intended, as appears by Lu. 14. where nothing else is mentioned. But
the main question (for so far the Parable may reach) is, whether they that
refuse to come into Gods Ordinances, (all which I allow it concerns, as well as
this) are not unworthy, v. 8. and in danger to be destroyed? And then whether
it be better for an unregenerate Christian to come to the Sacrament as
preparedly as he can, or wholly to omit it? and I think we are sufficiently
instructed by all other duties, which is the greater sin, to sail only in the
manner, or to leave undone the matter also. Let the briars and thorns be set
together in battle, the fire shall pass through them.

P. 102. In opposition to Mr. H. it is neither a certain duty on the Ministers
part to admit all, nor on the peoples part, for all to receive, etc.

Answ. Let Mr. D. take heed how he is carried through opposition, lest in
opposing Mr. Humfrey, he directly opposes the command of Christ. He grants, p.
47. That where there is no government settled, the Minister by a due forewarning
may clear his soul, but how sadly does he reverse this here, and wrap him again
in a fatal cloud? for if it be not his duty, it must be his sin, there is no
medium for his excuse. Let us therefore here steel our selves, that in doing
both, we do as we ought, without making his conscience (as to the particulars,
de facto) a rule of ours. For his distinction of mediately, and immediately, he
should have forborne the wound, and saved his salve; for there is none that
denies, but that every man is to examine himself, and prepare, as well as come.
But whereas he holds, that though a man should examine and prepare himself
(suppose as well as he can) yet if they judge him not visibly worthy, he must
not be admitted, and if he judges not himself really worthy, for his own part
yet, he must not eat, he has stretched a line: of division over the Church, a
plummet of lead on weak consciences, and wiped the Sacrament, as a man wipeth a
dish, wiping it, and turning it upside down in wiping.

In the same page he tells us, They do not keep away any for fear of accidental
scandal, though others do, he patrons not; and yet in the next, he says, I
charge them with doing evil, that good may come of it, whose damnation (that
is, I take it, disallowance) is just, Romans 3.8. And here, that the words may
seem harsh, he produces them without the Text, and will have it in a Rhetorical
way, when I barely take them as they are; and because this is not enough, he
frames an interpretation (by suspending, etc.) of his own; So that I must needs
be made guilty of censuring them, when he confesses, it does not concern them.
And now, for all this false accusation, shall I, instead of returning any evil
to him, humbly satisfy him, that as for any bitter spirit in quoting that
text, God knows I am innocent, and may even pathetically say with Paul, 2. Cor.
12.13. he may well forgive me this wrong, for I never intended any in it. But
as for his own censoriousnesse, it is such, as makes his very mercies to be
wounds, and his forgivenesses themselves, need to be forgiven.

He is pleased here to write a book against me, which is nothing almost but
revilings, and when he has done me all the injuries he can, that never offended
him, he proceeds to forgive me, and desires God to free Mr. H from all that
guilt, and mischief, he would bring on me. This is his kindness to me a
stranger, I thank him; And truly met hinks my soul is so troubled for fear I
should offend any of Gods people, I do even accept of it* Ah Lord I Can spite
go to prayer? Let me be spited, if I be forgiven. While he seems to hold up his
hands to pray for me, it is to strike me with them, and having already laid me
in the dust, he does but herein, as it were, kneel upon me to keep me down. Yet
will I heartily join with him, in beseeching the Lord to pardon my failings, to
pity my weaknesses, and to keep his Church, if I do err, from any hurt by it.
Let the righteous smite me, and it shall be a balm; yea, let him reprove me
where I do amiss, and it shall be an Oil; but Let not the foot of pride come
at me. Behold I am vile, I will lay my hand on my mouth, Once have I spoken,
and I will not answer, twice have I spoken, but will proceed no farther.
Nevertheless if truth shall be found with me, let not any disdain it, though I
am nothing, for I do even wholly herein look so upon my self, and depend on God
for it, with as much fear and trembling as my heart can hold; and I find those
impressions I sometimes receive in my addresses unto him, does carry me on, to
hope for good, and venture the issue upon him. Look on me, O Lord, and forgive
all my sins. Who can understand his own errors? Cleanse thou me from secret
faults. Thou that have shown me troubles, quicken me again, and raise me up
from the depths of the earth:

Page 103. He comes to the end of my first Sermon, and as he would have the
Reader observe me, p. 99. to leave some scruple about the unregenerates
receiving as a pledge, but observes not himself what is added, Which
nevertheless on the Ministers part, as offered on condition, is not hard. So
likewise here he quotes these words, I give you not my reasons by the heap, but
by the weight, but leaves out what follows, I humbly commit them to you, which
takes off the aspersion. One may easily make the best face seem unhandsome, if
without the good features, he shows only the freckles, with a piece of a nose,
and the gap of a tooth.

But whereas hereupon he concludes so victoriously, That my Eight arguments are
not worth one, (you may conceive he thinks it one of his own) and then having
well railed at them, leaves them discomfited with the edge of his mouth;
Methinks we have gotten here another Adino the Tachmonite, who has lift up his
spear against Eight arguments, and slew them at one time. This is the Worthy,
that thinks himself fit to be picked out, for the Champion in this Dispute,
against all comers, and all essays. This is the man, adapted, and officed,
Both for the Shewbread, and for the fine slower, and for the unleavened Cakes,
and for that which is baked in the pan, and for that which is fried, and for
all manner of measures and size.

THE Second Sermon vindicated.


The first Objection was about Excommunication, which being a point to be
combated by antiquity, I shall willingly submit to be instructed by others.
There are three false surmises here, I only endeavored to remove (according to
my maine end herein) as apt to trouble tender Consciences; the first was, That
Excommunication is merely in reference to the Sacrament, whereas it is a
censure, or punishment of binding the sins of men on earth, by casting them out
from the Church, and Christ externally, until they repent. It is true indeed,
when men are cast out from Church Fellowship in general, that they are
debarred from the Sacrament, which is a token or pledge thereof, (when other
Ordinances are more disputable) yet is it the state and relation men have to
the Church outwardly, and Christ, as visible Members, that Excommunication
respects, from which while they are excluded, their sins are accordingly (and
no otherwise) bound and retained, (because there is no remission out of the
Church, or without Christ: the visible herein (Clave non errante) presenting
the invisible) as they are loosed by being received in again through
repentance. And hence, I take it, was the Apostles shaking off the dust of
their feet against those that received not their Doctrine of that dreadful
importance, as signifying their nonadmission into this relation.

Concerning this, Mr. Drake first gives us an account of his practice, and then
lays down three particulars for the bill of his account, p. 105, 106. I shall
say nothing, but it may be fair, yet will not be taken, unless we could find
the Scripture had set her hand unto it; we cannot receive Master Drakes
Genesis, as we do Moses, without probation. For his particulars:

1. He tells us; Master H. omits the maine end of Church censure, which is the
amendment of the party, etc. Ans. I wonder at this, seeing but just over the
leaf, as soon as it is to my purpose, I do expressly tell him, the end is to
bring the offenders to repentance. It is reported of St. Albans Executioner,
that as soon as he had struck the blow, his eyes dropped out (as tears) at the
fact he had done; the same fate is befallen Mr. Drake, while he is so cruel,
many times, in his censure to me, he cannot see a leaf before him.

2 He would persuade us, That Church Censures are extendible to ignorant
persons, and every wilful sinner. Ans. The Scripture extends them I think to
none but the more notorious obstinate offenders; for my part, I dare not bind
such a heavy burden on the Consciences of others, which I durst not touch with
my little finger. It is a thing indeed to be wished, that the ignorant be
brought to Catechism and Instruction, the scandalous to reproof and
admonition, but not so slightly to be censured, or kept from the Sacrament.
Were this Doctrine strictly followed, it would soon leave us without
Church Members, and while it would thus scatter our Flocks, either Master
Drakes wits are going a wool gathering, or else ours must all be set a
gathering Congregations.

3 He challenges all the World to show him proof, that persons excommunicate
may not be present at any public Ordinance, etc. Ans. If Mr. D. think so
learnedly of himself, let him send his Challenge to Doctor Hammond, who
confutes this opinion as the foundation of Erastianisme; and tells us,
Excommunication is also from hearing and prayer, as well as the Sacrament (viz.
in public) when that is thought expedient to reform any; brings Tertullian,
and answers Master Drakes text, 1 Cor. 14.24. and reason (quoting it from
Erastus) at large (Power of Keys, chap. 4. Sect. 43, 44, etc.) Si vis cursu
gloriari, tigrim vince, vel leonem, nulla est gloria praeterire asellos; for my
part, I shall propose him only that one text, Matthew. 7.6. Give not that which
is holy unto dogs; Excommunicate persons are generally interpreted to be
Dogs, and Swine; the Word and Prayer are holy things as well as the Sacrament
(which yet was not instituted when this precept was first given, and so cannot
be primarily intended here) ergo.

Master Perkins upon this text tells us over and over, that Blasphemers,
Heretics, obstinate enemies, etc. Are to be barred from the Word till they
repent. The meaning of Christ is, says he, If any be openly convicted, etc. to
such publish not my word; and especially concerning the point, how far the
censure of the Church does extend, It extends (he tells us) to the debarring
such in the use of the Ministry in the Word, Prayer, and Sacraments; indeed if
the party be Excommunicate for some particular Crime, etc. then, although he be
excluded from communion with him, in the Sacraments, and Prayer (mark that)
yet may he be admitted to hearing the Word, to help him to repent, which is the
end of all Church Censures. So that it is strange Mr. D. should fasten here a
new Light on me, when himself is so singularly opposite to the practice of the
Church.

Upon this account I must confess, it has been my opinion, that the
Excommunicate being excluded Church society in general, it is by way of
mitigation (as I expressed in those few words I let fall about it, p. 13.) that
they are permitted at one Ordinance, when kept from others; but I desire not
here to be assertive, for though I doubt not but Excommunication does refer
to Church Communion in general, or Church Membership, yet do I conceive Mr.
Drakes (or Erast us) reason is not so easily to be waved, that Heathens may be
present at the Word, if not other Ordinances, 1 Cor. 14. I could be willing
therefore to compound this matter with one distinction. Exclusion is either
real, or relative; I shall leave it to him that will to dispute with Mr. D. how
the Church can exclude the excommunicate really from being presentat the Word,
and Prayer; and it shall suffice me that they are excluded relatively however,
from all privileges, so that though they may be present as Heathen, yet are
they cut off from all their interest in them, still as members.

That which we admit Heathen to in receiving them into the Church, I think we
cast them out from, in excommunicating them; now we admit men directly into
Church-Society in general, or Membership, whereby they are put in a state or
relation unto Christ, and consequently to all his Ordinances, with a difference
of privilege from the world, (and as they were at them before) that they
belong now to them, as externally in Covenant with him, redeemed, sanctified;
in a word, as in communion with the Head and Body, whereof the Sacrament is a
pledge, unto which they cannot therefore be admitted; until they are in, nor
Juridically debarred, until they are put out of that relation. The difference
then between Mr. D. and me lies not about the other Ordinances, for I will
suppose (not grant) that Excommunication does debar a man really (by
necessary consequence) only actual receiving, yet is his error still the same;
that whereas I hold a man is to be debarred this actual receiving by
Excommunication, he will have him to be debarred without it. I hold, it is
Church Membership gives a man admission, and sutably Excommunication excludes
him. He holds, it is visible worthiness upon trial can only admit him, and
consequently sets up a censure suitable to his rule (neither of which are in
Scripture) to exclude him without Excommunication; so that a man is still a
Churchmember, and in communion in general, yet must not be allowed the token
of that Communion; he is still externally in Covenant, and yet must be debarred
the external Seal thereof in the body, and must not partake of the body; this
is a Riddle.

Where the Sins of men are not bound, or retained, there is no Church-censure,
Matthew. 16.19. Jo. 20.23. but it is not excluding men from the Sacrament that
does bind or retain their sins, but the excluding them from the Church, and so
relatively from all its benefits; and therefore suspension without
Excommunication, or Dismembership, is no Church-censure, and ought not to wrong
that solemn institution.

We shall clear this by the manifest phrases of Excommunication, I will give
thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 16.19. That is, of the Church,
to admit in, and shut out of it; there is no censure of the Keys, without
exclusion from the Church, whatsoever degrees you make after; Let him be to
thee as a heathen, Matthew. 18.17. that is apparently, as no Churchmember, this
Mr. D. grants; from whence that interpretation is pertinent, when thou have
used all these Christian means, thou may implead him at the Law, which else
was not fit for a fellow member, 1 Cor. 6.1. (...) Joh. 9.22. putting out of
the Synagogue does manifestly import the same; that is, from being a member of
the Synagogue. One may think this censure excluded from all Ordinances, but
the Learned reduce it to Nidui, which kept them off only four paces, though
they might be present, yet this distance still noted their separation, as
Church Members, To deliver such a one to Satan, 1 Cor. 5.5. 1 Timothy 1.20. This
is paralleld with Cherem, Qui nec docet nec docetur, says Dr. Hammond (which
in the way may put Mr. D. to shame, that so blindly asserts the Parallel, p.
21. and yet every where denies the matter) some think the phrase was peculiar
to the Apostles, that could give men up to be bodily afflicted by Satan; I
judge it apt for the whole Church, and take the meaning is, to cast men out
from the Church, where Christ is head, into the World, where Satan is Prince,
not to be acted and ruled by him; for what can be more contrary then this, to
repentance, the end hereof? But in regard of this state of Membership, or
relative condition, Purge out the leaven, that is, from being a part or member
of the lump, ver. 7. and put away from among your selves such a person, ver.
13. (...). And (...) verse. 2. This seems to plead hard for a real sublation
from all Ordinances, and it must necessarily be a casting out from
Church-Society in general, and so at least relatively from all privilege in
them, as a Churchmember, though as taskes, and duties, and burdens, yet it
may seem just to Mr. D. they should not be exempted. I will not spare, 2 Cor.
13.2. is explained, ver, 10. to use sharpness; the word is (...), Ascission,
(...), sublation, taking away, or turning out of the Church, and so you see the
point is clear. Neither may any object here, that then those that are once
censured must be again admitted by a new Baptism, for all Excommunication we
know is but conditional, only until repentance.

It is therefore a very fond conceit of Mr. D. to make two degrees of
Excommunication beneath Dis-membership; that is, two degrees of purting men out
of the Church, before they are put out of the Church; two degrees of hanging,
before execution. As for the three texts quoted by him for his three degrees,
p. 105. I know other that are more Learned, applying them to the Excommunicate,
make them all the same, the (...), the same with (...), and the (...) to
explain the extent thereof, whether in sacris only, or in common converse too,
they question. I must confess, though I am moved herewith, yet have I rather
interpreted these two texts, 1 Cor. 5.11. and 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. (the same
expression, (...) being in both) of our ordinary duty of avoiding evil company,
as Mr. Prinne does; my reasons are these: 1. Because this no not to eat is
explained by the Apostle himself, keep not company, no not to cate.2. That
eating is permitted in this place to a Heathen fornicator, which is not to such
a one, called a brother. But Sacramental eating was not permitted to an
Heathen; therefore it is not Sacramental eating of which the place speaks.3. I
judge these words, (...) do refer to (...), hunc notum facite per epistolam,
signify that man by an epistle, to wit, that he may be censured if the case
requires, so that he cannot be understood already under censure.4 There is a
manifest difference between a (...), and an (...); as it is one thing esse cum
Christo, 1 Phil. 23. and another, Christum esse cum nobis, Matthew. 28.20. so is
it one thing to withdraw our selves from such a man, and another to remove
such a man from us; the one phrase only (I think) respects Excommunication,
not the other, which is in these two texts. If Mr. D. object, If we may not eat
with them at our ordinary table, then much less at this sacred Table; 1 I
return; If we may not keep company with them at our own table, then we may
not keep company with them at this Table; but this he will say will not hold,
for they may all be present; no more, I say, will the other.2 Communion is
either necessary, or arbitrary, we are to avoid such in arbitrary familiarity,
but not in the necessary service of God. The reason is plain, because one is
our duty, and not the other.

I pray see Page 107. I grant that by Excommunication they are made as Heathen
and Publicans, and are in statu quo no members. Now how strange is this, That
while he cannot deny the excommunicate are dis-membred, he should keep such a
do, to set up a censure which is no dis-membership, and make it a degree too
of Excommunication, which he confesses it is not. Thus while men will set up a
rule of their own for admission, they are forced to make a censure of their
own for exclusion. And as the Partridge gathers the young she has not
brought forth, that is, by her calling gathers others which forsake her, when
they see she is not their damme; so must this suspension not gotten by right,
leave them in the end, when it can find no covert under the wings of
Excommunication.

The only Argument that they here have, is from the greater to the less;
which while they urge thus, If the Church may exclude from all Ordinances, she
may from the Sacrament, has seemed something, but is a mistake in the very
foundation; for Excommunication refers directly to Church Membership, and
consequentially only to the Ordinances; so that a man must be put out of the
Church, or else he is not legally put from the communion. Even as the Leper was
not kept from the Camp, that he might be kept from public worship; but he was
kept from communion in worship, because he was kept from the Camp, this being
a necessary consequent thereof. So is a man kept from the Sacrament, because
he is excluded Church Membership, being out of the body, he is not to have the
communion of it. It were a wrong to have forbid the Leper at divine Service,
when his right was good to abide in the Congregation; So is it a wrong to turn
away a man from the Sacrament, while his right is good, as a member.

Look on our gathered Churches, they are herein uniforme (If I mistake them
not) and deny not fellowship with a member, till they put him out of their
Church; or to maintain a consonancy, me thinks should do so; and shall we
that have the Scriptures to uphold our visible Church against separation, as it
were yield our cause, when we dare not own our members in communion? This is a
breach that will not be made up, by his reason a majori, because the Magistrate
may inflict a punishment, which is the greater, according to Law; therefore he
may inflict a punishment, which is the less, not according to Law, or set up a
new one to inflict by it; because the Elders may execute a censure which is
allowed in the Scripture, therefore they may make a less, which is not in
Scripture. The Judge himself, that instead of death, inflicts burning, must
yet do it according to Law, or his act is not good. I will not dispute here of
the kinds or degrees of Excommunication; those three among the Jews, and four
among the Greeks are common; Nor what are the marks of distinction of such
degrees, whether exclusion really from the Sacrament, and prayer, may make a
minor, and suspension from them, and the word also, a major Excommunication;
(for I do think, when a man is Relatively deprived fellowship in general, the
Church may use mitigation, or severity to a real permission of him at some
Ordinances (and so perhaps for civil converse) according to prudence for his
edification, not destruction) or whether, as Mr. D. holds, Acts of Discipline,
are no bars at all to acts of worship, unless actual receiving; and why that
only? but because the Sacrament is the pledge of our Church Fellowship, which
one being cast out from, the other must follow: It shall suffice me that
Church-censure is putting out of the Church, and that suspension is null,
without dis-membership; Insomuch, that if a Jew were under Nidui, which was
their lowest degree, if unabsolved, Godwin observes, his children might not be
circumcised: and why not? but that they reckoned him no Churchmember;
Church Membership being an undoubted ground of their circumcision. I will
conclude: seeing then Excommunication by the Scripture is referred still unto
Church Membership, and not to the Sacrament, it is not visible unworthiness,
or unfitness thereunto, is the formal ground of censure, and consequently,
not ignorance, and every sin lived in. This is the point I desire may be
marked as the scope of this discourse, that I say upon this, it is not to be
visibly unfit for receiving (as some hold) but to be visibly unworthy all
Church-society that infers an excommunication. God forbid, but we should put
adistinction between sins, that stand not with sincerity, and that stand not
with public profession; I do not think the detection of a man living in any
known sin that contradicts the one, ought to excommunicate him; but the open
conviction of such sins, which are notoriously scandalous, and obstinate,
bringing discredit on the Church, and contradicting the other. And as for the
Antiquerist he quotes here of his side, so magnificently, and so often, Mr.
Prin tells us, it is himself. Let another man praise thee, and not thine own
mouth, a stranger, and not thine own lips.

The second surmise I would remove was this, That Church Censures are only to
keep the Ordinances pure, especially the Sacrament, lest it should be defiled
otherwise to the receivers. There are many precious Christians herein made
weak, which yet are not to be slighted with Mr. D. but tenderly to be
satisfied; It is true, The Ordinances may be said to be profaned or defiled to
a man's self, and therefore when a man is censured for a Swine or Dog, Mr.
Perkins says, he must be kept from them. But let not any pious soul think, the
unworthiness of another can pollute him in doing his duty. This it seems was
the old error of the Novatians.

For M. D. his exception here (Page 109.) where he yet agrees with me, they
might have been spared; 1 We think (says he) the Ordinances are defiled only
to those who use them sinfully.2 That persons are defiled not by presence with
unworthy receivers, but by partaking in their sins.3 They partake in their
sins that do not their duty to reform them, or keep them from receiving
otherwise.

Answ. The first of these, is good and instructive. The second likewise, if for
presence, he had put in receiving, else it is but superstitious. The third is
much amiss, and equivocal; They partake of those sins they should have
reproved, and do not, but not of any sin in their receiving, any more then
in their hearing and praying. Such words as these are subject to do hurt, as if
it were a duty simply to keep one another from Gods service; and that this were
the only eminent piece of piety, when it is certainly our duty to excite,
call, provoke them to, as counsel, fit, and prepare them for the attending all
Ordinances.

His next exceptions are at me for saying, that censures concern not the
admitted, but to reform the offenders censured, etc. For first, says he, It
concerns all Church members in their places to look to it. Secondly, To keep
them in awe, etc. And, who doubts it? But then he says, I contradict my self
(which I must be sure to do, when he pleases) in that my own ends (...),
concern the whole Congregation. Answ. One may here see how easy it is to
carp, and be fallacious; It is but taking a man's words simpliciter, when they
are spoke secundum quid, and it may be done; who cannot say as Mr. Drake,
Admonition concerns the Admonisher; Satisfaction the Satisfied; Example the
warned; But how do any of these ends concern them as to the Sacrament, as to
their own act of receiving thereof? There is none of them, I hope, intimate
any farther guilt or pollution would accrue to them, if the party (I say in
this act of receiving) were not excluded. Indeed this (...) he picks out, may
infer a man guilty of those sins (in a sense) he does not reprove and hinder;
if he can, but as for the Ordinance, that is a man's duty, if that prove a
sin, it is not propter fieri, but accidentally; so that Church Members are
not herein bound to be hinderers, but by their best counsels to be furtherers
one of another in their coming; and if in prudence they sometimes may advise
them to forbear, it can be lawful only but upon that account which may
proportionably reach unto all affirmative precepts. It is indeed the great
fallacy here that mis-leads many, when they plead our duty of watching over
others, not partaking their sins, to get the scandalous censured, and the like,
they wind it all in still, in order to the Sacrament, as if they were to be
done merely in reference to it, when as they are each of them distinct duties,
and the neglect or doing one, is no ground, or hindrance of the other. They
concern us as Church Members, not quatenus Receivers.

The third surmise was, That there is some near essential relation, between
Excommunication, and the communion, as if it were a part of it: so gross are
some conceirs, at least such a necessary antecedent, that they think they may
not come to our Sacraments without it; which is all one, as if because we have
here no Justices, or Assize, they should think it unlawful to follow their
Vocations.

To remove this, Mr. Drake joins with me (Page 110, 111.112, 113.) and shows
the vanity, contradiction, absurdity hereof, in terms suting the thing and
himself. Truly me thinks a man may be very merry, to see how featly he would
amaze people here, as if he did confute me, when he only speaks my part for
me, and shows the grossness of the same thing I do. Such is the man's
dexterity, excellency of Art, acuteness of Logic, depth in Divinity; so that
the whole learning of the great Esdras in his seventy Books of Abstruse
Mysteries hidden to the world, is all enucleated and rifled in two leaves of
him. Here is the Candle of Discipline lighted, for the Scribes and Elders to
take copy of. Here are some things to be declared to the perfect, and some
things to be shown secretly to the wise. For in him is a vain of
understanding, and a River of knowledge.

men's unfitness; unto which I answered 1. On the Churches part.2. On the
Receivers. For the Church in admission, I say, here is no validity, and he
acknowledges it, p. 113, 114. For Absolute unfitness, he says, is not the
rule of his suspension. But 1. Visible unfitness.2. That unfitness, he tells
us, they are to discern.3. That trial is to be by the Elders.4. Then
discovered, they must be kept back.5. And if intrude, censured. So likewise p.
115. If look, say he, then judge; if judge, then enquire; (for else he cannot
be like to discern who are infants) if enquire, then execute, etc.

Answ. Here is a pile of Buildings, fair, and costly, yet all is lost by
mistaking the ground whereon he has set it; for it is not visible Real
worthiness upon trial, but visible Relative worthiness (if I may so express
it) or external Covenant Relation, gives a man right, and is the ground of
admission; so long as he has his evidence of Baptism, and Membership, you
must disprove his right if you exclude him, and not he prove any other.

2 I require nothing be intruded on us without Scripture; Here is a catalogue
of Magisterial Doctrine, but I pray, where are his proofs? what Scripture has
he for it? Its true, the Apostle admonishes 1 Pet. 3.15. Be ready always to
give an answer to every man that asks you, of the reason of the Hope that is
in you: But 1. What is that in order to the Sacrament?2. The place there does
clearly speak, as to the defense of our Faith in case of persecution, and Mr.
Drakes trial is no Inquisition.3. Hope is taken objective, for Christian
Doctrine; not subjective, for the Truth of Grace he would inquire into. But
suppose he urge it, as an office of common charity; does all this follow upon
it straight? will he presently up and ride? Is there no more to be proved? This
is right as ready, as the Scholar for his Journey, he wanted only Boots, and
Spurs, a Cloak, a Horse, Bridle and Saddle, for he had gotten a Switch.

He objects, When God says, let a man so eat, how dare any say, let him
eat, though not so?

Answ. Who knows not to return, when God says, let a man so hear, so pray,
the case is the same? I say still a man must do both, there is no escape
(without sin) otherwise. But when Christ says, Do this, how dare Mr. D. say,
Do it not, while instead of Examine, and so eat, he commands, let a man
examine, and so not eat; Let the unregenerate abstain. His Argument is this,
The Scripture says, let a man so eat, so pray, so hear, therefore he must not
pray, hear, or receive, unless so. The weakness whereof is apparent, 1.
Because Affirmatives are not exclusive.2. Man's impotency cannot annihilate
Christ's Authority.

If the visibly unfit will thrust in, it is the Churches duty not to let them
murder the Lord of Glory, unless Mr. H. be of Cains Religion, etc.

Answ. 1. One good proof were better then many such untoward speeches.2. Our
Savior Christ I hope was of no such Religion, yet did not he keep away
Judas.3. Though we are to watch over, admonish, and be keepers of our
Brethren, it is within the compass of divine Precepts: But this precept, Keep
thy neighbor from the Sacrament, is to my best remembrance, none of the ten
Commandments.4. The case is still the same here as in other Ordinances,
unless you can show me any difference put in Scripture.5. Those the Church
ought not to admit, say others upon this, we ought not to join with, and if the
Minister neglects his duty, yet must we do ours, and so they separate from us.
And therefore lastly. I would have such know how to distinguish between an
action sub genere entis, and sub genere morum; we admit or allow none to
receive unworthily, nor hear, or pray unworthily; but we admit them to hear, to
pray, and to receive, and exhort them to do it worthily. We partake with
others in actu physico, but not in actu morali, neither in our admission, or
communication.

For the Receivers part, I laid down three things.

1 A natural man cannot do any thing as he ought, yet does not that nullify
his duty; Invocation is a duty of the first Commandment. The unregenerate man
does but take Gods Name in vain when he prays, which is expressly against the
third; yet does not the third Command make void the first. Mr. Drake excepts
the Supper is not converting is Prayer; I say otherwise, they are a like; But
with all, the rule we are to walk by in all duties is not the Event, but the
precept, which alone considered evacuates his plea; for as we must not do any
evil, that good may come of it; so must we do our duty, Gods Precept must be
done still, though evil come of it.

page 116. A natural man must hear, pray, though he cannot rightly, because
they are converting, not so receive.

Answ. But first, Is it not a sin to hear not rightly? Secondly, Because
hearing the word is a means of conversion, does that dispense with the sin of
hearing unworthily, and make it become no sin? Thirdly, If he sin in doing
it, then is he bound to do that, in doing whereof he sins; and if he be, he
must not omit the duty to avoid sin. And what do I say more concerning
receiving the Sacrament?

2 Every man must do what he can; he answers, true but this is morally
impossible, because unlawful; I reply, what Christ bids Do, cannot be
unlawful because it is done, but for the defect only of the Doer, and
therefore that failing it to be amended, but the duty still to be done. The
doing of a thing not rightly, is but partial, but the not doing at all, total
disobedience.

3 There may be a difference between a worthy Receiver, and Receiving worthily;
The distinction, as Mr. Pembles, he acknowledges good; In the use and meaning
we differ. It cannot be said of any that are legally unworthy, that they can
legally eat worthily; and if I construe it only, a man may be legally
unworthy, yet Evangelically receive worthily; it is not ad idem, and the
comfort is lost; but if it stand thus, that a man may be Evangelically
unworthy, yet receive worthily in his kind (to wit, as opposed to receiving
unworthily in the Apostles sense) so that it may please God to work upon him
by it; It is as full of sweetness as ever it can hold, that will have you
examine your estates, and be sensible of them, and so come as condemning your
selves, both legally unworthy, and Evangelically unworthy, yet waiting on
Christ to make you worthy, as knowing you can never be saved on other terms,
and being ready to say with the Lepers, 2 King. 7. Why sit we here until we
dye? If we enter into the City, the famine is in the City, and we shall dye
there, and if we sit still here, we dye also. If we forsake Gods Ordinances, or
remain in our condition, we are sure of death; Now therefore let us fall into
the hands of Jesus Christ, Convert thou us, and we shall be converted, if he
saves us alive, we shall live, and if he kills us, we shall but dye.

If any approve not the distinction, which yet I hope no man will grudge me,
Docendi gratia, it will be all one to hold without it, that a man is to be
accounted to receive worthily, that makes an effectual use thereof, according
to his condition, whether regenerate, or not; and consequently that all within
the Church, may be reckoned visibly worthy, as well as visibly in Covenant, or
visible Saints, although as he leads me the terms, in reference to trial,
and evidence, I am forced to follow him, and oppose his sense thereof.

Page 117, How many are there outwardly pious, who upon trial might easily be
uncased to live in some known sin? Each of these fearing to be uncased
before the Eldership, no wonder they are averse to trial, lest their
sheeps-cloathing should be pulled off, and themselves discovered to be
ignorant, profane, or hypocritical. So page before 49. The denial hereof, must
needs vex hypocrites, who by this means are pryed into, and uncased. Consider
this with such places, where he intimates that the Church is to require
evidence, and try every professor as to his sincerity, page 17. and that
otherwise, they shall be partakers of their sins, if they do not study, the
discovery of persons unworthy, page 120. and the people likewise, if they do
not endeavor to keep them from receiving, page 109.

Answ. I pray read, ponder, and lay such expressions to heart, if it be not a
sad thing, to have such grievous fears taught us by the precepts of men? Alas
Sirs! Is not the Ministers calling heavy enough? Are not his contests, and
hatred more then he can undergo already? Is not that serious duty of the
receivers to examine themselves, work enough to take them up? And is there any
Scripture that enjoynes men to pry into others fitness and unsitnesse, or
prevent sin in order to this Sacrament, more then other duties? What a burden
will men bring on tender spirits, which if we should do cursorily, and
negligently, and yet make conscience of it as necessary, it will but bring a
curse on us, Jer. 48.10. and if we should go to do it seriously, what
everlasting difficulties, and troubles will it create for us? This is such a
terror cannot be borne, while as the Israelites sprinkled their door posts
with blood in the Passover, that they might escape death; here is the blood of
the Sacrament as it were sprinkled upon every soul that none may escape the
guilt of it, but must be made fellow-murderers of Christ (as he sadly terms
it) if any visibly unworthy be admitted. For my part, if others will needs lay
such strictness here on, I can but reverence them, the very shadow of holiness
is to be feared, but I can never think that the door of the Sacrament (even
to the Receivers own part) is to be held quite as narrow as the door to
heaven, so long as the same men will maintain that necessary distinction of
the Church visible, and invisible.

Page 118. If Mr. H. object such persons ought to be excommunicated, then it
seems, we offend rather in being too favorable then too rigid, that only
suspend them, etc.

Answ. This favor of his, which he so often speaks of in suspension, when yet
he holds a man cannot be debarred any Ordinance, but actual receiving in the
greatest censure, is methinks, just like the good woman, when the man fell off
the house with an hatched by his side, and broke his neck; what a great mercy
is it, says she, he had no more harm?

Holy things to holy men: My answer was, by distinction of outward, and inward,
holy things, and persons.

Mr. Drake excepts page 119. 1 Infants, and the distracted are outwardly holy;
this is thirteen times.2 Some outwardly holy things, to wit, the word, Mat. 28,
29. may be administered to those that are not outwardly holy.

Answ. What then? therefore may it not be administered to those that are
outwardly holy? 3 Bare profession, if contradicted by profaneness, cannot
secure a man from Excommunication, much less from suspension. Answ. But what
is this to profession, not contradicted by profaneness, I mean such, as is
not sufficient to excommunicate him? It is that, I say, gives him admission. 4
The Excommunicate do still profess, and are outwardly holy, therefore Mr. H.
contradicts himself, etc. Answ. I pray Sir, excuse me, I say when a man is
excommunicate, he is as a heathen, and not to be reckoned, outwardly holy, or
as a Professor.

Whereas therefore he concludes over-leafe, page 120. that Mr. H. his answer
may vye with the objection in weakness. Be pleased to turn to page 139. In
both Sacraments, says he there, Real interest is sealed to real Saints, as
visible interest to visible Saints. Now I pray compare Mr. H. outward holy
things to outward holy men, and inward holy things, to inward holy men; A
visible Ordinance to the visible Church, and the invisible grace to the
invisible members that have a saving interest in them by faith. This was my
answer, and is it not misfortune think ye, that the same thing must be
strength in M. Drake, and yet weakness in M. H. and that M. H. must be
thought to contradict himself, when he, poor creature, is apt to think M.
Drake does; Besides, it is M. Drake says here, not Mr. H. that a man is still
a Professor, when he contradicts his Profession, and is excommunicate from it.
So that, by my consent he may set up the trade of a Contradiction-maker; for
seeing the Last of his own invention will so well serve any body, if he cannot
put off his Ware to others, it is but taking it to himself, and he may never
need to be any loser by it.

Page 121. He cannot deny that All in the Church are in some sense in Christ,
and sanctified by him, as I quoted those Texts, Jo. 15.2. 2 Pet. 2.1. Heb,
10.29. etc. From whence I argue, that those who are in a Church State, in
Covenant, or visible communion, so that thereby they are said to be in Christ,
redeemed, and sanctified, are to be admitted accordingly to the seal and badge
thereof, unless such as the Scripture gives ground to except; But all
Church Members are in Covenant, Deuteronomy. 29.1.10, 11. visible Saints, etc. and the
Scripture allows no bar to any, unless unintelligent, or excommunicate; Ergo.

Unto this seeing it concerns the maine, Mr. D. gives us two answers; 1 Then
Infants again may be admitted: this is fourteen times.2 In short, He is
confident against it. A very masterful argument! which confidence yet (without
proof) whosoever trusts to, shall find but as a broken tooth, and foot out of
joint. And here I desire the Reader to take notice, when he still comes to this
point, which is the foundation, whether it be sufficient satisfaction, only to
vilisie me, and slight it off. For as for this passage, with which he has
filled so many sheets, about children, it is good for nothing, unless they had
happily been in parchment, and then it would have served well, to make them
Drums, and sounded prettily by the emptiness.

Page 122. How gross is that assertion that there is an historical visible
faith that gives an out ward Church right unto the Elements? Answ. Nay rather
how clear and firm a truth does it appear, by the former Argument? That
faith, which serves to enter a man in external Covenant, and engage him to the
terms thereof, will serve to admit him to the Sacraments; but, a faith only
accepting the true God, in opposition to all other Religions does serve for
that, appears by the Covenanting of the whole body of Israel, Deuteronomy, 29.10, 12.
Ergo, All Professors or Church Members that have but a common, general,
historical, or visible faith (for any of these terms serve me) I say are in
Covenant, but the Covenant is the foundation of the Sacraments, Ergo, neither
will the right understanding hereof do any hurt to the Church, I hope, so long
as we press, nevertheless, a solid saving faith, to interest them in the
effectual benefits of them both.

His Exceptions are, 1 Then the Excommunicate have a right, for they have
stilan historical faith. Answ. How vain is this? who knows not the state of
the question supposes us within the Church?2 Some excommunicate may also have a
true saving faith. See how fairly, instead of opposing me, he checks himself.
I pray mark his strength in both, because neither an historical, nor saving
faith gives a man a right that is excommunicate, and thereby made no
Churchmember, therefore they cannot give him a right when he is not
excommunicate, and is a Churchmember.3 As historical faith, gives not a right
to Christ, but faith of adhesion; so a visible faith of adhesion, gives right
to Christ sacramental. Answ. 1 I might return to him, Why may not some
excommunicate persons, have such a visible faith of adhesion, as an historical
saving one: But.2 An historical faith is suo genere, a true faith, as the
Eunuchs, I believe that Christ is the Son of God. Act. 8.37.3 An historical
says which was barely so, and not saving gave Simon Magus admission unto
Baptism, Act. 8.13. and here Adultis eadem ratio holds firm.4 Faith of
adhesion I take to be an assent with application, and that is special faith,
which I question whether it may be termed visible, as distinguished from
saving.5 It is sufficient to me, that a faith which generally assents to the
truth of the Covenant, and engages to it, and yet falls short of justifying,
entitles to the Sacraments, for otherwise we shall quite confound the work of
the Minister, and the Spirit, the symbolical, and effectual Seal, and then no
man can be admitted at all without presumption.6 When the Papists prove that
historical faith justifies, because it sufficed unto Baptism, Act. 8.37. Some
of our able Divines answer, It is true, Profession of faith gives interest to
Baptism, yet it is not sufficient to Justification, Dr. Slater on Romans 3.22.

There is a manifest difference between a title to the Sacraments, and interest
in the saving benefits; A general faith gives title to one, a special to the
other. Regeneration is like David, that enjoyes Michal; when Profession, like
Phaltiel comes along behind weeping to Bahurim. A general faith has some
union with Christ, as a special, a saving union; Profession, like Orphah, may
kiss Naomi, when a saving faith, like Ruth, cleaves unto her.

The Seal is set to a Blanke, if all be admitted. My answer was, from
consideration of what is sealed; It is generally said, the Sacrament is the
seal of faith (wherein lies the difficulty;) I say only it is a Seal of the
Covenant; The Gospel is the writing, the Sacrament as the seal to that
writing; the Writing is true, and the Seal true, whosoever is admitted.

I must confess there is so much confusion in this business, especially in
Mr. D. who is usually most assertive when least advised, that it will be in
vain to dispute Andabatarum more, with terms blindfolded. These terms then,
sealing to a blanke, sealing to our faith, and sealing the Covenant, I judge
are ambiguous; when we differ only in terms, we may reconcile in our meaning;
but where we differ in our matter, one of us must be reformed.

First then, Sealing to a blank may relate to the thing, or person; when I say
there is no sealing to a blank, I mean as the thing sealed; for it is not the
unbelief of man can make the Covenant of God of no effect. Now when here he
takes a blanke as relating to persons, he says nothing, and is presently
answered, we hold none are visible blanks within the Church: but when he refers
it to the thing, as I do, here arises our difference.

Secondly, Sealing of faith, or to faith, we either mean as the thing sealed,
or the condition required, to the exhibition thereof; When I say the Sacrament
is not a seal of faith, I mean it still as the thing sealed (to wit, on Gods
part.) A Seal is an Appendix to writing, the Sacrament is not an Appendix to
faith, but to the Gospel. Now again, If he mean here, by this expression, It
is a seal to our faith, only, that faith is the condition, upon which alone,
Christ and his benefits are conveyed, it is, what none doubts, and for words
we contend not. But when he says, It is the seal of Faith, referring it as I
do to the thing sealed, our controversy here must continue, and there is but
one thing to look into, to wit, the sense wherein, or grounds whereon, he thus
holds it; which I shall satisfy, after I have laid down these other
distinctions likewise, about sealing the Covenant, as necessary to it.

Thirdly then, There are 3 things I humbly think are to be distinguished,
concerning the Covenant; 1 The condition thereof, on man's part;2 The benefits,
on Gods part.3 The tenor, which consists, or results our of both. The word
Sealing accordingly is used (I think) sometimes, for to bind, or engage;
sometimes to confirm or ratify, and sometimes to convey or exhibit, which are
offices of a Seal (with others) and do not a little puzzle our conceptions. Now
when we say the Sacrament seals the Covenant, as sealing is taken for
confirming, assuring, or ratifying (which is the properest sense thereof) it is
most genuinely applied to the tenor of it; As it is understood for conveying
or exhibiting, it is proper to the benefits; As it is used to engage or oblige,
it is most large, and may be applied to the condition with the distinction (if
we allow it) as man's seal, and not otherwise; for as it is Gods Seal, in none
of these senses, it seals the condition, God engages not hereby, to give man
Faith; if he did, every Receiver should have it; what he seals to, he performs.

Now then to come to our difference, the ground on which the Sacrament is held
a Seal of Faith, or to our Faith (which terms I shall not distinguish for him)
is usually this, because it confirms our Faith, that which confirms or
ratifies (say they) is metaphorically a Seal, so is the Sacrament to our Faith.

For satisfaction; 1 I distinguish, A thing may be confirmed or ratisied,
either Formaliter, properly and formally, or Consequutive, by consequence
only, and improperly in the event. It is not enough to make a thing a Seal,
that it confirms any way in the event, but that it formally confirms and
ratifies. Now the Sacrament confirms and ratifies the Covenant properly and
formally, as a seal set to a writing, ratifies the tenor and purport of it, but
it confirms faith improperly, and consequently only, to wit, it increases it,
as other Ordinances do, in the exercise thereof, all habits being strengthened
by their acts, which you see is improper and eventual to sealing. Whatsoever
God does properly ratify by way of Seal, he attests the truth thereof, but he
does not attest the truth of our faith by the Sacrament, Ergo, the Sacrament is
not the seal of Faith. Mr. Drakes answer to this (in Marg. p. 128.) that he
does it by consequence, will not serve; for I argue, That which is common to
the hypocrite with the believer cannot attest the truth of a man's faith
(signify or ascertaine him that he has grace) by any consequence that is
good; But the Sacrament, is common to both; Ergo.

2 I humbly judge, The Sacraments are not Seals because they confirm our faith
(which is the error) but they confirm our faith, because they are Seals. As
to use Mr. Drakes instance, When a bond sealed unto me confirms my belief,
that the particulars sealed shall be performed: The Seal to the Bond is not a
Seal, because it confirms me, but I am confirmed by it, because it is a seal;
and this is only an effect it has on me; for the Seal would be the same, and
writing too, though I were incredulous. It is derogatory, I think, to say the
Sacrament is only a metaphorical seal, or tropically a seal, which they are
forced to say, that make it a seal of Faith, from the consequent effect, of
confirming faith inherent in the worthy receiver; whereas indeed it is a very
proper formal seal to the Covenant; and thus the text Romans 4.11. speaks plain
for us; circumcision is not said to be a seal of faith (or that a man has
faith) for righteousness; but the Seal of the righteousness of faith, which
in Genesis is phrased, The token of the Covenant. If confirming or strengthening
a man's faith were enough to denominate it a seal; 1 Then Acts of grace should
be the best seals.2 Then should all other Ordinances be feals too.3 Then
Baptism should be no seal to infants.4 And then shall both the Sacraments
cease to be Seals, when any are admitted that have not true Faith.

3 Let us consider what faith is confirmed. Every act supposes its object, such
as is the object, such must be the act; the object the Sacrament seals is no
other, but what is in the word (for Mr. D. and I, here still agree, that these
go together.) The word speaks only in general, whosoever believes shall be
saved; this general, necessarily includes its particular, so that the faith
which is directly and immediately confirmed, is my assent to his truth, that if
I believe I shall have Christ, or be justified and saved; Only whereas a true
historical assent; and particular faith of evidence, are not divided, though
distinguished in the regenerate, but are one habit, men may not much scruple to
say, the one is confirmed instead of the other. Yet as to this Point, where the
whole stresse is laid upon it, it is to be considered, and we are to know,
that if a man would come to be assured of his faith (that it is saving) it must
arise from his own examination, and experience, and it cannot be confirmed to
him any otherwise. And as for those further degrees of assurance (if grounded)
he attains at the Sacrament, they are not conveyed to him by obsignation (there
is some danger and weakness to think so) but are acquired through Gods Spirit;
by exercise of his heart at that time in the sight of his experiences and
meditation (the great business he has to do here) no otherwise then at other
Ordinances, which do all agere only, virtute suoe significationis, or by
moral operation.

I shall end this with a plain consideration; a Seal so confirms a Bond, as
it was not confirmed before: but there is no Faith of particular evidence (that
Christ is mine) can be confirmed by the Sacrament (I say, ratione
obsignationis) but what is confirmed to me already by my experience, and
therefore it is a mean thing, to count it only tropically a seal to confirm
faith, when it is a seal formally to confirm the Covenant.

Another reason Mr. D. has, more peculiar, and affected. Faith is a part of
the Covenant, and the Covenant being sealed, Faith is sealed. For the
discussing this, we all know there is man's part of the Covenant, and Gods; man's
part is the Condition, which God does not seal to; if he did, my business
were at an end, for then all were to come hither for it; Gods part is the
Promise, wherein he engages to give us the benefits upon this Condition. Now as
Faith is our Condition, it is manifest it cannot be part of the Covenant which
God seal, whereof only we speak: And Mr. D. is at such a loss p. 134. For how
shall faith be promised in the Covenant, when men cannot be in Covenant
(effectually) without Faith? that is, how can Faith be promised upon condition
we do believe? Let us distinguish then.

1 There is the absolute, or conditional Covenant; or there is the Covenant
made with us, and the Covenant made with Christ; Faith is not given by virtue
of the Covenant made with man, but it flows from the Promise God has made to
Christ, that upon doing his work, this shall be his wages, To have a seed, a
people, Isa. 53.10. Isa. 55.4, 5. Psalm. 2.8. that is, many shall believe in
him. Now the Sacrament seals not the absolute Covenant, or the everlasting
engagements between God and Christ; but it seals the conditional Covenant, or
the Covenant made with man, and so not Faith.

2 To proceed more strictly, There is the first Grace, and second Grace. Faith
as the first condition, and the further degrees of it. If it be pleaded, these
further degrees comes under the conditional Promise: I Answer, For my part, I
judge from whence comes the first Grace, from thence flows Perseverance, by the
former Texts, with Joh. 10.29. Jo. 17.9, 10. Jer. 32.40.1 Pet. 1.5. etc. that
is from the absolute Promise, and this makes it incorruptible seed, in the
Doctrine whereof we are loath to loose so good a stay at our backs; and if
Perseverance belongs to the absolute Promise, the confirmation of the first
Grace does likewise. In Progressive Grace then, there is the work it self, or
an accessory consideration of it, as a reward to initial; though there is not
the least degree of Grace, but what is wrought by the Holy Spirit, yet he does
so sweetly attemper his work to our Wills, that he proposes it as the reward and
fruits of our endeavors in the right use of the first stock he has given us;
and so declares, or promises, To him that has it shall be given; Upon which
promise there arises a right of the second Grace to him that has the first;
and this Right only as to Real Grace (to wit, that God will crown his own
effectual workings with more) is all can be sealed in the Sacraments. To clear
this a little more, Whereas we speak here of the Grace the Covenant promises,
that is the benefits, let us know, 1. The word Sealing, we are to take for
conveighing or exhibiting.2. That the grace of the promise is either Relative,
that makes a change only as to our state and relation toward God (as
Justification, Adoption) and this is conveyed every Sacrament ( suo modo) to
the Believer; or Real, as these further degrees of Faith Love, etc. and Glory,
which change the heart and person; and this being a physical thing, cannot be
conveyed by obsignation. A moral Instrument acts not physically. To speak
freely in this sense of obsignation, the Sacrament does no more Sanctify us,
then Glorify us; It is then a right to further Sanctification, as to glory,
which is sealed, that is, exhibited, or conveyed to us by the Sacrament; and as
for the effectual work it self of the first or second: Grace alike, it is
the free gift of God, insinuated in all Ordinances, through the proposition of
the object, by moral action.

To sum up the whole Mr. D. can have here, it comes to this; whereas the
Sacrament as a seal, conveyes and exhibits the benefits of the Covenant (to
wit Relative Grace, and a right to Real) to true Believers, and not else, the
seal must be set to a blank (he may count) where there is no saving Faith, and
if any are visibly such, they ought not to be admitted.

To this I answer 1. By way of concession, as to the antecedent, which is true,
and the sense is only, that the Sacrament seals the benefits of the Covenant
upon condition, or those only that have the condition, have a right to the
benefits of it. The man could nor be so censorious, if he had not some good
meaning. To express this in Austines words, there is Sacramentum, and Res
Sacramenti; panis Dominus, and Panis Domini; It is true, though all receive the
Sacrament, and Panem Domini, yet none receive rem Sacramenti, and panem
Dominum, but such as have true saving faith.

But 2. By way of negation to the consequence, It does not follow where the
benefits are not exhibited, that the seal is set to a blank. For 1. The
Covenant is sealed either in regard of the tenor of it, or the benefits; though
the benefits (in this sense) are not sealed (that is conveyed) yet is the tenor
of the Covenant sealed (that is, confirmed and ratified, the chief sense we
contend for) to all the receivers; and there can be no seal to a blank, so
long as there is truth and writing in the Gospel2. As the general truth of the
Covenant is sealed to all, so is every man's particular interest sealed
according to his condition, and he is seriously to make his use thereof.

3 By way of further satisfaction, if Mr. D. will call it sealing to a blanke,
when the benefits are not, exhibited, the man may use what unhandsome terms he
will, but I will say if that be all, there is no absurdity in it. For 1. God
has commanded to baptize all Infants of Believers, and to admit all visible
Saints, (as himself says, p. 123.) which yet have not all the benefits
exhibited, and we must not think the eternal Wisdom puts us upon an
absurdity.2. The Lord Jesus submitted to the Sacraments, yet could not the
benefits of remission of sins, or regeneration, be sealed to him that never
sinned.3. Nevertheless, as he was to do this, to fulfill all righteousness;
so are we bound still to do our duty.4. As there is Relative Grace, as
remission of sin, and a right to life, exhibited to the sound Believer; so
there is Relative Judgment (if I may so say) as retention of sin, and debitum
supplicii, a due, or desert of death, exhibited to the unsound, which he is to
apply for his Conviction and Reformation.5. If he does not, yet is the
Ordinance hereby made a sweet savor of Christ unto God, though a savor of death
to him.

4 By way of inquity, I question. 1. How Gods establishing his Covenant by way
of seal, does import this exhibition of the effectual benefits, to those he
seals? There may indeed be outward privileges of the Church, necessarily made
over hereby? but the inward benefits of the Covenant, are engaged for, or
stipulated on Gods part to be given only upon condition, which man may be
bound to before the performance. I pray compare tha^ place, from whence alone
we derive this notion of seal. To. 4.11. with Genesis 17.11. One Text calls that a
token, which the other calls a seal, and wha^ one calls the righteousness of
Faith, the oath calls the Covenant; The token of the Cove^^nt, and seal of the
righteousness of faith, the same. Now see verse. 7. I will establish my
Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in their Generations, for
an everlasting Covenant, This shall be the token or seal thereof; But the
effectual benefits were not exhibited to the whole seed in their generations
that were circumcised, and therefore Mr. D. must affirm here, that God seals
to a blank (which he most desperately does) or that this objection comes to
nothing.

2 I question, Whether a man that scruples at the Sacrament, as having not
evidence to receive it as a seal, may, and must not yet receive it as a sign;
My reason is, all men within the Church, are bound to remember the death of
Christ, and be thankful, if it were but only for that he has brought them
under a possibility, probability, and the means of salvation; But the whole
institution is ordained for a thankful remembrance in the showing forth his
death, and benefits of it, wherein the whole Church is visibly interessed,
Ergo. If any reply, There is more then this to be don, I say, true, let not
anythink that is all; but I ask, is not this yet his duty? This one particular
cannot be denied, and if it be his duty, his failings and impotence otherwise,
cannot evacuate it; they must be amended, and this must be done. Wemust not do
evil that good may come of it, therefore, we must do our duty, though evil
comes of it.

And now I come to his book, p. 123. He begins with approbation of the
objection; All men (says he) are naturally Rasae tabulae, destitute of the new
Covenant in their hearts, 2 Cor. 3.3. Heb. 8.10. and so blanks, etc.

Answ. Here is Mr. Drakes great error, to confound the outward and inward
Covenant, the external and internal sealing; If the seal be set to a blank,
until Gods Law is written in the heart, then no mortal can apply the seal to
any, seeing that cannot be discerned by any. Compare this therefore with p.
72. Let the world know (says he) that truth of Grace in the heart is not the
rule of our admission. Now I pray note it, if he applies these Texts, Heb.
8.10.2 Cor. 3.3. (which speaks only of this inward writing) to confirm the
objection, that the seal is set to a blank if all be admitted; then the world
must know that the truth of grace is his rule, or else the new Covenant written
in the heart, is not truth of grace with Mr. Drake. Here you see the left
legset first forward, and the man's rule had need be better then his reason.

He proceeds, This blanke is either visible, or invisible; to God all blankes
are visible, and he may use his liberty to set his seal where he pleases.

Ans. In what a sad case has he here brought himself self through his former
error, when he must lay this for his foundation, that the God of Israel may set
his seal to a visible blanke, that styles himself by this title, who cannot
lie? If the Minister, who is Gods Ambassador, seals to a visible blank, it is
such an heinous sin, he says, as murdering Christ: and yet does he affirm,
that God sets his seal to a visible blanke without scruple. It is no wonder
that the man deals so coursely with me, that uses such rude and uncivil
language toward God.

He goes on, and tells how (p. 124) by commanding Baptism of Infants, and to
admit to the Lords Supper all visible Saints that are, Church Members; The
question is then whether man may apply the seals to visible blankes, etc. Ans.
I pray mark this over again, God may use his liberty to set his seal to a
visible blanke (he says) by commanding all visible Saints to be admitted; but
his question is, Whether man may apply it? that is, the question is, Whether
man may do as God has commanded him? Visible Saints are all one with visible
members, 1 Cor. 1, 2. Heb. 10.29. with Deuteronomy. 7.6. etc. so that it seems by that
time the man came to this place, he was never converted. But he falls off
again, It is clear he may not, for then heathen may be admitted, and their
Infants baptized, but there are visible blankes in the Church as in the world,
etc. Answ. 1. This is as good as the rest, because the heathen are not
admitted, who are not commanded to be admitted, therefore visible Saints may
not, who are commanded; As a jewel in a Swines snout, so is a fair face upon a
matter without discretion.2 It is Mr. Drakes error to say there are any visible
blankes within the Church, for how then, can we baptize all children? A
visible blanke, is one visibly out of Covenant, but to be in a Church State, is
to be externally, or visibly in Covenant, Deuteronomy. 29.1.10.11. and 26.17, 18.
visibly holy, Deuteronomy. 14.2.1 Pet. 29, 10.1 Cor. 1, 2. And so the Jews owned of
God as his Vovenant People, even when they know not, nor consider him. Isa.
1.3. Isa. 5.13. there is ignorance; and when they hearken not to him, and will
have none of him, Psalm. 81.8.11. Amos 3.2.1 Cor. 10.5. there is scandal. As the
legs of the lame are not equal, so is Church Membership without communion.

Page 125. Sacramental seals relate either to parties, or to things, etc. Answ.
For the parties, A man may be in Covenant either quoad jus foederis, or quoad
foederis beneficia; Though none but the regenerate, ar partakers of the
effectual benefits, yet are all Church Members in Covenant, according to an
external right or title. But in case any make a forfeiture, which he says, the
Church ought to take; It is manifest then he must be excommunicate, that is,
put out of Churchstate, or external Covenant; for while he stands De jure
entitled as a member, it is a manifest wrong to suspend him the symbol
thereof: And here our distinction of Ipso jure dis-membred, and so De presenti
dis-tituled must do its service, in some scruples, which will be even forced to
say, I have need of thee.

For the things to which these Seals relate, Page 126. he says, 1 They
confirm the Covenant; which is most true, and therefore all may be present to
see, not eat. Answ. The bare Elements do not confirm the Covenant, but the
Elements as instituted to that use, but they were instituted to be eaten and
drunken, and therefore those that are present must receive too, to wit, if they
be intelligent members.2 They confirm the faith of the worthy receiver,
therefore none but Evangelically worthy may partake. Ans. He may as well argue
thus, Baptism confirms the faith only of those that understand it, therefore
Infants may not partake of it. The word and prayer confirm faith, therefore
none but the regenerate may hear and pray. This is no consequence, for
whatsoever Ordinance can confirm faith, may beget it.3 They confirm judgment
to the unworthy receiver. Answ. And I pray now what is become of the blanke? By
this it appears the whole Covenant is sealed, Mar. 16, 16. and so there is no
sealing to a blanke possible. He that believes not shall be damned, is sealed,
as well as he that believes shall be saved; so that I humbly judge the right
use hereof is but to be taught the people, and our controversy may be done.

There is a vast difference between a physical, and moral instrument; and
likewise between what is Really and Relatively conveyed; If real judgment were
physically conveyed by the Covenant and Sacrament, it were death but once to
touch it, or but once to hear the word without faith. But it is not so, God
forbid, we should have such merciless thoughts of him; It is final unbeleefe
only that shall be really damned. The truth is, both the Covenant and Seal, do
still hold forth life potentially to a sinner, if he will repent, when it
actually sets death before his present condition; He is now then to despair
of sin, he is never to despiar of mercy upon conversion unto Christ.

For his next things, I speak to other where; There is one passage only here,
must yet be limited, it is this, The Sacrament will confirm the unworthy
receivers unbeleefe. Answ. You must take heed of this, by your serious
application. Indeed I think the Sacrament seals judgment to every
unregenerate man, according to the terms of the major Proposition in this
syllogism, (He that believes not, shall be damned, I believe not, therefore I
shall be damned) but not, in any hand, according to the terms of the
conclusion, Let every soul assure himself thereof. But for the confirming his
unbeleefe, that follows here only, as at the word, and prayer; A man may be
unworthy, yet by Gods grace, pray, hear, and receive worthily; for while he
rightly applies the word, or seal, according to his condition, it will be the
very means, I hope, to remove his unbeleefe, and quicken him to repentance,
which the Lord grant to poor sinners.

Page 127. The Sacrament does confirm faith, and ratify the Covenant to
faith, Ergo, it is a seal of faith, and to faith. Answ. 1 The Sacrament
confirms not faith formaliter, as I have said, but only consequutive, as
other Ordinances do, and that is not enough to make it a seal.2 The Sacrament
ratifies the Covenant to all, whether they have saving faith or no, but
exhibits the benefits only upon that condition; so that to seal to faith is
nothing else, but that it seals conditionally, which answers the whole
objection. Econtra: where there is no faith to confirm, it seals to a blanke,
as sealing a paper without writing, etc. Answ. Here is his constant error, for
the writing the Sacrament seals to, is not the inward Covenant in the heart,
but the outwart in the Gospel. For his Argument from the institution, How can
the Minister say, this is the blood of Christ, for the remission of sin to
the unworthy? Every one can resolve, as Christ said the same to Judas, whereof
before.

Page 128. He has four things; 1 He confesses, God does not attest our faith.
I return, But Seals are testimonies, and if he does not give testimony to our
faith, he does not seal to it.2 He says, Some reject the Covenant; This he
repeats page 131 where I shall answer it.3 There is the old business of
Infants, and the distracted, which is fifteen times.4 The Seals may be applied
before all, not to them, etc. Answ. Ye men of Athens, I perceive that in this
thing you are too superstitious. I pray see the sixth Chapter of John, verse.
53.56. Verily except you eat my flesh, and drink my blood you have no life in
you; but whosoever eats, etc. has eternal life. These words cannot be meant
of the Sacrament; 1 Because that was not then instituted;And 2. Men may never
eat him in the Sacrament, yet be saved. Now take this sixth of John out of the
Supper, that which remains only must be the seal, and what becomes of all
this dreadfulnesse then, that is laid upon our consciences with a bare Touch
not, taste not, handle not? Let a man only look on, he shall be sure to be
damned nevertheless, if he eats not the flesh, and drinks not the blood of
the Son of man by a true faith; and as sure to be saved if he does, according
to this text of St. John, alike, whether he receives, or receives not. This
actual receiving then, serves but to affect us the more solemnly with our
condition, and be a more serious obligation by the outward, to that inward
eating, whereby alone we look to be saved.

Page 129. He is notable, The Sacrament he counts it not a seal properly, but
figuratively, to the Covenant it self; I pray mark it. So in the former leaf
he concludes it tropically a seal. Well, now read but a few lines further, in
the very same page, and he tells us, As it confirms the Covenant, it confirms
Faith; and if this be not to seal in a proper formal sense theologically, I
know not what is. Is not this pretty? The Sacrament is not a proper, formal
seal, but figurative, and metaphorical; and yet if it does not seal in a
proper, formal sense, he knows not what does. Mr. Drake does often tell you
of my contradictions, when he only goes about to make them, but I need not
tell you, he has any. To his substance I have spoken already.

Page 130. Nor will his instance of circumcision help him, which was applied
to none but visible Saints, etc.

Answ. That is the whole Jewish Nation, I pray see Josh. 5.3, 6, 8. and that
instance alone, of the whole Body of Israel at once, when of age, without any
examination, or profession, but virtually only, being circumcised, does
declare, both that all Church Members are visible Saints, and that that alone
gives a right to be admitted.

For the simile that follows, I have spoken; and I refer you to Mr. Calvin, who
pleases himself with it, in showing this same point, to wit, Sacramenta non
definere esse testimonia gratiae Dei, licet impiis quoque porrigantur. Inst. l.
4. c. 14. sect. 7.

Page 131. How dare a Minister by word and seal apply the Covenant of Grace to
those that visibly reject it?

Answ. Unto this Mr. D. shall first answer. Mr. D. speaking of Infant baptism,
he tells us, Be their parents never so unworthy p. 81. Yet 1. Though they
transgress, they do not renounce the Covenant, as Turks do.2. They are Members
of the visible Church till ex communicated, p. 84. Well, now let him come to
speak about the Sacrament, p. 131. All who are visibly in the state of nature
(says he) are visibly out of Covenant. I pray mark it, if natural men be
members of the visible Church, how are they visibly out of Covenant? If they
are visibly in Christ, how do they visibly reject Christ? And now then, upon
this I will answer him. 1. There is a difference between disobedience and
renouncing; between a not resolving, and resolving not to accept of Christ.2.
How can Mr. D. say any visibly reject the Covenant of Grace, when they visibly
come to engage themselves unto it?3. So long as the Lord ownes a people in
Covenant, the Minister may apply the outward seals of it; But while men are
Church Members, the Lord does own them outwardly as his people, even when they
will not hearken, and will none of him, Psalm. 81.8, 11. that is plainly reject
the Covenant, as to obedience, when they are ignorant, Isa. 1.3. Hos. 4.6. and
scandalous, Psa. 106.39. with ver. 45. They went a whoring after their own
inventions, yet remembered he for them his Covenant.4. So long as men are not
excommunicate, I see no reason why Christ may not be offered Sacramentally, as
free as verbally, to work them to repentance; for the offering a sealed pardon
in general (the general always including the particulars) and the particulars
applying the same to single persons conditionally, whatsoever this mansurmises,
is but the same. If he can say to all, whosoever believes shall be saved, he
can say so to me; unless all, does not include me; and absolutely the
Sacrament seals no man's interest, as alike vainly he imagines.5. If men do
not walk conformable to the Covenant, the denouncing the judgment of God, and
the sealing of it, seriously applied, is the means to reform them.6. When
other means will not work upon them, there remains Excommunication, and let
that content him.

Page 132. He does but repeat the same.

Page 133. He has three things, 1. The Sacraments are Gods seals, as relating
to Gods Covenant, and as instituted to ratify the Covenant. Ans. A good
confession, Then they are not Gods seals as relating to Faith, and as
instituted formally to ratify Faith: They are not seals of Faith for
Righteousness, but they are seals of the righteousness of Faith, in
opposition to Works.2. Is not Faith, and every saving Grace promised in the New
Covenant, unless Mr. H. will turn Pelagian? Ans. I believe here Mr. Drakes
other studies has beguiled his Divinity; for he may be pleased to know, we
neither make Faith the birth of man's Free Will, nor yet to be given by virtue
of the Covenant made with man, which the Sacrament seals, but to be Gods most
free gift, that proceeds from election, and discovers the mystery thereof.3. If
the Covenant be Gods, if the Seal be Gods, and Faith promised in it be Gods
also; is it not apparent, that Gods seal, must needs be Faiths seal also?
Answ. If he count this apparent, which is a very Chaos, you may guess what
light to expect from him. The truth is, As faith is our condition, it is not a
branch of the Covenant that God seals, which puzzles this man; for if it were,
every man should unquestionably come, and engage the Lord by his own seal to
undertake for his condition (as I have already intimated) and consequently if
God perform what he engages, every one should be saved.

This he sees p. 134, 135. and is quite lost in his very first particular; for
while he supposes, the Covenant promises initiall grace to the Elect, and the
Sacrament seals that Covenant, and the seal secures what is in the writing
(which are all his own terms) he must necessarily take upon him to judge who
are reprobates, which is sinful to do; or all must be admitted: for though
men are visibly yet in the state of nature, they may be elect. Had not the man
so much contemned me, he might have found how to distinguish between what comes
from Gods undertaking with man, or the conditional bosom of the Covenant; and
what comes from his undertaking with Christ, or the free, absolute bosom of
Election. I pray compare his third particular with this first, The Sacrament,
he says there, is for nourishment (and that I hope to the Elect) So p, 147. It
seals not initiall, but progressive Graece; and yet here, the Covenant (he
counts) promises initiall grace to the Elect, and the seal secures what is in
the Covenant. So that what need I here to dispute with Mr. D. when his own
particulars have an opponent and defendant among themselves, and do rise up
methinks but like the heads and horns still in the Visions, to revile, and
fight with one another. I will here therefore pose these two pages of Mr.
Drakes with these Questions. 1. Whether it be one and the same Covenant he
speaks of there?2. How the Covenant being conditional does promise
absolutely?3. How it can promise initial Grace? for Faith and Repentance are
the condition of the Covenant, and how can faith be promised upon condition we
have faith, or the first grace be given upon condition we have grace?4. What
difference is there between the Covenants offer of grace, and promise of grace
conditionally?5. How can the offer of Grace be said to be sealed, as Offer is
distinguished from Promise?6. Whether the Minister can seal which he please,
either the Offer or Promise, and why he should not content himself to seal
the offer, which is sure to all present, rather then to seal the Promise where
he may err, seeing his visible Legatees really may not be such? By these
Questions happily it may appear Mr. D. does not see all things.

Page 136. Christ may be given to all, or held forth in the Sacrament, though
they do not receive.

Answ. What an unworthy shift is this, to be made use of so often! As Christ
is held forth to all Sacramentally, he is held forth to this end, to be
Sacramentally eaten and drunken; Take, eat, this is my body; that is, thus
taken, and eaten, it is his body, not otherwise: The Sacrament then gives not
out Christ, or holds him forth Sacramentally, but to those that receive it. And
they all drank of the rock, which was Christ.

In the same page, he has up Infants, and the distracted again, which is
sixteen times, and argues from the word, As the Minister may not lose by the
Key of doctrine, such as are to be bound, no more may be seal comfort, etc.
Answ. As the Minister does not only loose, but bind in the word, so does he
in the Sacrament; and as he neither binds nor looses, but conditionally in the
one; no more does he seal comforts, or judgment (and so terrors) in the
other. As for that only Objection against this conditional sealing he has
over the lease, that then heathen, and the excommunicate may be admitted; I
have answered, The word is a sealed word only to the Church; It is apparent,
the seal is delivered only for her use, Genesis 17. and therefore to be applied
(by express Text, Exodus 12.28.) only to her members.

Page 137, 138. He contends without cause that the Sacraments are man's seals,
which in his sense that they are appointed to his use (in a propriety of the
final cause) who doubts? but in that sense which regards him that sets the
seal, as if Mr. D. should make Articles with me, the setting his seal is not
mine; so do I think some wiser then Mr. D. may not judge it any thing
ridiculous, to make the seal Gods only, and our mutual restipulation, (I mean
the performance of it) to arise as the good use we are to make thereof. If any
contend for words* give place.

Page 139. Whereas I say the tenor of the Gospel is absolutely sealed but not
our interest in it absolutely; which distinction I desire to have marked,
because our interest relates to the benefits, and they are sealed (that is
exhibited) only on condition; and our assurance can be no otherwise: He
answers, This is true in the first branch, but false in the second, since not
only the tenor of the Covenant is sealed absolutely to the worthy receiver,
but also his interest in it. Answ. A very shrewd Argument; It is not, why?
because it is not. My reason I give here is, because the word speaks not
absolutely of any man's single interest; He answers, It does by signs, and if
any find those signs in himself it is as good, as if he were mentioned by
name. Answ. If a man's particular interest depends upon these signs and marks,
then is his interest only conditional, and must be sealed as it is, which is
the thing I prove. I pray consider this plainly, when the word tells me, Faith
is the condition of the Covenanant, it sets forth what faith it is, or the true
signs, marks, and description thereof, and it is all one to say, If thou do
believe, or if thou have these signs or marks. Now the Sacrament seals my
interest in the benefits of the Covenant only upon the condition, that I have
these signs wherein consists this true faith, and not otherwise; But the word
does no where tell me I have these marks, or signs, and therefore the Sacrament
cannot seal to me my interest but conditionally; which is so clear that all the
clouds in Mr. D. head can never obseure it.

And whereas in the same Page he speaks fortunately, that a visible interest is
sealed to visible Saints. I assume; But Church Members are outwardly holy, or
visible Saints, therefore consideratis considerandis must be admitted.

Page 140 to 149. He brings in the syllogism I quoted from Mr. Baxter (in
Aphor. Ap.) where by the way, let me admonish Mr. D. to take heed of this
self-conceit, prejudice, and bitter spirit, he shows in those By-expressions of
his upon a man so precious in the hearts of most pious unbyassed Christians,
and of so eminent a worth, where he wishes that godly person, if so; (If so,
such is his censure upon my naming him under that title) by entertainment of
this opinion, be not like that of the Galatians. Such conversion, is
perversion, etc. and calls for repentance, which I wish to that godly man, etc.
It is most malevolently spoken, he should have proceeded to suspension.

The syllogism is this, whosoever believes, shall be saved; But I believe;
Ergo, I shall be saved; The minor, and conclusion, Master Baxter, and I, say,
are not sealed; but the major Mr. D. opposes.

And first he says, the conclusion is sealed, p. 141, 142. His reason is,
because the Sacrament seals I shall be saved in particular, which he proves at
large* Answ. I deny his argument; for, That I shall be saved in particular, is
either conditionally or absolutely; That I shall be saved conditionally, is in
the major Proposition, by his own ground, The general includes the
particulars, and his own instances; As omnis homo est animal, includes tu es
animal; So whosoever believes, shall be saved, includes, If I believe, I shall
be saved, and that I shall be saved only conditionally, is all the Sacrament
seals, his own texts likewise prove, Romans 10.9. John 3.16. If thou confess,
If thou believe; so strong is he against himself: But that I shall be saved
absolutely, comes into the conclusion, and that the word says not, nor can it
be sealed. The conclusion, I say, is absolute, and thereupon he pleads. Now if
that be sealed, then not only whosoever once receives with faith, must needs
be certainly saved, which you may say, you see no hurt in, but likewise, he
that once receives without faith, must needs be certainly damned, which God
forbid.

As for his distinction, between the offer of grace, and the promise of grace;
he weakly troubles himself, for if the offer be of no other grace, but what is
in the promise (to wit, pardon and salvation as he means) I say that is
promised conditionally to all, and me in particular as well as offered.

And whereas he argues, Where the condition is performed, there the promise is
absolute I deny it, what is but upon supposition, is not absolute. You may say,
it is as good to me, as if it were absolute, that is, it is certain; (there
lies the equivocation) but how is it certain? not absolutely certain, (as
Election is) but conditionally certain, for the promise is still the same, and
no new promise. He proceeds, But when I believe, the condition is performed;
Ergo, the promise that I shall be saved is absolute. Answ. That which assures
me of a benefit only upon condition, and does not assure me the condition, does
not assure me absolutely of the benefit; But the Sacrament assures me of
salvation only on condition I believe, but does not assure me I believe (as by
and by shall be cleared) therefore it does not assure me absolutely of
salvation.

Again, That Proposition, that contains the Covenant is sealed, but the major
contains the Covenant, not the conclusion, therefore the major, not the
conclusion is sealed.

Let this suffice, Thy particular interest conditionally is contained in the
major proposition, promise, or Covenant, which is sealed absolutely; So I
remember pleads Mr. Baxter; If others contend it is sealed conditionally, they
yet reconcile in a word; As the word Sealing signifies ratifying and
confirming, and relates to the tenor of the Covenant; It is sealed absolutely,
that is, as an undoubted verity. As sealing signifies exhibiting, conveying,
and relates to the benefits of the Covenant, It is sealed conditionally in this
sense, that the benefits are conferred only upon condition.

Page 143. He undertakes the minor, Although before, page 128. he tells us, he
knows none so simple as to assert that God does attest our faith; Yet here, he
is grown so wise to assert that God does seal to this proposition, I believe.
And thus he argues; What the Covenant ensures the Sacrament seals, but the
Covenant assures him, I believe. His reason, because it gives him evidence in
affording the infallible signs of faith. Answ. You may see here how much
prejudice will blind a man. The mistake is manifest, in reckoning that to the
minor, which belongs to the major; for when the word says, If I believe I
shall be saved, it is all one with, If I receive Christ for righteousness, and
have these and these marks, whereby it describes this faith to me, all which go
to the major; now the minor, or assumption is, But I have these marks, signs,
or that true faith thus described; And this is no where affirmed to me in the
word, and consequently not sealed. I will therefore return his Argument; If
the Word or Covenant does not assure me I believe, then this minor cannot be
sealed; but this it does not, for it no where says, I have these marks and
signs; Ergo. Again, If it were in the Word, it were an object of faith; but it
is no object of faith. Probo. That which is seen, is no object of faith, for
sense takes away faith, 2 Cor. 5.7. and Faith is an evidence of things not
seen, Heb. 11.1. But this minor, I believe, is an object of sense, spiritual
experience, or thing seen: Ergo. To illustrate this, suppose there are Articles
granted and sealed to a Town upon such and such qualifications; If I come to
plead my benefit in them as a person so qualified, I must bring witnesses that
will attest such things I have done, that do so qualify me, and this is to be
made out by me no otherwise. Now as the Articles and Seal assure me of such
advantages upon the qualification; but it is my proof and testimony, evidence
those qualifications; so does the Covenant and Sacrament assure me of salvation
upon faith, but it is my own conscience, and spiritual experience that must
assure my faith; and therefore the Sacrament is not a seal of faith (to ratify
and assure that) but of the Covenant.

Page 144, 145, 146. He persists by way of explication to this purpose. The
marks and signs which the conscience makes use of, to evidence the minor, is in
Scripture, therefore the minor is consequently in Scripture. Answ. 1. That is,
Because the medius terminus is both in the major and the minor, therefore
whatsoever proves the major, must prove the minor.2. In his own terms, Though
the evidence in actu signato be in Scripture, this is nothing, seeing that goes
in the major Proposition; But his Evidence in actu exercito is the business of
the minor, and that is no where, I hope, in Scripture, by his own
confession.3. Whereas, in that Page (128.) before quoted, as here he puts this
off with not interminis, but by consequence; Let us see his consequence. All
are sinners, therefore thou Roger art a sinner; all must rise again, therefore
thou must rise again. This is true, because the one includes the other; So,
whosoever believes shall be saved, includes this de fide. If thon Roger
beleevest, thou shall be saved; but it can never include de fide, therefore
thou Roger beleevest. He says, yes, Because the minor here is the conclusion
in the Prosyllogisme, to wit, He that has these signs, believes; But I have
these signs, Ergo, I believe: I answer contra, Seeing the conclusion in the
Prosyllogisme is the same with the minor in the principal Syllogism, it
cannot be in Scripture, or de fide, by the same consequence he proves it can;
for, that he has these and these signs is not in Scripture; but to have these
and these signs is all one with to believe; Ergo, that he believes is not in
Scripture, or de fide, by consequence. He that has these signs, I say, is all
one with, he that believes; and so his Prosyllogisme then, comes effectually
but to this, He that believes, believes; But he believes, ergo, he believes.

And whereas to illustrate this, he so elaborately demonstrates he is a man,
partly by sense, partly by faith; first by a direct nct; and then by a reflect
act on the signs of his humanity, and properties of a man, and therefore shall
rise again in the resurrection; Spectatum admissi: When I am a man, and I
believe, are propositions of equal evidence, Mr. Drakes argument shall carry
it. He that is a man, is a man; He that believes, believes; He that is in the
right, is in the right; but Mr. D. is in the right, Ergo, he is in the right.

Page 146. He raises an objection, The Sacrament supposes assurance: It
supposes I believe, but does not evidence that I believe; Ergo, it is not a
seal of Faith. Unto this he can make no solution. For my part, I do neither
think the Sacrament supposes assurance, or effectual faith, that we must needs
forbear to come without it. There is a general faith and acknowledgement of
the Gospel, or Covenant of Jesus Christ, as the only means to be saved, (I
judge) pre-requisite to adult Church Membership, and so to the Sacraments,
which is not to the word that begets it; But as for that Saving Faith, which
consists in the prevailing interest of the heart for Christ, which is the
condition of the Covenant (wrought not always by the Word alone, but by other
means with it) It may be engaged to, I suppose, before it is performed; (and
those engagements conduce thereunto) even as in Bonds, a man seals to the
payment which is to be made, and he is bound before he makes it good.

There is a manifest difference I conceive between what is pre-requisite to the
enjoyment of the benefits of the Covenant, and what is pre-requisite to an
engagement to the condition; the condition is pre-requisite to enjoy the
benefits, but the condition is not absolutely pre-requisite to engage to the
condition; for nothing can be absolutely pre-requisite to its self. A
justifying faith then, I say, is required of every receiver, as pre-requisite
to enjoy the benefits, but not absolutely prerequired to his coming and
engaging to the Covenant, unless the whole Congregation of Israel, Deuteronomy. 29.
man, woman, and child, had a saving Faith.

I have therefore chose (in my former book, Ed. 3.) to tender this thus, with
humble submission; The condition of the Covenant may be considered in esse, as
already wrought in us, or in fieri, as to be done or performed of us. The
receiver seals not to his condition necessarily in esse, for children seal to
the same in baptism, and the Ordinance is to strengthen the weak that have not
assurance, and doubt of their Faith. But he seals to it in fieri, agreeing to
the terms of Christ proposed, expecting salvation, if ever he have grace to
perform his engagements (which he is presently to go about) and yields to be
damned (as looking for no other,) if he continue finally in an unsound or
impenitent condition, which whether he seals or no, is sure however. God
forbid but we should endeavor to remove such scruples at the very core, if it
may be; which for ought I see, do but a little serve to reform the bad, but
do very much help to deject many tender serious Christians, in their more free
and enlarged approaches unto Christ.

As for his discourse that follows, p, 147 (which yet quite waves the strength
in hand) he is much plunged; As the Sacrament (says he) is a means of grace,
so it is a means of assurance; now the Sacrament is not a means of initiall
Grace, but of progressive, etc. I pray mark it, and the conclusion that arises
from these two prem ses must needs be this, Ergo. the Sacrament is not a means
of initial, but progressive assurance. Yet be pleased to look but a few lines
lower, and he tells us, The Sacrament is sometimes the means of initiall
assurance, though ordinarily of progressive. This is the logic, whereto the
man still so highly pretends. I will therefore now return upon him; As the
Sacrament is a means of assurance, so is it a means of grace: But the Sacrament
is sometimes a means of initiall assurance; Ergo, the Sacrament, is sometimes
(if not ordinarily) a means of initiall Grace, or effectual conversion. The
major converse is his own; the minor also is expressly his own. If these be
true, How will he deny my conclusion? And whereas he speaks some things well,
as to the manner how the Sacrament increases grace, and assurance; Let the
judicious consider, what hurt there can be upon some of his pleas, to hold that
initiall Faith, Love, Repentance, Assurance, may be wrought by it, through the
Spirit of God, as well as progressive? If further degrees in the same kind, why
not the same kind it self? Seeing we attribute nothing here operi operato, to
the work done, but gratiae operanti, and neither the one nor the other (the
first seed or increase) is exhibited per modum obsignationis, but excited, or
wrought, proponendo objectum, morali action, and mediante significatione, that
is, no otherwise then real Grace is both begotten and confirmed by other
Ordinances.

Page 148. He is pious and healing; and it calls to my remembrance that
suitable, and sweet distinction he makes use of, p. 99. Want of grace, is
either sensible, or insensible. Let me beseech the tender Christian not to
forget this, and be discouraged utterly in the fight of his wants to come unto
Christ, but rather know, the sense of thy unworthiness, which thou make a
bolt to shut out Christ, should be a latch to open to him; for both thy need is
the greater, and his pity the more. Thou may come to the Sacrament (he tells
thee here) with the Prophets fear, I am undone, yet may go away with this
assurance, Thy iniquity is taken away, and sin purged. For this, we thank him,
and if a man may come as loft, Luk 19.10. and undone, then may he come while he
judges and humbles himself, though he is in doubt of his regeneration.

To conclude this point of sealing; If any are willing to contend about terms,
I shall not contend with them. For 1. If you will say, the Sacrament is a seal
of faith metaphorically, as it does consecutive, in the effect confirm (that is
increase) Faith, so as all other graces are sealed, and all other Ordinances
may be said seals, You may.2. If you will say, it is a seal of Faith
objective, because the main object of the Covenant is sealed, as we usually
hold faith justifies; In this sense, I should like it, and would argue, If it
be thus a seal of Faith, then is it not a seal of Experience, nor Reason. But
the minor and conclusion aforesaid is one of Experience, the other of Reason,
and the major only of Faith.3. If you say it is a seal to Faith, as the
condition required to the benefits; This is true, no man's interest is sealed
but conditionally.4. If you call it a seal to Faith, as a man is said to seal
to his own part (that is, engages to it) In all this you may use your liberty.
But if you say it is a seal of Faith subjective, properly to confirm and
ratify Faith; or any way so to assure, or evidence Faith, that God shall be
made to set his seal to a lie, if any come without a Saving Faith: This must
be denied, and rejected, and answered, that the Sacrament is not thus a seal
of Faith (to wit formally, directly, properly) but of the Covenant, unto which
it is set, as to an undoubted and immutable truth, and as a standing seal for
the Church, as firm and irrefiagable, as if it were in adamant; Against which,
Mr. Drakes arguments become but as earthen ware, or the vessels of a potter,
wherewith, while he striks at me, they break themselves in pieces, so that here
is scarce to be found in the bursting of them, so much as a shard to take fire
from the hearth, or to take water withal, out of the pit.

The Covenant belongs not to all, therefore the seals neither. To this I
answered, There is the Absolute Covenant, which is secret, and belongs only to
the election; or the conditional, which is revealed, and belongs to all, as
the tenor of the Gospel. Hereof we must distinguish; There are those to whom it
belongs only in regard to the publication, tender, and a kind of potentiall
interest if they come in, and thus it belongs to all even without the Church:
And there are those to whom it belongs by way of actual interest, and
privilege in it as Covenanters, Romans 9.4. and thus it belongs to all within
the Church and them only. Now this privilege is either outward, or according
to title; or inward, and according to the effectual benefits thereof. The
state of my Answer then lies plainly, that all those to whom the Covenant
belongs by way of interest in it, though but according to title, are in
Covenant so far as the external seal belongs to them, without some known bar
otherwise.

As for the prejudice here Mr. D. would raise upon me, it will not gain his
cause so much with the many, as it will loose it with the wise. All he has to
answer, is this, Page 149. The Sacrament indeed belongs conditionally to all,
but only to the worthy Receivers absolutely: Answ. 1 If there be any sense and
validity in this, he must argue thus, The Sacrament is nor to be delivered to
all it belongs conditionally, but to those only to whom it belongs absolutely;
but it belongs only to the worthy Receiver absolutely; therefore it must be
delivered only to the worthy Receiver. Now this you see is apparently false,
seeing he admits some only visibly worthy, to whom he himself counts it
belongs not absolutely.2 The interest of every man in the benefits of the
Covenant, and so in the Sacrament (as we now speak) I have proved already is
conditional, and not absolute.3 The distinction then, that might best serve our
turns, or accommodate us here, as I imagine, were of an actual and potential
(inward) interest, both conditional; for the absolute Covenant is secret, and
belongs only to God.

Page 150. Whereas I suppose a man now resolves to engage with Christ on his
own terms, yet not effectually in Covenant with him, and say the Sacrament
belongs to him (as the likeliest means, I judge, to root and establish him) he
fills his mouth with these terms, Come you Drunkards, Whore-masters, Muderers,
and all you Rabble of hell, here is doctrine for you, etc. Answ. Truly I think
here were rather fit language for them; It is pity, but the Doctor, before he
had left his profession of Physic, had taken a vomit to rid his stomach of
this bitter humor, and ill language which little becomes a Minister of Christ.
As for the contradiction herein, he would fasten upon me, I pray look page 191.
and he distinguishes for me; A good resolution (to wit to submit to the
government of Christ) is either Legal, or Evagelical; a Legal is antecedent to
faith, etc. I pray note it, and if a man may have a good resolution (to wit
Legal) before says, why must this be an absurdity in me, to say he may have
the same, before he is in Covenant? why does the man so forget himself? The
truth is, he is too narrow in the speaking of these things. A man may be so
under the previous operations of the Spirit of grace, as not only to resolve,
but enter Covenant, Deuteronomy. 29.12. return, remember God, and enquire early (to
wit, in good earnest for the time) after him, Psalm. 78.34, 35. and yet his
heart be not right and steadfast in it, v. 37. Thus the Scriptures speak often,
Jer. 42.3.5.20, etc. and thus are they interpreted by the Orthodox Reynolds on
Psalm. 110. p. 316.

Page 157. He likewise puzzles himself about my meaning, how the Covenant
belongs to all, and yet not the benefits, then concludes (as even now, and as
he still uses) it must be a contradiction, because he does not conceive it.
Ans. The Covenant is taken either for the condition (that is the duty) Thus it
belongs to all; or for the benefits (the reward, by grace through Christ, of
the duty) Thus it belongs to those only that have the condition, or are in
Christ; or for the tenor, consisting, or rather resulting out of both from the
sanction of such a reward to the duty; That which results out of both, and is
neither the one alone, nor the other, must be a third; And this is no other
then the grace of the Gospel, which brings salvation unto all men, and so
belongs to all, even the whole world, so far, that they have potentially, as
the Church has actually, a conditional (outward and inward) concernment in it.
Mr. D. I perceive is forced to take a great deal of pains to make my
expressions disagree, where there is no quarrel; but I need only now and the
bring the several passages of his book in sight of one another, and they fall
together by the ears of their own accord.

Page 152, 153. He has four things to oppose me in affirming a universal right
of obligation (I mean it orderly) to every Ordinance, Isa. 66.23. Yet if you
look back but in the leaf before, he acknowledges, As for the duty of the
Covenant it is indeed Epidemical.

The first is, Children, and the distracted again, which is seventeen times.
The second is, a misapplied distinction of a mediate and immediate right, which
yet is vain, seeing there is none denies but we must prepare, as well as come;
and I say still, we must do both. As for his instance of purification to the
Passe-over, that one text, 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19, 20. may convince him. The third
is spoken to otherwhere. Fourthly, He says Actual receiving is not an act of
worship, no more then preaching, etc. He should say, they are no duties
neither, for else it will not add a cubit to his strength.

I remember I have read of a man that still believed he was as big as his
shadow. I perceive Mr. D. has measured himself only in the morning and
evenings, whereas others happily, that look on him at noon day in the full
light, how ever goodly and tall he may seem in his conceit, will see him
shrink into a stature very sizeable with his fellows.

The Sacrament is only for the Regenerate; it is no converting Ordinance; and
this is made to serve upon all occasions.

For my answer to this, Although I judge there is not such strength herein, as
is supposed; for seeing this Ordinance is appointed for the Church, and every
member of age is bound to frequent it, and prepare for it: It is not the
consideration whether it will convert or not, can be brought in competition
with the command of Christ. If God command an unregenerate man to give alms,
he is not to question whether it be converting or no, but to do his duty,
though during that estate, he is sure to sin in it; so is it in this case,
and all others; It is not the event can be the rule of our obedience. It is
true Mr. D. stillurges, An unregenerate man must hear and pray; though he sins
in them, be cause it will convert him; but he must not receive, for that will
not convert him. Now consider this, and if there be validity in it, here lies
the point with him; A man must not do that wherein he shall sin, if it will do
him no good; but he may do that wherein he sins, so long as it will be
beneficial to him. Thus would mortal man, who is but dust, advance his benefit
above divine authority; and as if he were his own rule and end, make void Gods
precept, through his tradition.

Nevertheless, whereas I am persuaded that there is no man, but so far as he
does his duty, it shall tend to his good, which as I know may otherways accrue
to him, though it does not convert him, so do I think, that ordinarily while
men wait upon God in their duties of piety and charity, though they are no
causes, yet are they the way, wherein God does meet them with his effectual
grace, not through any special promise, for there is no such (we hold) to any
works before faith, but some general offers, and through the goodness of his
nature, the cause, and ground of all those promises, which is therefore a firm
rock to build upon (a point I think very fit to be considered) I have thought
good to deliver my opinion, that I deny not through Jesus Christ, but a poor
sinner, who examines himself, and so comes to him in the sight his condition,
may find this Ordinance an effectual means to beget grace in him, as well as
increase it.

I must confess I am heartily sorry to see what prejudice (or it is my
weakness so to think) has gotten on the spirits of many godly men, merely
upon the terms of a sealing Ordinance, an Ordinance for nourishment,
confirmation, and the like, which terms do indeed respect the visible Church,
or our incorporation in it, and so make for us. I shall therefore now return my
answer in this manner; When Jesus Christ ascended to heaven, he left order to
procure him a Church; To this end, he appointed a Ministry of the Apostles, and
their successors; This Ministerial commission contained two things, the
gathering together of the Saints, and edification of the body of Christ; This
body or Church, is either visible or invisible; The invisible consists only of
the regenerate and the Elect; The visible consists of all that are gathered
together in profession of his name; and unto the Church in this capacity does
the office of the Ministry appertain, as I judge undoubtedly. Now according to
this double work hereof, we distinguish of the Ordinances to effect it. There
is the gathering Ordinance, for the vocation or calling of the Nations, or to
convert the Heathen unto the Faith of Jesus Christ; and this is the Gospel, or
Word, whereby men are made Disciples incompleatly, and completely by baptism.
And there are ordinances for Edification of the body brought into the
profession of him, and those are all the other Ordinances together with the
Word. The Apostle speaks to this point, Romans 10.14. How shall they call on him
whom they have not believed, or believe without hearing, and a preacher? The
converting Ordinance here, to bring men to the Christian faith, is preaching;
being brought to this faith and knowledge of the true God they are to call upon
him, and they shall be saved, v. 13 Now Prayer then is an edifying Ordinance,
for if a Heathen pray before he comes to know the true God, it is flat
idolatry, and Godwil not give his worship to another. And as prayer is an
edifying Ordinance, so is the Sacrament, and no otherwise. My Answer then now,
to the Objection falls directly thus; It is true, the Sacrament is not the
gathering Ordinance, to bring in the Nations to the doctrine of Christ, or an
Ordinance to convert the Heathen; It is not appointed to that end (which is the
right notion of this distinction, I think, as sure as there ought to be any)
but it is an Ordinance for Edification of the visible Church, wherein there
being some members that are unregenerate (and that the most, I fear) as it
serves to edify them, it must be a means of their regeneration. And as for my
part, I am persuaded the serious exercise of common grace, the confirming and
increasing thereof, and that hereby, is the way of Gods own working special
grace also, yet most freely, as is suitable to the nature of it.

There are two things seem to me clear in the Gospel. 1. That the same faith
which served to admit men to be Church Members, served to admit them to the
Communion.2. That a Faith that falls short of saving (to wit, the very receiving
of the Apostles doctrine) served to make men Disciple and add them to the
Church. From which foundation, I appeal to the Judicious, for the solidity of
that distinction of an outward and inward conversion; which under favor I will
express thus, There is a conversion of assent, to believe in God and Jesus
Christ, in opposition to all other Religions (which alone reaches so far as to
engage one to the Covenant) and this I take it, is necessarily pre requisite to
adult Church membership, and both the Sacraments. And there is a conversion of
consent, in the embracing this God, as our chiefest good, and accepting of
Jesus Christ, as our Lord and Savior, so as to prefer his interest in our
hearts above the flesh. World, and Devil; and this conversion, though it is
required (as it is, to the right performance of every saving duty) yet is not
necessarily pre-required to the Sacraments, or Church Communion. Indeed I
think, as to the duty hereof a man may and is, to engage himself before it is
performed; (yet so, or in such terms, as the tenderest spirits may not be
brought in fear of a lie) but as to the Grace it self, as it is the Free Gift
of God, the most of our members may not yet have attained, it is the first or
chief part of their edification, wrought in them alone by the Holy Spirit,
very secretly and variously, in some more suddenly, in others I believe with
very many and long previous operations, whereunto he uses all his Ordinances as
means, together with the Word, and this Sacrament especially, where is a more
vigorous confluence of all of them.

The same Faith the Scripture requires unto the Sacraments, it requires unto
Prayer, Romans 10.12, 13, 14. now though an effectual Faith be required, Jam.
1.6. to pray savingly, yet is it not pre-required, but a man that is but
outwardly converted to the knowledge of Christ, may, and must wait upon God in
prayer, and that as a means (I judge) in the exercise of his common grace, to
obtain saving, through the grace of God. The same I say of the Sacrament, and
do conclude, whereas our Divines do give it the denomination of a confirming
or edifying Ordinance, it is to be taken in regard of the visible Church, and
not in regard of the invisible, as if none could have effectual grace wrought
by them, Vera adoptio (says Chemnitius in Har. Evan. in Lu. cap. 1.) ex mera
gratia donaour, quando spiritu suo per verbum and Sacramenta, fidem in nobis
efficit qua Christum recipimus per quem regeneramur. It were not hard I think
to quote good Divines very ordinarily prescribing the Sacrament with other
Ordinances, as the means for obtaining the Spirit, Grace. Faith, etc. to those
that want it; and I do not think their practice herein rowed against their
Judgment.

For the clearer knowledge whereof I have proposed this passage (in Edit. 3.)
There is two things in the Sacrament, a signification, which they have certain
from the Institution; and an Exhibition and Obsignation, which most Divines
that they may not make them nuda signa, do more disputably attribute to them.
There is likewise double grace; Relative Grace, which makes a change only in
our state and relation, and Real Grace, which changes the heart; and it is
either the infusion of the first grace in the habits or root, for conversion,
or increase thereof in the acts or fruit for confirmation. Now the Sacraments
are means of Grace two ways, Either by way of Conveyance, ratione hujus
obsignationis; or by way of moral Operation vir^^^^ (...) significationis. In
the first respect (which yet some hardly credit) they are instruments of
Relative Grace, exhibiting the benefits of the Covenant upon its condition, as
already performed (whenever wrought) in the receivers, and convert not; but
in the other respect, as they are (more undoubtedly ex instituto) instruments
of signifying and holding forth the death of Christ (and also the Covenant
sealed) by way of moral operation on the intelligent, they are means of Real
Grace, that is, they are Ordinances in the hands of Gods Spirit, to work on the
hearts of whom he pleases, either in infusing the seed, or producing a growth
of it in them.

Now let me beseech the pious and wise to lay this to heart, and consider it;
If I should hold the Sacraments confer grace physically, whether Real or
Relative, it were gross, and belongs to the doctrine of opus operatum. If I
should hold they convey regeneration, or any Real grace, morally, by way of
obsignation, I judge it were as injudicious and unsound; for moral instruments
cannot exhibit any thing real (but only a right to it) and the first grace
belongs to the absolute Covenant, not the conditional, which is sealed. But
whereas I hold only they beget grace (in the intelligent) no otherwise then
they increase it, that is, by way of moral action per modum objecti, as grace
is still both begotten, and confirmed in other Ordinances; It is manifest,
there is no danger here of advancing this Ordinance above its nature, or
condition; but there is very much danger, of being injurious to poor
Christians; of dis-valuing this means of Grace, the sweet Jesus has appointed
us; of bringing in question, how it can beget any degrees of grace at all, if
it cannot the first; and especially of being very presumptuous with the Spirit
of God, to go to limit him in the very same way he ordinarily works the same
effect, in his other Ordinances.

To come now to Mr. Drakes opposition. p. 154. He first tells us, Some Divines
indeed do hold Baptism to be a means of Regeneration, but they should not, and
he does not.

Answ. I agree with him, as for Infants; But for the Intelligent, John's Baptism
may convince him, whom we find admitting all to it and then exhorting them to
amendment, as the use (or end) of it; and therefore it is not said, they
repented unto baptism, but they were baptized unto repentance. The end cannot
precede what is in order to it, and the effect in esse, be before the cause in
operari. And as for his instances in the Acts, That faith was presupposed, It
is answered, That is an historical faith, only accepting the doctrine of
Christ, and profession thereof, as is beyond dispute (to me) in Simon Magus.

P. Ibid. In regeneration the Word is writ in our hearts, and can any man make
the seal a cause of the writing?

Answ. He may as well ask, can any writing be a cause of it self? But here is
the man's error still, The seal of the inward writing in men's hearts is not the
Sacraments, but the Spirit, and that seal I hope, is the cause of the writing,
and that by the means of the outward writing and seal, the Word and Sacraments.

Page 155. He produces my Argument, The Sacrament, is a visible Gospel; the
showing forth the death of Christ is the means of conversion; But the Sacrameut
is a showing forth of his death. Ergo. His Answer is, This proves only, that
all may be present (which he pleads for) not actually receive. Answ. Methinks
the heart of a godly man should at first scare serve him, thus to shift, and
trifle with this holy Ordinanee, and the Consciences of people. And yet his
granting this is enough, for so long as he maintains, that as the Sacrament
holds forth Christ to the eyes, there is none may be debarred from the sight,
no more then they may be debarred from hearing, where he is held forth to the
ear. I argue, Then as Christ is held forth Sacramentally to the taste and
touch, there is none can be debarred (to wit, if intelligent Church Members)
from the tasting and feeling of him herein, then they can from the seeing of
him, or hearing: Nay, our force for this is rather greater, because the words
of institution expressly respects the touch and taste, while Christ says this
is my body, not barely to see, and hear, but to take, and eat. As the
Centurion by looking on Christ upon the cross, believed he was the Son of God,
So did Thomas by feeling his wounds, believe his Resurrection; And I do not
doubt but that all these senses do afford their grounds of suitable
meditation, about the melting objects of Christ's Passion, Redemption, and
tender mercies so represented, they may become means to work upon us through
the Spirit of God, which we may piously hope for by virtue of an Ordinance. For
if Mr. D. say (Page 147.) What the word applies by one sense, the Sacrament
does by all senses, and therefore is a more powerful means of assurance; I will
not doubt to say by the same reason, as it applies the same thing with the
word, it may have the same operation, and as faith comes into the heart at
first in the one, by hearing alone, it may in the other, by hearing seeing,
touching and tasting altogether.

Page 156. He brings in my next Argument; In the institution there is a Take
and Eat; a Take, for such as have not Christ, a word of grace to quicken those,
as an Eat to nourish others. My substance is, Here is a free offer and command
in this word Take, and we are not to hold it ineffectual. He excepts, Taking
and Eating call for acts of faith, and presuppose the habit. Ans. When Christ
and his Disciples preached, Believe and repent, The command did call for faith,
and repentance, but I hope it did not presuppose the habit in those who were to
be converted; so when Christ says here Take, that gracious word includes
Believe, or receive me by faith; but faith I hope is required, where it is not
pre-required, to wit, required that it may be wrought as well as acted. And
herein indeed I place my strength; This Take requires Believe, but there is a
virtue or power from Christ that goes along with his commands; The free tenders
of himself, are the conveyances of the grace he requires to the receiving him;
even as the Apostles words to the Jailer ( Act. 16.31. which he well notes)
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, was the instrument to work that faith, and
convert him; And as while Thomas, by feeling Christ's wounds, believed, why
might it not be the virtue of Christ's gracious command, bidding him to put his
fingers in his sides, and believe, that produced that powerful application, My
Lord, and my God? Now we have Christ here likewise, presenting his broken body
and blood; and bidding us feel his wounds, touch, and taste, Take, and eat, be
not faithless but believing. Here we have a joint offer and command; and why
then should we distrust the power of our Lord, when we have the word of our
Lord? What if we had but that one word for us, were not one word from the mouth
of our dear Savior, which is a standing word to his Church, enough to rest
upon? Truly Christians, Let me plead with you: Are the words of Christ Spirit
and life, or are they not? Is there any power goes along with the tender
offers, and precepts of the Gospel, or is there not? If there be not, why do
poor dead souls wait on them for life? If there be, then why is there not the
like power expected in this precept, and offer of grace? How dull and flow of
heart are we to rely upon Christ, and expect virtue from his commands?
Methinks I could wish, that all faithful Ministers would set themselves to
believe in Christ for this effect, and while they should as it were stand round
about this little word Take, by their acting faith in Christ, and expectations
from him, as the Disciples did about Paul when they supposed him stoned dead,
Act. 14. though they judge no otherwise of this word, though they suppose it,
but a dead word to the unregenerate, they might find life in it, for the
quickening of their flocks, (as some have) and comfort of their labors. If you
will not believe, surely you shall not be established.

Page 157, 158. He objects three or four things against this: I But we have
neither promise, nor president of blessing the command of Taking in the
Sacrament, as we have of blessing the word preached in order to conversion.
Answ. 1. God has promised in general to meet with those that wait on him in
his ways; and where is there any text that denies this blessing here? If there
be none, it is but a sad thing to distrust God.2 Do we not know that Jesus
Christ did consecrate this Ordinance with a blessing? Now is not Christ's own
action herein as good as any promise, or all presidents, and who can limit that
blessing to one member above another, or tie up the Spirit of God?3 I pray see
over leaf, and himself tells us well, This Take is a short exhortation, and
virtual Sermon; Now what a thing is this, to demand a promise and president to
prove that the Exhortation and Sermon of Christ is converting? Is not the Word
converting? And is th^s word less converting, because it is Christ's? Alas
Sirsl the case is even clear, and the grand Objection is unbeleef.

2 But the word is both seed and food, not the Sacrament. Answ. 1 Who knows not
that the very being and operation of the Sacrament consists through the word;
and indeed the nourishment we have in it, well considered, is only by the
implicit virtue thereof; By which same kind of working, may the first grace,
as clearly, as any farther degrees, be wrought by it.2 The Sacrament is both
seed and food too, for here is a Take, and this is certainly seed, as a word of
grace from Christ; and here is an Eat, including food.3 Prayer is no where
called the immortal seed, yet is it seed, I doubt not, in this sense, to beget
grace in us.4. Ex quibus nascimur, ex i is nutrimur, That which nourishes us,
can beget us, is a principle so true, that out the same food that goes to the
aliment of our own bodies, does arise the matter, for our childrens
generations.

3 But suppose a man stouts it out before, and after the word Take, if actual
receiving can convert him, the Apostles rule is not universally true. He that
eats unworthily eats judgment to himself. Answ. Suppose the Jailer had
stouted it out against that word Believe; had he like to have been converted,
if he had not been converted? what a question were this? The truth is, These
dis-junctive supposals are but vain and evil: And therefore I shall only fore
warn tender consciences to take heed of that Dilemma that lurks here; He that
receives worthily is converted already; He that receives not worthily eats his
damnation. Let us rather persuade our selves; 1 That a man may be in a state of
unregeneracy, and in that sense unworthy, yet may hear, pray, or receive
worthily in his kind ( in suo genere) when he is so wrought on by it, as to
make a saving use thereof; for it seems not to me so tolerable to say, a man
heard unworthily when he was converted by it.2 There is a general eating
damnation, as the unregenerate in sensu composito during that estate, sins in
hearing, praying, and in all he does; and so this is clearly answered, with
other duties; or there is a particular eating damnation, or judgment in the
Apostles sense, and that judgment he speaks of; appears to be those temporal
judgments which were brought upon the Corinths, not for their coming to the
Sacrament in an unregenerate estate, but for their not putting a difference
between this sacred Table, and a common, (that is, used it not as a holy
institution) which is the direct meaning of both those phrases, eating
unworthily, and not discerning the Lords body, which expound one another, or
not for an unworthiness of unregeneracy, but an unworthiness of profanation.

4 But suppose a man may be converted by that short exhortation, and virtual
Sermon, Take, That may be done by bare presence, etc. Ans. If all come to this
still, you may see what he must have, A Sacrament without receiving, which yet
himself decryes. When Christ says, Take, it is to this end, to eat, and who
dare separate Christ's end from his action? Let this suffice, we have here both
words, Take and Eat, for our encouragement; and we need not doubt, but all the
Sacramental actions do as it were, in a kind of communication of proprieties,
interweave their virtue in working upon each man according to his condition.

When God commands us to make us new hearts, Ezekiel. 18.31. Ephesians. 4.23. he tells us
otherwhere, Ez. 11.19. I will put a new heart in you; so Christ bids us Take.
Yet faith is the gift of God; Now then Man is to wait on his duty, and to
expect a power in Christ's precept. For my part, let others look on this word
only as an empty livelesse word; I shall endeavor to let it sink in my
heart: And though I am a poor unworthy sinner, that am not sure I have faith
enough to save my soul (the Lord increase it) yet methinks I do so
pathetically believe the goodness and sweernesse of Christ, that I dare lay my
life on it, he would never have so indeterminately commanded, Drinks you all of
it, if so many thousands of unregenerate members that come thither, must but
necessarily thereby eat their damnation. I must confess, I do ever suspect my
own weakness, and am tenderly afraid left I should ewe, and hurt others; (and
therefore I beseech every Soul to look well to the word, and his own
conscience, and trust nothing on me) yet do I find amidst the doubts and
fears of my spirit, a sweet melting, and repose of my thoughts, in this answer,
which I must make unto my Savior, when he calls me to account for what I have
writ. Lord here is expressly thy command, and I durst not nullify it to any
that are capable of it; Here is thy tender offer of grace, Take, and I durst
not bring up any such hard thoughts on thy ways to fright men from thee. And
now I am assured, Lord, thou will as freely forgive me if I place too much
trust, or would raise too much confidence on thy bare word, as thou will
forgive others, if they place too little in it. For though the Flesh profits
nothing yet the Spirit quickneth, and thy words are spirit and life.

Page 159. He brings in this instance of mine; Suppose a moral Christian, who
cannot be denied, prepares himself and so comes, shall the Sacrament be
necessarily fruitless to him? He answers, not withstanding all his preparatory
acts, he comes to the feast without the wedding garment. Answ. This himself
satisfies; for the Feast he says is Christ, and I hope a man must come to
Christ for conversion. As for my words, Doing his best; you must take them in
his kind, as of the regenerate in his kind. And whereas he thinks I attribute
too much to a few dead acts of a natural man, he mistakes; for I attribute all
to the power of Christ's command, and the efficacy of his quickening grace in the
use of the means.

Page 160. Actual receiving is no act of God, but of the creature, and an
outward act too, and therefore has not a converting power in it. Answ. A very
mature and digested Argument! Hearing is no act of God, but an outward act of
the creature; and if you will too, has no converting power in it; therefore it
is not a means of conversion. Tertius E coelo cecidit Cato.

As for his old close, that the fruit of the visible and audible word may be
attained here by bare presence, it will not serve, seeing the fruit that is to
be here attained, is not of the word only as visible and audible, but also as
tactible, and gustible, while the Sacrament holds forth that word of life,
which we have not only seen and heard, say: John, but also handled; and of
whose flesh and blood we must eat and drink, says Christ himself. And as for
the custom of the ancient Church, Ite missa est, it is not to be vilified,
because it is directly contary to him, but to be weighed with the former grave
judgment of our own Church, and the express text, Drink you all of it, and
they All (that were present) drank of it.

Page 161. For what he answers to my second instance, of an humbled soul, to
wit, under the preparatory work of grace, yet no: fully fashioned for the
receiving the habits which are ordinarily infused per modum acquisitorum, I
shall say nothing, but only ask this great Doctor, How was his soul infused
in his body after it had its due time of disposition for it? It is true, as for
all preparatory works, nostris viribus, as the mere issues of Free Will, we
disprove them, but as they are the previous operations of the Spirit (which
through our fault it is, they often prove abortions) it is no more derogatory
to attribute them to him in our Conversion, then it was to God, to take six
days to the Creation. I say then, Can he tell me this? How was his soul
produced at first in his natural birth? Can he tell me the way of the wind?
Joh. 3.8. If he cannot, how will he define me the way of the heavenly Spirit?
If he cannot tell me the things that are with him, How shall his vessel
comprehend the ways of the most High?

As for my instance of Luke 24.30.31. (though I only alluded to it) Calvin
has these words upon it, Augustinus and plerique alii senserunt, panem hunc
po^rectum fuisse ^n sacrum corporis sui symbolum, and hoc dictu plausibile est,
Dominum in spirituali demum caenae speculo agnitum fuisse, nam discipuli
corporalibus eum oculis intuiti non cognoverunt. Now what Saint Augustine, and
most others think true; and what Calvin judges plausible (though he adds for
his own part, simplicius accipio) Master Drake answers, It is a dictate so
absurd, that the very naming it, is a sufficient confutation.

Page 162. By presence, benefit may be gained, but the danger of eating and
drinking unworthily, cannot be incurred without receiving, etc. Ans. Methinks
the man here speaks very carnally. His Doctrine is this, If you swear by the
Altar it is nothing, but if you swear by the gift upon it, you are guilty; If
you partake of the Lords Table without Faith, you are without danger, but if
you actually touch the bread upon the Table, and ease, you become a debtor; I
pray which is greater, the bare Bread and Wine, eating, and drinking of the
Institution it self, and consecration, which sanctifies the Elements? For my
part I never imagined, but the words eating and drinking, 1 Cor. 11.27.29. are
spoken Synecdochically, for the whole duty of the Receiver, who can never be
guiltless when Christ is offered to him (and that he says is to all present,
though they only look on) if he does not receive him by Faith; So that, if I
may speak as I think, It is not the bare eating and drinking we are to stand
upon, in comparison of his serious address unto Jesus Christ, according to his
condition.

Page 163, to 167. Whereas I say the Sacrament and all the Ordinances are
primatily and directly means of grace, and remotely means of conversion and
confirmation; He pretends as if I went about to blind my Reader, with a
conversion of our selves, instead of Gods converting us, and so pursues his
trace. Ans. I must confess to you here he is mistaken, for this never came
into my thoughts, as my words following plainly declare, which are, This grace
which he distributes as a most wise God, works in every one as his state and
need requires(where he does ill, p. 166. to substitute others, and cry absurd)
in the regenerate for their strength and establishment, in the unregenerate,
for their conversion, Mr. Drakes weakness, here then, is apparent, that cannot
distinguish between gratia operans, and operata; I say the Ordinances are
means, whereby God works, or the Spirit moves; and though gratia operata is
Regeneration, or confirmation it felse; yet gratia operans, I hope, lies
indifferent between the regenerate and unregenerate, (as men come to seek to
God for it, in his means) and is indeterminate to either effect. So that this
business is so clear, I take it, to any unprejudiced understanding, that I am
glad to be put to no more trouble by so many pages.

Page 168. As for his exceptions against our distinction of an outward and
effectual conversion, the right conceiving the terms only may satisfy, and I
will explain my self thus: In the soul there is two faculties, the
Understanding, and the Will; There is accordingly a double conversion, either
unto the things which before we did not know, or to the right improvement of
the things we do know; or there is a conversion to a sincere Religion, or to be
sincere in our Religion. The first of these must necessarily be wrought by
teaching only, and persuasive Arguments, unless by miracle; but when we once
are informed by the word, then do all the other Ordinances conduce to bring
that knowledge into the heart and life; So that here does likewise arise that
other distinction of mine, of the principal converting Ordinance, and
subordinate, which work by virtue thereof. Now if you will suppose a heathen
sufficiently knowing, in the mysteries of our Religion, I do not doubt but
this solemnity were apta uata to convert him, because it shows or holds forth
that which is a means of Conversion. But these two things we must know as sure;
1 That it cannot beget any assent, or reverential apprehensions, but upon
supposition of the virtue of the principal Ordinance; to wit, that he is
informed (before, or at present) in the meaning hereof; For this bare knowledge
alone, is that which is neither increased nor begotten by the Sacrament, but
the Word only, that instructs us about it.2 That God has not appointed it for
this use, but contrarily commanded, that every man shall be first initiated in
the Church by Baptism before he communicates, No uncircumcised person shall
eat thereof. And here is answered those two Objections, page 163. which show
you how low Mr. D. is brought, If the Sacrament can convert, how dare Mr. H.
exclude Infants (which is eighteen times) and heathens? I answer, because it
converts by a joint virtue of the word, and discernment, which children have
not; and because the unbaptised (which is the case of heathen) are forbid to
eat thereof, Exodus 12.48. 1 Cor. 14.40.

And now at last, if you will bring the point even with the same in Baptism of
Infants, and do nothing but urge upon me for an express text where this
Sacrament is ordained to this end to convert any; I will demand of you first,
an express Text, where it is instituted for Edification (which yet by clear
argument you may show) and when you have produced that, I will manifestly show
you; 1 That this Edification refers to the visible body, Saints by calling, or
the whole Church.2 That there are many unregenerate members among them; and
then I demand how it can be appointed to edify members, if it be not a means
of begetting grace in some, as increasing it in others? As for the term (this
word) Edification it is clearly common to the visible Church, 1 Cor. 14.
Insomuch that when an unbeleever comes in amongst them, verse. 23. All things
are said yet to be done unto edifying, verse. 27. What Minister does not pray
ordinarily for his whole people that they may be edified? Church Censures are
for Edification (2 Cor. 13.10.) but I hope it is not the regenerate only are
censured. We need look no further then Romans 14.19. and 15.2. the word is so
ordinary, that what is done for our neighbors good, is said to be for his
edification.

Page 169. In that word (fancy) he wrongs me; For his sense it is answered, A
vital Ordinance can beget life.

Page 170. Mr.H. makes confirmation of the Covenant a primary end, confirmation
of our faith a secondary end of the Lords Supper; I wish he did not show
himself, as little skilled in morality, as in Logic etc. Answ. One would
verily think here, that Mr. H. sure, was in some great absurdity, by this man's
language; but will you be pleased to turn to Mr. D. himself, page 126. The
Sacrament (says he there) relates to things, and thus as seals, first they
confirm the Covenant; Secondly, they confirm faith. I pray mark it; And is it
not worth your notice; how much he is skilled in Logic, Morality, Physic, and
what not? that can find you out a distinction between my Primary, and
Secondary, and his First and Second? It is even pity so samous a man should
forget all his learning here, and exclaim thus at me, for saying the same thing
he does; nay the same thing, the truth, and others do with us: For let me
help him out here, There is the end of the Ordainer, and the end of the
Ordinance; It may be true, that the Churches Edification, is primarily in the
intention of the Ordainer, but the primary end of the Ordinance, must be that
which goes into the Institution, and the secondary that which flows from it:
Now the end that is thus express in the Institution is, for to be a memorial
of Christ's death, or the Covenant by his death, and so outwardly to seal,
solemnize, or confirm the Covenant, and then the confirming a man's faith (as
begetting it in others) is plainly a consequent effect, result, or concomitant
thereof. By this one passage well considered, you may have a guess at the man.

As for his following exceptions from page 171. to the end of the Objection,
where he carps at me, for putting in the whole duty of the receiver, both
before, and after, as well as In receiving (and what practical Divine does not
tell us of awakening the virtue of the Sacrament by after-meditations) page
172, 173. And for that phrase, Baptized into the Church, which I take to be a
good explanation of being baptized into Christ, page 174. And for those terms
of a general faith, Doing a man's beft, etc, they are not worth any farther
notice: So likewise where he snarles at my allusion, page 175. in that word,
(belongs) The harvest belongs not to the Reapers, but to Boaz himself: And
that other (penitently inclined) which yet I purposely picked out instead of
penitent, etc. what pitiful poor things are they, as if he envied me barely an
expression? even as Leah cast a blear eye upon Rachet, only because she was
beloved and accepted.

Waving therefore these letts, I shall proceed to gather together my Arguments
to prove the Sacrament, and actual receiving (which is the thing only he
opposes) a means of the unregenerates edification, and consequently his
effectual conversion. And they amount to twelve, besides the chief of my last
book, as it is verbum visibile, with others, the Reader may find out himself.

1 It is the duty of every intelligent member to frequent the Sacrament; but
officium, est propter beneficium; Ergo, Mr. D. here indeed does most sadly, and
without ground argue, that the Sacrament cannot do an unregenerate man good,
but certain hurt, therefore it is not his duty. The weakness whereof is
manifest, because 1 It is not man's benefit, but Gods precept, is the ground of
duty.2 A thing is not good, and our duty, and therefore God wills it, but God
wills it, and therefore it is good, and our duty. But we argue (I take it)
firmly against him; It is his duty (the duty I have proved good in my fifth
Reason, and eighth Objection) and therefore it can do him good, for all the
Commands of God are good; and it is but an heavy thing to bring up such an
evil report upon the good land of the Sacrament. This is the case: If the
Sacrament can do an unregenerate member no good, then must such be either bound
necessarily to eat and drink their own damnation, or else the Sacrament is
not their duty. The former Mr. D. must renounce; and for the latter, if he can
give me but one Text, I will yield to him, if he cannot, let the pious consider
whither they must come to deny this point (for therefore have I set this Reason
foremost) and that is, through man's impotency to make void Gods Authority.

2 All Gods Ordinances within the Church are means of grace, whether first or
second, to be get or increase it; as God has declared, that he will meet with
those that wait on him in his ways that come to his house. that seek his face,
and the like; Ergo: You must produce some Text where converting grace is denied
peculiarly to this means or you wrong it. If any say this is a negative which
ought not to be proved; I answer, though it be so formally in the words, yet
materially in the thing i^ is an affirmative, for he that excepts out of a
general affirms a limitation, and must prove it. I have before (in 3. Edit.)
expressed this thus. If there be a previous operation of the Spirit on some,
preparatory to conversion, and God has appointed his Ordinances in general, as
the means for obtaining grace, both first and subsequent, commanding them as
duties and promising a blessing, which affords a Peradventure, to the
unregenerate, in the use of them; why should we bereave the Sacrament of this
effect, which the Scripture gives it in genere, as an Ordinance, whilst in
specie, it no where denies it, and Reason likewise by the first Rule of the
Ante-predicaments. For the Antecedent preparations to bring men to Conversion
(says Pemble) they are either outward, namely the observation of the external
part of God worship, as frequenting the word preached, prayers, Sacraments,
keeping the Sabbath, or inward, etc. Our Divines press upon men ever whiles
they are unconverted, the necessity (to wit, from the strict Commandment of
God) and profitablenesse (to wit, from Gods promise, and ordinary proceedings)
of all those forementioned preparations (page 81, 82.) and it may be those two
pages may establish you.

3 There is but an It may be, A peradventure, A who knows what God may do? For
the conversion of any in the use of all means besides, because there is no
special promise of grace in the best use of mere naturals: But there is An It
may be, granted by our opposites to the Sacrament, for conversion, At, though
not By, occasionally, though not intentionally, as some speak; Ergo. If Mr. D.
grudge thus much, then he must bring it to a Cannot, Actual receiving cannot
convert any; and if he does so, he takes upon him to limit the Spirit of God in
the very way he usually works the same thing in other. Ordinances. If he say
he can, but will not; How knows he the mind of the Lord, who has made him his
Counselor? That what he has done to some, he may not do to others? It were a
miserable thing for some poor sinners, if the gracious Spirit in many respects
should do no more good upon them, then men would let him.

There is here (I judge) a point carefully to be considered, to distinguish
between a general, and ^pecial promise, or as some express it between Half
^romises, and full promises, or as I would say it, A Peradventure promise, and
an Assured Promise; We hold that God has made no promise of ^race (that is no
special, whole, or assured promise) to natural works before faith (to wit, as
any condition of the first grace) which is his most free gift; for then
Facienti quod in se est, so much de^ryed, must prove a sound principle. But we
are yet to press these kind of general tenders, half, or ^eradventure
promises, together with Gods good nature; that none may want encouragement to
duty.

4 If the Sacrament be converting, as it is a Visible word, or holds forth
Christ unto the eye, then must it be converting, as it is a Gustable, Tactible
Word, and holds him forth to the other senses, and the rather, because the
touch and taste comes within the Veirge of the Institution. But the former is
granted; Ergo.

5 The Precepts of God are lively, and operative, and the offers of grace are
the means and conveyances of that power we have not in our selve^ to receive
it; But here is this most sweet and gracious offer and command, Take and Eat
Ergo.

6 The reclaiming a man from some particula^ vice, or vices, is a good step
forward toward Repentance and Conversion; But the Sacrament is a constant
experiment hereof, so that those passage^ of some men; (be their esteem never
so great) who dare say, that the Sacrament can do no good to the poor
unregenerate Christian, but certain hurt are sadly to be dis-owned, and
expunged eve^ with their tears. This case (in Edit. 3.) I have proposed thus.
Suppose you have a Son, (...) good natured, yet unregenerate youth, addicte^
to some vice, as drunkenness, he seeks to Go^ for pardon and grace, so comes,
and takes the Sacrament upon it, he will never by the Lord help be overtaken
more; Well, this engagement now lies so solemnly upon him, he is ever after a
sober man, and this no doubt, is not likely only but very frequent to natural
conscience, working on most such particular, and temporary conversions. Now I
pray Sir, what think you of such a fruit as this? Would you dislike your Somes
coming to the Sacrament, or bless God for it?

7 The acting, or exercise of common grace, and endeavoring to do what a man
can, is another good step forwards toward Conversion; But the Sacrament, which
is for the exercise of Faith, Love, Repentance, Thankfulness, as special
graces in the Regenerate, is the means to exercise the like common grace in the
Unregenerate. Ergo. For my part I judge it good still for a Christian to be
doing, and whether he be effectually converted or no, yet has he cause, and
ground sufficient to love Christ, and be thankful, to mourn for sin, and to
do well; He has besides a knowledge, affections, and some ability to do it
in some manner, though not as sincerely as he ought. And as I said of the
Promises, I will say of Gods, acceptance; there is a kind of half acceptance,
or rather a comparative acceptance, so I will choose to express it, God accepts
comparatively of such actings of the heart toward him, and waiting in his ways
though a man be unregenerate, to wit, in comparison of a total omission, or
neglect thereof.

8 The solemn engagement of the soul unto Christ upon his terms, to rely
upon him as a Savior, and submit to his government (as the former were steps)
is a means of a full, and effectual closing with him, if Gods Spirit shall be
pleased to act with it. But actual receiving is a means for engagement of the
soul to the conditions of the Covenant, or the terms of Christ, which a man
may bind himself to, before he has performed, even, as Soldiers, servants,
and all relations, do list, agree, and oblige themselves to their services and
duties, and stand to them after. Ergo. Here I think most Christians know by
their own spirits, that they have very good resolutions at some times (that
make them fit for the present against all doubt) and yet find often they come
to nothing. Now what can more conduce (under the word) when we have some
purposes of leaving sin, and assent to the terms of Christ, to beget a full
consent of heart, and make them serious, then the obligation of this Ordinance?
A penny in earnest, binds some men more, then twenty promises.

9 That which can beget more degrees of the same grace, can beget the first
grace, unless these degrees are begotten some other way then that is; But all
grace (first and second) is begotten alike, as the Ordinances, propose the
object, and then the Spirit of God by enlightening the mind, and a touch upon
the will, brings the heart to embrace that object; which object is showed forth
in the Sacrament, as in the word; and it is a mistake, to think that the
second grace (though it be within the promise which is sealed,) is exhibited by
way of obsignation (for there is only a fight to it this way conveyed) but it
is wrought (I say) through the Spirit of God by the way of moral operation
only, as the first and second grace both, are begotten in reading and hearing,
etc. Ergo.

10 The sad consequence of this Tenent, that the Sacrament belongs only to the
effectually converted is sorely against it, and that both for the giver and
receiver. For the Receiver, this will cut off every poor doubtful Christian
from the Sacrament, For 1. If I am bound to receive when I am regenerate, and
bound to forbear if I am unregenerate; then must I be persuaded in my
conscience that I am regenerate, or else I cannot eat in faith; and he that
eats and doubts is damned if he eat. I desire this may be tenderly
weighed.2. Upon this account every one that comes, professes himself
converted, and if any man be but doubtful that he is not yet converted, he
cannot come but he acts a lie, and is a public hypocrite; which is a thing so
hateful to him, that rather then he would profess of himself, what he does
not know, he would confess his unworthiness, and never come there: and thus
shall every humble tender Christian only keep away, and the
selfe-justiciary-harden to death. For the giver, first, The case will be near
the same, for the Sacrament cannot be administered according to rule, nor he act
in faith, unless both the receiver is regenerate, and he assured of it (which
he cannot be) if regeneration were a qualification commanded as necessary to
receiving. Secondly, Men will be ready to think themselves converted, when they
are admitted, and the formal Christian rest in his estate, when he should come
hither to repent of it. Thirdly, The best Minister must fall infinitely short in
the discharge of his trial, were any at all required upon this ground. The
Lord Bacon observes of Philosophy, the first and lighter tastes thereof
inclines the mind toward Atheism; but a more fixed and deeper contemplation
brings it about again unto Religion: So do I judge here, the first touches of
Conscience in the pious, have inclined them to a trial of others fitnes and
unfitness to the Sacrament, but a more serious and digested consideration of
the issues of it, will bring them about to the Apostle, Let a man examine
himself, and the Minister only do his best for their Instruction.

11. The confirming of a Christians Faith in general, or his assent unto the
truth of the Covenant in Jesus Christ to him in particular, is a means of
bringing up his heart to a special Faith; for I am persuaded here lies often
the root of unregeneracy, that men do not firmly believe the Gospel; and
where the holy Spirit works believing impressions, he ordinarily brings in the
soul to him. But the Sacrament is a means of confirming Faith, and that
directly in this act of assent, (which is common in its degree to the
unregenerate with the regenerate) that if I will believe, repent, or accept of
Christ, I shall be saved; Ergo. Unto this purpose Mr. Calvin has a clear
passage, Primum verbo suo nos docet Deus, and instituit Dominus; deinde
Sacramentis confirmat; postremo sancti sui spirit us lumine, mentibus nostris
illucet, and aditum in sorda nostra, verbo and Sacramentis, aperit. So that
whereas Calvin with others, ordinarily calls the Sacraments confirming
Ordinances; I shall take their meaning only thus, that they are not appointed
to convert the Heathen to the Church, but to incorporate the members thereof,
Who being instructed by the word, and confirmed by the Sacraments, the Spirit
of God in the use of both (both Words and Sacraments, so he speaks) opens a
passage into their hearts, to wit, for their effectual conversion, Calv. Inst.
lib. 4. cap. 14. sect. 8.

12. The solemn application of the Covenant to a man's self according to his
estate, to wit, of salvation through Christ if he will believe and repent, and
of judgment from Christ if he continues in his sins, and does not turn
effectually unto him, is the very only way whereby the Spirit usually works
conviction, and sincere conversion; but actual receiving of the Sacrament, is a
solemn means of such an application: Ergo. The Apostle, To. 10.4. tells us
Christ is the end of the Law; in this Law Gal. 3.10. it is written, Cursed be
every one that continues not in all things which are written therein to do
them: Unto this curse Deuteronomy. 27.26. All the people were to say Amen. It is nor
possible all the people should be guiltless; yet this Amen is a particular
application, so that the malediction it self, as well as the precept, is to be
particularly applied, for a Schoolmaster to Christ, who is in that respect said
to be the end thereof. Now then, must a Christian that does not as he should,
unfainedly repent, but harbor his sins in his heart, apply the Covenant in the
right part, to wit, that judgment which is due for them, and is both denounced
and sealed, to make him turn sincerely from them, unto the mercy that is
together offered him, if he does. And while his heart melts, and he humbles
himself before Christ as worthy thereof, he lies under the very strokes of
Gods Spirit, to drive him in effectually to him.

When the Apostle 1 Cor. 11. bids us examine our selves, least we eat
unworthily, and drink our damnation, he sweetly adds, for if we would judge
our selves, we should not be judged. There are Scriptures I find, that will
support a Christian in his duty, yet happily will not hold the disputes of men,
that go to take the comfort of them from us: In this case the pious soul is
not to hearken to them, but to strengthen it self in attendance upon God.
There is a sweet promise therefore comes often in my mind with this Text, I
will not say a promise to dispute withal, but to rest upon for our
encouragement. It is in Zach. 10.12. I will pour out the spirit of grace and
supplications, and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they
shall mourn. Poor souls! you have in the Sacrament, as in the Word, Jesus
Christ represented to you as pierced; you are to apply it, and say, Here Lord
thou have promised to pour out the Spirit of grace on those that look on thee
for to mourn over the wounds which they have made in thee, by their sins; Let
the sight of thy broken body, break my hard heart; Let the sight of thy pierced
sides, pierce mine eyes; and of thy bleeding heart make my heart to bleed, in
an unfeigned repentance, and conversion toward thee. Let this Word of the Lord
be good unto me, which he has spoken.

It is no wonder there are so few Christians converted at the Sacrament, when
we do not use it for conversion, when the Ministers have no expectations from
Christ, nor instruct their people for it. And if any of them shall have some
good impressions wrought upon their hearts by this blessed Ordinance; while
they are taught it cannot convert them, they shall but distrust the work to be
ineffectual, and so derogate from the good Spirit, be injurious to their poor
souls, and if possible, loose, quench, and not improve it.

For my part therefore I will exhort every one to a self-examination, and if he
does not find himself regenerate, but willing to go on in his sins, and refuse
Jesus Christ, I will not gratify him so far, to say he must stay away; as if
he were now to lay by the thoughts of him; This were doctrine after the Fleshes
own heart, but I judge rather, his duty still lies upon him for to come; He is
to be remembered of the death of Christ, unto which he contribute by his sins;
he is by his actual receiving, both to assure his soul of a just condemnation,
unless he repents, and to bind on his conscience his certain duty of Faith
and Conversion, if ever he be saved.

And now whereas the Devil usually does beat off poor sinners from acceptance
of Christ, by affrighting them with the strictness of his terms, as if they
should but increase their hypocrisy, unless they could be immediately
perfect; I will advise thee if thou can not sincerely leave all thy sins at
once, yet do not give up thy soul quite as lost, but rather; first bewailing
and condemning thy self wherein thou failest, engage against some one
corruption or other, and so wear them off, if thou can not otherwise, by
little and little. Truly Christians, it were some good use of this Sacrament,
if the blood of Christ may every time wash away one stain: It were much better
sure, then to trample on that blood, and reject it. I would have thee likewise,
if thou can not at once bring up thy heart to that full obedience as thou
ought, humbling thy soul still for thy infirmity, resolve at least this
time upon one duty, and next upon another, and be reforming according to thy
strength; It will be something if a poor sinner can but every Sacrament get
one step forward nearer God; for I am persuaded we may safely say, that such a
person, if he be not yet converted, is more in the may of effectual grace, he
is nearer to the Kingdom of Heaven, ( Mark. 12.34.) then before, and Christ is
better pleased with him, to make some good use of his Ordinances, then wholly
to neglect them, Mar. 10.21. Jon. 3.9.10.1 King. 21.29. etc. What if thou
should not yet have any saving grace, this will not ex^^se thee from thy
duty; Thou have, I hope, some kind of faith, love, and thanks to give unto
Christ, and why should not thou offer to him that poor mite that thou have,
and say, O my Savior, Though I may not yet be permitted with John to lay my
vile head in thy bosom, yet will I with Mary fall down, and catch hold of the
feet of my Lord; I will condemn my self, wait on thy Free Grace, and do my
duty.

The Scripture in some places tells us, we have no sufficiency of our selves, Of
him we have the will and the deed; yet in others, it lays the whole stresse on
man's self, Why will you dye, O house of Israel? etc. The best reconciliation I
think of such Texts, will be by practice; A Christian is to labor and set
himself to his duty, as if he could gain life by it, and yet is he wholly to
depend upon the Free Grace of God in the doing, as that alone which can make it
effectual. And with submission, I judge that all those actings and tendencies
of men's hearts toward Conversion, in the use of means, if they end in
Conversion, shall be reckoned upon a regenerate account, as if they prove but
abortions, they shall be reckoned upon a natural account, at the great day.

There is indeed some distinction the Scripture seems to put between
unregenerate men as to Gods worship, in such places, as Prove. 28.9. Psalm.
50.16, 16, 17. with Psalm. 106, 79. and 44. 1 King. 21.19. etc. I shall not
venture hoar upon any exact use of it, but only beseech my Readers, that as I
have been tender, you should not bring a guilt on your selves, by a neglect of
your duty, you will not so ill requite my Labors, to bring a guilt on me, by
any careless, secure, presumptuous performance of it. I must profess against
you, I do not teach you this, I do not teach any to come, and come
unworthily; but to come worthily, yet to come. I tell you, you must examine
your selves, humble your selves, resolve against your sins, set upon duties,
Come then, and let us reason together; If you think worthily of your selves,
you stand on your own justification, look well to your condition, But if you
will judge your selves, you shall not be judged.

We read of Elisha when he had got the Mantle of Elijah, he smote with it on
the waters, saying, Where is the Lord God of Elijah? Our Savior Christ has
ascended to his Father, and left us this Sacrament, as the Mantle, or Symbol of
his Body, Come thou now, smite on the waters of thy heart with it, and say,
Where is the Lord God of Jesus? Where is the grace, life, power, virtue of his
Ordinance, which thou, O Lord, can make effectual to us when thou please,
for our conversion, as our confirmation.

I shall therefore now close up this point with one president, from a neighbor
Minister, a man godly, judicious, and truly worthy, whose testimony is without
exception; and whereas Mr. D. is ready to cite me before the great Tribunal, I
may appeal thither to those many Saints in Heaven, together with this party,
that will rise up for me, and be my witnesses, by their own experience, for a
converting power in this Ordinance.

Being desired by Mr. Humfrey to testify under my hand what he has heard me
relate by word, I could not (though differing from his opinion about the
Sacrament) but grant his request, and testify this truth.

There was one Thomasin Budde, who lived from the time of her Conversion to her
death an eminent Christian under my charge, who has often affirmed to me, that
my very delivering to her, and her receiving the Sacramental bread and wine,
was the first thing which she sensibly perceived by the power of the Spirit
brought over her will to the acceptance of our Lord Christ Jesus; the virtue of
which Ordinance, remained forcibly with her, to her death, which was some five
years after. A little before that time, she was extremely ignorant and
obstinate, and only had some slight motions, and conviction wrought on her,
before her admission to the Ordinance, by my discoursing with her.

Richard Fairclough Pastor of Mells.


Judas received not the Sacrament because he went out, John 13.30. My answer
was, it appears expressly, by ver. 1. and 29. that this Supper of John was
before the Feast of the Passover, and that very likely two nights, comparing
Lu. 22.1 -- 4. Mat. 26.2.14.

Unto this, all Mr. D. answers (p 176.) is, Mr. H. in two leaves takes some
pains to small purpose. Answ. I pray note it, while I allege Scripture to
prove that this Supper in John, and the Passover were two different Suppers,
and in two different places, Bethany, and Jerusalem, (which Mr. Light foot
says is most clear hand. glean. on Exo. sect. 19.) he tells us, this is to
small purpose: as if the alleging Judas went out to agree with the High
Priest from a Supper two nights before the Sacrament, was sufficient proof
that therefore he went out, at the Sacrament.

I must confess there are here many difficulties, if we compare Mat. 16.17.
Mark. 14 12. with Joh. 18.28. Joh. 19.14. This one thing shall suffice me for
an argument; The evening of the fourteenth, and morning of the fifteenth day of
Nisan (as I judge) was the Feast of the Passover; for the Scripture reckons
the day from evening to evening, Genesis 1.5. and from the evening of the
fourteenth day, to the evening of the twenty one, is just seven evenings and
mornings, and so the feast complete of seven Scripture days according to the
computation, Exodus 12.15, 16, 18. and this explains Number. 28.16, 17. where the
fourteenth day is called the Passover, and the fifteenth the Feast of the
Passover, and yet the Passover and feast, not distinguished, as some think.

Now then I argue, if this Supper of John was before the evening of the
fourteenth of Nisan, then was it not when Christ instituted the Sacrament; for
he instituted that questionless at the Passover; But this Supper was before
that evening, Probo. The evening of the fourteenth day of Nisan, and the
morning of the fifteenth (as appears) was the feast of the Passover, (or the
day of the feast called so (...)) But John's Supper he tells us expressly was
before the feast of the Passover; Ergo, it was before the evening of the
fourteenth of Nisan, and the time Christ instituted his Supper.

As for those other reasons Mr, D. repeates against Judas receiving, and are
answered before, I count them only as so many ciphers joined to a figure, which
may serve indeed to advance the number while that figure stands, but when this
reason once (which is the figure) is taken away, the rest will come to signisie
nothing of their own accord. And yet there is one new passage he has here very
remarkable, and not to be forgotten, that is, It seems probable (says he) that
Christ excluded Judas in particular, in these words, Lu. 22, 21. But behold,
the hand of him that betraieth me, is at the table. Answ. A very probable
argument indeed; Judas was excluded from the Sacrament, because Christ says
expressly he was present at it. It is fictioned of a certain fellow, who to
get a little money pretended he could go invisible, and nothing should be seen
of him but his hand; the people assemble to the sight, he having gotten their
pence, runs away, and leaves them a paper with this writing in it, Here is my
hand but see me if you can. I perceive this fellow is nothing to Mr. D. for
invention, who will make Judas absent at the Table, when the hand of him that
betrayed Christ was there without equivocation.

Those that receive unworthily eat their damnation. Unto this I answered. 1.
On the Churches part.2. On the Receivers.

For the Church (that is Minister and Joyners) I judge this cannot be made to
concern them he excepts p. 178. 1. Paul says Let a man so eat. Ans. This
concerns the Receivers to which I speak anon.2. But his words are not to be
understood restrictively. Ans. Belike then by Mr. D. the Apostles (...) must be
thus interpreted, let a man examine himself, (...), and so the Presbytery
having examined him, let him eat.3. Church Officers had need to pray, Lord
forgive me other men's sins. Ans. And therefore to take heed how they keep away
men from Gods Ordinance.4. It is absurd in Reason and Divinity, by an
affirmative to exclude a negative, to say, I must examine my solfe, therefore
another must not examine me. Ans. 1. I shall hoar then desire Mr. D. to see and
acknowledge this same absurdity in himself (who goes wholly on this ground)
for if affirmative propositions are not exclusive (which is his meaning) then
how can he still argue and impose on us, that because the Apostle says, let a
man so eat, therefore a man must not eat, unless so.2. If this be absurd in
Divinity and Logic, it may be demanded, how then will Mr. D. make good,
therefore another must examine me: I will tell you how he may in Rhetoric,
per Aposiopesin, for the Scripture says nothing of it.

For his simile of poison p. 179. 180. he tells us, 1, Whosoever can, ought to
hinder his brother from drinking poison. Answ. There is no doubt of it.2. The
Sacrament to some is poison, as one man's meat is another poison. Ans. This
instance may satisfy us, I must give a man his food, and so I give the
Sacrament; if by his ill use of it, it turns to poison, this is accidental to
the nature of the thing, and to me; I must do my duty, as in the word 2 Cor.
2.14, 15, 16.But 3. He says, he may know, and judge, when the Sacrament is
poison to any. Ans. This were sinful to say, but that he adds, by the effects
and, consequents, so that he must first belike, give them a little poison to
try them. But I pray what arguing is here in the mean while? Because he sees
some men after receiving worse then formerly, therefore, he knows the Sacrament
is poison, and beforehand (like a Physician) will not give it.4. The Sacrament
may be applied before all, not to all; all may see, and be present, not eat,
etc. Ans. This is but a kind of spice of secret Popery, with which Mr. D. would
sweeten the bitterness of his book, that yet will not go down, he has strewed
it so thick. Christ ordained the Supper to be a taking matter, an eating
matter, a remembering matter (says Mr. Fox with Mr. Bradford) Contrary, our
Masse-men make it a matter not of taking, but of gazing, peeping, I thank God I
have seen my Maker to day, etc. Book of Martyrs vol. 3. p. 3.

For the Receivers part, I say there is a double duty; A principle, Do this,
and an Accessory, Let a man examine himself, both which, is to be performed; A
man must come, and he must come worthily, the case is the same, as in all
Ordinances, there is the substance of a duty, and the manner of performance; If
the manner be evil, it must be amended, and the matter still must be done. He
has three Objections, page 181, 182, 183.

1. How assuredly does Mr. H. make that the principle duty which is the
carcass and form only? Answ. Methinks Mr. D. should not speak so lightly of
Christ's own words, Do this? who dares not know, Do this, includes matter and
manner, to wit, in faith, love, thankfulness, as we ought; and if this be not
the principal duty, to which self-examination is subservient, let all judge*
Even as the Feast though it lasts but an hour, is the principal; and the whole
week of preparation, accessory to it. As for his words then that follow, they
are but a pen full of ink spartled in my face, while his peevish spirit, like
a troubled sea, is still casting up mire and dirt.

2 True, He that is bound to come, is bound to come worthily, but he that is
bound to come worthily, is not bound to come absolutely. Answ. I know not how
he may strain the word absolutely, but I say, a Churchmember is as absolutely
bound to come hither, as so pray, and hear; as the Apostle says, Let a man so
eat, Christ says, Take heed how you hear, so pray, and so give alms. But are
they therefore ever the less absolute duties? There is no doubt but the
manner, as well as the matter, comes under the same absolute command; so that a
man is bound, I say still, to come, and come worthily, and both absolutely,
though not, Ad semper, to either. And therefore, whereas he asks, p. 178.
Every man is to examine himself, and so to eat, but where is it said
absolutely. Let every man eat? It may suffice him, that Christ says expressly,
and absolutely to all present. Let every one drink, Do this, Drink you all
of it. But let me ask him again, Where does the Scripture say any where, Let a
man not eat, or not drink? where does (...) so, signify not? As for his
instances then about Legal purifications, they are answered in their place;
They may serve to be alluded to (if he will) for pressing preparation, but
ought not to be made any ground to omit duty; because no legal uncleanness
could have excused a man from Gods service, but that it had an express law for
it; which if Mr. D. can produce here, we shall yield to him.

3 Sinful unpreparednesse will not exouse a man from guilt, but it will excuse
him from receiving: Answ. I judge this must be taken very warily, so far only
as a man may in Christian prudence dispense with affirmative precepts for his
souls better advantage: Provided his abstinence serves to humble him, and put
him upon greater ear to prepare for the next Sacrament, (as he cautions well
over the leaf) and if it will not otherwise, this may silence himself.

Page 184. He comes to my three Queries; The first is, Whether the very
receiving be a sin incurring damnation in him that is unworthy? and here I
carefully distinguish between the very receiving, which is a man's duty, and the
unworthiness, which makes the sin only: This unworthiness is either in the
person, which will condemn him, nevertholesse for his staying away, and
therefore I judge he should rather come, and condemn it. Or in the Act;
herein is the matter, which is good, and the manner, which is amiss. Now the
sailing in the manner of a duty (I must still inculcate) does not abrogate the
matter. If Mr. D. can keep an unregenerate man from the obliquity in the
manner, and yet let him do the matter, I shall like him; but he may not cause
him to neglect that which is his duty in the substance, to avoid evil in the
performance; Our disobedience is total in not doing, but only partial in doing
it otherwise then we ought.

Indeed Mr. D. says here, these cannot be distinguished, There is no sinful
act, but notionally you may abstract sinfulness from it, but really you
cannot, when it comes to be acted. Answ. Let him remember, if he cannot
distinguish Receiving, and unworthy Receiving, then can he not distinguish
Hearing, and unworthy Hearing; Praying, and unworthy Praying; And if he cannot
really (and not notionally only) sever these, how can he make them means of
grace? Can sin be a means of grace? Can that which is a cause of death, be a
means of life? If he say, it may be an accidental occasion; it is true, but it
must be intentionally a means with him; seeing he tells us, A man may hear (and
pray) unworthily (page 186.) (there is a sinful act, which cannot, he says,
be abstracted really in the duty from the sin) yet be converted by it, (there
it is a means of grace, and instituted for it.) I think this must be a plain
conviction upon Mr. D. 1 Hearing and Praying, are means of conversion. 2 To
hear and pray unworthily is a sin. 3 Yet must a man hear and pray
nevertheless. 4 Sin cannot be a means of grace. 5 A man must not do evil
for any good effect. Now if you can abstract really in no sinful act, the
sinfumesse from it, when it comes to be acted; 1 Then must sin be a means of
conversion.2 Then must it be our duty to sin.3 Then must we contradict St.
Paul, and say, a man may do evil that good may come of it. As for what he
farther adds, A man is not bound to receive till he be Evangelically worthy,
but is prohibited in statu quo; I desire him to show me that prohibition, which
is indeed Mr. Drakes eleventh Commandment, that makes all his strength being
without the support of any Text, to become but as a bowing wall, and tottering
fence.

My second Query is, whether receiving unworthily is other ways damnable, then
hearing and praying unworthily, and if it be not, why should not we receive
still, as pray and hear; He answers, It is otherwise damnable, 1 Because not a
universal duty, (where he brings in Infants the eighteenth time)2 Not
converting. Ans. 1 This is untrue, for as to every intelligent member it is an
universal duty, and a means of conversion.2 It is vain, and grossly
inconsequent; for, There are some duties belong only to men in such and such
relations; Is the neglect hereof, ever the less damnable, because they are not
universal? Again, A natural man cannot convert himself by his moral works; are
his sins therefore ever the less sinful? As the precept only is that which
makes an action to be good, so it is (...) the Transgression alone (not any
thing else) makes it damnable.

My third Query is, Whether an unregenerate man must never come to the
Sacrament? Mr. D. holds, he must never, because in will not convert him; I hold
the case is still the same with the word and prayer, which though they become
the savor of death unto some, yet must not the duty be neglected, and the
precept plucked up by the roots. I shall therefore here join issue with him.

If there be any weight in the ground upon which he goes, that an unregerate
man must not receive, because it will not convert him, then an unregenerate man
must not do that which is not converting; If this be not good, his argument
will be ex puris particularibus, and cannot be good: If it be good, then must
Mr. D. prove to me that singing of Psalms, Alms-deeds, obedience to Parents,
love to our neighbor, and all the duties of the ten Commandments are
instituted of God as means of conversion, or otherwise an unregenerate man must
not do them. If he say, they are means of conversion, I will distinguish
hereof, either they proceed from a preparatory work of grace through Gods
Spirit upon the heart, and so I think indeed in a due sense they are
converting; Or they proceed from a bare principle of reason, or natural
conscience, and so they cannot be converting, for nature alone (the Scripture
teaches us) can never begot grace. Now then, I ask him whether such bare moral
actions (which yet as to the matter are good works, and every man's duty) do
cease therefore to be duties, and ought not to be done, because not converting?
If they do not, then is M. Drakes foundation, but as a banck of sand, which
the more he stands upon, fails him, and sinkes away.

There are two things in Gods Ordinances, an homage that is due to him, and a
benefit accruing to us, as they are means of his grace. Now let me demand of
any mortal, how dare he bereave God of his homage (though outward only)
because he cannot reap his own benefit? What if there were no benefit to man,
must not the will of God stand? Again, Is it not the duty of every one within
the Church to remember Christ, show forth his death, and be thankful, if it
were only that he is brought into a Church State, and relation to God, which
Paul accounts so high a privilege to the Jews? And is not the Ordinance
appointed to this end? how then can any totally neglect it without sin? and
must he sin, to avoid sin? must he do evil, that he may not do evil? how can
this be? Indeed it is true, there are other ends besides this, which an
unregenerate man cannot do; but must this end it self therefore be abrogate?
The Lord Jesus was not capable of remission of sins, must he therefore not be
baptized? It is enough, that there was an homage herein, or duty due unto God
from him as man, though he could receive no benefit by it. So long then as this
homage stands good, and here are some ends every intelligent member is capable
of; how can man's eating, or not eating his damnation, stand in balance with
the will of God? The will of God must stand against all consequence.

Indeed Mr. D. Page 186. still urges, He that hears unworthily may be
converted, not so, he that receives unworthily, at that time. But I say, where
did Mr. D. learn, a man must hear the word (or pray) though he hears
unworthily upon this ground, because it is a means of conversion, as he still
pleads p. 98. p. 116.185. etc. The truth is, this ground alone could not stand,
for hearing unworthily is certainly a sin (which he says further cannot be
really severed from the act) and the Apostle says, it is a dangerous thing to
hold such a tenent that men may sin, or do evil (as to hear unworthily is)
that any good (as conversion is) may come of it. But the ground then indeed,
why a man must pray, hear, receive, though he does it unworthily, is because
God has commanded it, and we must not omit our duty, to avoid sin; because we
must not do evil (which that omission is) that good (which the avoiding sin
is) may come of it.

Page Ib. He distinguishes between Abstainers and Refusers. Ans. This
distinction cannot be applied here, because a man cannot always forbear an
Ordinance, though he may sometimes, but his omission makes him a Refuser and
Neglecter; and my question is, Whether an unregenerate man must never receive,
for fear of earing his damnation?

Page 187. Whereas I say, what is sealed is the same, he tells us, This is an
apparent falsity, unless salvation and damnation is the same. Ans. It is an
apparent truth, for I do expressly say, That which is sealed, is the
Covenant, and that is the same I hope, though our estate alters, as to the
threatenings and promises in it. And this passage, I hope, shall do much good
(which therefore I have recited before) when Mr. Drakes loose and malicious
aspersions shall do him no good. He that bears false witness against his
Neighbor is a maule, and a Sword and a sharp Arrow.

Page 188. What releif can the Sacrament bring to a doubtful soul that has
no grace? 1. It cannot convert him.2. It cannot confirm him. Answ. This is
amiss, It can confirm him in his common, general grace; and the exercise
thereof, is the way, wherein we are to wait for effectual grace. So then, it
can convert him, and confirm him; and convert him, because confirm him.

Page Ib. The Receiver seals as necessarily to the condition (to wit of the
Covenant) in Esse, or de presenti; as in fieri, or de futuro. Ans. This cannot
be. For 1. Children seal to the same in Baptism.2. The whole body of Israel
engaged to the same, when they entered Covenant, ( Deuteronomy. 29.) and did but what
they were to do, and commanded to do, and yet had not all of them a saving
Faith, for many of them were destroyed ( Heb: 4.1, 2,) for their unbeleefe.
Indeed where there is an engagement required, there ought to be also a sincere
resolution to perform what we engaged. There is the matter of the engagement,
and the manner of the engagement; the right manner consists in this serious and
sincere resolution; If we fail in the manner it is to be amended, and the
matter still to be done. It is not a Cannot what I will, but a Will not what I
Can, and a Do not what I will and can, shall condemn a man at the last day.

Page 189. By actual receiving of the Sacrament a man professes he receives
Christ, signified and offered to him in particular, and therefore if he does
not act Faith at the same instant, he plays the Hypocrite and mocks God, etc.

Ans. I think this scruple as it is more closely urged by others, sinks deepest
in this business of any, and therefore requires the larger consideration.

1. First then, There is a real undissembled Faith (whether you call it
general, historical, or visible) that falls short of Saving, Justifying Faith,
that makes a man truly a Disciple, or Professor, though not a true Disciple,
or sincere Professor; in Covenant, though not effectually in Covenant: Now that
common Faith, as it makes a man a Professor, it makes him partaker of the
Ordinances, and his waiting thereupon, or meeting at the Word and Sacraments,
is his very profession signified; and his badge that he is one of the visible
Church; so that you must either say that every unregenerate man must leave off
his profession, and become no Christian, or the scruple is removed; for the
truth is, that Faith he has in the doctrine of Christ, so far as it is
undissembled, and makes him a Christian in opposition to all other Religions,
will bear him up in the profession, and make it his duty for to come, which in
the manner ought to be done, and the matter not left undone.

2 The case is the same in all Ordinances, while a Christian comes to the Word,
that is a signified profession that he will obey the mind of God when it is
revealed: now unless he heartily resolves to practice what he hears, it is a
like mocking God, and playing the hypocrite (if I may use his words) Psa.
50.16, 17. Jer. 43.2, 5, 20. Likewise in Prayer, there is a vertuall engagement
of us to endeavor the grace we pray for; Nay, herein is the most express
hypocrisy, for how can an unregenerate man say, Thy Kingdom of grace come,
when he does not sincerely desire grace (which yet he ought to pray, and
sincerely desire too) if he did truly desire it, he were regenerate; for a
desire of true grace (as Mr. D. says) is true grace. Yet do I think Mr. D.
does not exclude any of his unregenerate Members from the Word and Prayer.

3 This argument then is strong to enforce men to the manner, when they do the
matter; but not to leave off the matter, because they fail in the manner. It
is of force to press men to bring up their hearts and lives to their
engagements, but not to forbear those engagements they are bound to, as
Professors.

4 Though a professor be unregenerate, he does 0 truly believe Jesus Christ to
be the Son of God, and the alone Savior of the World, in opposition to all
other Religions, and thereof this is a true profession; and that suffices to
the Sacraments precisely considered, though not complexly, as to the entire
benefits of the Covenant.

5 So far as a man is in Christ, or a member of his Church, Christ is given to
him, and received of him, with a true distinction of privilege from the world.

6 He engages himself (or is engaged) hereby to submit to the terms of Jesus
Christ, as he is bound to do, which if he do not perform, it is the issue makes
it a lie, and him an hypocrite ( Psa. 78.35. with 37.) but the obligation it
self (and that sincerely) is his duty.

7 There is the nature and substance of this Ordinance, and the diverse uses to
be made of it; The very nature and substance consists in a Commemoration of
Christ; An unregenerate man is capable of this substance, and so it becomes his
duty, which cannot be made void by the mal-performance; for no consequence can
annihilate Gods Precept. Neither does my incapacity of satisfying all the ends
and uses of an Ordinance (as before) exempt me from those I can; for then
neither could children be capable of Baptism, not Christ of Circumcision.

8 As the Minister does tender and apply Jesus Christ conditionally to all
according to the terms of the Covenant, so may he receive him, to wit, as
looking for salvation from him upon performance of the condition, and
condemnation if he continues in unbelief without repentance (as the case in
penal obligations) this being the means both to persuade, and fright him to it.
And then,

9 The full and safest answer to this, will be by a serious practice; Let us
examine our selves, and humbling our souls in the sight of our unworthiness,
acknowledge our deserts, and apply the due sense of our just condemnation
according to our present estate, together with the offer of mercy, upon our
amendment, and this takes off the hypocrisy; for if my actual receiving be a
Lie (to wit, as it is a visible profession) it must be so, either before God,
or before men; It is not a Lie before men, for I hold it a means of conversion,
and profess not my self converted already, but come only as a Churchmember;
and It is not a Lie before God (I mean so far as any unregenerate man's service
can be without it) for I condemn my self, and apply that part of the
Covenant which is due to me (as I ought with the offer of grace) to bring me
home to him.

Page 190. I easily grant, assurance is not absolutely requisite, as a means to
receiving. Answ. Upon this true concession, I argue against him in the maine;
If it be necessarily pre-required that a man be regenerate before he receives,
then must assurance be absolutely requisite as a means; But seeing assurance is
not necessary as a means, therefore it is not necessarily pre-required that a
man be regenerate, and this becomes a means of conversion. The former I prove:
That which a man cannot be persuaded in his conscience is lawful to do, it is
sin if it be done, Romans 4.23. But a man that holds it absolutely unlawful for
an unregenerate man to eat, and is not certain, that he himself is
regenerate, cannot be assured in his conscience that he ought to eat. And he
that doubts is damned if he eat, because he eats not with faith, for
whatsoever is not of faith is sin. This is the misery is brought upon us,
while men deny the Sacrament to be a means of conversion.

Page Ibid. and 191. Whereas I press upon the Receiver to resolve against every
known sin for the present, and to accept of Christ, which is his duty, as well
as to come. He excepts at me as not speaking consonantly to my self, and the
nature of faith.

For the former, I do believe, we know so little of the nature of spirits, our
own souls and actings thereof, and so infinitely less the workings of Gods
Spirit, that I dare not confine my self herein. I do not doubt but there may
be many good resolutions, and some supernatural motions on the hearts of men
which prove abortions, when the like desires cherished in the use of the means,
by Gods grace become effectual. It is therefore my Doctrine, that a Christian
should still endeavor to blow up every spark, desire, or good motion he finds
in him. We do not know how the seeds (or first impressions) of grace differ in
any, and discover them only, by the rooting and continuance; If common grace
differ from special only gradually (which for ought we know may be the truth)
then we have a certain promise, that in the use and exercise, those degrees
shall be increased, which will make it saving; Habenti dabitur. If it d^ffers
specifically, (which those terms of the immortal seed, the new birth,
regeneration etc. do incline me to believe,) yet have we a Peradventure, in the
use of the Ordinances, which we have not otherwise; And I conceive as the act
of man brings in the wind and water in their Mils, and makes use of their
natural motions, to do their work, and serve their occasions: So does the
holy Spirit make use of Gods voluntary actings, in his waiting on the means,
for the effecting of his special work of grace in him, which is, as it were,
acquired by infusion, yet so, as we can do nothing of our selves, It is the
free gift of God.

For the latter, I do admire he should say, Mr. H. professes he knows no
other constituting parts of saving faith, then an Historical assent and good
purpose, when I speak hereof only as what suffices to the Sacrament, not to
justification; And whereas upon this he wishes Mr. H. would study fundamentalls
better, before he come to superstructures; I shall desire him, seeing he
acknowledges our dispute to be but about a superstructure, that he would not be
so hot, and froward that another differs from him. And as for my studies about
this point of the nature of Faith, I shall submit my self to give him this
small account of them.

Faith is an assent to a testimony, and so it differs from Knowledge,
Experience etc. That testimony, is either of Man, and then it is an humane; or
of God, and then it is a divine Faith. Divine Faith then is an assent to divine
Revelation, or the Word of God, and it is either general or special; General.
Faith is this assent, without effectual application; Special is this assent
with it; and this assent with application is Saving Faith. Now this Special
Faith in the habit, has two acts (according to its object in the word) the
one, whereby it is carried out upon the precepts and threats for obedience; or
the other, as it is carried out upon the promises, especially the great Promise
of salvation through Christ, and this is the act we say justifies, whether in
sensu proprio, or in sensu correlativo, in respect of its object, the point
seems decided by those two Texts, Romans 3.25. with Romans 5.9. where to be
justified by Faith in Christ's blood, is to be justified by his blood. Yet do I
think that those men that do, as it were, compound these two acts into one,
and call it acceptance of Christ as Lord and Savior, and so say it justifies
as the Covenant-condition, speak piously, solidly, and safely, as to these
times.

To close up this eighth Objection. Though it is certain, a Special Faith is
required to every saving duty; yet whereas the duty (at least, as a task,
service, tribute) must still be don; I will advise every Receiver to look
mainly into this one thing, that there be not upon him the unworthiness of an
evil conscience, which I account not in reference to his life past, though he
has been an ignorant, obstinate, and grievous sinner, so long as for his life
to come, he now resolves to go on no more in any of his known, wilful sins
against Conscience, but to leave them, and if his heart upon examination can
truly tell him this, though he be unregenerate, and this resolution but legal,
and preparatory, yet seeing he can heartily for the present engage himself to
the terms of Christ, as there is nothing in his Conscience can be opposed
against his coming: So, I am entirely persuaded (without the least doubt as to
such a one) that this Ordinance is a most fit means (subordinate to the Word)
to make his good purposes serious, for his effectual conversion. And as for
those harsh terms, and opinions of others, that a man if he be unregenerate,
does but mock God, murder Christ, drink his poison, and cate necessarily his
damnation; It would even pity a man to the heart to see how they make the holy
Table of the Lord to become a snare, a very rack, terror, and torture to many
consciences, while our grand Enemy makes use thereof to defraud our souls of
then due sustentation by it. The fear of guilt and damnation, may be applied
for the pressing men to preparation, but not to keep any from his duty.

A person famous for wit, being condemned, had his life promised him, on
condition he could make a fat Lamb become lean within such a time, and yet
allow him his ordinary meat; This he undertakes; prepares two grates, in the
one he puts the Lamb, and gives him the food required, in the other he puts a
Wolf, and gives him no meat. As the Wolf grows hungry he baits at the
Lamb, with his head and paws raving at him; the poor Lamb in the sight of so
much terror though he cate his meat, pines suddenly away, and becomes as lean
as if he had been quite famished for want of it. I am afraid it fares thus with
many of the tender Lambs of Jesus Christ, who whiles they doubt of their
regeneration, and men set damnation to rave at, and bark them away if
unregenerate, not being sensible of the grates that protect them, they feed at
the blessed Table of the Lord with so much fear and doubtfulnesse, that their
spiritual meat hardly does them good, or their poor souls thrive by it. It is
even as when an hungry man dreameth, and behold he eats, but he awaketh, and
his soul is empty; or as when a thirsty man dreameth, and he drinks, but he
awaketh, and behold he is faint.

The Ordinance is polluted if all be admitted. My answer was, Unto the unworthy
Receivers it may be said defiled, as all things are to the unbeleeving, Tit.
1.15. but not no others. If the heathen Husband be sanctified to the believing
Wife, which is the nearest communion that can be, 1 Cor. 7.14 so that she must
not separate from him in the duties of marriage, as it is Gods Ordinance; I may
resolutely say, it is not the unworthiness of another (which is external to
him) should make a believer separate from the Sacrament. To the clean nothing
is unclean, Mat. 5.11. Romans 14.14.

Unto this p. 192, 193. Mr. D. consents, and therefore he might have dealt more
ingenuously to have joined with me in strengthening the weak, rather then to
vilify the succors I brought them; but that like a troublesome briar there is
nothing can pass him without catching, renting; and tearing, while he brings
his nettles to possess our pleasant places, and thorns our tabernacles.

Page 194. He accuses me again for excluding infants, (which is nineteen
times) and because I do not exclude others also, as he would have me, he bids
me take heed there be not the Pharisee and Hypocrite in my heart, etc. Answ.
His advise may be good, (blessed is he that fears always) for though, if I
belie not my own temper, I think it is free and open, a lover of truth and
reality; yet when I come to the closer inter-views between God and my soul, it
makes my heart bleed to see what a deal of infidelity, and spiritual
unsoundnesse there is in me; besides the guilt of my life, which others may not
know of me, but thou Lord know; Thou tryest the reins, and my sin is ever
before thee; Cleanse thou me, heal me, make me upright with thee; and then
shall my answer be alone in thy mercy. Nevertheless I am persuaded (though I
am nothing) there are many good and worthy Christians that are not altogether
of Mr. Drakes opinion, and yet are no hypocrites. Who art thou that judge thy
Brother? who art thou that set at naught thy Brother? we shall all stand
before the Judgment seat of Christ. The humble dust will fly in the face of
him that spurns it.

The two next pages (p. 195, 196.) he might have spared. It he does not teach
it to be simply a sin to receive with any visibly unworthy, nor is against all
mixed Sacraments, he knows who does, and might have let that alone that does
not concern him. Nevertheless, I cannot here wholly free Mr. D. for I think
there is a deadly wound made upon tender Christians, while he involves every
soul under the guilt of participation with the Receiver, in his sin of
unworthy receiving, If they do not their best to hinder him from receiving,
which yet is not simply a duty (where still lies this sad fallacy) but only
seoundum quid, in reference to the parties amendment as the end, and
excommunication as the means, whereby a man being cast out of Christian
Communion in general, is consequently debarred the Sacrament: and otherwise to
keep him from it, is amiss, as going upon this false ground, that unfitness
to the Sacrament is the formal cause of Excommunication; and I fear sinful,
because it is simply our duty to exhort (and in our places to prepare) all our
fellow members both to come, and come worthily to it. To clear this, suppose a
regenerate man deserves to be excommunicate, and I do not complain of him, he
comes and receives in faith; Now if I must partake of a man's receiving
unworthily, when I should endeavor his excommunication, and do not, then must I
partake in this man's receiving worthily; and so my not endeavoring their
excommunication shall be good in the one, and sin in the other. It is apparent
therefore that this sin is to be singled by its self, I am never the more or
the less guilty, whether he come or not come, receives worthily or not
worthily, that is (...), but this is one only continued guilt on me, that I do
not my duty in admonishing and telling the Church of him, supposing the cale
so, that it is my duty.

If it were my duty simply or absolutely to keep away the unworthy from the
Sacrament, (besides that, no man then could keep himself from guilt;) it would
be my duty also to keep them from the Word and Prayer. For 1. There is the same
moral pollution in the one, as the other, Tit. 1.15.2. The sin is as
abstractible in the one as the other.3. The one is our duty as well as the
other, unless Mr. D. can give us any text that forbids it. And here indeed
will come the issue of all. When Christ says, Baptize all Nations, those that
except Infants, must show Texts for it. When the Scripture says, all the
Congregation, the whole people, every man was to eat the Passover, Exodus 12.
When Christ says, do this, drink ye all of it, and St. Paul applys the same
to the whole Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 11.23. Those that will except the
unregenerate (which is likely the greater part) out of these, do affirm a
limitation, and must prove it. When you come together, ver. 33. does to me
plainly include, both a supposall they would come together, and an allowance
that they might. Their manner of coming is reproved, but their coming together,
and that to eat, is what they ought.

There may be here one case to be satisfied; Suppose I have not admonished my
Brother, and complained of him, is not the neglect of my duty a sin? and how
then shall I come to the Sacrament with this sin on my Conscience, but it shall
be defiled to me? I Answer, if thy Conscience tells there it is a sin (for there
is some prudence to go in to it) thou art to repent of it, by resolving to take
the next opportunity to perform thy duty thou have omitted; and upon this
resolution of thine (as in the like neglects) there is no doubt but thou may
come safely. 2. If thou have neglected one duty, I dare not say that omission
can excuse thee from doing another duty, the Apostle commands us Jam. 1.21. to
lay apart all naughtiness and so to receive the word: and the Psalmist tells
us, If we regard iniquity in our hearts, God will not hear us, Psalm. 66.18.
Yet dare I not say, If a man does not sincerely lay aside all his sins (as he
ought) that he may not hear, nor pray. The case is the same in all duties,
the person is to be reformed, but not the duty left undone.

Page 198, 199. He has nothing more considerable; only that new argument from
Children which we have now had, no less then twenty times over; and therefore
I shall be content, seeing he argues so strongly for them, that he should take
them with the distracted into his company. It is a manifest testimony of the
exceeding weakness of his own grounds, that he is forced through his whole
Book so poorly to argue only from such a Concession, which yet the Primitive
Church in St. Austins time, would not have granted him.

from those several Texts that ano alleged for separation from wicked
persons. My Answer was, that all these Texts are to be reduced either to their
wicked courses, Ephesians. 5.11. 1 Cor. 10.20, 31. 2 Cor. 6.14. and it may be, Jer.
15.19. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.11 Rev. 2.6. or their common samiliarity, and so I answer,
1 Cor. 5.9, 10, 11. 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. Romans 16.17. 2 Timothy, 3.5. 2 Jo. 10.11. Prove.
22.24, 25. and it may be 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. Tit. 3.10. But I affirm there is no
Scripture allows a separation from any one of Gods public Ordinances, unless
in case of Excommunication.

As for what Mr. D. objects here, I have satisfied at once already. I shall
only leave two notes; 1 Whereas Mr. D. accounts my opinion (that
excommunication referres to Church Communion in geueral) to be 1 False;2 Cruel,
I am persuaded he will be of another mind when he comes to understand me
better, how I take this, that is Relatively, wherein I think, I am near the
truth. And hereupon it will follow that every slight occasion must not serve
for Church-censure, but such notorious crimes as will bring a defamation on the
Church, and our Christian profession, if suffered; whereas if we allow any
censure less then casting out of the Church, it is no wonder, if bare
ignorance, or any small matter be held enough for it; By which means, our
Church censures are like to become ordinary, and soon contemned, which should
indeed be ever administered for this very respect, with the greatest
dreadfulnesse, rarity, and solemnity.

2 Separation from wicked men (as to their persons) may be considered
simpliciter, or secundum quid, as it is considered simply (or absolutely) it is
not a duty, for a man may go into the company of evil persons upon his
necessary business, and as Christ himself did, to admonish, and do them good.
But as it is taken secundum quid, or Relatively, in respect of such or such an
end, so is it our duty. Now that end, either respects our selves, or them; That
which respects our selves, is to avoid their sins, or not to partake thereof,
by acting with them, infection, connivance, or the like; And This respect does
always bind, so that in such case as we must needs partake of their sins, we
are undoubtedly to avoid them: That which respects them, is to bring them to
repentance, by shaming them, etc. Hereupon it will follow, that if any man goes
to avoid his brother in Gods Ordinances, unless it be to this end, his
separation is evil, the reason being plain, because as I am bound to avoid
the least partaking of another sins so am I bound to the greatest partaking
with him in duty, and though I must separate from him in civil familiarity (I
mean common, and unnecessary) where I have my liberty (and not else, 1 Cor. 7.
13, 14.) unless it be to exhort, and edify him; Yet may I not, in sacred
society, and the service of God (which is both his and my duty) unless he be
excommunicate. I pray note this, Separation, I say, is either from civil
society alone, or from Sacred, and Civil both; In the first, I am to withdraw
from every one that walks disorderly, (yet with prudence) and complain of
him; But the second is proper to Churchcensure, before which, my withdrawing
from him in public duty, is not like to be any means of bringing the man to
repentance, but rather to harden him; and therefore, to speak freely, I fear it
is but a likely sin, to withdraw from others at the Sacrament, before
Excommunication.

P. 204. He comes to my wishes, which he is pleased to approve, and engage me
to him before he parts, with two passages; The first is Page 205. where he
tells me, he has made me an object of fraternal correption, and hopes, I am in
a fair way to be mended by his admonition.

Answ. Had the man been longer a Divine, or a little more modest in the spirit
of meeknes, and words of sobriety, he could have managed his cause, with me, I
think (so far as I know of my own spirit) that I am so conselous of my own
weakness, and afraid to offend others, that I should have been more ready to a
submission, then dissertation, could it have stood with any face of truth and
ingenuity: but when I see how his whole book is carried with such a high
conceit of himself, and interest, so much contempt of me, bitterness of
language, passion, and incontinency, truly, it is a great argument to me (and
inward support against his opinion) that the Lord does not approve it, or at
least intends not to succeed it. If it had been the mind of Christ, it is more
likely he would have humbled his heart, and suited him a spirit fit to have
declared that mind to us; But now has his temper betrayed his cause, now are
his Arguments little besides prejudice; now are his instructions but briars and
thorns, with which he goes to teach me, only as Gideon taught the men of
Succoth. Now are these admonitions which should come from him as a brother, but
the bitter insultations of an adversary; which must make me answer him in the
words of Micha, 7.8, 9. Rejoice not against me, Oh mine enemy, when I fall I
shall rise, when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me. I will
bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he
plead my cause for me, he will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold
his righteousness.

The second is, Page 206. How justly may be at last be looked at as a Weed by
our great Husbandman, who will cherish Weeds, etc.

Methinks it were enough for Mr. D. to have passed a suspension on me in the
beginning of his Book, he needed not have prosecuted it to the end, and even to
the last judgment. It is not for him to take the Tribunal, and condemn me for
a Weed at the great day. I desire God, that this man's rashness may teach me to
consider his righteous Judgment, that I may sanctify him in my heart, and
make him my fear, and my dread; so shall I reap the benefit of his censure,
without the guilt of it. I must humbly acknowledge, if the Lord should deal
with me according to my deserts, he might indeed justly look at me as a Weed,
and condemn me for ever; But enter not into judgment with thy servant, O
Lord, but take occasion by this man's judgment to forgive me, and him; for thou
see how some men's piety out-runs their charity, and their over-eager zeal,
like Moses, breaks the Tables: And though he would have me suspended from the
favor of thy people, do not thou suspend him, or me from a fellowship in thy
mercies, and while he is ready to shut up the bosom of the Church against me,
as if it could no: hold me, and him, let me be assured that Abrahamt bosom
stands wide enough open to receive both me, and my opposer.

I could have heartily wished Mr. D. had so carried his business, that I might
rather have reverenced his judgment, and yielded to his piety, then be forced
to show him his weakness, which yet may serve to abate his imperiousness, and
some weariness in the Reader. For my part, I shall prepare my self to expect
from him nothing but the dregs of his former bitterness, and that many godly
men will speak evil of my Book, though they shall receive a relaxation, and
support by it; I shall be contented to let them speak evil of me, so long as
they receive good by me; only I shall desire them that they will be ready to
propagate what they find in me may do good, as I shall be ready to retract
what I am convinced is amiss: But let them not reject all, if they dislike
some; Even as when the new wine is in the cluster, and one says, Destroy it
not, for a blessing is in it.

There is these four things, for which I must demand some Texts of Scripture
(if any will answer me) by which the world may judge of their satisfaction? 1
Where visible worthiness upon trial, is the rule of admission to the
Sacrament?2 Where they find suspension as distinct from Excommunication?3
Where the unregenerate are forbid to receive the Sacrament?4 Where this
difference is advanced between the Sacrament and other Ordinances, that herein
it is better to omit the matter and manner both, then to do the matter, if the
manner be not done as they ought, which is directly contrary to all other duty?

And now if Master Drake shall have need to write again, as I believe nature
will work, and his spirit cannot hold; I shall desire him, if he will go to
vent that superfluity of maliciousness, which yet he ought to lay apart, to
take along with him, that Text of Dent. 23.13. Thou shall have a paddle upon
thy weapon, and it shall be when thou shall go to ease thy self abroad, thou
shall dig therewith, and shall turn back, and cover that thing which comes
from thee; for this froward language, and bitter spirit, has no good savor in
the holy Camp, but is an unclean thing that ought not to be seen amongst Gods
people.

He concludes, Page 207.209. with a Scruple to the Reader, and tells us he
has done with Mr. Humfrey.

Ans. Thus Hiram has finished the work he had to do, the Pots, and the
Shovels, and the Basins, the Pillars, and the Pommels, and the Chapiters, and
the wreaths to cover the Pommels of the Chapiters on the top of the Pillars.

FINIS.
READER, The absence of the Author, must excuse the Errors of the Press, of
which these are apart.

Page 84. line 12. read Ministers, p. 115. l. 13. r. (...) p. 179. l. 5. r.
other, p. ibid. l. 7, r. are the same, p. 181. l. 18. for never, r. near, p.
191. l. 26. r. I give place, p. 217. l. 6. for out, r. of.


