Englands Diurnall, OR PASSAGES OF STATE, Executed by (and against) the known
Law of the Land. With certain Queries, wherefore, and by what Law, so many
things have been done contrary to the known Law of the Land.

Printed in the year, of Englands fear, Being the first of Reformation or
Desolation.

Englands Diurnal, OR Passages of State, executed by, and against the known Law
of the Land.
THe first matter of consequence which claims precose^cie in this discourse,
is his Majesty's departure from his Court of Whitehall, which indeed was the
first and principal beginning of these ensuing and since succeeding miseries,
this was the root from whence has sprung all these following mischiefs; for
the Papists and other evil affected persons by this means gained time and
opportunity to work their pernitions and wicked ends, both to the ruin of his
Royal Majesty, and the whole Kingdom, laboring to destroy both the Religion
and Laws of the Land, as by the sequel may appear.

1. By the powerful working of these evil affected persons, the Queen was
sent into Holland, and the Jewels of the Crown pawned and made away to
porch^se Arms to be employed for the destruction of the same Crown, for take
away Religion and Law, the supporters of the Crown, and consequently the Crown
must fall, and loose its lusture, take away the purity of Religion, and the
Justice of the Law, and then consequently Athesme and Tirany must be the grand
supporters, than this has been the practice of these men is apparent, as
follows.

Those men that shall and do labor to destroy the Religion of a Land, which
is grounded upon saving Faith, and warranted by Holy writ, and endeavor to
introduce and bring in a Religion neither grounded upon Faith, nor warranted by
scripture, do as much as in them lies to destroy the Preachers and Preaching
of the Gospel on Earth, and in so doing does absolutely deny the power of God
in heaven, and to deny God and his power, who is it one Athesme, the Papists
have endea vou^ed this it is apparent, and thence I conclude that their endea
vouring the destruction of Religion has declared their intention to introduce
Popery, which is in some points absolute Athesme.

2. Those men which shall by their practizes endeavor to subvert the Laws of
a Land, or to hinder the due execution of the Laws against those that by
delinquency have made breach thereof, do as much as in them lies to destroy
the Laws, for take away the power of the Law it must needs be of no effect,
when the Subject (groaning under the pressure of Arbitrary and Tiranicall
oppressions) shall repair to the Laws (which should be the protectron of the
Subject) and shall expect Justice from the Law, and that Law which was at first
ordained for the same end, shall be employed against it self, and in stead of
Justice, the Subject so complaining shall most unlawfully and most unjustly be
censured, (contrary to Law) according to the disposition of those Law-breakers,
is not this absolute Tirany, is not this to destroy the Laws of the Land.

That this is apparent, and has been frequently done in the Starchamber,
High Commission, and indeed in most Courts of the Kingdom, where the Purse
paid for Judgment, and Justice was sold by the ounce, witness Master Hambdens
Case of Ship Money, the Laws were abused, the subject groaning under an almost
Arbitrary Government, Taxes upon Taxes following one in the neck of another,
Levies must be made through the Kingdom for the maintenance of a superfluous
Army, in the defense of an Eclesiasticall Fancy, against the Kingdom of
Scotland, these and innumerable more encumbrances and grievances caused him to
complain, for which (in stead of redress, which the Law if not abused, had
affoorded him) he was tossed too and fro, from one Court to another, Fine upon
Fine, Judgment upon Judgment, his Estate confiscate, and his person
imprisoned, now let the world be judge whether this were not absolute Tirany.

Having as they conceived brought their business to fair growth and finding
that there might be danger in their staying near or about London, the
Parliament having discovered their hypocrisy, and begun to imprison some of
the chief of their Ringleaders, therefore they persuaded his Majesty to make
his refid^nce in York a p^oe remote, where they likewise projected the vay sing
of this Army for the abetting and maintaining of their Athestieall Assertions,
which was done under the Notion of standing for the defense of his Majesty's
Prerogative and the known Laws of the land, with the Liberty of the Subject
now let us examine what has been done by them either agreeable to the known
Law of the land or conduceable to the benefit, Liberty, or property of the
subject.

1. By what known Law was there Commissions of Array sent out into every County
of this Kingdom to ray se Arms, there being no Foreign Invasion, nor fear
of any, but of their own Accomplices and Allies which they invited and sent for.

2. By what known Law were several Members of both Houses sent for to York,
and discharged their attendance, contrary to their Oaths taken at their
Elections, before the respective Counties, for and by whom they were chosen.

3. By what known Law were persons entertained and employed in places of
Command in the Army, (called by the name of the Kings Army) which are known
Tray tors according to the^ known Laws of the Land, and protected from the
Justice of the known Law, contrary to known Law.

4. By what known Law have several Persons that have been known Rebels in
Ireland, been likewise entertained, and held in great respect.

5. By what known Law were the Papists of this Kingdom suffered to have Arms,
and not only suffered but Arms delivered unto them, and Commissions granted
them to raise Papists when it is known that by the known Law of the Land, no
Papist convicted should be suffered to have any Arms for himself, muchlesse
to have power to Arm other Papists.

6. By what known Law have Papists been permitted to attend his Majesty even at
his table, and in his Chamber, ( Vide E^^dimion Porter, who would go to Church
in the morning, and to Mass in the Evening, when by the known Law of the Land
no Papist ought to come within ten Miles of the Court, much less into his
Majesty's Chamber.

By what known Law has so many practices been to disolve this Parliament,
which was established by a known Law made this Parliament, and graciously
confirmed by his Majesty in, and to this Parliament.

As touching their bare pretenses of standing for the Liberty of the Subject.

Was it for the Liberty of the Subject that the Trained Bands were summoned,
and disarmed, in several Counties?

Was it for the Liberty of the Subject, that this Army was raised to plunder
and rob the Inhabitants of Cities, Towns, Corporations and Villages?

Was it for the Liberty of the Subject, that Hull was invaded. Kingston and
Brainford plundered, the Inhabitants of Ciciter murdered and destroyed?

Was it for the Liberty of the Subject that the City of Westchester was
surprised, and made a receptackle for Papists, and an Inn to entertain Rebels
out of Ireland, who no doubt if they be not prevented will easily be persuaded
to asist the adverse party in the pursuance of those Designs which they have
now on foot, the promoting of which conduces so much to the furtherance of
their detested Rebellion in Ireland?

Now if these things have been done by the known Laws of the Land, or for the
Liberty of the Subject, Let all men that are not either wilful or ignorant
judge.

But now on the contrary part, let us examine what has been done by the known
Laws, and for the maintenance and prefervation of the Liberty of the Subject,
and then we shall easily be resolved in that grand Case of Conscience, whether
we have most reason to stand for the King and Parliament, or for the King
against the parliament.

1. For the Militia, the thing that they make the grand occasion of these
differences.

As touching his Majesty's power over the Militia, it is manifest that his
Majesty's Lievetenantship was void at the coming together of this Parliament,
and being void, it must necessarily follow, that if the coming together of the
Parliament made his Majesty's Lievetenantship void, that they then have at the
least a negative voice in the disposal thereof, for without doubt, had non his
Majesty found that the safety of the Kingdom consisted in the calling of this
Parliament, the Parliament had never been called and if they were called to
consult and to order those things which did conduce most to the safety of the
Kingdom, (and could not be done without them) then consequently the Militia,
(in the ordering and disposing of which, consists the only safety of the
Kingdom) must necessarily rest at their dispose.

Object. But it is objected, that though the Parliament have this power in the
disposal yet they are not to make use of that power without his Majesty's
Assent.

Ans. It Is true his Majesty's assent ought to be thereunto, but if his Majesty
dissenting, shall neglect that charge committed to him, shall the Parliament
therefore make that their president, and suffer the Kingdom to lie open to
foreign Invasion, and Domesticke Innovasion, because his Majesty did not
consent to the passing of a Bill for the future establishment of the Militia
for the security of the Kingdom, therefore the Parliament must not by an
Ordinance (according to the known Law) provide for the present disposal
thereof, to the end that the Kingdom may be put into a posture of defense, and
be enabled to defend it self against all those that envy the peace of this
Kingdom, though by the known Law of the Land, they were called for that
purpose.

The second objection is that the Parliament cannot raise an Army without his
Majesty's assent thereunto, when on the contrary I will prove, that by the
known Law of the Land the Parliament has raised this Army, and that by the
same known Law, they have power to impose contributions on the Subject to
maintain the present war against those that labor to invade the Religion and
Laws of the Kingdom.

It is manifest that every Court of the Kingdom, established by the Laws of
the Land and the Authority of Parliament, has a power by writs to command
before them all such persons as shall be for any lawful cause complained of,
and indicted in the said Court, and if the persons so commanded, or served with
such Writs, shall deny to obey their Writs, by virtue of the said Warrant the
respective Officers have power to call to their aid and assistance all such
persons as they shall think convenient, to the end that the said Persons so
refusing and resisting, may be made to answer the Law in all and every
particular which shall be objected against them; Now there is no Court of
Justice in this Kingdom but has had its first original constitution from the
Parliaments of England, and it would seem very preposterus, that inferior
Courts should have a power imposed upon them by the authority of the Law, and
the Judgment of Parliament, and the Parliament it self (which is the superior
Court, from whom all other Courts had their beginings) should be denied that
power by writ to command Delinquents before them, (and in case the Persons
commanded shall not only refuse, but shall be protected) to raise sufficient
strength to fetch all such persons so refusing, or protected, and it would
likewise seem a very preposterous thing, that the Law should give them power
to raise an Army for this end, and deny them means to maintain the Army so
raised, neither is the raising of the said Army, or the imposing of
contributions upon the Subject for the maintenance of the said Army, any way
destructive to the Liberty of the Subject, since what is imposed is but a
reasonable contribution for the maintenance of that Army which is employed
against those that labor to destroy it, and the known Law of the Land, as I
have formerly proved, and therefore it is a vain and foolish resolution which
some men have taken up, pretending that they will not take up Arms against the
King, nor assist the Parliament against the King, never remembering the
difference between his person and his Office; thus ending the last Years
Diurnall, I leave you to this Years recantation, and rest,

Your Friend if you please* if not I care not. I. H.

FINIS.

