A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral and Metropolitical Church OF St. Peter in
York.

On Sunday, November. 17. 1695.

By George Halley, M. A. and Rector of St. Cuthberts in York

In his days shall the Righteous flourish, and abundance of peace, so long as
the Moon endures.

Psalm 72. He shall have dominion also from Sea to Sea.

V. 7, 8, 9. Jerusalem is built as a City that is at Unity in it self.

Psalm 122. LONDON, Printed for Rob. Clark in the Minster-Yard, in York. 1695.

To His GRACE THE Duke of LEEDS, Lord President of his Majesty's Most
Honorable Privy Council.
May it please your Grace,
WHen I reflect upon the many Great Services you have done to this Church and
Nation, and the vast obligations they both owe to your Grace for their Peace
and Prosperity; it raises in me not only an admiration of your Person, but a
grateful sense of them, and fills my heart with wishes for your Health and
Happiness.

It is upon this consideration, My Lord, that I humbly presume to dedicate to
Your Grace this ensuing discourse, which, I hope, out of the known candor and
goodness of your Nature, you will be pleased not only to pardon but accept of,
as a small tribute of thankfulness, and to give it your Noble Patronage and
Protection.

It is a Sermon, which, tho mean enough in its composure, yet sincerely exhorts
my Fellow Subjects to pray for the welfare of His Sacred Majesty, and to serve
him with their Lives and Fortunes. Now, at whose Feet can I better lay it than
at Yours, who have hazarded all that is near and dear to you in this world for
his Present Majesty's Interest, for the Support of Monarchical Government, and
the Protestant Religion; for which Your Illustrious Name ought to be had in
everlasting Remembrance.

It is true indeed, some Pamphlets have, of late, appeared abroad with a full
design to blacken Your Grace, and injure your Reputation. Such things, as
these, have been in all ages and will be still incident to Great Men: for such
as move in High Spheres and with a vigorous luster, must needs (as the Sun)
raise many envious Exhalations: But God be thanked Your Graces merit and
integrity are so well known, your Glorious Name and reputation shine so bright
in the English Horizon, as makes it beyond the power and capacity of a
Pamphleteer to eclipse or blemish them.

Alas! we live in an Ungrateful Age: The King himself, tho the Author of the
greatest happiness to this Nation, yet has his Enemies. How many have we
amongst us, whose Madness and Stupidity make them desire to exchange a golden
Scepter for an iron Rod of French Cruelty and Popish Revenge; Who repine and
murmur, complain and conspire against the best of Princes? Some long for
troubled waters to fish for an Estate in, impatiently wait for the moving of
the water, to repair their broken, or heal their lame fortunes; so great is the
Vice and Immorality of some, that they hate such a Governor as enlightens the
sublime Orb he moves in, with the bright luster of an exact and an exemplary
Conversation, and studies nothing more than a general Reformation of Life and
Manners, and so endeavors, as much as in him lies, to make His People happy,
by having the Lord for their God.

All I have to add, is my hearty prayers that nothing may undermine our State,
or shake King William's Throne, that nothing may disturb our Happiness and
Tranquillity, that God may preserve Your Grace and Noble Family, and give a
Blessing to all your faithful Endeavors for the Peace and Prosperity both of
this Church and Nation. I humbly beg leave, My Lord, to subscribe my self,

Your Graces most humble and obedient Servant, George Halley.


PSALM CXXII. 6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem.
THis Psalm was composed by the Royal Prophet King David, after his translation
of the Ark of the Lord to Jerusalem; the place which God had appointed for his
solemn worship and adoration, and whither all the Jews, wheresoever inhabiting,
were obliged by the testimony or law given to Israel, to go up thrice every
year, to commemorate the mercies of God toward them, and to offer up unto him
the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving. Thither the Tribes go up, even the
tribes of the Lord according to the testimony or commandment, to give thanks
unto the Name of the Lord, v. 4. there also are set thrones of judgment, even
the throne of the house of David, v. 5. that is, there is the supreme
judicature of the Nation, there is the administration of justice and judgment,
the great Court for the decision of the highest matters, for the conduct and
management of the most important affairs. Thus at the time of this Psalms
composure, there was a re-establishment of Piety and Religion, Justice and
Judgment, Liberty and Property; the Sun had once again dazzled the rays of
prosperity upon the Jewish Church and State; and for this, in the beginning of
the Psalm, we find Holy David in a transport of joy and exultation: I was glad
when they said unto me, let us go into the house of the Lord. Our feet shall
stand in thy gates, O Jerusalem, v. 1, 2. and here in the Text he passionately
excites and calls upon his subjects, upon all good men, to express an ardent
love, a sincere affection for Jerusalem, to pray to God for its happiness, for
a continuance of the great blessings, of the many precious advantages which it
then enjoyed: and as an argument to influence and persuade them so to do, he
assures them that it tended to their own inexpressible interest and advantage,
to their temporal and eternal felicity, that in the peace thereof they should
have peace: that upon the peace of Jerusalem depended the peace and prosperity
of the whole Kingdom. O pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper
that love thee

And here, what thus concerned the people of the Jews does no less concern us
Christians. We of this Church and Nation have as strong reasons, as nervous
arguments, as powerful motives to pray now for the peace of our Jerusalem.
Praised be the Lord, great and inestimable are the blessings which we enjoy: We
have the true Religion established amongst us, a pure, an easy and substantial
Religion, which infinitely transcends that of the Jews: We have the blissful
prerogative of peaceable public Assemblies, we are not debarred from coming
into the Courts of the Lord. We have liberty and ease, justice and judgment,
plenty and abundance, peace and tranquillity in a great measure here at home,
and the Almighty has lately made us victorious and triumphant abroad, through the
incomparable conduct and heroic valor of our Glorious Prince, whose hands God
has taught to war, and his fingers to fight. Now all this great happiness lies
at stake, now seems to be the Crisis of our affairs both Ecclesiastical and
Civil, the peace and prosperity both of this Church and State seeins to depend
upon the peace and unity, upon the harmony and concord of that August Assembly
which is nigh at hand; for which reason I thought it not improper to call upon
you to pray for the peace of Jerusalem. A word spoken in due season, how good
is it? says Solomon. Prove. 15.23. All our happiness, I say, seems to depend
upon the unity and concord of that August Assembly which is nigh at hand.

A Multitude of Counselors, in them is our safety, if they prove worthy
Patriots, if they employ and unite their counsels together for the public
good, if they be such as fear God, men of truth and hating covetousness, if
their hearts be truly English, inflamed with love and affection for their
Country's interest, for the present Government, and for the Protestant
Religion, for the honor and glory of the Nation, for the grandeur and
reputation of our Prince, then may we promise to our selves Halcyonian days,
then shall we have a charming Prospect and a comfortable assurance of a more
complete and established felicity. When such wise and prudent men govern
affairs, what can be the effect but all temporal bliss and prosperity? if such
Pilots are placed at the Helm, the Ship must sail in an Ocean of peace and
tranquillity. Oh! therefore let us make it our important business, at this time
especially, to pour forth our prayers and supplications to the God of Heaven,
with ardor and zeal, with fervency and devotion, for a blessing upon all their
consultations: that their hearts and minds may be as uniform as the graceful
buildings of that Metropolis, whither they are going, where is the seat of
Judgment, where is our Prince's Throne O my Brethren, let me beseech you in the
affectionate words, in the passionate language of the Royal Prophet, King
David, to pray for the peace of Jerusalem. O pray for the peace of Jerusalem.

From which words I will endeavor to show you

1. The importance and signification of Peace.

2. What method we must of necessity take, what means we must make use of to
enjoy the Blessings of Peace. But first, in the first place I will endeavor to
show you the importance and signification of Peace.

In the lively oracles of God, Peace is a word of a large extent and
signification; it comprehends all kind of happiness and prosperity: Sometimes
it imports a freedom from inward sorrow and trouble, a satisfaction or
contentment of mind; a happiness which such are possessed of, as come into the
house of the Lord, and worship him there in the beauty of Holiness, as keep his
Sabbaths and reverence his Sanctuary, as serve the Lord with fasting and
prayers night and day.

Nothing but a good and religious life can secure to a man that thing which
ought to be valued by him above all the things in this world, namely, the
inward peace and tranquillity of his mind: such only can have this great peace
as love the law of God* as sincerely endeavor to live up to the precepts and
obligations of the Gospel. A virtuous man has peace and an Heaven in his
bosom; the greatest transports of joy possess and surround his breast, such a
man is satisfied from himself, Prove. 14.14. has quietness of conscience; this
is the thing which gives him abundant satisfaction: for there is such a natural
principle as conscience which God has implanted in every man, this is the
Angel-Guardian which God and Nature has placed within every ones own breast,
this is the scale which impartially weighs all our actions, all our works,
whether they be good or whether they be evil: when we do the good, it creates
in us delight and pleasure, complacency and satisfaction, it entertains us with
this sweet and grateful Echo, well done good and faithful servants, you shall
enter into the joy of your Lord: When we do the evil, it lashes us, fills us
full of regret and trouble, shame and disgrace. It is this natural principle
which is the great repository and Magazine of all those pleasures, which can
afford any solid refreshment to the soul: When there is a calmness and serenity
in the conscience, then a man properly enjoys all things, and what is more,
himself; and nothing can make a man's conscience to applaud and comfort him, but
a life conform to the Divine Laws, a conscience void of offense both toward
God and toward men. There is no pleasure comparable to that which springs from
a good conscience; all other pleasure is transient and momentary, vanishes and
is gone immediately after its fruition or enjoyment, and generally leaves a
sting behind it; but the pleasures and satisfactions which flow from purity and
holiness; these fan the mind, entertain the conscience with sweet and
comfortable, with durable and lasting reflections.

But the case is far otherwise with a wicked man; such a one is a great
stranger to inward peace and tranquillity of mind; because of his evil deeds,
his conscience flashes in his face, casts abroad its thunder, and strikes him
the greatest terror and affrightment. A life of ungodliness is always
tormenting, and the expectation of a future Judgment is always terrible; his
conscience tells him that in the world to come, he shall have such a punishment
assigned him as is proportionable to his vicious life and immoral conversation.
The Holy Scriptures compare a wicked man to a troubled Sea, Isaiah 57.20. a
wicked man is like a troubled Sea! how? he is always working, restless and
uneasy; and when he comes within sight of the port of eternity, what storms
and tempests are then raised in his Soul? he is seized with the greatest
anguish and horror, with sadness and confusion of Spirit. No, if we will
believe the Lord our God, there can be no peace to the wicked, v. 21. No, this
is only the good Man's portion, it is he alone who has peace and tranquillity
of mind, it is he alone who has a comfortable expectation of the life to come,
his conscience only, as a glass, represents to his sight the Beatific Vision,
the ineffable pleasures and the endless joys of eternity. But

2dly, By Peace may be understood a deliverance from War, from strife and
contention both in Church and State; and this is the proper import and
signification of peace in the words of my Text. O pray for the peace of
Jerusalem.

And indeed, it is this Peace which is the greatest temporal happness: this is
the peace which makes a Nation glorious and flourishing: this blesses the
people with affluence of prosperity; this gives them richly all things to
enjoy; without this, riches and honors, the greatest plenty and abundance is
but a dubious and an uncertain felicity. And this sort of peace we of this
Church and Nation are comparatively blessed with, beyond many other Nations in
the world. The greatest part of Europe lies now a bleeding, involved in blood
and confusion: how does fire and sword, distress and persecution rage in
several places beyond the Sea? how many Cities are there by War laid waste and
demolished? how many noble structures are turned into ruinous heaps? how many
thousands abroad are in trouble and sorrow, detained from the comforts of Gods
solemn worship, fed with the bread of weeping and have nothing but
plenteousness of tears to drink? When, in a great measure, the beauty of our
Church and State is as yet unsullied; when we sit under our own Vines; when we
have the true Religion, and can come into the Courts of the Lord; when we can
appear before the presence of our God without disturbance or molestation. It is
true indeed, we are engaged in a chargeable and expensive, in a very bloody
war; but still we are happy in respect of other Nations, because it is a War
nor at home but abroad: A War that is absolutely necessary, we can have no
prospect of happiness without it; and if we will but so exercise our selves as
to engage the Lord of Hosts to be our God, we may see it shortly produce an
honorable and lasting Peace, durable tranquillity. O pray for the peace of
Jerusalem. But

3dly, Peace, in the Holy Scriptures, not only imports a good conscience,
satisfaction or contentment of mind, not only a deliverance from war, from
strife and contention both in Church and State, but also it signifies all kind
of temporal happiness and prosperity: and according to this comprehensive
signification we enjoy Peace in a great degree.

We are blessed with the best of Princes and the best of governments, with a most
incomparable constitution: we live in the most temperate part of the temperate
Zone: our habitation is encompassed with the Sea, as a Wall of defense to us on
every side. Et penitus toto divisos orb Britannos. And we enjoy a Government
as temperate as the Climate itself; the beams of Sovereignty are neither so
perpendicular over our heads as that they can scorch us, nor yet so oblique,
but that they are able to warm and cherish us; there is nothing but what enjoys
the auspicious influence, the comfortable heat thereof. A government which made
our forefathers happy at home and famous abroad. If you consult such as are
men of wisdom and experience, as have seen many things by traveling foreign
Countries; read but the accurate remarks and curious observations of such
understanding persons, and they will tell you that no Polity is more amiable
and lovely, more graceful and glorious than our own. If any Nation under Heaven
can, we may justly say that the lot is fallen unto us in a fair ground: let us
therefore humbly beg of God a continuation of these his Blessings. O pray for
the peace of Jerusalem.

And this leads me to the second observable, namely, what method we must of
necessity take, what means we must make use of to enjoy the blessings of peace.

And here, the Text chalks us out a method, prescribes us such means, as, if
rightly made use of, will effectually procure us the blessings of peace; and
that is Prayer. We must pray for it. O pray for the peace of Jerusalem.

The time would fail me to tell of the virtue and efficacy, the force and
energy, the wonderful strength and power of prayer. Such cannot be ignorant of
this as believe the Holy Scriptures, as are conversant in the lively oracles of
God. What strange and prodigious things are recorded there, unto which prayer
has given an accomplishment and perfection? how many Victories has it
obtained? how has it stayed the course of the Sun and Moon? how has it made
those glorious Luminaries to stand still in the midst of Heaven for the space
of a whole day? how has it brought down rain from Heaven to refresh and enrich
the parched ground? this important truth is illustrated by several Examples in
the Sacred Records. We find there, that the effectual fervent prayer of a
righteous man avails much; that God is graciously pleased to be prevailed
upon, and overcome by prayer; that this is the way to storm the Mansions of
Eternity; that by this artillery, if well planted the kingdom of heaven
suffers violence, and the violent, the obstinate suppliants, take it by
force. If therefore such be the virtue and efficacy, the force and energy, the
wonderful strength and power of prayer, O pray for the peace of Jerusalem.

But 2dly, Prayer, as well as peace, is a word of comprehensive signification.
Prayer, which is the necessary means for the obtaining the blessings of peace,
implies a putting our trust and confidence in the Lord our God. If we must pray
unto God for peace, it supposes that we must place all our hopes in him; for
in vain should we pray unto him, if we did not make him the object of our hope,
if we did not put our trust in him. No, when we pray, we must say, with the
Royal Psalmist, Let thy merciful kindness, O Lord, be upon us, like as we do
put our trust in thee, Psalm. 33.21. Or in the words of our excellent and
incomparable Liturgy, O Lord, let thy mercy be showed upon us, as we do put our
trust in thee. O therefore not only pray unto, but put your trust in the Lord
for the peace of Jerusalem.

Alas! in whom shall we trust, in whom shall we repose our hopes for the peace
of Jerusalem but in the Lord our God? Shall we trust in our Naval Force? Vain
are all these helps without God our defense. Our Ships may be consumed by fire:
such a surprising and terrible tempest may arise, as may drive the Walls of our
Nation upon rocks, or else they may be dashed in pieces with the violence of
the waves. They that go down to the sea in ships and occupy their business in
great waters, do see the works of the Lord, and behold his wonders in the deep;
such men frequently see the sad and dismal effects of a rough wind and a
tempestuous sea; for at his word the stormy wind arises which lifts up the
waves thereof, they are carried up to the heaven and down again to the deep,
their soul melts away because of the trouble; they reel to and fro and
stagger like a drunken man, and are at their wits end, but when they cry or
pray unto the Lord, when they trust in him, he delivers them out of their
distress. O therefore pray unto, and trust in God, for the peace of Jerusalem,
whom the winds and the seas obey. Shall we trust in prudent Politicians? Alas!
God by a secret and irresistible power can stop or countermine the deepest
projects can split the closest counsels, and smite the most refined policy with
frustration and a curse: God can infatuate the wisdom of the wise, and turn all
their counsels into folly, as he did the counsels of Achitophel.

Shall we trust in the strength of tough, well-disciplin'd and veteran Troops?
God can strike a terror into their hearts, He can make them hear a a noise of
Chariots, a noise of Horses, even the noise of a great Host; He can fill their
hearts with such a fear as shall put them all into disorder and confusion, as
shall enforce them to decamp and fly: Thus He did with the Host of the Syrians.
2 Kings 7.6.

Shall we trust in the power and friendship of our Allies? Shall we depend upon
the strength of Leagues and Confederacies? God can dissolve and break such
chains in sunder: God can set Ephraim against Manasses, and Manasses against
Ephraim, and both against Judah. No; let us pray unto, and trust in the Lord
our God for the peace of Jerusalem. Tho here, mistake me not, I do not declaim
against a Naval force, against prudent Politicians, against a well-appointed
Army, or against the power of Leagues and Confederacies: No, these are
necessary as well as Prayer, as well as a trusting in God; tho not in the same
height or degree: it must be our prime and supreme care, our principal study,
we must in the first place have our recourse to God by prayer and supplication;
for all is in vain, if God goes not forth with our Fleets and Armies; without
Gods favor and loving kindness we must not expect the blessings of peace.
Thus, I say, a Naval force, a well appointed Army. Leagues and Confederacies,
are necessary as well as Prayer, tho not in the same degree; for, such is the
dispensation of Divine Providence in this sublunary world, that it requires
humane means, our own labor and indefatigable industry in conjunction with it;
we must not expect Miracles at this time a day. You know the Fable in Anianus;
A Country man, that had laid his Wagon fast in a Slough, did nothing but call
upon Hercules to help him out of the mire; no, set your shoulder to the Wheel,
and then is your time to pray; and this is emblematical of our duty and
obligation: We must not lie with our fingers in our mouths, no, we must
exercise all our powers and abilities, we must not expect the gracious
assistance of Divine Providence, except we set our own shoulders to the work:
So that it is necessary to fight, to have good forces both by Sea and Land, as
well as to pray for peace, for our temporal bliss and felicity. And here how
happy are we, who have a Courageous Prince to head his Armies, to fight our
Battles; a Prince of a sound and steady understanding, of a great spirit and
heart, who runs upon the very mouth of the Cannon, for the peace of Europe.
That unfortunate Gentleman (Mr. Godfrey) was slain by a Cannon-ball, when
standing very near his Majesty in the Trenches, in the late famous Siege of
Namur: Thus has He exposed himself in places of greatest danger, and is still
ready to charge through storms and tempests of flame, for our happiness and
prosperity. It is He whom God has made the happy instrument of our
preservation: it is He who gives the miserably harrassed and disturbed part of
Christendom a glorious prospect of its former peace and tranquillity. Let us
pour forth our supplications, let us heartily pray to God for him, that he
would be pleased to protect his Royal Person, and crown all his enterprises
with success.

But this is not the whole of our Duty. Let us serve him with our lives and
fortunes, let us cheerfully and willingly contribute to the support of his
government proportionably to our respective abilities. Money is the nerve, the
strong sinew of War; without this what peace can we expect? without this, as
well as prayer, how can He break the power of the ungodly and malicious? how
can He humble the troubler of Israel? A Denial of this takes off the Chariot
wheels, and makes things drive on not vigorously but heavily, and then what can
(...) for but an inundation of misery and distress (...) let us not imitate the
foolish and inconsiderate Constantinopolitans of old who, tho they were the
richest Citizens in the World, yet, when their City was besieged would find
nothing to give their Emperor for its defense and security, tho He implored it
of them with the greatest importunity: But when once the Ottoman Power became
its insulting and triumphant Conqueror, then those narrow hearted Citizens, who
before had nothing to give, had more than enough to lose. We had better give
the greatest part of what we have, than be exposed to the plunder and rapine,
to the ravage and fury of the common enemy and oppressor.

Blessed be God we have now a King, who leaves nothing unattempted for our
peace and quiet, for our ease and repose, for the security of our government
and the Protestant Religion, even to the hazard of his own sacred Person; and
shall we be wanting in any thing to so noble an enterprise, to so glorious and
heroic an achievement? No, let us serve him with our lives and fortunes, and
pray fervently for the peace of Jerusalem.

But 3dly and lastly, in order to all temporal bliss and happiness, and that
the God of heaven and earth may hear your prayers for the peace of Jerusalem, I
humbly offer to your consideration these two things, and I beg of you to
observe and practice them; and they are

1. To dwell together in unity.

2 To glorify God by purity of life and holiness of conversation.

And first I humbly beg of you to dwell together in unity. Behold how good and
joyful a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in unity Psalm 133.1. to
this the Lord has promised his blessing and life for evermore, v. 4 Alas! what
peace can we expect if we dwell not together in unity? A Kingdom divided
against it self cannot stand. What was it that facilitated the conquest of the
old Britains by the Romans but their civil Factions? and what exposes this
nation now to such a conquest, but our deplorable dissatisfactions, schisms,
and religious dissentions? O pray for the peace of the Church, they shall
prosper that love her.

Let us be all of one heart, one mind, and of one religion, the excellent
religion of the Church of England, a religion which is first pure, then
peaceable, which is wisdom from above; a religion which may be easily proved to
be primitive and Apostolical, to be the faith which was once delivered to the
Saints. Oh that we could justify our lives as well! Oh that we would make it
our business to live up to the precepts and obligations of this incomparable
religion! then would God hear our prayers for the peace of Jerusalem. But alas!
how many are there that refuse fellowship and communion with us? that have
particular places to meet in, and a singular way of worship to themselves? What
reason can be assigned for their disunion, but a leaning too much to their own
understanding? a spirit of obstinacy and contradiction? Can they object against
the substantials of our worship? Are we defective in any essential part of
Religion? No, they cannot deny but our Religion is substantially true and pure,
without spot or wrinkle or any such thing, holy and without blemish. Can they
object that our way of worship has the Roman complexion, that there is in it
any thing of Popery and Superstition? No surely, if they have understanding and
ingenuity, they must be convinced, they must confess that our Church has no
inclination at all to Popery: Her admirable deportment and gallant behavior in
the late Reign must satisfy any reasonable man, that she is the most strong
and standing Bulwark of Protestancy, and has been so ever since the
Reformation. In the late Reign how did her Dove like innocence appear? when the
weather was hard and severe, when the season was tempestuous, when the rain
descended and the floods came, when the winds were strong and boystrous and
vehemently beat upon her, she did not, like a subtle Serpent, creep into a
hole, but bravely showed her self upon the face of the earth, and vindicated
her principles with such a mouth and wisdom as all her Adversaries were not
able to gainsay nor resist; and stood, like a Rock, impregnable against all the
assaults made against her. The charming voice of antiquity speaks in behalf of
our Religion: What then is the matter? What occasions Nonconformity? What just
reason is there of complaint and dissatisfaction?

There are some Ceremonies which they cannot away with. As for her Ceremonies,
there is nothing in them but what is harmless and innocent, discreet and
primitive, in number few, in use decent, peaceable in regard of conformity, and
highly conducive to Devotion. I am sure, our Holy Mother the Church treats her
Children with all imaginable tenderness and moderation, she commands nothing
but what very well suits with St. Paul's Canon, let all things be done decently
and in order. That there should be Ceremonies, it is of absolute necessity; no
outward work can be performed without ceremonial circumstances, and that there
should be constitutions concerning them, it is necessary, tho not simply and
absolutely as the former, yet necessitate convenientiae. If this were not, then
every man might have his own fashion by himself, and so consequently there
would be nothing but infinite distractions and horrible confusions in the
Church. No, the Holy Apostle has taught us better things, God is not the
Author of confusion but of Peace, 1 Cor. 14.33. and 1 Cor. 11 16. If any man
seem to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the Churches of God.
But it is a Jesuitical Artifice to promote Separation. Nothing can better
advance the interest of Rome: It is their business to delude, to break the
peace of the best constituted Church in the whole World. They are highly
sensible that enmity amongst our selves is the only gate that can possibly give
Popery an entrance into this Kingdom. O let us then in time unite, and see the
things which belong unto our peace. Let us meet all together with one accord in
one place, let us live together in Love and Unity. Upon this virtue of
Unanimity, our Riches, our Honors, our Laws, our Religion, our King and our
Country all our hopes depend. Then shall we see happy days, and peace upon
Israel. O pray for the peace of Jerusalem.

But 2dly and lastly, Let us glorify God by purity of life and holiness of
conversation. This we must of absolute necessity do, or else the Almighty will
not hear our prayers for the peace of Jerusalem. It is infallibly true which we
read in several places in Holy Writ; thus Prove. 28.9. He that turns away his
ear from hearing the law, he that hearkens not to the Lord his God and obeys
not his laws, the prayer of that man is an abomination. Thus Psalm 66.18. If I
regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me: but Psalm 34.15. The
eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are open unto their
prayers. Thus in the ninth Chapter of St. John's gospel verse 31. we read, that
God hears not sinners. Yes, God hears and sees whatsoever is transacted upon
the stage of this World. God is a witness and spectator of all men's actions;
not so much as a thought can escape him, neither can any word be hidden from
him: to him all hearts are open, all designs are known, and from him no secrets
are hid; every man's heart is as pellucid, as clear to him as Crystal, he knows
what is done in the inner rooms of the heart. The eye, indeed, of the
Adulterer, the Thief, the Murderer, waits for the twilight, for the evening,
for the black and dark night, saying, no eye shall see me; and disguiseth his
face. Alas! he labors under the grossest mistake and delusion: the night, with
God, is as clear as the day, the darkness and light to him are both alike. Oh,
that such men would but consider that God is the Author of their frame and
constitution! It is he who has enriched us with the noble powers and excellent
faculties of hearing and seeing. It is by him that we are thus fearfully and
wonderfully made. Now what man of sense or understanding can imagine him to
want any power or excellence which He alone has imparted to his creatures? If
the effect be so glorious, what is the cause? surely he hears, he sees, in a
superior degree, in a more eminent manner than we can possibly comprehend, his
eyes must be ten thousand times brighter than the sun. He that formed the eye,
shall not he see? He that planted the ear, shall not he hear? Psalm. 94.9. God
hears not sinners. These words were spoken by the man who was blind from his
birth, and whose eyes our Blessed Savior had opened; such an astonishing
miracle as confounded the Pharisees, as made them fly to opprobrious language
and Excommunications such a credential, such an infallible testimony as
illustrated his Divinity, as sufficiently evinced and proved his divine
original and authority. God hears not sinners! That is, God patronizeth no
sin, God works no miracle to authenticate or justify the mission of a
sinner: Wicked men are always hateful to God, he rejects and refuses the
prayers and requests of sinners, that is, such as live in a state of
impenitency, such as run on in sinful and debauched courses with the greatest
boldness and presumption, such as affront him by avowed wickedness and impiety.
Nothing will endear the God of heaven to us but purity and holiness: the God,
with whom we have to do, is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity; this will
certainly make a separation betwixt him and us, this will enforce him to
withdraw from us the light of his countenance. If we continue in our sins, then
when we cry, He will not hear; when we call, He will not answer. O then let us
lead holy and exemplary lives, let us live with especial regularity and
strictness of conversation; let us glorify our Heavenly Father by works of
meekness and humility, charity and patience, sobriety and temperance: thus if
we perfect holiness in the sight of God, we shall then have evident
demonstrations of his power and audience; he will graciously hear us when we
pray for the happiness and prosperity both of Church and State for the peace of
Jerusalem? God will then direct the consultations of the High and Honorable
Court of Parliament now at hand to the advancement of his Glory, to the good of
this Church, to the safety, honor and welfare of our Sovereign, and his
Kingdoms. We shall than have a comfortable hope that all things will be settled
by their endeavors upon the best and surest foundations, that peace and
happiness, truth and justice, the Protestant religion, and true Christian piety
will be established among us for all generations.

Which God of his infinite mercy grant, for Jesus Christ his sake, to whom,
with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed of us and the whole Church, all
power, glory and praise, now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

