THE MYSTERY OF CHRIST in Us, With the Mystery of the Father, Word, and holy
Ghost or Spirit, OPENED.

Also, the Parable of the rich man's flocks and herds, and the poor man's
ewe-lamb, Explicated.

Likewise, the way that Christ takes to undo a man, and take away his life.

Together with a discovery of the neerness of Christ's coming, and of those
glorious things which are to be fulfilled in these later days.

Set forth and published by Ed. Hide jun.

Romans 10. 6, 7, 8, 9. 2 Samuel 12. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 1 John 5. 7, 8. Psalm. 87.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Isa. 6. 6, 7. Zech. 14. 20, 21. Zech. 5. 6, 7, 8, 9.
London, Printed by Ja. Cottrel, for Giles Calvert, at the black Spread-Eagle at
the West End of Paul's. 1651.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
BEfore I was stirred up to set pen to paper in this following Treatise, I
found in my spirit such a contrariety to it, that I resolved within my self I
would write no more. But within a little while after, I found the Spirit of God
to have such violent, strong, and powerful influence upon me, that I could not
withstand it, but write. And besides, I had no peace and quietness in my
spirit, till I had unloadened my spirit, and finished this Work: for I had this
dashed into my spirit, Write. But no sooner was it dashed in, but I went and
consulted with flesh and blood, and so questioned it, whether it was from the
Lord, or no. And after some further clearings of it up by the Lord to my
spirit, I was forced to lie down under the truth, power, and authority of it.
Within a while after, there were diverse places of Scripture given in unto me,
with the mind, interpretation, and meaning thereof; which I was to write, and
which I have in this Discourse inserted.

Two things therefore I do desire of you in the reading of this Discourse:

First, That you would not pass censure upon it, till you have thoroughly
examined and tried what is written, lest you pass sentence upon the Truth, and
so be found an opposer of it.

The second is this: That you would not judge nor take that for Error, that
does not suit with your judgments or apprehensions: this is the weakness of
many Professors in our age; if their judgments and lights cannot comprehend a
thing, they look upon that thing to be erroneous: they measure Truth according
to their capacity; it is not Truth no further then they can reach it: this very
thing has made many to withstand Truth; As for example, our Priests and
others, how often have they withstood Truth, merely upon this ground! Weigh
what is written, ponder it in your heart and spirit: if you cannot comprehend
what is written, be silent, do not resist it; it may be, you may have a
discovery of that you never had before; happily what is written, may meet with
some of your hearts and spirits* Here are waters to the Ancles, to the Knees,
to the Loins; a River that cannot be passed over, a Fountain that will never be
dry; waters to wade in, to swim in; living waters, waters of life; healing
waters, pure waters; waters to drown man in, to bury man in: do not despise
these waters, wait on them; you know not but that an Angel from heaven may come
down and put you into them, and involve you in them: there is one in this
Discourse, it may be, may meet with you; if he does, he will rob you of all
your goods, wit, parts, gifts, understanding, knowledge, wisdom, power; he will
quite undo you, yea, take away your life. If you meet with one that does this,
do not forget to return praises to him; wait, it may be you may have that great
doubt resolved, Christ in you, whom you have so much expected from heaven and
from the deep: if you have, exalt the Lord, not me. It may be, you may meet
with some discoveries of the Father, Word and Spirit, or Water, Blood and Holy
Ghost, and of their several testimonies; if you do, praise him that lives for
ever and ever, not me. It may be, God may meet with you in a parabolical way
and manner, as he did David, and make you pass sentence upon your self, in
passing sentence upon another, and condemn you out of your own mouth that you
have sinned; if he does, magnify the Lord, not me. It may be, Jesus Christ may
steal like a thief into your hearts by this Discourse, with greater power and
glory then ever he has done heretofore: if he does, be sure to return praises
unto him, not to me. It may be, God may make mention of Rahab and Babylon to
you, in this Discourse; it may be he may call you to behold Philistia and Tire,
with Ethiopia, and tell you that this man was born there: if he does, admire
the Lord, not me. It may be, you may have a discovery of that glory that is to
be revealed in these latter days, and is in this Discourse set down: Who would
resist and withstand therefore? who would not wait, seeing there is no safety
in resisting, but in patiently waiting? Then resist rather say, Ah Lord, there
may be Truth in this Discourse, though I cannot comprehend it; and it is
madness in men, to withstand and speak evil of that they know not, nor are able
to comprehend: reveal it, discover it, that I may praise thee; then he will
discover it to thee. Here is no need of the Sun, Moon, Stars, Candle, and
Temple; for the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, are the Temple thereof, and
the glory of God did lighten them, and the Lamb is the light thereof: and there
shall be no night there, and they need no Candle, neither light of the Sun; for
the Lord God gives them light. I look for some to scoff, laugh, and jeer at
me, and that which I have written; to slight and scorn me, and what is written,
As I am sure the Priests and others will. Do, slight, scorn, laugh and jeer at
me and what I have written; see what you will get by it in the end; see what
will be the issue of it. And I look for others to find fault with me, and
speak evil and reproach me, and be angry with me for what I have written.
Others I look should say that I go backward and forward in what I write, and
contradict my self. I look that others happily should say, that I write
scatteringly, meanly, and not learnedly, but poorly. I care not what they say,
I weigh it not; I desire to speak not in the eloquence of man's wisdom, but in
the plainness of the Spirit: and as for their scoffs, jeers, laughters, evil
speakings, and reproaches, I weigh them not likewise; they are my portion, I
rejoice in them all, if there were as many more of them: I shall and do count
them my Crown, and shall and do not think my self worthy of them. I know whom I
have believed, whose I am; not Men's, not Sins, not Satan's, but the Lords,

In the Truth that is after godliness, EDW. HIDE Junior*

CHAP. I.
Some sweet Discoveries of CHRIST in us, out of Romans 10. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10*
Verse. 6. But the righteousness which is of faith, speaks on this wise: Say
not in thine heart, Who shall ascend into heaven? That is, to bring Christ down
from above.

7. Or, who shall descend into the deep? That is, to bring up Christ again from
the dead.

8. But what says it? The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy
heart; that is the word of faith which we preach,

9. That if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe
in thine heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved.


IN the Thirtieth and One and thirtieth Verses of the Ninth Chapter to the
Romans, there are two Nations spoken of; that is to say, the Gentiles and the
Jews. The Gentiles were those which followed not after righteousness, yet had
attained to righteousness, even the righteousness which is of faith: and the
Jews, otherwise Israel, were those which followed after the Law of
righteousness, but had not attained to the Law of righteousness. The first
reason of it, is set down in verse 32. Wherefore? because they sought it not by
faith, as the Gentiles did, but as it were by the works of the Law. The second
reason of it, is, Because they stumbled at that stumbling stone, v. 33. As it
is written, Behold, I lay in Sion a stumbling stone, and rock of offense; and
whosoever believes on him, shall not be ashamed. Jesus Christ is a great
stumbling block, and rock of offense, to those professors that do not openly
nor professedly, but, as it were, seek righteousness by the Law.

Quest. But what is it to seek righteousness, as it were, by the Law?

Answ. It is to seek righteousness partly by believing, and partly by doing.
Those that do so, stumble at Christ, and know not what to make of him, and are
offended at him; and, in the end, they split themselves against him, just as
those glorious professors the Scribes and Pharisees did, by reason of their not
knowing him. Now in the first Verse of the tenth Chapter to the Romans, Paul
tells his brethren the Jews what a hearty desire he had, and how he prayed that
they might be saved: Brethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel
is, that they might be saved. And the reason of this prayer, he tells them*
verse. 2. For I bear them record, that they have a zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge. They were mighty zealous for God, but it did not
proceed from true knowledge: as the Scribes and Pharisees were mighty zealous
and strict in keeping the Sabbath, praying, giving of alms, and the like; but
it proceeded not from a right knowledge, it did not proceed from a true
principle. And there are many Zealots in our days, Oh how full of zeal they are
for God, in praying, speaking, preaching, and the like! but yet not agreeable
to true knowledge. And the reason of this is in the third verse: For they being
ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to establish their own
righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God. As
the not seeking righteousness by faith, keeps those from attaining to the Law
of righteousness, that follow after the Law of righteousness: so ignorance of
Gods righteousness makes many go about to establish their own, and so by that
means do not subject to God's righteousness. In the fourth verse, Paul shows,
that Christ is the end of the Law, for righteousness, to every one that
believes: which the glorious Israelites, Scribes and Pharisees, follow after,
thinking to be justified thereby. The righteousness of which Law, Moses
describes in the fifth verse, that the man which does those things shall live
in them. Which saying, Satan, many times, makes use of against poor souls,
thereby to stir them up to follow after the righteousness of the Law: And he
makes use of it thus: Says Satan, If you do the things that the Law commands
you, you shall live by them: this is Scripture says the devil, If you perform
the Law, you shall live; for there is life wrapped up, in keeping of the Law:
And poor souls set upon the keeping of it, and trouble, and perplex, and wear
out themselves; and the more they strive to keep it, the further off are they
from keeping of it; And the devils design in it, is, to keep poor souls from
submitting to the righteousness of God; the devil knowing well, that as many as
are of the works of the Law, are under the curse; for it is written, Cursed is
every one that continues not in all things that are written in the Book of the
Law, to do them, Gal. 4. 10, 11. And that no man is justified by the Law, in
the sight of God, is evident: for the just shall live by Faith, Now in the 6.
ver. which is that I intend to speak to, Paul describes the righteousness of
Faith: But the righteousness which is of Faith, speaks on this wise, Say not
in thine heart, Who shall ascend into heaven? that is, to bring Christ down
from above, etc.

The words are the voice of the righteousness which is of Faith; they are what
the righteousness of Faith speaks: and there are in the words, these things
to be considered:

First, What Faith is.

Secondly, What the voice of the righteousness of Faith is.

Thirdly, What it speaks.

Fourthly, To whom it speaks.

The first thing to be considered, is, What Faith is; that is, what the Faith
of Christ is, as it is in the original. It is a supernatural divine work of
God, upon the Spirit, which enables the soul to believe above all that natural
Faith and Hope that is in the soul, and above all fear and questionings, and
against all grounds that are in the soul to the contrary: it is that which
lets us into God, into the righteosness of God; it is the key that unloks
the Cabinet where righteousness is, and lets us in into the mysteries of the
kingdom: Gal. 3. 7, 9. Know ye therefore, that they which are of Faith, the
same are the children of Abraham, and are blessed with faithful Abraham. Or,
faith in this place may be taken for Christ; Gal. 3. 23. But before Faith came,
we were kept under the Law, shut up unto the Faith which should afterward be
revealed.

The second thing to be considered, is, what the righteousness which is of
Faith is. It is the righteousness which is by believing. But what is the
righteousness which is by believing? It is the righteousness of God. But you
will ask me, What is that? See in Romans 3. 25, 26. Whom God has set forth to be
a propitiation, through Faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness, for
the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God; to
declare, I say, at this time his righteousness, that he might be just, and the
justifier of him which believes in Jesus. His righteousness consists in
this, in that he can remit sin, and yet be faithful; in that he can justify
the ungodly, and yet be just: or the righteousness of Faith is the
righteousness of Christ; for Faith is called Christ, as I said before; He is
made of God unto us, Wisdom, Sanctification, Justification, Redemption,
Righteousness, and the like. But what is the righteousness of Christ? or in
what does the matter of it consist?

In the Active and Passive obedience of Christ; That is, in what he has done
and suffered for us.

The third thing to be considered, is, What the voice of the righteousness of
Faith is, or what it speaks.

It speaks these following things; that is to say,

Say not in thine heart. That is, Do not speak secretly. It speaks this to us,
our readiness to speak that secretly, which happily we would not speak openly,
that others may take notice of what we say.

Quest. But what should I not say in my heart?

Answ. These two things following: First, Who shall ascend into heaven? What is
that? That is, to bring down Christ from above. We are ready to speak it in our
hearts, though not in our mouths, Who shall ascend into heaven? We want
Christ; he is not in our hearts; surely he is in heaven; and our souls are
troubled with care for one to go up into heaven, to fetch him down into our
hearts: O how we have endeavored to fetch him down, by prayer and striving! As
I my self have done: O how I have gaped for him to come down from heaven into
my mouth and heart, when I was many times praying! And when I could do no good
this way, I have been much inquisitive in my spirit for one to fetch him down
from out of the skies, and out of the deep, into my heart.

Answ. 2. Say not in thine heart, Who shall descend into the deep? What is
that? That is, to bring up Christ again from the dead. For want of a feeling of
Christ within us, we are ready to say in our hearts, though not with our
mouths, Who shall descend into the deep? We conclude many times in our
spirits, that either he is in the heavens, or in the deep. But first, we are
carried out, with much care, for one to fetch him from above: And if Jesus
Christ come not down from thence into our hearts, then we conclude he is not
there, but in the deep; and we are very inquisitive who shall fetch him from
the dead. We think that either he is above us, or beneath us, among the dead in
the grave, in hell. Sometimes we think he is risen, and ascended above; and
sometimes we think that he is not.

Thus much for that which the righteousness of faith would have us not say.

Now we are to speak of that which the righteousness of faith says. What is
that?

First, The righteousness of faith says, The Word is nigh thee. But what word?
The word of faith, which we preach* What word is that? Christ. Why is he called
the word of faith? Because he it is that begets faith in souls. The
righteousness of faith says, That word is nigh thee. Oh that God would give us
ears to hear: it is good news that the righteousness of faith speaks. We will
hear thee what thou say, therefore speak, Lord.

The Word is nigh, Whom? Thee, us, them, him, her, all. Friends, Christ is nigh
us; he is on our right hand, and on our left hand* though we see him not, Job
23. 9. The Word of God is nigh us. But why is Christ called the Word of God in
Scripture? Because, as the word of a man is that whereby a man expresses
himself, his mind: so Christ is called the Word of God in this respect; he is
the mind of the Father expressed. That by which we know the mind of a man, is
his words; that by which we know the mind of God, is by his Word. So that
Christ is the mind of God discovered; the Word is God made known, revealed:
This Word was God, and was with God, Joh. 1. 1. Christ is called the Word of
Truth likewise in Scripture: Who has begotten us to himself by the Word of
Truth. But why is he called the Word of Truth? Because he begets Truth in the
soul. This Word is nigh thee. How nigh me? Very nigh thee: Deuteronomy. 30. 14. For
the Word is very nigh unto thee. Where is it? In thy mouth. I do not find him
there. Though you do not, yet he is there.

Secondly, He is in thine heart. I do not feel him there, and therefore he is
not there. That will not follow: he is there, though you feel him not: that
Jesus which you look for from above and beneath, is exceeding nigh to thee,
even in thy mouth, and in thine heart; he is as nigh as possible can be: he is
not far from every one of us, Acts 17. 27. We many times disquiet our selves
for one to fetch him from above, and from the deep; whenas, poor souls, our
Christ is within us. We are carried out after more Sense then Faith; and that
is the reason that we no longer then we feel Christ to be in us, do conclude
him to be in our hearts.

The next thing to be enquired into, is, To whom the voice of the righteousness
of faith speaks. That is, to those, who, by reason of the want of feeling
Jesus Christ within them, are carried out to enquire who shall ascend into the
heavens, and who shall descend into the deep, to fetch Christ from thence into
their hearts: which were the Jews, Israel, and, in them, the Saints: And the
words indeed are spoken, to prevent all Objections in them, and others, against
this truth, Christ in them. And there is not an Objection that they can make,
or that we and others can make, but it is there answered. The voice of the
righteousness of faith speaks so fully to all Objections, that I cannot but
subscribe to the truth of what it says, That Christ is in me: I am forced to
do it, by reason I have nothing to say against the truth; though my base heart,
together with the devil, is ready to question every truth of God, though it be
never so plain.

The words being explicated, there will arise naturally this Corollary; that is
to say,

That there is an aptitude in the spirits of those who feel not the Lord Jesus
within them, to enquire who shall ascend into heaven, or who shall descend into
the deep, to fetch Christ from thence into their spirits, whenas Christ is
within them. This is clear from the words.

The grounds of this Doctrine are two: 1. Ignorance. 2. Unbelief.


First, Ignorance. We are ignorant of the Omnipresencie of Christ, that he is
present in every place, and in our hearts, as in every place. I have heard many
professors subscribe to this truth, but yet have denied it a truth in their
particular souls.

Secondly, Unbelief. We cannot believe that he is in our hearts: we will give
Christ a being in every place, but not in our hearts. The cause of Unbelief, is
Ignorance: we are ignorant of this truth, Christ in us, and therefore cannot
believe it.

If it be so, that there is a readiness in those who feel not the Lord Jesus in
them, to enquire who shall ascend into heaven, and who shall descend into the
deep, to fetch Christ from thence into their hearts; Then say not in your
hearts, Who shall ascend, and who shall descend, to fetch Christ from heaven
and the deep, into your hearts: it is the voice of the righteousness of Faith.
Why do you say so? what is the reason of it? Because, says the soul, I do not
enjoy him, nor possess him within me. How do you know that you do not enjoy
him? Because I feel him not: I should feel him within me, if he were there.
Poor soul, he may be within thee, though thou feel him not; and it is thy
being carried out after more Feeling then Faith, that blindes thine eyes.

2. If it be so, This may serve to discover what manner of spirit we are of; it
discovers the baseness of our spirits, that though the righteousness of faith
says, Say not in your hearts, Who shall go up into heaven, and who shall go
down into the deep, to fetch Christ from thence into our hearts; yet we will
say so, and do say so often in our hearts, though we have no ground to say so,
seeing Christ is within us.

A second Corollary from the words, is this:

That that Christ which we take care for, who shall ascend into the heavens,
and who shall descend into the deep, to bring him into our hearts, is within
us, even in our hearts. This is clear from the words: They enquired, who shall
ascend, and who shall descend, to bring Christ into their hearts; whenas he was
within them. To prove this truth further, we shall bring diverse places of
Scripture: See that in Joh. 15. 4. Abide in me, and I in you: he speaks to his
Disciples that were offended at his fleshly departure from them: and that in
Joh. 17. 23. I in them, and thou in me: and then that in 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine
your selves, whether ye be in the Faith: prove your own selves: know ye not
your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? That
is, unapproved, or rejected. As if the Apostle should say, You are reprobates,
if Christ be not in you: and therefore he puts them upon trying and proving
whether he be in them or no. And that in Ephesians. 4. 6. One God and Father of all
who is above all, and through all, and in you all. And that in 1 John 4. Ye are
of God, little children, and have overcome them; because greater is he that is
in you, then he that is in the world; speaking of Christ, that he is in us, and
is stronger then he that is in the world, which is the devil. It is very sweet
to consider this well; and the right consideration of it, will take away the
fear that is many times in our spirits of the devil, and of Christ not being in
us. And that in Gal. 2. 20. I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live;
yet not I, but Christ lives in me. I am crucified, and yet I live. This is a
paradox, a strange thing: how can a man be crucified, and yet live? The meaning
of it is, he was crucified to the world, and lived to God. And in Psalm. 46. 5.
God is in the midst of her; she shall not be moved. Friends, God will not
suffer us to be moved away from the hope of the Gospel, but will help, and that
early, when a temptation seizes upon us, because he is in the midst of us. And
that in Jerem. 14. 9. Why should thou seem to be as a man amazed with us, and
as a mighty man that cannot save us? They ask God this question; Yet, that is,
Though it be so, thou art in the midst of us, thou art near to us, we are
called by thy Name: that is, We are thine, and therefore leave us not. Just so,
poor souls many times say to God, when he seems to their souls as a man amazed,
and as one that cannot save them; Why art thou so, Lord? tell us the reason of
it: notwithstanding this, thou art in the midst of us; thou art ours, and we
are thine; we are called by thy Name; do not forsake us. And that in Zeph. 3.
5. The just Lord is in the midst thereof, (speaking of his Sanctuary:) he will
not do iniquity, that is, sin. Friends, the holy Lord is within us: see the
fifteenth verse: The Lord is in the midst of thee; thou shall not see evil any
more. Therefore, in the fourteenth verse, he calls upon his people to sing:
Sing, O daughter of Zion; shout, O Israel; be glad and rejoice with all the
heart, O daughter of Jerusalem. Is not this good news? Friends, why do ye not
sing and shout for joy, seeing the Lord is within you? And in the seventeenth
verse he speaks of the same thing: The Lord thy God in the midst of thee; or,
he that is thy God, is in the midst of thee: he is mighty; that is, he is
strong; he will save thee; nothing shall hinder him, neither sin nor devils: he
will rejoice over thee with joy; that is, he will spend his joy upon thee; thou
shall have his joy; he will love thee, and he will rest in that love; he will
lie down and take his ease in that love wherewith he has loved thee: He will
not only rejoice over thee with joy, but he will joy over thee with singing:
he will sing and joy over thee; thou shall be the subject of his joy and
rejoicing. Now in the sixteenth verse it is said, In that day it shall be said
to Jerusalem, Fear thou not, I am in the midst of thee; and to Zion, Let not
thy hands be slack; that is, be not unbelieving.

The reason why I mentioned all these places of Scripture, was, that so the
Objections might be fully satisfied concerning this truth, Christ in them.

If it be so, that that Christ which we take care for, who shall ascend into
the heavens, and who shall descend into the deep, to bring him into our hearts,
is within us, that is, in our hearts:

Then, Friends, be peswaded of this truth, that Christ is within you. But who
is it that says, that Christ is within us? The righteousness of faith and the
Scriptures say so, that he is in us, in the midst of us, nigh to us, even in
our hearts. O glorious truth! O excellent truth! This is sweet, sweet. But you
seem to make no difference between Christ's being in all the world, and his
being in the Saints. Yes but I do; there is a great deal of difference. He is
in all the world more generally; he is in his Saints more particularly.

If it be so, then this may serve to discover this truth to us: O how pitiful
ignorant many professors are of this truth, Christ in them! How ready are they
to disclaim it, and put it away from them, and not to own it, by teason of
their not knowing and ignorance of it! Friends, do ye believe it? is it a truth
to your souls? Then why do you not rejoice and sing? why are ye sad, seeing the
Lord God, in the midst of you, is mighty.

If it be so, wait upon God, till he reveal his Son in you. Paul did not know
Christ to be in him, before God revealed him: When it pleased God to reveal his
Son in Paul, then Paul knew him to be in him. No man knows the Son, but he to
whom the Father will reveal him: Therefore desire the Father to reveal him in
you.

If it be so, awake him not, till he please. Cant. 3. 5. I charge you, O ye
daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes and hindes of the field, that ye stir not
up, nor awake my Love, till he please. And Cant. 2. 7. he speaks of the like
thing, We are ready to awake the Lord, and stir him up, when he does not
please: we are not contented that he should awake when he pleases. If he does
not awake when we would awake him, and discover himself in us and to us, then
we are discontented and troubled at it. The Spouse charge the daughters of
Jerusalem not to do it, by the roes and hindes of the field: the meaning is,
The Spouse does call the very dumb creatures to witness against stirrers up of
Christ; and we are charged also not to do it. And therefore, Friends, take
heed, be patient; wait, wait, till he is pleased to make known himself in you.

If it be so, then take heed of conferring with flesh and blood, (which is men,
or the fleshly part of the soul) when he does please to reveal himself. This we
are ready to do, and then immediately we question whether it be true or no,
that he is within us. Paul says, Gal. 1. 16, that he consulted not with flesh
and blood, when he had adiscovery of Christ in him, whether it was true or no.
If ye go to ask flesh and blood the truth of your discoveries, it will tell
you, that all your discoveries of Christ are false. Have a care therefore of
going to flesh and blood: so soon as ever you have a manifestation of Christ in
you, flesh and blood will make you question all your discoveries of Christ; and
the reason is, because it is an enemy to the soul.

If it be so, that Christ is within us, Then let us confess him with our
mouths; this is our duty, to confess him: Whom? Jesus Christ. How confess him?
To be within us. Where? In our hearts. That which is required on our parts, is,
I say, to confess him to be within us: That if thou shall confess with thy
mouth the Lord Jesus, He is in us; it is so, it is no lie. Whether we confess
it, or no, this is the true saying of the righteousness of faith; and therefore
let us confess him.

Object. But, may some say, How shall I confess him, when I do not know whether
or no he is in me? Whether you know, or do not know it, he is there. But I
cannot acknowledge it, says the soul. Why cannot you acknowledge it? Because I
do not feel him to be within me: nay, surely he is not within me. Why do you
say so? What makes you say so? What makes you think he is not within you? I am
such a vile wretch, says the soul, so sinful, so ungodly; my heart is so
filthy, so vain, and that makes me conclude and think he is not within me: it
does not consist, says the soul, with Christ's holiness, to be in such a vile
unclean heart.

Answ. 1. To this I answer: What thou say, is a clear Argument to me, that
he is in thy heart: for else, if he were not there, how came thou to have
such a discovery of the baseness of thy heart? Who gave it thee? Where had
thou it? Deal seriously with me; did not Christ within thee, discover it to
thee? Thou can not have otherwise a discovery of thy heart, but by Christ
within thee. He that has an ear to hear, let him hear.

Answ. 2. I answer to it thus: I can prove it to you, that he is in the worst
of sinners: See in Hos. 11. 9. I will not execute the fierceness of my anger, I
will not return to destroy Ephraim: for I am God, and not man, the holy One in
the midst of thee. Ephraim was as vile as could be, yea, as thou can be: we
shall see this, if we look into Hos. 8. 11. Because Ephraim had made many
Altars to sin, Altars shall be unto him for sin. Idolatry is a great sin, in
the account of God; it is worse then Witchcraft, and yet he committed it. And
then that in Hos. 8. 9. For they are gone up to Assyria, a wild ass, alone by
himself: Ephraim has hired lovers. And that in Hos. 6. 10. I have seen a
horrible thing in the house of Israel; there is the whoredom of Ephraim. And so
throughout all the chapters of Hosea, the Prophet discovers Ephraims
wickedness. And he was in Paul the chiefest of sinners, before God revealed him
in him; Gal. 1. 16. So that now I think your objections are answered. (Selah.)

Answ. 3. And by way of answer to that, you do not know him to be in you, I say
thus: That though you do not know him to be in you, yet you shall know him to
be within you. See Joh. 14. 20. At that day, you shall know that I am in my
Father, and you in me, and I in him. That day is to be understood when Christ
does send the Comforter. And that in Joel 2. 27 And ye shall know that I am in
the midst of Israel, and that I am the Lord your God, and none else. The time
is coming, yea, it is at hand, that you shall know Christ to be in the midst
of you, and to be your Lord and God: you shall know him; nothing shall hinder
you from knowing of him, neither sin nor devils. O it is a good word of God,
(praised be God:) you shall not only know it, but God is willing to make it
known, to reveal it. See that in Col. 1. 17. To whom God is willing to make
known Christ in you the hope of glory: and all the promises in Christ are Yea
and Amen. He is very willing to do it. See that in Zach. 2. 5. For I, says the
Lord, will be unto her a wall of fire round about, and will be the glory in the
midst of her: Which is spoken of Jerusalem, ver. 2. See likewise, Genesis 45. 1,
2, 3, 4. Then Joseph could not refrain himself before all them that stood by
him, but he must discover himself to his brethren: for he had no power over
himself. And he cried, Cause every man to go out from me. And there stood no
man with him, while Joseph made himself known to his brethren. And he wept
aloud; and the Egyptians and house of Pharaoh heard. And Joseph said unto his
brethren, I am Joseph: Does my Father yet live? And his brethren could not
answer him: for they were troubled at his presence. And Joseph said to his
brethren, Come near me, I pray you. And they came near. I am Joseph your
brother, whom ye sold into Egypt. This Joseph is a Type of Christ; and his
discovering himself to his brethren, is the manner that Christ takes to reveal
himself to his brethren. Christ cannot many times refrain himself; he cannot
forbear, but discover and reveal himself to his brethren, that have sold him
into Egypt; he must discover himself to his brethren, as Joseph did: as Joseph
wept to see his brethren, so does Jesus Christ to see his brethren; he weeps
aloud to see us; yea, he weeps for joy to see his brethren, before he discovers
himself to them; and afterward he says, I am Joseph, I am your Joseph, one of
your fellow-brethren; Does my Father yet live in you? When Christ speaks thus
to the soul, the Soul cannot answer him, because it is troubled at his
presence. And as Joseph said to his brethren, Come near; so Christ bids us come
near. We are ready, when we have a discovery of Christ, to stand afar off, and
to be afraid of him; and then Christ says, Come near; as if he should say, Why
stand you a loof off? Come near: and to encourage them to come near, he speaks
more plainly to them now, I am Joseph your brother, whom ye sold into Egypt;
but before he said, I am Joseph, only: and then the soul comes near to Christ.
O how sweet this is! Christ shall not, no, will not, only reveal himself; but
he can do no otherwise; he cannot refrain himself; and therefore Christ says
unto them, Be not grieved nor angry with your selves, that ye sold me into
Egypt: for God did send me before you, to preserve life. See how Christ
endeavors to take away all grief and anger from his brethren, by telling them
that God sent him into Egypt to preserve life. Selah.

So that confess him to be in you, though you do not feel him within you: yet
if you believe he is in you, you may confess him: But what is it to confess
him? To confess him, is to acknowledge him come in the flesh, and come within
you: 1 John 4. 2. Hereby know ye the Spirit of God: every spirit that
confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God. 1 John 4. 15.
Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwells in him, and he
in God. Confessing there, is acknowledging. Phil. 2. 11. And that every tongue
shall confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. There
is the same word. So that to confess him, is to acknowledge him. How? Thus:
thou art within me; I do subscribe to the truth of it, that it is so even so.
But yet I cannot confess him, says the soul. The word of faith is in thy
mouth, to make thee to confess that Christ is within thee, and to say, It is
true, Lord, as I have believed, thou art within me. There is the
acknowledgement of the soul.

There is not only a confession of the mouth required of the soul, but a
belief of the heart likewise, that God raised Christ from the dead; which I do
intend a little to speak to. Dead here is to be understood grave, hell, that
state that Jesus Christ was in, of whom it was said, Thou will not leave my
soul in hell, neither will thou suffer thy holy One to see corruption, Psalm.
16. 10. It is not enough to confess Christ to be within us, but to believe in
our hearts that God raised him from the dead: if we would be saved, our Faith
must reach further then Christ in us; it must reach to the Father also. See 1
Pet. 1. 21. Who by him do believe in God, that raised him from the dead, and
gave him glory, that our faith and hope might be in God. See further in Act.
13. 32, 33, 34. And we declare unto you glad tidings, how that the promise
which was made to our Fathers, God has fulfilled the same unto us their
children, in that he has raised up Jesus again, as it is also written in the
second Psalm, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. And as concerning
that he raised him up from the dead, now no more to return to corruption, he
said, I will give him the sure mercies of David. A faith that saves, that is, a
faith that is accompanied with Salvation, is in God as one that raised Christ
from the dead: for there is in Gods raising Christ Remission of sins, and
justification from all things (as sin, iniquity, and the like) from which we
could not be justified by the Law of Moses, Act. 13. 38, 39. And besides, to
us, there is an imputation of righteousness, which was imputed to Abraham, if
we believe on him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead, who for this
very end was raised from the dead, that is to say, for our justification, Romans
4. 24, 25. God would have us believe in him; as one that raised Christ from the
dead, because in Gods raising Christ, he raised us, through the faith of the
operation of God, who has raised him from the dead, and the uncircumcision of
our flesh has he quickened together with him, having forgiven us all
trespasses; blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us,
which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nayling it to the cross;
and having spoiled principalities and powers, he made a show of them openly,
triumphing over them all. A glorious slaughter of all our enemies is to be
seen, in Gods raising Christ from the dead. And then that in Ephesians. 2. 5, 6. In
Gods raising Christ, we, though we were dead in sins, yet were quickened
together with him, and were raised up together with him, and made to sit
together in heavenly places, in Christ Jesus; which was Gods rich mercy and
great love: and his end in it, was, That in the ages to come he might show the
exceeding riches of his grace, in his kindness toward us in Christ Jesus, Ephesians.
2. 4, 7. Now God many times suffers us to have the sentence of death in our
spirits, he suffers us to be pressed out of measure, beyond strength, insomuch
that we despair of life, that we should not trust in our selves, but in God
that raised the dead.

Quest. But you will ask me, First, How God raised Christ from the dead.

Secondly, What it is to be believe it.

Answ. For the first, how God raised Christ; It was,

1. By the glory of the Father, Romans 6. 4, 9

2. By the Spirit, Romans 8. 11.

3. By his mighty power, Ephesians. 1. 20.

The second thing to be enquired into, is, What it is to believe that God
raised his Son from the dead.

There are diverse sorts of faith spoken of in Scripture: There is a believing
from the relation of another, Ioh. 4. 42. As the Samaritans did, merely upon
the report of the woman, but afterward they believed because they had seen
Christ: and there is a believing, as I said before, that is not accompanied
with salvation; which Simon Magus had: and there is a believing that is
accompanied with salvation, Heb. 10. 39. But we are not of them who draw back
unto perdition, but of them that believe to the saving of the soul: This is the
belief that is intended here. Now that faith that saves* is the faith of
Christ; which consists in yielding up hearty obedience and subjection to this
truth, that God raised Christ from the dead: We have obeyed from the heart,
that form of doctrine that has been delivered unto us, Romans 6. 17. This
believing in God, that he raised Christ from the dead, is nothing but a souls
lying down under the power and authority of it, and saying, It is so, It is so,
Lord. Lie down therefore under the power of this truth, that God raised his
Son; say it is a truth, and thou shall be saved: it is a truth, Lord, it is
even so; thou art saved.

Quest. But you seem to make no difference between confession of the mouth, and
belief with the heart.

Answ. Yes but I do. Faith in the heart believes this is a glorious truth, that
God raised Jesus Christ from the dead, and that Christ is within us; Confession
with the mouth declares and publishes nothing but what says in the heart
believes is truth.

CHAP. II.
The Parable of the rich man's flocks and herds, and the poor man's ewe-lamb,
unfolded, out of 2 Samuel 12. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
Verse. 1 And the Lord sent Nathan unto David: and he came unto him, and said
unto him, There were two men in one city; the one rich, and the other poor.

2 The rich man had exceeding many flocks and herds.

3 But the poor man had nothing save one little ewe-lamb which he had bought,
and nourished up; and it grew up together with him, and with his children: it
did eat of his own meat, and drank of his own cup, and lay in his bosom, and
was unto him as a daughter.

4 And there came a traveller unto the rich man; and he spared to take of his
own flock, and of his own herd, to dress for the wayfaring man that was come
unto him, but took the poor man's lamb, and dressed it for the man that was come
to him.

5 And David's anger was greatly kindled against the man; and he said to Nathan,
As the Lord lives, the man that has done this thing, shall surely die.

6 And he shall restore the lamb fourfold because he did this thing, and
because he had no pity.

7 And Nathan said unto David, Thou art the man.


IN the first verse of this Chapter, there is the Lord sending Nathan unto
David, with a Parable in his mouth: It was the Lord that sent him unto David,
and that put the Parable into his mouth, to declare to David. From part of the
first verse to the fifth verse, Nathan makes known the Parable. A Parable, you
know, is to be taken otherwise then is set down in the letter of it, and is
much like an Allegory.

The first words of the Parable are these: There were two men in one city; the
one rich, and the other poor. The City are the Saints: see Heb. 12. 22. But ye
are come unto mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly
Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels. And Ephesians. 2. 22. Matthew. 27.
53. Rev. 21. 2, The rich man is David, who had exceeding many flocks and herds.
The poor man is Christ: see Eccles. 9. 15. There was a little city, and few
men in it; and there came a great king against it, and besieged it, and built
great bulwarks against it. Now there was found in it a poor man, and he by his
wisdom delivered the city. See likewise 2 Cor. 8. 9. For ye know the grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for our sakes he became
poor, that ye through his poverty might be made rich. See Psalm. 34. 6. This
poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles.
And in another place he is called, The man Christ Jesus. Now the rich man's and
poor man's living in one city, was their enjoying each other, and having
fellowship with each other, in the city of God. The rich man's flocks and
herds, are those exceeding many spiritual blessings that God had blessed David
with; which are those blessings that God blesses many of his people with: see
Ephesians. 1. 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ. The poor
man's ewe-lamb is the beloved disciple of Christ, as John was: see Luke 13. 23.
Now there was leaning on Jesus bosom one of his disciples, which Jesus loved.
This ewe-lamb the poor man bought with a price, even with that price he bought
the rest of his people with: 1 Cor. 6. 12. Ye are bought with a price;
therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirits, which are Gods. And
then that in 1 Cor. 7. 23. Ye are bought with a price: be not ye the servants
of men. Jesus Christ did not only buy this ewe-lamb, but nourished it up
himself, with the milk of himself; it grew up together with him: that is,
Christ brought it up with himself, as he was brought up with the Father: see
Prove. 8. 20. And it grew up with his children; that is, with Christ's children:
Who are those? Such that are of faith, and so are blessed with faithful
Abraham, and are Gal. 3: 7, 9. Those which are born of the free woman, that is,
born after the Spirit, or by promise. It did not grow up with Christ alone, but
with the rest of his children, who grew up with him. And it did eat of the poor
man's own meat, and of the poor man's own drink; which is Christ himself. That
which nourished the lamb, and which the lamb fed upon, was the meat and drink
of Christ, which is his flesh and blood. See in Joh. 6. 53, 54, 55, 56. Then
Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh
of the Son of man, and drink his blood, you have no life in you. Whosoever
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life. For my flesh is meat
indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my
blood, dwells in me, and I in him. That which Christ fed this Lamb with, was
Life and Spirit, which is his flesh and blood. O glorious food! Friends, it is
the best food Christ has, or that he can feed a soul with. Christ did not
only buy this Lamb, nourish it up with himself, and with his children, feed it
with his own flesh, and with his own blood; but it must lie in his own bosom:
his beloved disciple is so dear to him, that he will not have it lie out of his
own bosom: And therefore he is said toca^ry the lambs in his own bosom, Isai.
40. 11. He shall feed his flock like a shepherd: he shall gather the lambs with
his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with
young.

And then he goes on with the Parable: And it was unto him as a daughter, that
is, as one of the daughters of Jerusalem: See Cant. 3. 10. He made the pillars
thereof of silver, the bottom thereof of gold, the covering of it of purple;
the midst thereof being paved with love, for the daughters of Jerusalem.
Speaking of Solomon, who made himself a chariot of the wood of Lebanon, verse
9. See Luke 23. 28. But Jesus turning to them, said, Daughters of Jerusalem,
weep not for me, but weep for your selves, and for your children. This was
spoken when Jesus was a leading away to suffer. See that in Cant. 5. 16. This
is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem; meaning Christ. But what is a daughter
of Jerusalem? It is a daughter of love and glory.

Nathan goes on further with the Parable.

And there came a traveller unto the rich man. This traveller is a wayfaring
man; and a wayfaring man is one that is here, and there, and everywhere; an
unstable and unsettled man. Wayfaring men are often spoken of in Scipture. See
Jer. 9. 2. O that I had in the wilderness a lodging place of wayfaring men,
that I might leave my people, and go from them! for they be all adulterers, and
an assembly of treacherous men. And that in Is. 35. 8. And an highway shall be
there, and a way; and it shall be called the way of holiness: the unclean shall
not pass over it, but it shall be for those: the wayfaring men, though fools,
shall not err therein. And that in Ier. 14. 8. O the hope of Israel, the
Savior thereof in the time of trouble, why should thou be as a stranger in
the land, and as a wayfaring man, that turns aside to tarry for a night?

This rich man spared to take of his own flocks, and of his own herds, to dress
or make ready for the wayfaring man that was come to him, but took the poor
man's lamb, and dressed it for the man that was come unto him. The taking of the
poor man's lamb, and dressing it for the wayfaring man, is the doing of any
thing that is sinful before God; as David's slaying Vriah the Hittite, and
taking the Hittite's wife to be his, verse. 9. Or a man offending his weak
brother: see 1 Cor. 8. 11, 12. And through thy knowledge shall thy weak brother
perish for whom Christ died? But when you sin so against the brethren, and
wound their weak conscience, ye sin against Christ. Therefore he says, verse.
9, 10. Take heed lest by any means this liberty of yours become a stumbling
block to them that are weak. For if any man see thee which have knowledge, sit
at meat in the idols temple, shall not the conscience of him that is weak be by
you emboldened to eat those things which are offered to idols? The committing
of any sin, is the slaying of the poor man's lamb for the traveller.

After this, David's anger was greatly kindled against the man: and he said to
Nathan, As the Lord lives, (that is, As sure as the Lord lives) the man that
has done this thing shall surely die; or, is worthy to die; or, he is a son of
death. This kind of saying of David, is suitable to that, in a manner, in Genesis
38. 24. And it came to pass about three months after, that it was told Judah,
saying, Tamar thy daughter in law has played the harlot; and also behold, she
is with child by whoredom. And Judah said, Bring her forth, and let her be
burnt.

In this 2 Samuel 6. 12. David sets forth what the rich man that had killed the
poor man's lamb, shall restore: And he shall restore the Lamb fourfold,
according to the Levitical Law: see Exodus 22. 18.

Because he did this thing, and because he had no pity, of the poor man's lamb.
Suitable to this, is that in Psalm. 109. 16. Because he remembered not to show
mercy, but persecuted the poor and needy man, that he might even slay the
broken in heart.

Now in the seventh verse of 2 Samuel 12. Nathan describes the man that took the
poor man's lamb, and slew it for the traveller: And Nathan said unto David, Thou
art the mau that did this thing. See how all this while David condemns himself
out of his own mouth; and passes sentence upon himself, in passing sentence
upon another; just as Judah did: See that forenamed place of Scripture, in
Genesis 38. 25, 26. When she was brought forth, she sent to her father in law,
saying, By the man whose these are, am I with child: and she said, Discern, I
pray, whose these are, the signet, and bracelets, and staff. And Judah
acknowledged them, and said, She has been more righteous then I, because I
gave her not to Shelah my son. And he knew her again no more. Judah condemned
himself out of his own mouth, in condemning Tamar; as well as David did, in
passing sentence upon the rich man: And he knew, after that Tamar had showed
him the bracelets, signet, and staff, that he was the man that judged himself
out of his own mouth.

The Parable being explicated, there will arise naturally these Points of
Doctrine.

The first is this, That Nathan the Prophet never went about any thing, but he
was sent of God to do it.

The second is this, That Christ suffers that disciple whom he dearly loves, to
be brought and nourished up with him, and to grow up together with Christ, and
with his children; to eat of his own meat, and drink of his own drink, and lie
in his own bosom, and to be unto him as a daughter.

The third is this, That committing of any sin whatsoever, is the killing of
the poor man's lamb.

The fourth is this, That God many times speaks in a Parabolical way and
manner, to awaken poor souls out of the deep sleep of security and sin, by
causing them unknowingly to pass an impartial sentence against themselves in
the person of another; that so they might be brought to unfeigned repentance.

The fifth is this, That that which convinces a soul of sin, is God's saying
unto him, Thou art the man.

For the first, That Nathan the Prophet never went about any thing, but he was
sent of God to do it; this is clear from the words. He was sent from God unto
David, to declare this Parable unto him: he was sent from God to David, to tell
him that the Lord had put away his iniquity: he was sent of God to David, to
speak nothing but what God had put into his mouth; according to all the vision,
so did Nathan speak unto David, 1 Chronicles. 17. 1, 2, 3, 15.

If it be so, Then this may serve to discover those that go before they are
sent, with this in their mouths, The Lord has sent them; whereas the Lord
has not sent them: they tell the people so indeed, that the Lord sent them to
this place, and to that place; whenas they should find, if they would deal
seriously with their own hearts, that it was their great Livings that brought
them thither. There are many that take upon them the Apostles Commission to
preach, without power from above, merely to get livings, to get a livelihood:
What enquiring has there been, and yet still is, among the Priests, for fat
Benefices! what asking* each other is there amongst them, What is such a Living
worth, and such a Living; is it worth any thing? is it a great one or not? If
it be a great one, then what laying of heads together amongst the Priests, is
there; to get it! and if it be a small Living, rather then they will have none,
they will have that. They make merchandise of the Word. O how Christ speaks of
these Priests, in Matthew. 23. 13, 14, 15, 24, 25, 27, 28. Woe unto you,
hypocrites; for ye shut up the kingdom of heaven against men: for ye neither go
in your selves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in. Woe unto you
hypocrites, who for a pretense make long prayers: you use vain repetitions, and
think to be heard for your much speaking. Woe unto you, ye hypocrites; ye
compass sea and land to make one proselyte; and when he is made, you make him
twofold more the child of hell then your selves. When ye fast, ye are like the
hypocrites, that are of a sad countenance: for they disfigure their faces. Woe
unto you, ye blind guides, which strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel. Well
did Isaiah prophecy of you, saying, This people draw nigh unto me with their
mouth, and honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me. But in
vain do ye worship, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men. Ye blind
leaders of the blind; if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the
ditch. Ye can discern the face of the sky, but ye cannot discern the signs of
the time. Ye are graves that appear not, and the men that walk over them are
not aware of them. Woe unto you; for ye lade men with burdens grievous to be
born, and ye your selves touch not the burdens with one of your fingers. Ye
love the uppermost seats in the Synagogues, and greetings. Beware therefore,
Friends, of the leaven of the Pharisees. Woe unto you; for ye make clean the
outside of the cup and of the platter, but within ye are full of extortion and
excess. Ye are like (says Christ) whited sepulchers, which indeed appear
beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's bones, and of all
uncleanness: ye outwardly appear righteous to men, but within ye are full of
hypocrisy and iniquity: ye do what ye do, to be seen of men, and have glory of
men. Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of
hell? And the old Prophets speak as much, if not more, against them; That they
prophesied in his name, whenas he sent them not: See Jer. 14. 15. I am against
the prophets, says the Lord, that steal my word every one from his neighbor,
Jer. 23. 30. O what picking and stealing by wholesale, is there among the
Priests of our age, out of other men's Books and Writings, and from one another!
What patching up of Sermons is there amongst them, of other men's experiences,
and so preach them! I have not sent these prophets, yet they ran; I have not
spoken to them, yet they prophesied, Jer. 23. 21. They prophecy lies, yea,
they are prophets of the deceit of their own heart. Jerem. 23. 26. The heads
thereof judge for reward, and the priests thereof teach for hire, and the
prophets thereof divine for money; yet they will lean upon the Lord, and say,
Is not the Lord among us? none evil can come upon us, Mic. 3. 11. Her prophets
are light and treacherous persons, her priests have polluted the Sanctuary,
Zeph. 3. 4. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the prophets shall be
ashamed every one of his vision, when he has prophesied; neither shall they
wear a rough garment to deceive, Zech. 13. 4. You Priests, and Prophets,
hearken to the word of the Lord in Mic. 3. 5, 6. Thus says the Lord God
concerning the prophets that make my people err, that bite with their teeth,
and cry Peace; and he that puts not into their mouths, they even prepare
war against them. Therefore night shall be unto you, that ye shall not have a
vision; and it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not divine: and the sun
shall go down over the prophets, and the day shall be dark over him. And then
that in Jer. 24. 15. Thus says the Lord concerning the prophets, Behold, I
will feed them with wormwood, and make them drink the water of gall: for from
the prophets of Jerusalem, is prophanes gone forth into all the land. They
commit adultery, and walk in lies; they strengthen also the hands of evil
doers, that none does return from his wickedness: they are all of them unto me
as Sodom, and the inhabitants thereof as Gomorrah, ver. 14. See here what God
threatens and speaks to you Priests and Prophets; your judgment does not
linger, it is at the very door; And God himself will exalt a poor despised
people that shall do his work. Behold I am against the prophets, says the
Lord, that use their tongue, and say he says. Behold, I am against them that
cause my people to err by their lies, and by their lightness, yet I sent them
not, nor commanded them: therefore they shall not profit this people at all,
says the Lord, Jer. 23. 31, 32. There is a voice of the howling of the
shepherds; for their glory is spoiled: a voice of the roaring of young lions,
for the pride of Jordan is spoiled, Zach. 11. 3. Methinks I hear this voice,
Howl, O ye Priests; howl, O ye shepherds; howl O ye Prophets, that slay the
flock of the slaughter, and hold your selves not guilty: and they that sell
them say, Blessed be the Lord, for I am rich; and their own shepherds pity
them not. Three shepherds also I cut off in one month, and my soul loathed
them, and their soul also abhorred me, Zech. 11. 3* 5* 8. Gird your selves and
lament, ye Priests; howl, ye Ministers of the altar: come, lie all night in
sackcloth for the sinfulness of your doings, in changing your selves into
angels of light, and ministers of righteousness. But they also have erred
through wine, and through strong drink are out of the way, the Priest and the
Prophet have erred through strong drink, they are swallowed up of wine: they
are out of the way through strong drink; they err in vision, they stumble in
Judgment, Isa. 28. 7. From the Prophet even unto the Priest, every one deals
falsely, Jer. 6. 13. For both prophet and priest are profane, yea, in my house
have I found their wickedness, says the Lord, Jer. 23. 11. And there shall be
like people like priest: and I will punish them for their ways, and reward them
their doings, Hos. 4. 9. The priests said not, Where is the Lord? and they that
handle the Law, knew me not: the pastors also transgressed against me, and the
prophets prophesied by Baal, and walked after things that do not profit.
Wherefore I will yet plead with you, Jer. 2. 8, 9. The prophets prophecy
falsely, and the priests bear rule by their means, and my people love to have it
so: and what will you do in the end thereof? Jer. 5. 31. Hear ye this, O
priests, and hearken, ye house of Israel, and give you ear, O house of the
king: for judgment is toward you, because you have been a snare to the people
of God, Hos. 5. 1. As troops of robbers wait for a man, so the company of
priests murder in the way by consent: for they commit lewdness, Hos. 6. 9.
Thus says the Lord, O priests, that despise my name; and ye say, Wherein have
we despised thy Name? Ye offer polluted bread upon mine altar, and ye say,
Wherein have we polluted thee? Mal. 1. 6, 7. And now, O ye priests, this
commandment is for you. If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it to
heart, to give glory to my Name, I will even send a curse, upon you, says the
Lord, and I will curse your blessings, Mal. 2. 12. The pastors are become
brutish, and have not sought the Lord: therefore they shall not prosper, and
all their flocks shall be scattered, Jer. 10, 21. Many pastors have destroyed
my vineyard, they have trodden my portion under foot, they have made my pleasant
portion a desolate wilderness; and being desolate, it mourns unto me, Jer.
12. 10, 11. We be unto the pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep of my
pasture, says the Lord. Therefore thus says the Lord God of Israel against
the pastors that feed his people, Ye have scattered my flock, and driven them
away, and have not visited them: behold, I will visit upon you the evil of your
doings, says the Lord, Jer. 23. 1, 2. And in another place he says, I will
require my flocks at your hands.

Object. But you will say, that you are no Priests, and that I have no warrant
to call you so.

Answ. That you are Priests, will appear by comparing you with the Priests
under the Law; as,

First, The Priests under the Law did wear holy garments, Exodus 31. 10. so did
and do you; as Copes, Surplices, and the like.

Secondly, The Priests office under the Law, was to make atonement for sin by
offering sacrifice, Levit. 4. 20. Levit. 14. 20. Numb. 15. 25, 28. This has
been and is the work of you Priests, to offer sacrifice, to make atonement,
peace, and reconciliation for sin. For this purpose you have prayed, and moved
others to pray; as I have heard some of you say to your hearers, Make your
atonement, peace, and reconciliation with God, by prayer, fasting, humbling
your selves, and the like.

Thirdly, The Priests under the Law were to offer up sacrifice to take away
sin, Levit. 15. 30. So do you Priests; you pray, and fast, and humble your
selves, and do this and that, to take away sin.

Fourthly, None but the highpriests, under the Law, were to enter into the
holy of holies, Heb. 9. 6, 7, 25. So you say and hold now, None but you are to
enter into the holy of holies, whenas there is a free way and passage made by
the veil of Christ, that is to say, his flesh, for all the saints to enter into
the holy of holies.

Fifthly, The Priests under the Law lived by Tithes, they had no other
maintenance but Tithes: So do you Priests live upon that which was for the
maintenance of the Priests under the Law, that served at the Altar, which was
Tithes; and so may fitly be called Priests. It was a Legal administration that
they were under, therefore they were to live of the Law: but those who are
under the dispensation of the Gospel, they live of the Gospel; that is, free,
and can trust God for their maintenance.

Sixthly, The Priests under the Law were to interpret the Law, Neh. 7. 8. This
has been and is the work of you Priests, to open the Law, to press the people
upon working for life, and to threaten judgment to drive to Christ.

Son of man* therefore prophecy against the shepherds of Israel, prophecy and
say unto them, Thus says the Lord God unto the shepherds, Woe be to the
shepherds of Israel that feed themselves: should not the shepherds feed the
flocks? Ye eat the fat, and ye clothe you with the wool: ye kill them that are
fed: but ye feed not the slock. The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither
have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was
broken, neither have ye brought again that which was driven away, neither have
ye sought that which was lost, but with force and with cruelty have ye ruled
them, Ezekiel. 34. 2, 3, 4. His watchmen are blind: they are all ignorant, they
are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark, sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber.
Yea, they are greedy dogs, which can never have enough, and they are shepherds
that cannot understand: they all look to their own way, every one for his gain
from his quarter. Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we will fill our
selves with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more
abundant, Isa. 56. 10, 11, 12. Howl, ye shepherds, priests and prophets cry,
and wallow your selves in the ashes, ye principal of of the flock: for the days
of your slaughter and of your dispersions are accomplished, and ye shall fall
like a pleasant vessel. And the shepherds shall have no way to flee, nor the
principal of the flock to escape. A voice of the cry of the shepherds, and an
howling of the principal of the flock shall be heard: I hear it, I hear it; and
others shall hear it: for the Lord has spoiled their pasture, Jer. 25. 34, 35,
36. Ye shepherds and priests, hear the word of the Lord again, Thus says the
Lord God, Behold, I am against the shepherds, and I will require my flock at
their hand, and cause them to cease from feeding my flock, neither shall the
shepherds feed themselves any more: for I will deliver my flock from their
mouth, that they may not be meat for them. And as for his people, he says, I
will seek out my sheep, and will deliver them out of all places where they have
been scattered in the cloudy and dark day, and will bring them to their own
land, and feed them upon the mountains of Israel by the rivers, and in all the
inhabited places of the Country. I will feed them in a good pasture, and upon
the high mountains of Israel shall their fold be: there shall they lie in a
good fold, and in a fat pasture shall they feed; I will feed my flock, and
cause them to lie down, says the Lord. I will seek that which was lost, and
bring again that which was driven away, and will bind up that which was
broken, and will strengthen that which was sick. God will feed his flock
himself, and cure them and heal them himself. Ezekiel. 34. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15, 16.

If it be so, that the Prophet Nathan never went about any thing without a Call
from God; Then take heed of those that venture upon any thing without a Call
from God; as there are many of our Priests do: they preach and prophecy
without a Call from God: they have been at Cambridge, and have taken their
Orders and Degrees, and have been chosen by men to the work; and they think
that is a sufficient Call from God. Paul had not his Ministry from man, nor by
man, but as he was taught it by the revelation of Jesus Christ: and therefore
these are false Priests and Prophets. There shall false Prophets arise, that
shall deceive many; if it were possible, the very Elect. If the Priests in our
age, were put to prove their Call to the Ministry, there would be found very
few of them that could prove their Call from God. Beware therefore of these
Wolves; take heed of the voice of strangers, lest they devour you: they will
pretend that they are fearful of offending or troubling the consciences of Gods
people; but if any child of God makes a scruple in his conscience of paying
Tithe, and that it is a trouble to his conscience to pay it, and he should, if
he did pay Tithe* sin against his conscience; yet the Priests will have it.
What care they for offending the Conscience of Gods people? How shall we live*
say they, else? It is not Conscience, say they, it is rather humor; and
besides, Tithes is a Civil Right, and a soul need not scruple them, say they.
This is a divelish cloak to cover the Priests baseness. But we hope you would
have us have a livelihood? Yes, (God forbid else:) work with your hands as the
Apostle says, and live no more upon the sweat of other men's brows; else you
must fast, and not eat: See 2 These. 3. 10. For even when we were with you this
we commanded you, that if any would not work, neither should he eat. And if any
man obey not our word by this Epistle, note that man, and have no company with
him, that he may be ashamed, ver. 14. We do work, they will say; we sweat and
take pains day and night for the good of peoples souls. But do you work with
your hands, and set upon some manual calling or other? I know you take a great
deal of pains for to study and get by heart this man's and that man's writings,
and to preach them in public Congregations, to get a living: but do you work
as the Apostles did with their hands?

Obj. But it is said in Scripture that the Lord has ordained that they which
preach the Gospel should live on the Gospel; and, Do ye not know that they
which minister about holy things, live of the things of the Temple; and they
which wait at the Altar, are partakers with with the Altar? Or I only and
Barnabas, have not we power to forbear working? Who goes a warfare at his own
charges? Who planteth a Vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? Who
feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk thereof? Say I these things as a
man? Or says not the Law the same also? For it is written in the Law of Moses,
Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn. Does God
take care for Oxen? Or says he it altogether for our sakes? For our sakes, no
doubt, this is written; that he that ploweth, should plow in hope; and he that
thresheth in hope, should be partaker of his hope. If we have sown unto you all
spiritual things, is it a great thing, if we shall reap your carnal things? If
others be partakers of this power over you, are not we rather? 1 Cor. 9. 6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

Answ. I answer thus: It is true, that those that preach the Gospel, should
live by the Gospel; but you preach other men's books and writings: You preachers
of the Gospel! What, you ambassadors of Christ, and have not matter to speak
from Christ, but speak other men's experience! Neither, as I said before, had
you your Ministry from Christ, nor by Revelation, as Paul had. If you had your
Ministry from Christ, you would trust Christ for a livelihood; you would not
first seek a Living, and then go and preach the Gospel. You cannot preach
without other men's books, and therefore are not fit to preach the Gospel. Can
you preach, all books being taken away from you save the Bible, at any time
when you are desired to do it? Can you preach twice every day of the week
throughout the year, without other men's books? If you cannot, you are not to
live on the Gospel: for ye are no true Preachers of the Gospel.

Secondly, I answer thus: Though those that preach the Gospel may live on the
Gospel, as Paul and Barnabas might; yet, says Paul, We have not used this
power, but suffer all things, lest we should hinder the Gospel of Christ, 1
Cor. 9. 12. But I have used none of these things, neither have I written these
things (says Paul) that it should be so done unto me: for it were better for
me to die, then that any man should make my glorying void, 1 Cor. 9. 15. What
is my reward then? Verily, that when I preach the Gospel, I may make the Gospel
of Christ without charge, that I abuse not my power in the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.
18. For your selves know how ye ought to follow us: for we behaved not our
selves disorderly among you, neither did we eat any man's bread for naught, but
wrought with labor and travel night and day* that we might not be chargeable
to any of you, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 7, 8. Let me see you Priests do so: where is there
such a spirit as Paul had, among you? O how you make the Gospel of Christ
chargeable! Your reward is Tithes; but this was Paul's reward, His preaching
the Gospel for nothing: he abused not his power in the Gospel, as you do: he
wrought with labor and travel night and day, that he might not be chargeable
to any; you are idle, and mad upon taking Tithes.

Object. But you will say, We have done good, many of us, and converted souls,
and are worthy of somewhat for our pains.

Answ. This was Paul's reward, his preaching the Gospel for nothing; and it is
a bigger reward then taking Tithes. O that you would consider of it therefore!

If it be so, let us be sure to have a Call from God for what we do. We do many
things that we have no Call for from God. O how sweet it is, when we do what we
do from a Call from God! We cannot take pleasure in any thing we do, unless we
have a Call from God to do it. We cannot warrant unto our selves safety and
prosperity in going unto such a place, and such a place, and convert such a
soul, without a Call from God. We must not look that God should go with us, and
be with us, in any enterprise, without a Call from God. If we have a Call for
what we do, we may do what we undertake with cheerfulness, and may expect God
to go with us, and be with us, and in us, to help us to do what he calls us to.

Quest. But, may some say, How shall we know whether we have a Call to this or
to that?

Answ. You may know it by this, that is to say, by the power of God: If it be
nakedly the power of God that carries you out to do this or that, and not any
by-respect, or self-end, then you have a Call from God. Or you may know it by
this: If you be called by God to do this or that, he enables you to do that
which you are called to, suitable and according to his will.

If it be so, Then if God has called any of you to teach, instruct, pray, and
the like, to go to such a place, and do such a thing; whatsoever he has called
you to, that do; be not disobedient to the heavenly vision: follow the Lamb
whithersoever he calls you; if it be to suffer, yet follow him* if he bid thee
go to such a one, and such a one, to tell him of his sinfulness, pride,
baseness, hypocrisy, to convince him of his sin, though in a Parabolical way
and manner; go, and the Lord will be with thee.

The next Point of Doctrine to be* spoken to, is, That Christ suffers that
disciple whom he dearly loves, to be brought up and nourished with him, and to
grow up together with him and his children; to eat of his own meat, and drink
of his own cup, and lie in his own bosom, and to be unto him as a daughter.
This is clear from the words.

If it be so, Then this speaks the great love that Christ has to his beloved
disciple. Friends, what high love is here! What, for his beloved disciple to be
brought up and nourished with Christ, and to grow up together with him; to eat
of Christ's own meat which he eats of, and to drink of his own cup, that cup
which he drinks in! and moreover, to lie in his own bosom, and be unto him as
a daughter! Greater love then this, can no man show. What heart would not this
love ravish and melt! It speaks the height, length, breadth, and depth of love.
Lord, thou make us amazed at it; we cannot do any thing but wonder at it: we
are not able to express it, and tell what it is, and how much it is: it is so
vast, that when we look into it, we lose our selves in the apprehensions of it:
we cannot declare it, but stand and admire, that he should suffer us to lie in
the bosom of himself, who lay in the bosom of his Father, and there drink of
those breasts of consolation that are in him, and to sit at his own table, and
eat his own meat, and drink his own drink. O admirable! O excellent! And I
appoint unto you a kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me, that ye may
eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and sit on thrones, judging the twelve
tribes of Israel, Luke 22. 29, 30.

If it be so, Friends, then beg of Christ to be one of his beloved disciples,
that so you may be brought up and nourished with him, and grow up together with
him, and with his children; eat of his own meat, and drink of his own cup, and
lie in his own bosom, and be unto him as a daughter of Jerusalem. It is a high
privilege to be one of the beloved disciples of Christ: for then we are
interessed into all the glory of Christ; there is nothing that Christ has, but
we have a share in: if we be his lambs, we are under his tender care and
protection from the wolfs mouth.

If it be so, then do not envy the poor lambs happiness; that is to say, his
being brought up and nourished with Christ, and growing up together with him,
and with his children; his eating of Christ's own meat, and drinking of
Christ's own cup, and lying in his bosom, and being unto him as a daughter. We
are ready to envy another's happiness: because we are not as this man, and
cannot do as this man, therefore we envy him: Such a one has notable parts,
can write and preach; he has sweet enjoyments of God, knows much; but I am
poor, and enjoy nothing, and can do nothing: and because the soul cannot do as
that man does, therefore, through the baseness of the heart, and malice of the
devil, it envies, speaks evil of, and reproacheth that man.

I beseech you, therefore, take heed of speaking evil of the poor man's lamb,
that is as dear to Christ as the apple of his eye, lest you speak evil of,
envy and reproach Christ. That is indeed a beloved disciple of Christ, which
Christ suffers to lie in his bosom, to eat of his own meat, and drink of his
own drink, etc. Therefore, beware, beware, take heed what you speak of a
beloved disciple of Christ.

The next Point of Doctrine to be spoken to, is this, That the committing of
sin is slaying the poor man's lamb. This is clear from the words.

If it be so, that the committing of sin is the slaying the poor man's lamb,
then, Friends, take heed of sinning, of committing adultery, murder,
fornication; of offending a weak brother; of being proud, high-minded, lifted
up* lest you kill the poor man's lamb.

If it be so, then this may serve to discover what the killing of the poor
man's lamb, or slaying the beloved disciple of Christ* is: It is the doing of
any thing that is sinful before God; all your unholy walkings, all your
self-admirations, all your self-exaltations high conceit of your selves,
self-applause, is the slaying the poor man's lamb.

If it be so, let the poor man's lamb be tender in your eyes: it is tender in
Christ's eyes, let it be so also in yours. Do you love it as Christ loves it?
Be you careful of offending, killing, slaying of it, as Christ is: let it be
dear to you, as it is to Christ.

The next Point of Doctrine to be spoken to, is this, That God many times
speaks in a parabolical way and manner, to awaken a poor soul out of the sleep
of security and sin, by causing him unknowingly to pass an impartial sentence
against himself, in the person of another, that so he might be brought unto
unfeigned repentance. This is clear from the Parable.

If it be so, then this may serve to discover the truth of this, How that God
many times takes such a mystical way of speaking, that he makes the poor
creature condemn himself, pass sentence upon himself in the person of another,
as he made David. It makes me wonder at David's being caught by God, and what
he said, when the Prophet said unto him, Thou art the man. Friends, if you have
committed adultery, murder, fornication, or some secret sin, or the like; God
has a Parabolical way and manner, to make you pass sentence upon your selves,
in passing sentence upon others, if he intend good to you. There is no hiding
of your sins; God will find them out. David little thought that he was the man
the Prophet spoke to, and that he passed sentence upon himself in the person of
another. God can catch us, some way or other: if he intend good to our souls,
he will show us that we have sinned, as he did David, some way or other.

If it be so, it speaks the wisdom of God. O how wise is our God, for our good!
Though happily, we think him not to be so. O the depth of the wisdom of God! his
ways are past finding out, in this thing, in convincing of sin in such a
parabolical way. We many times speak against his wisdom and ways, because we do
not comprehend them: there is no searching of his ways, they are past finding
out; the more we search into them, the more we lose our selves in them.

The fifth doctrine is this: That that which convinces a man of sin, is, Gods
saying unto him, Thou art the man: This is clear from the words.

If it be so, Then you that take your fill of sin, that commit sin with
greediness; when God comes to say to you souls, You are the men and the women
that have sinned against him, what will you do then? And you that are proud,
self-conceited, high-minded, and the like; God will find you out, and discover
to you, that you are the men and women that have sinned against him, and
wronged your own souls. To confirm this Doctrine, consider that in Act. 2. 3,
6. Therefore, let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God has made
that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ; Whom they had
crucified. When God had said unto them, that they were those which crucified
Christ, that they were the men which did it; when they heard this, they were
pricked in their hearts, and cried out, What shall we do to be saved? And in
another place, It was ye that denied Christ in the presence of Pilate, that
denied the holy One and just, and desired a murderer to be granted unto you: it
was ye that killed the prince of life, whom God, raised from the dead, Act. 3.
13, 14, 15. The God of our Fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on
a tree, him has God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior,
to give repentance unto Israel, and forgiveness of sins. When they heard that,
they were cut to the heart, and took counsel to slay them, Act. 5. 30, 31, 33.
The Apostles saying unto them in the Spirit of Christ, that they were those
that slew Christ, they were the men that did it; that cuts them to the heart,
and makes them take counsel to slay them. When God speaks to a soul, Thou art
the man that have sinned, that have slain Christ; either he will cry out, What
shall I do to be saved? or else he will inrage and take counsel against the
people of God. The Word of God is like a two edged sword, and will cut one way
or other.

If it be so, Then O that God would say to you, as he did to David, you are the
men and women, that have killed the poor man's Lamb! We are ready, with the
whorish woman, to wipe our mouths, and say, We have not sinned: but when God
comes to discover sin, we shall see we have sinned, been proud, vaunted, and
gloried in our selves what we have been, done, or can do; that we have spoken
honorable of those that admired us, and poor, and base, and contemptible, of
those that did not admire us, and cry us up.

CHAP. III.
The three Witnesses in heaven with their testimonies; and the three Witnesses
on earth, with their testimonies, explicated, out of 1 John 5. 7, 8.
Verse. 7. For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word,
and the holy Ghost; and these three are one.

8 And there are three that bear witness in earth, the Spirit, and the Water,
and the Blood; and these three agree in one.


IN the fifth verse of this chapter, there is a Question propounded with an
Answer annexed to it. The Question is this: Who is he that overcomes the
world? The answer is this: But he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God,
this is he that came by water and blood, even Jesus Christ; not by water only,
but by water and blood. And it is the Spirit that bears witness of this. The
reason is, because the Spirit is truth. Now these two verses which we are to
speak to, are a reason of part of the sixth verse. There are in the first verse
of the words, these things to be considered,

First, Who the Witnesses are that bear record in Heaven.

Secondly, What Heaven is, in which they bear testimony.

Thirdly, What the Witnesses Records are.

Fourthly, What the Witnesses Oneness is.

There are in the second verse of the words these things likewise to be
considered,

First, What earth is.

Secondly, Who they are that bear witness in earth.

Thirdly, What their testimonies are.

Fourthly, How the Witnesses agree in one.

The first thing to be considered in the first verse of the words, is this: Who
the Witnesses are, that bear record in Heaven. They are three great mysteries,
the Father, the Word, and the Spirit; the hugest mysteries that ever were;
which no natural eye can find out: all the parts, learning, and gifts of men,
are here lost: And besides, they are of such infinite vastness, that they
swallow up all other mysteries whatsoever. The very marrow of Godliness and
Christianity consists and lies hid in the knowledge of these Three: it is the
right understanding of these Three, that makes the soul truly godly. All
happiness and glory lie involved in these Three, the Father, Word, and holy
Ghost.

Quest. But you will ask me, What is the Father? what is the Son? and what is
the holy Ghost?

Answ. The Father is God, the Son the same God, and the holy Ghost the same
God; though in a different manner.

Quest. But why is God called the Father? why the Son? and why the holy Ghost?

Answ. He is called the Father, with respect to two Creations:

First, the Old Creation;

Secondly, the New Creation.

First, he is called the Father with respect to the Old Creation: he is the
Former, Begetter, and Framer of the heavens, and of the earth, and of the sea,
and of every thing in the earth and in the sea; that belongs to the Old
Creation: for it is the proper work of God, as he is the Father, to Beget and
Create.

Secondly, He is called the Father with respect to the New Creation: he is the
Father, as he is the begetter of Christ, Psalm. 2. 7. and as he is the begetter
of souls to himself by the Word of truth in the New Creation, James 1. 18. as
he is the begetter of us to a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ
from the dead, 1 Pet. 1. 3. and as he is the begetter of us to himself by the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 4. 15.

He is called the Word, first, with respect to the Old Creation likewise;
secondly, with respect to the New Creation also.

First, He is called the Word, with respect to the Old Creation, as he is the
thing begotten in the heavens, and in the earth, and in the sea, and in every
thing in the heavens, earth, and sea: for there is nothing in them, but holds
forth the power and wisdom of God, which is Christ: see 1 Cor. 1. 24. For it is
the proper work of the Son, to be begotten in the Old Creation.

Secondly, He is called the Word, with respect to the New Creation, as he is
the thing begotten in us in the New Creation; as he is the life, power, and
hope of glory within us, Col. 1. 27. as he is our wisdom, justification,
sanctification, redemption, and the like. For it is the proper work of the Son,
to be begotten in us.

He is called the Spirit, with respect to two things:

First, as he is a discoverer and revealer of Truth and Glory to us, and in us,
in the Old Creation: there is abundance of Truth and Glory to be seen there,
which we see not, nor know: every thing of the Old Creation sets forth more or
less glory. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his
handiwork. And the devil keeps us from looking after the glory of God that
shines forth in the things of the world. Now it is the only work of God, as he
is the Spirit, to discover and reveal that glory and truth that lies hid in
every thing in the world.

Secondly, he is the Spirit, as he is the revealer and discoverer of truth and
glory in the New Creation: there is no glory to be seen, without the Spirit;
and there is no knowing of truth and glory, but by the Spirit. We may seek to
find it out, and labor, and weary out our spirits, and yet not find it. It
is not the joining of every man's Learning together, can find it out: Truth
indeed will put all learned Rabbis to a nonplus. And so for the Glory of God,
it is unsearchable; men cannot find it out, though they join all their heads
together. Where is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputer of this
world? Tell me what is glory of God, and what is Truth. You cannot tell me:
for, no man knows the mind of God, but God. Now it is the only work of God,
as he is the Spirit, to reveal and make known Truth and Glory to us and in us.

Again, he is called the Spirit, as he is the leader of the poor creature into
Truth and Glory, in the Old Creation. Though God, as the Spirit, discovers
Truth and Glory to us in the Old Creation; yet, Friends, we cannot be led into
it, but by the Spirit: though we see never so much Truth and Glory shine forth
in the Old Creation, yet we cannot enjoy it, without the Spirit; the Spirit is
that which leads us into the enjoyment of it, which is sweeter then the
seeing of it. Howbeit, when he the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you
into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall
hear, that shall he speak; and he will show you things to come, Joh. 16. 13.

Secondly, he is the Spirit, as he is the guider of poor creatures into Truth
and Glory, in the New Creation. Friends, if there be any Truth and Glory that
you possess, the Spirit guided you into it: for we are so ready to go out of
the way of Truth and Glory, though it be discovered to us, that unless we had
some one to guide us into Truth and Glory, we should miss of the enjoyment of
it, though we see it.

The second thing to be spoken to in the first verse of the words, is this:
What heaven is, in which the Witnesses bear record.

Heaven here, is the uncompounded and unmixt state of Saints; it is such an
estate of glory in which Saints shall be, as shall not be mixed or compounded
with flesh. That state which we are now in, it is a mixed state of Flesh and
Spirit; but that state which we shall be in, in heaven, is a pure state of
Spirit and Glory.

The third thing to be enquired into, is, What the Witnesses record in heaven
is. In which, we shall consider four things.

1. What the Father's report is. 2. What the Word's report is. 3. What the holy
Ghost's report is. 4. How they witness.
For the first, what the Father's report is: The Father's report is somewhat
concerning the Son. What is that? See in 1 John 5. 9, 10, 11, 12. If we receive
the witness of men, the witness of God is greater: for this is the witness of
God, which he has testified of his Son. He that believes on the Son of God,
has the witness in himself: and he that believes not God, has made him a
liar, because he believes not the report that God gave of his Son. And this is
the report, that God has given to us eternal life, and this life is in his
Son. He that has the Son, has life; and he that has not the Son of God, has
not life. See that in Joh. 5. 32. There is another that bears witness of me;
and I know that the witness which he bears of me, is true. See verse 37. And
the Father himself which has sent me, has born witness of me. But what does
the Father witness of Christ? See in Matthew. 3. 16, 17. And Jesus, when he was
baptized, went up straightway out of the water; and lo, the heavens were opened
unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove, and lighting
upon him. And lo, a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom
I am well pleased. That which the Father testifies of Christ, is, That he is
the Messiah, the Son of God; and that he is well pleased with his Son, and so
with us, in his Son. Then that in Joh. 8. 18. The Father that sent me, bears
witness of me. What is that? See verse. 12. Then spoke Jesus again unto them,
saying, I am the light of the world: he that follows me, shall not walk in
darkness, but shall have the light of life. God bears record of Christ, that
he is the light of the world, that enlightens the world; and that he that is a
follower of Christ, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of
life, that is, life's light; that is, he shall have that light that is
accompanied with life. See that in Heb. 7. 17. For he testifies, Thou art a
priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek. The Father testifies of
Christ, that he is an everlasting Priest, to make intercession for us, and to
take away our sins. Who is made, not after the Law of a carnal commandment, but
after the power of an endless life, that is, unlooseable and indissolvable life.

The second thing to be enquired into, is, What the Word's report is.

1. It bears witness of the Father. 2. Of it self.
First, It bears witness of the Father, that he sent his Son to be the
Savior of the world; it testifies what it has seen and heard, in the Father,
and from the Father, Joh. 3. 32. The Word testifies of that good will, love,
and grace, which it has seen and heard to be in the Father, toward the worst
of sinners: the Word bears witness of the Father, by its works that it did,
that the Father sent him into the world, to finish that great work of
Redemption and Reconciliation. See Joh. 18. 37. To this end was I born, and for
this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth.
Every one that is of the truth, hears my voice.

Secondly, It testifies of it self. See Joh. 8. 14, 18. Jesus answered and
said unto them, Though I bear record of my self, yet my record is true: for I
know whence I came, and whither I go. I am one that bears witness of my self,
that I came from the Father, and go to the Father.

Object, But, may some say, Christ says in Joh. 5. 3. If I bear witness of my
self, my witness is not true: so that Christ bearing witness of himself, is not
true.

Answ. To this I answer; If Christ bear witness of himself alone, that is,
without the Father, and not as one sent from the Father; then indeed his
witness is nottrue; otherwise it is.

The third thing to be enquired into, is, What the holy Ghost's report is.

The holy Ghost's report, see in Heb. 10. 15. Whereof the holy Ghost also is a
witness to us: of which see in verse. 10. By the which will we are sanctified,
through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all. See likewise
verse. 12. This man, after he offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down
on the right hand of God, from henceforth expecting till his enemies be made
his footstool. See verse. 14. For by one offering, he has perfected for ever
them that are sanctified. All which the holy Ghost testifies. And that in Act.
5. 32. For we are his witnesses of these things, and so is also the holy Ghost,
whom God has given to them that obey him. What does the holy Ghost witness?
See in verse. 30, 31. The God of our Fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and
hanged on a tree. Him has God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince and
a Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins: of which
the holy Ghost is a witness. Now the holy Ghost bears witness by cloven
tongues, that Christ is exalted. See Act. 2. 3, 4, 33. And there appeared unto
them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them. And they
were all filled with the holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as
the Spirit gave them utterance. Therefore, being by the right hand of God
exalted, and having received of the Father the promise of the holy Ghost, he
has shed forth this which you now see and hear.

The fourth thing to be inquired into, is, How the Father, Word, and holy Ghost
witness. They witness immediately, that is, without means.

The next thing to be inquired into, is, How the Father, Word, and holy Ghost,
are one. They are one in substance, in being; they are one pure essence and
person. He does not say, They agree in One; but, Are One.

If it be thus, Then this may serve to discover what these three Witnesses in
Heaven are; they are the Father, Word, and holy Ghost; three immediate, true,
and strong Witnesses. It is written in the Law, that the testimony of two
witnesses is true; much more the testimony of three. What greater testimony can
there be in Heaven, then the testimony of three? the Father bearing testimony
of the Son, and the Son of the Father, and the holy Ghost of both; all three
witnessing grace and love, to our spirits, that we are theirs, and they ours.
Job says, Also now behold, my witness is in heaven; (speaking of the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost in unity) and my record is on high, that is, in the high
places, Job 16. 19. It shall be established for ever, as the moon, and as a
faithful witness in heaven: Selah: speaking of David's Throne. So Psa. 37. The
witnesses in Heaven are such as are faithful. Now a faithful witness will not
lie, Prove. 14. 5, 25.

If it be so, Then desire God to open the Temple of the Tabernacle of the
Testimony in heaven to you. Rev. 15. 5. It is said, when the Temple of God was
opened in heaven, there was seen in the Temple the Arc of his Testament; and
there were lightnings, and voices, and thunderings, and an earthquake, and
great hail, Rev. 11. 19. Friends, when God comes to open his Temple in Heaven,
then we shall see the Ark of his Testament, and lightenings, and voices, and
thunders, and an earthquake, and great hail fall upon the man of sin in us.

If it be so, Then this may serve to discover what the mystery of the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost or Spirit is; That they are three, and yet one; one, and
yet three: that the Father is one, the Son another, and the holy Ghost another;
and yet the same* God variously come forth. So that Unity brancheth forth it
self into Variety, and Variety into Unity: the Father is not limited to Unity,
but spreads forth himself into Diversi^y.

If it be so, Then this may serve to discover the vanity and blasphemy of those
that hold that Christ and the Spirit are mere Creatures, and not the most high
God; For it is clear from what has been spoken, that they are the most high
God in Unity; and the Father, Son, and Spirit differ not, but in their several
makings forth; all are but one, eternal, wise, immortal, and invisible Being.
And the reason why people fall into such gross absurdities, is, because they
are ignorant of this mystery: He that sends, and he that is sent; He that
gave the holy Ghost, and the holy Ghost that was given; He that speaks of
himself, and he that speaks not of himself; He that teaches, and he that is
taught; He that gives, and he that receives; He that is the giver, and he that
is the gift; He that prays, and he that offers up prayer, are all but one
incomprehensible being; and therefore Christ says of the Father and himself,
that they are one: I and my Father are one. Till we come to understand things
thus, we shall miss of the truth, and run into a thousand errors.

Thus much for the first verse of the words.

The first thing to be considered in the second verse of the words, is, What
earth is, in which the Water, Blood, and Spirit witness.

Earth is the mixed and compounded state of Saints, in which they live in this
life; which is an estate part of flesh, and part of spirit; part fleshly, part
spiritually: in which state, there is such a lusting and fighting of the spirit
against flesh, and flesh against the spirit, that a Saint cannot do many times
the things he would, but is led captive into the law of sin.

The second thing to be considered in the second verse of the words, is, Who
they are that bear witness on earth. They are three; the Spirit, Water, and
Blood.

But you will ask me, What the Spirit is, what the Water is, and what the
Blood is.

The Spirit is God, and the Lord is that Spirit. Now God is the Spirit (as I
said before) in reference to the discovery of truth, and leading into truth:
or, he is called the Spirit, in respect of his Omnipresency, or because of its
Invisibility: a spirit cannot be seen.

The second thing to be spoken to, is, What the Water is. It is that which
came out of the side of Christ, when one of the soldiers with a spear pierced
his side.

The third thing to be spoken to, is, What the Blood is, that bears witness
in earth: It was that likewise which issued out of Christ's side. See both
these in Joh. 19. 34.

The next thing to be considered in the words, is, What the VVitnesses
testimonies in earth are: and in this, there are these three things to be
considered:

1 What the witness of the Spirit is. 2 What the witness of Water is. 3
What the witness of Blood is. 4 How they witness.
The first thing to be inquired into, is, What the witness of the Spirit is,
or what it testifies. It testifies of Christ: See Joh. 15. 26. But when the
Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit
of truth which proceeds from the Father, he shall testify of me, and make
known me: I say, The Spirit testifies of Christ; it witnesses Christ to the
soul.

1 It testifies of the sufferings of Christ. 2 Of the glory that should follow
those sufferings.
First, It testifies the sufferings of Christ; it witnesses them to the soul;
it makes known what Christ has suffered, and the fruit of those sufferings;
and witnesses the truth thereof to the soul, 1 Pet. 1. 11.

Secondly, It testifies of that glory which should follow those sufferings.
What is the glory? That glory which Jesus Christ is in at the right hand of
the Father. What is that? See in Joh. 17. 5. And now, O Father, glorify me
with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the world was;
which was with his own self. Now the Spirit testifies of that glory, and
witnesses it to the soul. There is always glory following after affliction;
and the more affliction, the more glory: Our light afflictions, which are but
for a moment, are not worthy to be compared with that glory which is to be
revealed in us. All which the Spirit testifies.

The next thing to be considered, is, What Water witnesses. It witnesses
mystically Sanctification, Purity, Washing, Cleansing, doing away sin.

The third thing to be considered, is, What Blood witnesses. It witnesses
Salvation, Redemption, Justification, Life, though in a mystical sense.

Object. But, may some say, How can Water witness Sanctification, washing,
cleansing of the soul? And how can Blood witness Salvation, Justification, and
the like, seeing the Water and Blood of Christ was long since spilt upon the
ground?

Answ. I shall answer this, by asking another Question: How did Abel, being
dead, speak? Rev. 11. 4.

The fourth thing to be inquired into, is, How the Spirit, Water, and Blood
witness. They witness mediately, that is, by means.

The last thing to be inquired into, is, How the Spirit, Water, and Blood
agree in one. Thus: They witness to one thing: what the Spirit witnesses, that
Water witnesses; and what Water witnesses, Blood witnesses; and what
Water and Blood witness, that the Spirit witnesses, which is love.

If it be thus, Then this may serve to inform us of this truth, That God has
not left us without three VVitnesses in earth: God would not have us be without
three, by reason that he tenders us so much: he knows our frailties, that we
are ready to be set upon by Satan, and to sink in our Spirits for want of
VVitnesses: he has given us three, to confirm us, and establish us, in our
mixed state of flesh and blood, lest we should be discouraged, and so faint away
in our spirits, because of those corruptions and flesh which are within us: he
has given us his own Spirit, and his own Water and Blood, to bear witness to
our souls of loving kindness and mercy, sanctification, pardon of sin,
righteousness, and the like.

If it be thus, Then do not say you shall not be Sanctified and made clean:
Water witnesses Sanctification, and Purity to the soul. Do not say you are
not, nor shall be justified, that your sins are not pardoned: Blood speaks it,
that your sins are pardoned, and you justified.

If it be thus, Then set to your seals to that which the Spirit, Water, and
Blood testify: the not receiving what they witness, is the cause of abundance
of trouble, and sinkings of the spirit. Listen therefore what Water and Blood,
or rather the Spirit in water and blood witnesses, and it will force you to
submit to its testimonies; and those that have received their testimonies, have
set to their seals that God is true.

CHAP. IV.
Some sweet Discoveries of those glorious things that are spoken of the city of
God; out of Psalm. 87. 1, 2, 3* 4 5, 6, 7.
Verse. 1. His foundation is in the holy mountains.

2. The Lord loves the gates of Sion, more then all the dwellings of Jacob.

3. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God. Selah.

4. I will make mention of Rahab and Babylon to them that know me; Behold,
Philistia, and Tire, with Ethiopia: this man was born there.

5. And of Zion it shall be said, This and that man was born in her: and the
Highest himself shall establish her.

6. The Lord shall count when he writes up the people, that this man was born
there. Selah.

7. As well the singers as the players on instruments, shall be there: all my
springs are in thee.


THere are in the first verse of this Psalm, these things to be considered:

First, what is meant by foundation here.

Secondly, whose this foundation is.

Thirdly, where this foundation is.

Fourthly, what the holy mountains are in which the foundation is.

The first thing to be enquired into, is, What is meant by foundation here. It
is meant Christ; he is a Saints foundation, upon which he builds, or is built.
We are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief cornerstone. It is not any thing that a believer
builds upon, but Jesus Christ. As a wise master builder, (says Paul) I laid
the foundation, Christ: for other foundation can no man lay, then that is laid,
Jesus Christ. Now if any man build upon this foundation, gold, silver, precious
stones, wood, hay, stubble, which are false Doctrines and Principles; every
man's work shall be made manifest: for the day shall declare it, because it
shall be revealed by fire; and the fire shall try every man's work, of what
sort it is* If any man's work abide, which he has built thereupon, he shall
receive a reward. If any man's work shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss* but he
himself shall be saved; yet so as by fire, 1 Cor. 3. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.

The second thing to be enquired into, is, Whose this foundation is. It is
God's foundation, of God's own laying in the mountains: Behold, I lay in Zion
for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a sure foundation, Isai. 28. 16. And
in another place it is said, that the foundation of God stands sure, 2 Timothy
2. 19.

The third thing to be enquired into, is, Where this foundation is: that is to
say, in the holy mountains. What is meant by the holy mountains? See Dan. 9.
16. O Lord, according to all thy righteousness, I beseech thee, let thine anger
and thy fury be turned away from thy city Jerusulem, thy holy mountain;
because, for our sins, and for the iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and all
thy people are become a reproach to all that are about us. And that in Joel 3.
17. So shall ye know that I am the Lord your God, dwelling in Zion my holy
mountain: then shall Jerusalem be holy, and there shall be no strangers pass
through her any more. So that the holy mountain is the City Jerusalem; it is
Zion: God has laid his foundation in Jerusalem, in Zion, for Zion to build
upon.

The Lord loves the gates of Zion more then all the dwellings of Jacob.

There are in this verse these things to be considered:

First, what the gates of Zion are. They are those that open into Zion, that
give an entrance into Zion, that let us into Zion. It is the property of a gate
to let in into some place or other: so the gates of Zion are those which give
us an admittance into Zion.

The second thing to be enquired into, is, what the dwellings of Jacob are.
They are these: They dwelt upon somewhat that was not God; they dwelt upon
wickedness, as those that know not God do: see Job 18. from verse. 6 of this
Chapter, to verse. 21. Yea, the light of the wicked shall be put out, and the
spark of his fire shall not shine; the light shall be dark in his tabernacle,
and his candle shall be put out with him: the steps of his strength shall be
straightned, and his own counsel shall cast him down. For he is cast into a net
by his own feet, and he walks upon a snare. The grin shall take him by the
heel, and the robber shall prevail against him. The snare is laid for him in
the ground, and a trap for him in the way. Terrors shall make him afraid on
every side, and shall drive him to his feet. His strength shall be
hungerbitten, and destruction shall be ready at his side. It shall devour the
strength of his skin; even the firstborn of death shall devour his strength.
His confidence shall be rooted out of his tabernalce, and it shall bring him to
the king of terrors. It shall dwell in his tabernacle, because it is none of
his: brimstone shall be scattered upon his habitation. His roots shall be dried
up beneath, and above shall his branch be cut off. His remembrance shall perish
from the earth, and he shall have no name in the street. He shall be driven
from light into darkness, and chased out of the world. He shall neither have
son nor nephew among his people, nor any remaining in his dwellings. They that
come after him, shall be astonished at his day, as they that went before were
affrighted. Surely such are the dwellings of the wicked, and this is the place
of him that knows not God. Then that in Psalm. 55. 15. Let death seize upon
them, and let them go down quick into hell: for wickedness is in their
dwelling, and among them. Now the Lord loves the gates of Zion, the outward
part of Zion, the entrance of Zion, more then Jacob's dwellings: he cannot
endure dwelling places where wickedness is: he cannot endure our dwelling
places, that which we dwell and live upon besides God.

Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God. Selah.

The things that are to be enquired into in this verse, are these following*

First, what the city of God is. It is that in which God dwells and inhabits,
and takes up his abode: it is Zion, Jerusalem; it is God's people.

The second thing to be enquired into, is, what those glorious things are that
are spoken of the city of God. See Psalm. 45. 13, 14, 15. The Kings daughter is
all glorious within; (which is the Church of Christ:) her clothing is of
wrought gold. She shall be brought to the King Christ Jesus in raiment of
needle work: the virgins her companions that follow her, shall be brought unto
thee. With gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought: they shall enter into
the Kings palace; that is, into Christ's glory; whose garments smell of myrrh,
aloes, and cassia, out of the ivory palaces whereby they have made thee glad,
verse. 8. Kings daughters were among thy honorable women: upon thy right hand
did stand the queen in gold of Ophir, verse. 9. See that in Isai. 33. 20, 21.
Look upon Zion, the city of our solemnities: thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a
quiet habitation, a tabernacle that shall not be taken down: not one of the
stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall any of the cords thereof be
broken; but there the glorious Lord will be unto us a place of broad waters and
streams, wherein shall go no galley with oars, neither shall gallant ships pass
thereby.

See Rev. 21. 1. And I saw a new heaven and a new earth. This new heaven and
earth is a state of righteousness: See 2 Pet. 3. 13. Nevertheless we, according
to his promise, look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwells
righteousness: that is, such heavens and such an earth as is free from all
corruption and sin. This new heaven and new earth is spoken of in Isai. 45. 17.
For behold, I create new heavens and a new earth; and the former shall not be
remembered, nor come into mind. This new heaven and new earth is described
there to be such an estate of glory, in which the voice of weeping shall be no
more heard, nor the voice of crying, verse. 19. but Jerusalem shall be created a
rejoicing and a joy, verse. 18. And he who blesses himself in the earth, shall
bless himself in the God of truth; and he that swears in the earth, shall
swear by the God of truth; because the former troubles shall be forgotten,
verse. 16.

For the first heaven and first earth were passed away: they shall not be
remembered, nor come into mind. Which first heaven and earth is that state of
things in and under which the Saints are now: Whose voice then shook the earth;
but now he has promised, saying, Yet once more I shake not the earth only,
but also heaven, Heb. 12. 26. God is now a shaking the old heaven and earth,
and they begin to fall apace, and to make way for the new heavens and earth.

And there was no more sea: That is, no more troublesomness, confusedness,
broils, waves, tempests, and storms. This John saw, and it will shortly be
fulfilled.

And I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of
heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. This holy City, new
Jerusalem, is the Church of Christ in her glorious triumphing estate. It is
therefore said to come down from God out of heaven, because it has all its
newness and holiness from God, and from heaven, by which she is now prepared
and adorned for her husband.

And I heard a great voice out of heaven, saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God
is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people; and God
himself shall be with them, and be their God. John heard a voice from heaven,
which called him to behold, see, and take notice, that God would tabernacle in
men, make men his tabernacle. He tells John that this his tabernacle is with
men; he does not tell him it shall be with men; but it is already; he dwells
himself with the Saints already: intimating unto us this, that it is so in the
counsel of God. There is a great deal in that word himself: he dwells in us now
by the Spirit: (Ye are the habitation of God by the Spirit:) but he will dwell
himself, in his own proper substance, being, and person: God himself shall be
with them: He is with us now, but he shall be with us in greater glory: and he
will dwell with us: Now he is in us and with us for a while, and then withdraws
himself; but then he shall take up his dwelling for ever in our hearts: and we
shall be his people: We are his people now; but we shall be so his people, as
that his name shall be written upon our foreheads, that we shall be
distinguished from the world: the world shall acknowledge us to be his: and he
shall be their God: He is their God now, but it shall appear to all then that
he is their God.

And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for
the former things are passed away. Here is a further description of
Hierusalem's state. When God comes to dwell among us himself, when he himself
comes to be with us, he will put an end to all our sorrow, and crying, and
pains; yea, he will wipe away all our tears; so that we shall weep no more; he
will take away death, even that death through fear of which many were all their
lifetime subject to bondage, Heb. 2. 15. and we shall live for ever in his
sight: and the reason is, Because the former things are past away.

And he that sat upon the throne, said Behold, I make all things new. And he
said unto me, Write: for these words are true and faithful. And he said unto
me, It is done. Here is Christ upon the throne, calling us to behold that he
makes all things new. Friends, Jesus Christ is doing of it, and he will restore
his people into a better and more firm estate then they were in in the first
Adam; and for the confirmation of this, commands John to write it as a thing
already done. Things to come, which are decreed in the counsel of God, are as
certain as if they were past: for God cannot change nor alter: therefore he
says, I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, ver. 6.

Now at the ninth verse he says, And there came unto me one of the seven
Angels which had the seven vials full of the seven plagues, and talked with me,
saying, Come up hither; (Here the Spirit of the Lord calls up John above
himself, that so he might see and receive the visions of the Lord) I will show
thee the Bride the Lambs wife, that is, the Church of Christ in her glorious
estate.

And he carried me away in the spirit to a great and high mountain, which is
Christ, that so he might take a view of the spouse of Christ in her glory.
Which thing holds forth this to us, that none can take a right view of the new
Jerusalem, unless they be taken from earth into heaven. And showed me that
great city, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from God, having the
glory of God, that is, the light, wisdom, power, beauty, and excellency of God:
no less then the very glory of God is the new Jerusalem clothed with. And her
light was like unto a stone most precious, even like a jasper stone; which is
full of beauty, excellency, and glory. And clear as crystal, that is, in
respect of its bright shining and glistering light* And had a wall great and
high; which speaks the security, defense, and safetiness of the City. And it
had twelve gates; which signifies this to us, the hardness and difficulty of
enemies to enter in. And at the gates twelve angels, to keep the gates, that
none but the righteous enter in. And names written thereon, which are the names
of the twelve tribes of the children of Israel; that is, all the Elect of God,
both Jews and Gentiles, that are not Israelites after the flesh, but true
Israelites. Which holds forth this to us, that those that are to enter into the
City, their names are written upon the gates of the City. On the east three
gates, on the north three gates, on the south three gates, and on the west
three gates. Which holds forth this unto us, That out of all the four quarters
of the earth, the Elect shall be gathered. See Mat. 24. 31. And he shall send
his angels with a great sound of a trumpet; and they shall gather together his
elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other: or, from the
uttermost parts of the earth, to the uttermost part of heaven, Mark 13, 27. And
some shall be let in at one gate, and some at another. And the wall of the city
had twelve foundations; which speaks the sureness of its foundation: and in
them the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb; to signify unto us, that
the ground and foundation of this City is laid upon the doctrine of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the cornerstone. And he that talked
with me, had a golden reed to measure the city, and the gates thereof, and the
wall thereof. Measuring with Reeds, was a thing of great use, as we read among
the Prophets. Because every thing of this spiritual Jerusalem is glorious,
therefore the measuring-reed is said to be of gold. This golden Reed is the
Spirit. And the city lies foursquare: which presents us with this, The
fastness and unmoveableness of its stature: for round things are easily rolled
and moved aside; but square things are not. Seeing we receive a kingdom that
cannot be shaken, let us have grace, whereby we may so serve God, that we may
please him, with reverence and fear, Hebr. 12. 28. And the length is as large
as the breadth. And he measured the city with the reed, twelve thousand
furlongs: the length, and the breadth, and the height of it are equal. The
Angel with his golden Reed measures the square side of the City, both in
length, breadth, height, and depth of it and finds each of them to be Twelve
thousand furlongs; which after 8 furlongs to the mile, makes in our account
fifteen hundred miles, as some say; and so the whole square of this great City
comes to six thousand miles; which is a great compass; and holds forth unto
us the great largeness of this City, that there is room enough for all the
inhabitants thereof, yea most pleasant and commodious rooms. And he measured
the wall thereof, an hundred forty and four cubits, according to the measure
of a man, that is, of the angel: which, after our common account of two Cubits
to a Yard, amount unto seventy and two yards; which is a great thickness, even
so thick, as no enemy can break in. And the building of the wall of it was of
jasper; that is, spotty, greedy, green, and flourishing. And the city was pure
gold, without any mixture. Like unto clear glass, pure and glistering. And the
foundations of the wall of the city were garnished; beautified and adorned with
all manner of precious stones, which were written upon the breast plate of the
Highpriests under the Law.

But here we are not to think that the city of God is of such metal and matter
indeed, as is here described: but the holy Ghost would give us some taste of
it, and, after a sort, shadow out unto us under these things, which are of most
esteem amongst men, what the glory and excellency of this new Hierulem is.

And the twelve gates were twelve pearls; every gate was of one pearl: and the
street of the city was pure gold, as it were transparent glass. All which hold
forth to us the braveness, beautifulness, gloriousness, glistering, and
admirableness of the City. If the gates be of Pearl, and the street of gold,
then what are the inmost rooms! And I saw no temple therein, as was in the old
Jerusalem. For the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, are the temple of it. As
the City has no need of the Temple, so it has no need of the sun, neither of
the moon, to shine in it: that is, it has no need of any light: for the glory
of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. God and Christ is all
in all there. The kings of the earth do bring their glory and honor into it.
Though none of the Kings and Nobles of the Gentiles might be admitted into the
old Jerusalem, yet they have free passage into this. And the gates of it shall
not be shut at all by day. The gates of this City always stand open for
believers to come in, as not fearing enemies. For there shall be no night
there. All shall be light. And they shall bring the honor and glory of the
nations into it; and throw it down at Christ's feet. And there shall in no wise
enter into it any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination*
or makes a lie, but they that are written in the Lambs book of life. No
unclean thing shall enter in here.

Now in Chap. 22. to verse 6. he speaks of a pure river of water of life:
This River is Christ, who is pure: the Water of this River, is the Spirit, that
flows from him, and begets life in us. Clear as crystal. There is no muddiness
in it. Proceeding out of the throne of God and the Lamb. Which holds forth unto
us, that God in Christ is the original of all our life and happiness. In the
midst of the street of it, and of either side of the river, was there the tree
of life; which is Christ: which bare twelve manner of fruits: Which speaks
those varieties of pleasures and delights that are in Jesus Christ. And yielded
her fruit every month, as well in summer as in winter: Which speaks this to us*
the plenty of pleasures and delights that are in Jesus Christ. And the leaves
of the tree were for the healing of the nations; to preserve them from all
diseases and griefs, sorrow and pain, and sickness. The tree stands not in an
outward corner of the City* but in the midst of the street, and of both sides
of the river, that all the Citizens of Jerusalem might freely come unto it, and
taste of the fruits of it. And there shall be no more curse. We shall be no
more subject to any curse in the heavenly Paradise, as Adam was in the earthly.
But the throne of God and the Lamb shall be in it. God shall be on his throne,
and the Lamb there. And his servants shall serve him; yea, they shall see his
very face, (which Moses could not endure the sight of) and be taken with his
glory. And his Name shall be in their foreheads; which shall distinguish them
from the world: yea, his Name shall be so seen in their foreheads, that all the
world shall take notice of it. And there shall be no night there, and they need
no candle, neither light of the sun: for the Lord God gives them light; and
they shall reign for ever and ever with the Lord. And he said unto me, These
sayings are faithful and true. And the Lord God of the holy prophets sent his
holy angel to show unto his servants the things which must shortly be done. All
which are spoken of the City of God. Selah. And if you look into the 54, 60,
62, 65 of Isaiah, you shall see further what glorious things are spoken of the
City of God.

I will make mention of Rahab and Babylon to them that know me.

The first thing to be inquired into in these words, is, What Rahab is. It is
Egypt: See Isa. 51. 9. Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the Lord; awake
as in the ancient days, in the generations of old. Art thou not it that has
cut Rahab, and wounded the dragon? See Psalm. 89. 10. Thou have broken Rahab in
pieces. Or* Rahab may be taken for the harlot. Heb. 11. 31. By faith, the
harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not, when she had received
the spies with peace.

The second thing to be inquired into, is, What Babylon is. It is a great City,
Rev. 18. 10. Alas, alas, that great city Babylon.

The third thing to be inquired, is, What Gods making mention of Rahab and
Babylon is. It is his making known and discovering of Rahab and Babylon.

The fourth thing to be inquired into, is, to whom God will make mention of
Rahab and Babylon: and that is, to those that know him; to those that are
acquainted with God; that have not an outward cognizance of God, but a divine
inward knowledge of him: God will make mention of Rahab and Babylon to them
that thus know him. What, make mention of Rahab and Babylon? Why? What is to be
seen in Rahab? Is there any thing to be seen that is worth the seeing, in
Egypt, where there is nothing but blackness* darkness, bondage, cruelty, and
the like? Yes, this man was born there. Who is that? Christ. What, Christ born
in Egypt, among the Egyptians, where there is nothing but cruelty, darkness,
and bondage? This is strange. God will make mention of this, to them that know
him, as an encouragement to them to believe, notwithstanding their darkness and
bondage, that Christ shall be born in them. Or, Rahab here* may be taken for
the harlot. If you take Rahab for the harlot, then it is thus: God will make
mention of Rahab the harlot to them that know him. What, a harlot? Is there
any thing to be seen or learned from her? Yes; though she was a harlot, yet she
obtained mercy; and so it is an encouragement to us. Gods making mention of
Rahab the harlot to them that know him, is his letting them see, that she
obtained mercy; that so it might be an encouragement to those to whom he makes
mention of it, to believe.

I will make mention of Babylon likewise to them that know me. Why, is there
any thing to be seen in Babylon, among the Babylonians? Yes: This man was born
there. Where? In Babylon, among the Babylonians, those sinful persecuting
creatures, that held the people of God in captivity: this God will make mention
of to them that know him, as an encouragement to them likewise.

Behold, see, take notice. What shall we take notice of? Philistia. What is
Philistia? A Country, of which the Philistims came. What is to be seen there?
This man was born there. Where? Among the Philistims that fought against
Christ, and were enemies to him.

Behold, see, take notice of Tire. What is Tire? A City, Mat. 11. 21, What is
to be seen there? This man was born there. What, born in that sinful City? Yes.

Behold, Ethiopia. What was Ethiopia? A Country, of whom the Ethiopians came,
that is, Blackamores. What is to be seen there? This man was born there. Where?
Among the Blackamores, those sullied, sinful, black creatures.

So that if Satan makes the question, how Christ can be born in such an
Egyptian Babylonish Rahab-like heart as thine is; make mention of Rahab and
Egypt, and tell him* That this man was born there.

If Satan makes the Question, how Christ can be born in thee, that art so
Philistia and Tyre-like; Behold Philistia and Tire, and tell him, That this man
was born there.

If Satan tempt thee with thy blackness and sulliedness* and makes thee
question whether Christ be born in thee, from thy blackness and sulliedness;
Behold Philista; and tell Satan, That this man was born there.

As it was said of Rahab and Babylon, Philistia* Tire, and Ethiopia, That this
man was born there: so it shall be said of Zion. And of Zion it shall be said*
This man, and that man, that is, man and man, the man Christ Jesus, and the man
David, was born in her.

And the Highest himself shall establish her. God himself shall establish her
with grace, shall root her and ground her in himself, against all winds of
Doctrine, temptations, sin* and the gates of hell.

The Lord shall count, or, reckon, when he writes up the people (among the
living in Jerusalem* Isa. 4. 3. In the writing of the house of Israel, Ezekiel.
13. 9.) That this man Christ, was born there. Born where? In Zion. Selah. He
that has an ear to hear, let him hear.

As well the singers, as the players on instruments shall be there. Where? In
Zion; and shall make sweet and heavenly music and melody in their hearts to
God. What singers and players on Instruments shall be there? Not carnal
singers, but such as can sing the song of the Lamb; and not carnal players or
carnal Instruments neither, but spiritual.

The Psalmist ends the Psalm with this sweet saying, All my springs are within
thee: As if he should say, I am nothing but what I am from thee, thy springs
are mine; all my springs of comfort joy, parts, are in thee; and if thou
withdrawest them, I die: my lower and upper springs are in thee, my lesser and
my greater. Christ says of his people, A garden enclosed is my sister, my
spouse; a spring shut up, a fountain sealed* a fountain of gardens, a well of
living waters and streams, from Lebanon* Cant. 4. 12, 15. Therefore with joy,
shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation, Isa. 12. 3. Therefore are
they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple; and
he that sits on the throne shall dwell among them. They shall hunger no
more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun light on them, nor any
heat: for the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne, shall feed them, and
shall lead them unto living fountains of waters; and God shall wipe away all
tears from their eyes, Rev. 7. 15, 16, 17.

CHAP. V.
Some sweet Discoveries of the way Christ takes to undo a man, and take away
his Life, Light, Understanding, Knowledge, Wisdom, and so make him a mere
beggar; out of Isa. 6. 5, 6, 7.
Verse. 5. Then said I, Woe is me, for I am undone; because I am a man of unclean
lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips: for mine eyes have
seen the King, the Lord of hosts.

6. Then flew one of the Seraphims, unto me, having a live coal in his hand
which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar.

7. And he laid it upon my mouth, and said, Lo, this has touched thy lips,
and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged*


IN the verses going before, the Prophet Isaiah gives a description of that
discovery that he had of the Lord, and of the time when he had it: the
description of his dicovery is part of the first verse, to the fifth: the time
when he had this discovery, is set down in the first words of the first verse,
which was in the year that King Vzziah dyed, 2 Chronicles. 26. 23. The Prophets
discovery of the Lord, is as follows.

I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne; as ready to judge, Psa. 9. 7, 8. But the
Lord shall endure for ever: he has prepared his throne for judgment, and he
shall judge the world in righteousness; he shall minister judgment to the
people in uprightness. See Dan. 7. 9, 10. I beheld till the thrones were cast
down, and the Ancient of days did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the
hair of his head like the pure wool; his throne was like the very flame, and
his wheels as burning fire* a fiery stream issued and came forth from before
him: thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
stood before him. The judgment was set, and the books were opened. See that in
Rev. 4. 2* 3. And immediately I was in the Spirit, and behold, a throne was set
in heaven, and one sat on the throne; and he that sat, was to look upon like
a jasper, and a sardine; two glistering stones. And there was a rain-bowe round
about the throne, in sight like unto an emerald; which holds forth the Covenant
of Grace. See Revel. 6. 16. And they said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on
us, and hide us from the face of him that sits on the throne, and from the
wrath of the Lamb. And that in Rev. 20. 12. And I saw the dead* small and
great, stand before God: and the books were opened, and another book was
opened, which is the book of life: and the dead were judged out of those things
which were written in the books, according to their works. At verse. 19. And I
saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it, from whose face the earth
and the heaven fled away, and there was found no place for them.

Or, the Throne may be taken thus: A Throne denotes Dignity, Rule, Kingliness,
Authority: Sitting holds forth Rest. The words being thus explained, the
meaning of them is this: Isaiah saw the Lord sitting upon the Throne; that is,
ruling, reigning, triumphing, in a peaceable manner, over his enemies.

High, and lifted up; that is, far above all principalities and powers, might
and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but that
which is to come, Ephesians. 1. 21.

And his train filled the temple: That is, the skirts of his Robes* with which
he sat upon the Throne, filled the Temple, that is, the Saints: for they are
the Temple of the living God, 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17.

Above it (that is, above the Throne) stood the Seraphims. What are those?
Angels appearing as fire, Psalm. 104. 4. Who makes his angels spirits, his
ministers a flaming fire. These stood and attended Christ. See Dan. 7. 10.
Thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
stood before the Ancient of days* that sat upon the Throne, whose garments
were white as snow.

Each one had six wings: with twain he covered his face; as not able to endure
the brightness of Christ's glory; even as Moses did: see Exodus 3. 6. Moreover,
he said, I am the God of thy fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and
the God of Jacob. And Moses hid his face: for he was afraid to look upon God.
See that likewise in 1 King. 19. 11, 12, 13. And he said, Go forth, and stand
upon the mount before the Lord. And behold, the Lord passed by, and a great and
strong wind rent the mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before the Lord;
but the Lord was not in the wind: and after the wind, an earthquake; but the
Lord was not in the earthquake: and after the earthquake, a fire; but the Lord
was not in the fire: and after the fire, a still small voice. And it was so,
when Elijah heard it, that he wrapped his face in his mantle* and went out* and
stood in the entering in of the cave. Elijah could not endure the glory of God,
and therefore puts a mantle before his face.

And with twain he covered his feet; as abashed in apprehension of their own
infirmities and imperfections, compared with God's incomparable perfection and
majesty, Job 4. 18. Behold, he put no trust in his servants, and his angels he
charged with folly.

And with twain he did fly: Which speaks their readiness and swiftness to go
about God's business, Psalm. 110. 20. Bless the Lord, ye his angels, that excel
in strength, that do his commandments, harkening unto the voice of his word.

And one cried to another, or, this cried to this, Holy, holy, holy. Their
constant employment is praising God. See Rev. 4. 8. And the four beasts had
each of them six wings about them, and they were full of eyes within; and they
rest not day and night, saying, Holy, holy* holy Lord God Almighty* which was,
and is, and is to come. The whole earth is full of his glory; or, his glory is
the fullness of the whole earth: He fills heaven and earth with his glory: we
can look nowhere, but behold glory. Psalm. 104. 24, 25. Lord* how manifold are
thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all: the earth is full of thy riches;
so is this great and wide sea.

And the posts of the door moved at the voice of him that cried; and the house
was filled with smoke* that is, the posts of the door of the house or temple
moved. The posts are those upon which the door hangs: Their moving was a sign
of God's indignation. See Amos 9. 1. I saw the Lord standing upon the altar,
and he said Smite the lintel of the door, that the posts may shake; and cut
them in the head all of them* and I will slay the last of them with the sword:
he that flees of them, shall not flee away; and he that escapes of them shall
not be delivered.

And the house was filled with smoke: Another sign of his fierce anger
incensed. See Psalm. 18. 7, 8. Then the earth shook and trembled* the
foundations of the hills moved and were shaken, because he was wroth. There
went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth devoured; coals
were kindled by it. See Deuteronomy. 29. 20. The Lord will not spare him but then the
anger of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against that man. Or by smoke
here is meant darkness: see Rev. 15. 8. And the temple was filled with smoke
from the glory of God, and from his power: and no man was able to enter into
the temple, till the seven plagues of the seven angels were fulfilled.

In this symbolical Vision, Isaiah saw the Lord; and the discovery of the Lord
had such an efficacy and power upon his spirit, that he was forced to cry out,
that he was undone. So that the words are a fruit of that discovery that Isaiah
had of Christ. And there are in them these things to be considered:

First, Here is what Isaiah said when he saw the Lord: Woe is me, or, Woe belongs
to me; it is my portion.

Secondly, Here is the reason of that saying, Woe is me; and that is, For I am
undone, that is, cut off.

Thirdly, Here is the ground why he said he was undone; which is threefold:

1. Because I am a man of unclean lips; that is, because he was vile.

2. I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips.

3. Because mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts.

That which we shall raise from the words, is this:

That a true seeing the Lord, is accompanied with these things following:

First, It undoes a man.

Secondly, It makes him cry out, Woe is he.

Thirdly, It makes him cry out that he is a man of unclean lips.

Fourthly, That he dwells in the midst of a people of unclean lips.

I. First of all, A true discovery of the Lord, undoeth a man; that is, cuts
him off from what he is, or can do. As for Samaria* her king is cut off, as the
foam upon the water, Hos. 10. 7. As the foam upon the face of the water is cut
off, so is that man cut off and beheaded, that has seen the Lord. Or, it may
be meant that Isaiah was cut off in his own apprehensions and thoughts. Or, the
word undone may be taken thus: An undone man is one that has nothing to live
upon of his own; no victuals or clothes of his own: Friends, to be undone, is
to have nothing to live upon of our own; as parts, gifts, righteousness, doing,
working, being, thinkings, conceits, self-perswasions, high estimation of our
selves, fancies, fictions, and the like; but to live upon somewhat of another,
which is Christ. There is in a true undoing of a man by the sight of the Lord,
these things following:

First, There is a striking of a man down. When God intends good to a soul, the
first work that God takes with him, is, he strikes him down stark dead, that he
never lives any more to himself, or to sin, or to the devil, but unto God. In
this manner Paul was struck down, as he journeyed with letters to Damascus: he
came near to Damascus, and suddenly there shined round about him a light from
heaven; and he fell to the earth, and heard a voice saying unto him, Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me? Acts 9. 3, 4. Much like to this, is that in Rev.
1. 17. And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead.

Secondly, A true discovery of the Lord, takes away a man's sight, that he
cannot see with his own eyes. Friends, if God intends us good, he will put out
our eyes; he will blind us, that we shall not see in our own light* as he did
Paul* And Saul arose from the earth; and when his eyes were opened, he saw no
man* but they led him by the hand, and brought him into Damascus. See Acts 9.
8. and 22. 11. We would live and see, but God will destroy our life and sight,
if he intend us good.

Thirdly, A true discovery of the Lord, takes away a man's strength and breath.
See Dan. 10. 16, 17. And behold, one like the similitude of the sons of men,
touched my lips. Then I opened my mouth, and said unto him that stood before
me, O my Lord, by the vision my sorrows are turned upon me, and I have retained
no strength: for how can the servant of this my Lord talk with this my Lord?
for as for me, straightway there remained no strength in me* neither is there
breath left in me. It takes away our breathing after God, and our strength, our
power to do this and that* to subdue sin, withstand temptation, and to wrestle
with God, and the like. We are ready to vaunt, and say, This is that which we
have done by our might, for the honor of our majesty: but God will, if he
intend good to us, confound our breathings and strength, yea, all that we are,
or can do.

Fourthly, A true discovery of the Lord confounds a man's Understanding. See
Prove. 30. 1, 2. The words of Agur the son of Jakeh, even the prophecy: the man
spoke unto Ithiel, even unto Ithiel and Vcal. Surely I am more brutish then any
man, and have not the understanding of a man. Our understandings are a great
hinderance to us, in the knowledge of the things of God; and till our
understanding of things be destroyed, we shall not see into the truth of things.

Fifthly, A true discovery of the Lord* destroys our Knowledge, We would and do
know things; and no further then things do suit with our knowledge, do we take
things to be truth. We make our Knowledge the measure of all Truth. But a true
sight of God, will confound it: If once you come to see the Lord* then you will
say, you have not the understanding of a man; As I was forced to say.

Sixthly, A true sight of the Lord, destroys our Wisdom that makes us wise in
our own eyes. We think we are wise, and we need not the wisdom of God, whenas
our wisdom is foolishness. We think we carry our selves wisely: but God will
destroy the wisdom of the wise. We think we are wise to do good, and all other
wisdom is nothing to our own: but a true sight of God will put an end to it.

Seventhly, A true discovery of the Lord, destroys all man's Holy walkings: Not
that I am against holy walkings, if they be the holy walkings of Christ: it
destroys all that a man has trusted in, and put confidence in, beside the
Lord; all his natural faith and hope of being saved; all his speakings, pride,
selfishness, and the like.

II. A true sight of God does not only undo a man, but discovers sin to him,
and makes him cry out, that he is a sinner, that he is a man of unclean lips,
that he has sinned against the Lord: Against thee, thee only have I sinned,
and done this evil. It makes a man abhor himself: I have heard of thee by the
hearing of the ear, but now mine eye has seen thee; wherefore I abhor my self,
and re pent in dust and ashes, Job. 42. 5, 6.

III. A true sight of God, makes a man cry out that he dwells among a sinful
people: O it is a wicked people among whom I dwell and live! It makes him cry
out of their sinfulness. A soul that has seen God, cries out of sin* wherever
he sees it; and of his dwelling in the tents of Sechem. It does not only make
a soul cry out that he is a man of polluted lips, but makes him acknowledge,
that the people among whom he dwells are sinful. A man that has seen the Lord,
will not only cry out that he himself has sinned, but that those among whom
he dwells have sinned.

IV. A true sight of God makes a man cry out, Woe is him: woe and destruction
belongs to me, for I am undone* I am a man of polluted lips, for I have seen
the Lord. Friends, if once you come to see the Lord, then you will cry out* Woe
is you, woe is you, we are undone* we know not what to do; How shall we do to be
saved?

Then flew one of the Seraphims unto me: That is* one of the fiery Angels, at
the command of God. See Psalm. 103. 20. It is said, It flew: It speaks the
swiftness with which it went to Isaiah; it speaks the haste that it made to
him, Isaiah being in an undone state. Having a live coal in his hand* This
Seraphim did not fly empty to Isaiah, but it had in his hand a live coal; it
came with somewhat to enliven and comfort Isaiah in this state. But what is
this live coal? And whence had the Seraphim it? This live coal is the Spirit:
And the Seraphim, had taken it with the tongs from off the altar: which Altar,
in the type of it, was the Altar of burnt offerings, where the fire never went
out, and upon which the fat of the Peace Offerings was burnt: See Lev. 6. 12.
The Antitype of which Altar is Christ: so that the Seraphim had it from Christ.
The tongs are that with which he took the coal from off the Altar. And he laid
it upon the prophets mouth; or* caused it to touch the Prophets lips. And said,
Lo, this has touched thy lips, and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin
purged. The coal touching the Prophets lips, is nothing but a secret persuasion
by the Spirit, that his iniquity was done away. God no sooner strikes a man
down dead, and undoes him, but he sends a Seraphim with a live coal, to tell
him good news, that his sins are pardoned, and his iniquities are done away.

If it be thus, Then this may serve to discover a true sight of the Lord from
all false sights of him. Friends, if it be a true sight of the Lord that you
have had, then it has undone you, taken away your Strength, Breath*
Understanding* Knowledge, Wisdom, Light, Life, etc. It has robbed you of all
yours, made you a mere beggar, so that you have nothing of your own to trust
to* feed and live upon: It has stricken you stark down dead; dead to every
thing of your own and of the worlds, and alive to God: it has crucified you,
slain you, that you no more live* but Christ lives in you: it has forced you
to cry out, Woe is you, woe is you; for you are of unclean lips, and you dwell
among a people of unclean lips. He that has an ear to hear* let him hear.

If it be so, Then do not cozen and cheat your own souls: do not say you have
seen, when you have not seen him. What, have you seen the Lord, and are not
dead, and are not undone? What have you seen the Lord, and are alive? Do not
lie. I beseech you, let not a deceived heart lay hold on you; do not feed on
lies, in this respect. If you have not seen him, speak the truth, and do not
decieve your own souls: if you have seen him, he has stricken you down dead.
If you say you have seen him, and are yet alive, then I know not what seeing of
him is.

If it be so, Then this may serve to discover the goodness of God, that when he
has struck a soul down dead, and took away his life from him, undone him,
forced him to cry out that he is undone, and that woe, woe is he, for he is a man
of uncircumcised lips, and dwells among a people of unclean lips; yet, that God
should not suffer that man to be swallowed up in despair, but should cause to
fly one of his Seraphims unto him with a live coal in his hand, and to lay it
upon his mouth, to put life into him, and say, Lo, this has touched thy lips,
and thine iniquity is taken away* and thy sin purged; and should say* O man
greatly beloved, fear not; peace be unto thee: be strong, yea, be strong; As he
did to Daniel, Dan. 10. 19. This is admirable.

If it be so, Be not afraid to be undone, to lose your Life, Light, Breath,
Understanding, Knowledge, Wisdom, and Strength. O it is sweet, sweet: do not
think much, though God by the discoveries of himself to you, rob you of all you
have* leave you a beggar. Be not afraid of the discoveries of sin; do not fear
that you shall be swallowed up in despair, if God should discover your self and
sin to you: so soon as ever he has discovered sin to you, undone you, taken
away your life, he will send a Seraphim with a live coal in his hand, a coal
that has life in it, and will lay it upon your mouth, and say to you, This
has touched thy lips, and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged,
Thou art greatly beloved; fear not; peace be unto thee; be strong; and so fetch
life in thee again, keep thee from sinking in spirit, and being swallowed up in
despair. And you shall no more live your own life, but for ever live the life
of God; And you shall no more understand and know things, and see things in
your own understanding knowledge, and light: but in the understanding,
knowledge, and light of God: you shall do nothing in and by your own strength
and wisdom, nor breathe after God in your own breath: but you shall do all
things in the strength and wisdom of God, breathe after himself in the breath
of God. Selah.

If it be so, Beg of God a discovery of Christ upon the throne; of a risen
Christ; that it may undo you, take away your Life, Wisdom* Strength,
Understanding, Knowledge, Light, Strength. It is a sweet thing to be undone, to
be stripped of all a man has, to lie naked before God; and we to have nothing
and be nothing of our own, but to have all and be all in God: it is the
greatest work God can do for a soul, and it is the greatest mercy God can show
to a soul.

If it be so, Then O that I had a discovery of a risen Christ, of Christ upon
the throne, says the soul. Do you know what you desire, what you ask for? Are
you contented to be undone, to lose all that you have and are? Are you willing
to have all burnt up in you by that fiery flame that issues out of Christ's
mouth? Then he will manifest himself to you, and you shall know the Lord indeed
and in truth, in your souls.

CHAP. VI.
Some sweet Discoveries of what shall be in the later days, out of Zech. 14.
20, 21.
Verse. 20. In that day, shall there be upon the bells of the horses, HOLINESS
UNTO THE LORD: and the pots in the Lords house shall be like the bowls before
the altar.

21. Yea every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah shall be holiness unto the Lord of
hosts: and all those that sacrifice, shall come and take of them, and seethe
therein. And in that day, there shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of
the Lord of hosts.


THe words are a Prophecy of what shall be in the later days, and of the time
in which shall be that which is prophesied of. What shall be, are these things
following.

First, There shall be upon the bells of the horses, Holiness unto the Lord.

Secondly, The pots in the Lords house, shall be like the bowls before the
altar.

Thirdly, Every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah, shall be holiness unto the Lord
of hosts.

Fourthly* All they that sacrifice, shall come and take of them, and seethe
therein.

Fifthly, In that day, there shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of the
Lord of hosts.

Sixthly, The time when all these things shall come to pass* will be, In that
day.

There are in the first verse of the words, these things to be considered:

First* what the bells of the horses are.

Secondly, what the meaning of that saying is, There shall be upon the bells of
the horses* Holiness unto*the Lord.

Thirdly* what the Lords house is.

Fourthly, what the pots in the Lords house are.

Fifthly* what the altar is.

Sixthly, what the bowls before the altar are.

Seventhly, in what sense the pots in the Lord's house shall be like the bowls
before the altar.

The first thing to be enquired into, is, What the bells of the horses are.
They are the bridles of the horses, which govern, rule, and command the horses.
Bridles are such, that are put into the horses mouths, to restrain them.

The second thing to be enquired into, is, What the meaning of that saying is,
There shall be upon the bells of the horses, Holiness unto the Lord. The
Prophet having spoken before, of the horses overthrow, and other cattle of the
enemies, (see v. 15.) he adds, to make up the measure, That all their spoils,
even the very deckings of their furniture, should be consecrated to God, to
make utensils for his service. The meaning is, God shall convert to his
service, in his Church, all such things as before were employed against him.
See this interpretation further cleared, in Isai. 23. 17, 18. And it shall come
to pass, after the end of ten years, that the Lord will visit Tire, and she
shall turn to her hire, and commit fornication with all the kingdoms of the
world upon the face of the earth: and her merchandise and her hire shall be
holiness to the Lord; it shall not be treasured, nor laid up: for her
merchandise shall be for them that dwell before the Lord, to eat sufficiently,
and for durable clothing. Her hire shall be holiness unto the Lord; that is,
shall be converted to the service of God, which was before employed against
God. Or, the meaning of that saying, There shall be upon the bells of the
horses, Holiness unto the Lord, may be this: There shall be holiness seen upon
mean things poor things comparatively, as a Bridle is: A man shall look
nowhere, but he shall see Holiness written, yea, upon the most contemptible
things: If a man look behind him, or before him, or on either side of him, he
shall see Holiness, that is* he shall see somewhat of God in every thing in the
world; shall see Holiness in mount Zion: though mount Zion now seems to be that
she is not, black, unholy, yet there shall be Holiness seen there: for it shall
shine forth, and all the world shall see it: See Obadiah verse. 17. Upon mount
Zion shall be deliverance, and there shall be holiness. As there is written
Holiness upon the brestplate of our high priest Christ Jesus: so shall there be
Holiness written upon us, upon mount Zion; and it shall be visible too, as it
is in our Head, and as it was in the High Priest under the Law: See Exodus 39.
30. And they made the plate of the holy crown of pure gold, and wrote upon it a
writing like to the ingraving of a signet, Holiness to the Lord, or of the
Lord. And as holiness was engraven upon the Brestplate of the High Priest under
the Law: so it shall be upon us. Consider that in Joel 3. 17. So shall ye know
that I am the Lord your God, dwelling in Zion, my holy mountain. Zion is holy,
but the world sees it not, and therefore the world speaks evil of Zion. Then
shall Jerusalem be holy, or holiness; and there shall be no stranger pass
through her any more. God looks upon Jerusalem to be holy, now; but when there
shall be no stranger pass through her, then she shall be more holy; then she
shall be visibly holy; holiness shall so break forth in her, that the world
shall acknowledge her to be holiness to the Lord.

The third thing to be enquired into, is, What the Lords house is. It is Zion,
it is Jerusalem: the Lords house are those in whom he dwells; and they are his
people.

The fourth thing to be enquired into, is, What the pots in the Lords house
are. The pots in the letter, were those that were made use of under the Law,
and were made of brass. See Exodus 38. 3. He made all the vessels of the altar,
the pots, and the shovels, and the basins, and the fleshhooks, and the
fire-pans, all the vessels thereof, made he of brass; and they were such in
which they sod the holy offerings. See 2 Chronicles. 35. 13. And they roasted the
passover with fire, according to the ordinance; but the other holy offerings
sod they in pots, and in caldrons, and in pans, and divided them speedily among
the people, and afterward they made ready for themselves and the priests,
because the priests the sons of Aaron were busied in offering of burnt
offerings. See that in Ezekiel. 46. 22, 23, 24. In the four corners of the court,
there were courts of forty cubits long, and thirty cubits broad; these four
corners were of one measure: and there was a new building round about in them,
round about them four: and it was made with boylingplaces under the rows round
about. Then said he unto me, These are the places of them that boil, where the
ministers of the house shall boil the sacrifice of the people. So that you see
the pots in the letter were those in which the Sacrifices of the people were to
be boiled. The pots in the mystery, are those Divine discoveries and
manifestations of Christ, in which the spiritual Sacrifices of the Saints are
and shall be boiled. That they are the discoveries of Christ that fit a
Sacrifice to be offered to God, see Mal. 3. 2, 3, 4. But who may abide the day
of his coming, and who shall stand whon he appears? for he is like refiners
fire, and like fullers soap; and he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of
silver; he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver,
that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness: then shall the
offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord* as in the days of
old, and as in former years.

The fifth thing to be enquired into, is, What the Altar is. The Altar is
Christ.

The sixth thing to be enquired into, is, What the Bowls before the Altar are.
The Bowls, in the letter, were those in which was put the blood of the
Sacrifice, and of Sprinkling. See 2 Chronicles. 4. 8. Exodus 29. 20. Levit. 4. 6.
Levit. 9. 8, 9. Or, the Bowls in the letter were those in which they put fine
flour mingled with oil, for a meatoffering: See Numb. 7. 13, 19, 25, 31, 37,
43, 49, 55, 61, 67, 73, 79. The Bowls in the spiritual interpretation, are the
Saints, in which the blood of sprinkling is. The pots in the Lords house shall
be like the Bowls before the Altar, in this respect, that is to say, for
multitude; as it was in the letter: see 2 Chronicles. 4. 8. He made also ten tables,
and placed them in the temple, five on the right side, and five on the left:
and he made an hundred basins, that is, bowls of gold. Now the pots were not so
many. It speaks the manifold discoveries of God that shall be in the later days
to his people. Or, it speaks this, that is to say, The multiplicity of
spiritual services that shall be offered to God in the later days.

The things that are to be enquired into in the last verse of the words, are
these following.

First, what Judah and Jerusalem are.

Secondly, what every pot in Judah and Jerusalem is.

Thirdly, how and in what sense it shall be holiness to the Lord of hosts.

Fourthly, what is meant by the Canaanite.

Fifthly, when these things shall come to pass.

The first thing to be spoken to, is, What Judah and Jerusalem are. Judah was
one of the twelve Tribes: see Revel. 7. 5. Jerusalem is the Saints of the most
High, the Lambs wife.

The second thing to be spoken to, is, What every pot in Judah and Jerusalem
is. It is the same as the pots in the Lords house are: Every pot, that is,
every discovery of Christ, that purifies every Sacrifice, and makes it fit to
be offered up to God.

The third thing to be spoken to, is, How and in what sense every pot in Judah
and Jerusalem shall be Holiness to the Lord. The meaning is, It shall be of a
holy use to the Lord of hosts, that is, of Armies. But of what use? To purify
and make fit Sacrifices to be put up to him. Or* it may be taken thus: every
discovery of Christ shall be holy to the Lord; that is, there shall be written
upon every discovery, Holiness: for those are truest discoveries, that have
Holiness written upon them. Sclah. And all they that Sacrifice shall come and
take of them, that is* of the discoveries, and seethe therein: they shall boil
their Sacrifices in the discoveries and manifestations of Christ, and so make
them pure Sacrifices, to be offered up to God, Mal. 1. 11.

The fourth thing to be spoken to, is, What is meant by the Canaanite. The
Canaanite may be meant the Merchant: he seems to have a special relation to the
abuse of Merchandising and selling, which was used in the Temple: See Joh. 2,
15. And when he had made a scourge of smallcords* he drove them all out of the
temple, and the sheep and the oxen and poured out the changers money, and
overthrew the tables, Mat. 21. 2. Or, by the Canaanite may be meant the
unclean, person: See Isa. 35. 6. And an highway shall be there, and a way; and
it shall be called the way of holiness: the unclean shall not pase over it. See
Rev. 2. 27. And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles,
neither whatsoever works abomination or makes a lie. God will so purify his
people, that there shall be no unclean thing in them; but they shall be holy
and unblameable before him.

The last thing to be spoken to, is, When all these things shall come to pass;
and that is, In that day. What is meant by that day? The day of Gods coming:
See Zech. 14. the latter part of verse. 5. Then shall these Prophecies be
fullfilled, when Jesus Christ shall appear the second time without sin, to
salvation.

If it be thus, Then this may discover what shall be in that day; there shall
be holiness written upon every thing: we shall see somewhat of God in every
thing, even in the meanest things. And those things that have been made use of
against the Lord, shall be turned into an holy use: they shall be holiness unto
the Lord. The pots in the Lords house shall be like the bowls before the Altar:
there shall be multiplicities of discoveries of Christ; that is, abundance of
discoveries of Christ in the latter days: Every pot in Jerusalem shall be
holiness unto the Lord; there shall be holiness written upon every discovery of
God: they shall come and boil their Sacrifices in these discoveries of God:
there shall no Merchant, no unclean thing, be in Zion, in Jerusalem, but all
shall be pure, and nothing shall hurt nor destroy in Gods holy mountain. So
that Zion shall be a peaceable and pure estate.

If it be so, This may serve to discover what Zion, the Lords house, is. It is
not a Stonewalled house, such as your meeting-places are: the Lords house is
his People, in whom he dwells: the the foundation of this house, is Christ; it
is founded upon a sure Rock, that the winds and storms of corruptions and
temptations cannot shake it. The Lords house is a spiritual building, built by
himself, to be the habitation of himself by the Spirit.

If it be thus, Then this may serve to inform us of those pure Sacrifices that
shall be offered up to God in the latter days. Now, our Sacrifices are full of
dross and mixture of somewhat of our own; but then, they shall be clean: that
which shall make them clean, shall be those great and large discoveries of God
that then will be. Now, we are troubled and perplexed that we cannot offer up
better Sacrifices then we do, to God, that we cannot worship him as we would
do, in Spirit and in truth; but then, we shall worship in the pureness of the
Spirit.

If it be so, Then this may serve to discover true discoveries of Christ, from
false. What a many rotten pretended discoveries of Christ we and others have
had! O how we have entertained falsehood instead of truth, and lived upon it!
But a true discovery of Christ, has this Motto written upon it, HOLINESS TO
THE LORD. If your discoveries of God bring not along with them holiness, they
are delusions of Satan: if any discoveries of God come with holiness engravened
upon them, receive them.

If it be so, Then this may serve to overthrow that doctrine that is newly
sprung up; which is, that there shall not be Sacrifices offered up to God in
the new Jerusalem-state. That there shall be, it is clear from what I have
said: Only there shall be this difference; more purer Sacrifices shall be
offered up then, then now there are: then shall the offerings of Judah and
Jerusalem be more pure and pleasant to the land. And that the words here speak
of the new Jerusalem-state, it appears by the last verse: There shall be no
more the Canaanite in the land; of which thing John speaks of, when he speaks
of the new Jerusalem-state, in Rev. 21. 27.

Quest. But, may some say, It will be a long while before what you have said
will come to pass.

Answ. To this I answer, It will come to pass in that day; and how soon God may
come, we know not: he may come presently, and deceive many, for ought that we
know.

Secondly, I say this, that all the promises of Christ are yea and amen in
Christ; and we are not to look upon prophecies and promises as altogether at a
distance, and to be fullfilled hereafter; but ^^gh, and fulfilled in Christ.

CHAP. VII.
Some sweet Manifestations of the neerness of Christ's coming, and of those
glorious things that shall follow after his coming; out of Zech. 14. the later
end of verse. 5. and v. 6, 7, 8, 9.
Verse. 5. And the Lord my God shall eome, and all the saints with thee.

6. And it shall come to pass in that day that the light shall not be clear nor
dark.

7. But it shall be one day, which shall be known to the Lord, not day nor
night: but it shall come to pass, that in the evening-time it shall be light.

8. And it shall be in that day, that living waters shall go out from
Jerusalem, half of them toward the former sea, and half of them toward the
hinder sea: in summer and in winter shall it be.

9. And the Lord shall be King over all the earth: in that day shall there be
one Lord, and his Name one.


IN the first Verse of this Chapter, the Prophet speaks of the coming of the
day of the Lord: Behold, the day of the Lord comes, says he: Behold; as if he
saw it, and therefore called upon them to see it: and tells them, that their
spoil shall be divided in the midst of them. He bids them behold and take
notice of the coming of the day of God, lest it should come upon them unawares.
He gives them the reason why he would have them take notice of the coming of
the day of God: For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle, and
the city shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and the women ravished. Here he
speaks of the ruin of Jerusalem. And half of the city shall go forth into
captivity. Here he speaks of leading one half of the City into Captivity. And
the residue of the people shall not be cut off from the city. Here, he would
save a remnant that should possess and enjoy those glorious things prophesied
of in this Chapter. Then shall the Lord go forth, and fight against those
nations: or, as it is in the margin of some Bibles, in the middle, or among
those nations gathered together against Jerusalem; not as an enemy, but helper.
And he shall fight as when he fought in the day of battle for Gideon, Judge. 7.
22. God setting every man's sword against his fellow; and as at the red sea,
causing his enemies to be drowned in the sea, and his people to go over
dry-foot. And his feet shall stand in that day upon the mount of Olives which
is before Jerusalem on the east. God would fight upon that mount against
Jerusalem. Or, it may be taken thus: By this manner of speech the Prophet
shows Gods power and care over his people, and how he will as it were by
miracle save them. And the mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst thereof,
toward the east, and toward the west; and there shall be a very great valley:
and half of the mountain shall remove toward the north, and half of it toward
the south, so that there shall be a very great valley; insomuch that out of all
the parts of the world they shall see Jerusalem, which was before hid with this
mountain. This is to be understood of spiritual Jerusalem, the people of God.
See Isai. 66. 23. And it shall come to pass, that from one new moon to another,
and from one sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship before me,
says the Lord. And ye shall flee to the valley of the mountains: All you
believers shall run unto the people of God, to be safe from the destruction of
Jerusalem. Or it may be taken thus: The Prophet speaks of the hypocrites,
that could not endure the presence of God, but should flee into all places
where they might hide themselves among the mountains. For the valley of the
mountains shall reach unto Azal; that is, to the place he separated for his
people; which the word Azal signifies. Yea, ye shall flee, like as ye fled
from before the earthquake in the days of Vzziah king of Judah; which fleeing
was with fear and trembling. And the Lord my God shall come, and all the saints
with thee. Because they did not credit what the Prophet said to them, he
turns to God, and comfort himself, in that he knew these things should
come to pass, and says, And the Lord my God shall come, and all the saints
with thee, to perform this. The Prophet speaks to the Lord, as his God, and can
claim an interest and propriety in him* as his; as the Psalmist in many places
of the Psalms does: Thou art my God, and I will praise thee. Oh how sweet a
thing it is, when a soul can claim an interest in God, and can say, Thou art my
God, The Lord my God shall come! The Prophet cannot only claim an interest in
the Lord, as his God; but he can command God; He shall come: he had power with
God, as Iacab had over the Angel. Friends, what an excellent thing it is, for a
soul to command God, to have power with God for any thing; to subdue sin, repel
a temptation, conquer the devil! A believer has this privilege and power; he
may command the Lord, as his God, for things to come, things concerning his
sons, or the work of Gods hands; and he will be commanded by him. See Isai. 45.
11. And there was no day like that, before it, or after it, that the Lord
hearkened unto the voice of a man: for the Lord fought for Israel. See this in
Josh. 10. 14. And this is the confidence that we have in him, or concerning
him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us: and if we
know that he hear us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petition that
we desired of him, 1 John 5. 14, 15. And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name,
that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. If ye shall ask
any thing in my name, I will do it, Joh. 14. 13, 14. And in that day ye shall
ask me nothing: Verily, verily, I say* unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the
Father in my name, he will give it you, Joh. 16. 23.

The Lord my God shall come. There are three sorts of the coming of Christ, in
Scripture.

First, There was a coming of Christ in flesh. Great is the mystery of
godliness, God manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3. 16. Who verily was
foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was manifested in these
last times for you, 1 Pet. 1. 20. But we have not followed cunningly-devised
fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ; but were eyewitnesses of his majesty. See this in 2 Pet. 1. 16. Now
this coming of Christ was to finish transgression, and to make an end of sin,
and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting
righteousness, Dan. 9. 24.

Secondly, There is a coming of Christ in Spirit. See Joel 2. 28, 29. And it
shall come to pass in the last days, says God, I will pour out of my Spirit
upon all flesh; and your sons and daughters shall prophecy, and your young men
shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams. See that likewise in
Zech. 12. 10. And I will pour out upon the house of David, and upon the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplication; and they
shall look upon me, whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as
one mourns for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that
is in bitterness for his firstborn. Now all this was fulfilled in part, in
Act. 2. 2, 3. and is yet to be fulfilled. And the end of his coming thus, was,
to convince the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment. See Ioh. 6.
9, 10, 11. and to teach his disciples all things, and to bring all things to
their remembrance. See Ioh. 16. 26. and to testify of Christ to them, and to
guide them into all truth; and many other things.

Thirdly, There is a third appearance of Christ, which is his appearance the
second time, without sin* unto salvation, unto them that wait for him, Heb. 9.
28. Which coming of Christ, is the last coming of Christ; of which I do intend
now to speak.

My God shall come. I can say boldly, as well as the Prophet My God shall come,
(blessed be his holy Name:) I can command him, and he will be commanded by me.
And not only My God shall come, but Your God shall come. He is not only the
Prophet's God that shall come* but My God, Our God, Thy God, and Your God which
shall come. What, my God? Yes: see Isai. 35. 3, 4. Strengthen ye the weak
hands, and confirm the feeble knees: say to them that are of a fearful heart,
that is, of an unbelieving heart, or hasty heart, Be strong fear not: behold,
your God will come: your God that you seek for, and wait for, will come, and he
shall come. What, to me? Yea, to a hasty heart. But he will appear to my
shame. No, to your joy and comfort. See Isa. 40. 10. Behold, the Lord God will
come. Behold; as if he saw him coming. Isa. 66. 11. Behold, the Lord will come,
will indeed come. The vision is for an appointed time; wait for it, it will
come, it will surely come, it will not tarry, Habb. 2. 3. Sing and rejoice, O
daughters of Zion: for lo, I come, and will dwell in the midst of you, Zech. 2.
10. Say unto the cities of Jerusalem, Behold, your God, Isa. 40. 9. Let the
fields be joyful, and all that is therein: then shall all the trees of the wood
rejoice before the Lord; for he comes, for he comes to judge the earth: he
shall judge the world with righteousness, and the people with his truth, Psalm.
96. 12, 13.

Quest. But how shall he come?

Answ. See that in Psalm. 50. 3. Our Lord shall come, and shall not keep
silence. I have a long time, (says God) holden my peace, I have been silent, I
refrained my self; now will I cry like a traveling woman, I will destroy and
devour at once. The Lord shall go forth like a mighty man; he shall stir up
jealousy like a man of war; he shall cry, yearoar: he shall prevail against
his enemies, Isa. 42. 14. 13. A fire shall devour before him; which is himself:
See Deuteronomy 4. 24. For the Lord thy God is a consuming fire, even a jealous God:
understand therefore* this day, that the Lord thy God is he which goes over
before thee: as a consuming fire he shall destroy them, and he shall bring them
down before thy face; so shall thou drive them out, and destroy them quickly,
as the Lord has said unto thee, Deuteronomy. 9. 3. And it shall be very tempestuous
round about him. Who shall stand when he appears? for he is like the refiners
fire, and he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of gold, Mal. 3. 2 3. Consider
that in Isa. 35. 4. Your God will come with vengeance, even God with a
recompense will come and save you. This Scripture holds forth the coming of
Christ two manner of ways.

First, He will come with a vengeance against all our sins, and temptations,
and devil; and save us from them all.

Secondly, He will come with a recompense: he will come with a reward for all
those sufferings that we have endured from sin, men, and Satan: he will reward
us for all our sufferings. Or it may be taken thus: He will come with a
recompense; he will reward with destruction all our enemies: for the Lord is
our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver* the Lord is our King; he will save us,
Isa. 33. 22. And then that in Isa. 41. 10. The Lord will come with a strong
hand* or against the strong with a mighty hand* or mighty power, against his
enemies against our corruptions; and his arm shall rule for him. The strength
of a man is in his Arms; so Gods strength is in his Arms: Gods Arms shall
rule for him: Behold, his reward is with him, and his work (or recompense)
before him. Consider that in Isa. 66. 15. Behold, the Lord will come with fire;
and with his Chariots like a whirlwind (that is, he will come swiftly and
fiercely) to render his anger with fury upon his enemies, and his rebuke with
flames of fire: that is, with the scorching burnings of himself.

We shall further illustrate the coming of Christ by these things.

First* He shall come in a cloud.

Secondly* He shall come in the clouds.

Thirdly* He shall come with clouds*

Fourthly, He shall come with his Saints and Angels.

First, He shall come in a cloud. See Luke 21. 27. And then shall they see the
Son of man coming in a cloud. What cloud? In a cloud of darkness. As he went up
in a cloud, so he shall come down in a cloud: in the same manner that he went
up, in the same manner he shall come down. See Act. 1. 11. Which also said, Ye
men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? This same Jesus which is
taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him
go into heaven. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout,
with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in
Christ shall rise first. Then we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up
together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we
ever be with the Lord* 1 These. 4. 16, 17.

Quest. But, may some say, You hold the personal reign of Christ.

Answ. Yes: but I do not hold it as many hold it: I hold that he shall come
personally, and reign; but yet spiritually, with spiritual flesh and blood,
with a glorified body; and what that is, I know not.

Object. But shall not he come and reign, with that very flesh and body which
he had at Jerusalem?

Answ. No. My reason is: For thou sowest not that body which shall be: that
which shall be, is changed, metamorphosed.

Object. But some will say, How are the dead raised? and with what body do they
come?

Answ. Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die; and
that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be* but bare
grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some other grain; but God gives it a body,
as it has pleased him, and to every seed his own body, 1 Cor* 15. 35, 36, 37,
31. Selah.

Secondly, he shall come in the clouds. See Matthew. 26* 64. Jesus said unto
them, Thou have said. Nevertheless I say unto you, Hereafter shall ye see the
Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, which is the Father, and coming
in the clouds of heaven. What are these clouds? They are clouds of darkness:
Psalm. 97. 2. Clouds and darkness are round about him, and he makes the clouds
his chariot, Psalm. 104. 3. Clouds of darkness are Christ's Chariot, in which he
will come riding into the world, and into the spirits of his people. He shall
come in this Chariot two manner of ways:

First, he shall come with Power: he shall come with power into the world, and
the spirits of his people: they shall feel his power: he will come with
majesty, and as one that has authority: he will beat down the mountains, and
every thing that lies in opposition to him; the lofty looks of men and women
shall he humble, and the haughtiness of them shall he bow down: then every one
that is prond, lofty, and lifted up, shall he bring low; all the tall cedars
of Lebanon, that are high and lifted up, and all the tall oaks of Bashan, and
all the high hills, and the high towers, and fenced walls, and the ships of
Tarshish, and pleasant pictures; and the idols shall he utterly overthrow and
abolish. And they shall go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of
the earth, for fear of the Lord, and the glory of his majesty, when he arises
to shake terribly the earth: and then shall they cast their idols of silver and
gold, which they have made every one for himself to worship, to the moles, and
to the bats, to go into the clefts of the rocks, and into the tops of the
ragged rocks* for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty.

Secondly, he shall come in great Glory; that is, huge* vast glory, that shall
dazzle the eyes of all people: he shall come in such glory as shall scorch the
men of the earth: he shall come in the brightness of himself, which shall
astonish all flesh.

Thirdly, he shall come with clouds. See Revel. 1. 7. Behold, he comes with
clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him; and the
kinreds of the earth shall wail because of him. Even so. Amen. Clouds of
darkness shall usher him in into the world, and all shall see him; and those
that have pierced him, shall cry out because of him.

Fourthly, he shall come with his Saints and Angels.

First, he shall come with his Saints: My God shall come, and all his Saints
with him. And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, Behold,
the Lord comes with ten thousand of his saints, Jude verse. 14. To the end he
may establish your hearts unblameable in holiness before God, even our Father,
at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his saints, 1 These. 3. 13.

Secondly, he shall come with his Angels likewise. The chariots of God are
twenty thousand, even thousands of angels: the Lord is among them as in Sinai,
in the holy place, Psalm. 68. 17. For the Son of man shall come in the glory of
his Father, with his angels, Matthew. 16. 27. And to you who are troubled, rest
with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty
angels. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. As clouds and darkness shall usher him in, so Saints and
Angels shall be his guard to wait upon him, in his coming.

I shall further hold forth the coming of Christ, these manner of ways
following; and then show you the end of his coming.

First, he shall come in the glory of his Father.

Secondly, he shall come in the glory of Himself.

Thirdly, he shall come in the glory of his Angels.

First, he shall come in the glory of his Father, clothed with his Fathers
glory, clad with his riches, grace, and good will; filled with his fullness. See
Mar. 8. 38. Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, in
this adulterous and sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of man be
ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father.

Secondly, he shall come in his own glory, which is God himself. Father,
glorify me with thine own self, which is with the glory I had with thee before
the beginning of the world, Joh. 17. 5. The Lord possessed me in the beginning
of his way, before his works of old: I was set up from everlasting, from the
beginning, or ever the earth was, Prove. 8. 22, 23. In the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God, Joh. 1. 1. He shall come
with the fullness of the Godhead in him, Col. 2. 9. he shall come with a fullness
of grace and truth, Joh. 1. 14. For it pleased the Father that in him all
fullness should dwell, Col. 1. 19. With all his fulnhss he shall come.

Thirdly, he shall come in the glory of his Angels, clothed with the Angelical
glory. But what is the glory of Angels? See Heb. 1. 7. And of the angels he
says, Who makes his angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire. The
glory of Angels is that flame of fire that is in them, and wherewith they are
clothed, which is nothing but their fiery and flame-like appearances. The
glory of Angels is the strength of Angels* Bless the Lord, ye his angels, that
excel in strength, or, are mighty in strength* Psalm. 103. 20. The glory of
Angels is their holiness: See Mat. 25. 31. When the Son of man shall come in
his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne
of his glory. The glory of Angels consists in this likewise: They neither
marry, nor give in marriage.

The last thing to be enquired into, is, the ends of his coming. They are these
things following.

The first is this: That in the dispensation of the fullness of times, he might
gather the other into one, all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and
which are on earth, Ephesians. 1. 10. And he shall send his angels, with a great
sound of a trumpet or, with a trumpet and a great voice; and they shall gather
together his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other,
Matthew. 24. 31. or, from the uttermost parts of the earth, to the uttermost part
of heaven, Mar. 13. 27.

Secondly, that he might gather his people together, unto the supper of the
great God; that is to say, to eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of
captains, and the flesh of mighty men; and the flesh of horses, and of them
that sit on them; and the flesh of all men, both free and bond, both small and
great. Friends, we shall feed upon all our enemies; we shall make a supper of
them all, Rev. 19. 18. And I saw an angel standing in the sun, and he cried
with a loud voice, saying to all fowls that fly in the midst of heaven, Come
and gather your selves together to the supper of the great God, verse. 17.

The third end, is to take vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey
not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus. 2 These. 1. 7, 8 9. And to you who are
troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with
his mighty angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God,
and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: who shall be punished
with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory
of his power.

The fourth end of his coming, is, that he might destroy that wicked one: And
then shall that wicked one be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the
spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming; which
is Antichrist, 2 These. 2. 8.

If it be thus, that My God, Thy God, Our God, Your God shall come, yea, will
come; Be not afraid of his coming and of his fiery appearance: he comes to save
you, to redeem you: he brings with him Redemption and Salvation: he comes to
deliver you from your corruptions, from your temptations, from your bondage and
affliction. Why should ye fear? Therefore, lift up your heads: for your
redemption draws nigh.

If it be thus, that My God, Thy God, Your God shall come, Do not doubt of his
coming. Say to them that are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not; behold,
your God will come; You need not fear but that he will. But when will he come?
He shall suddenly come, Mal. 3. 1. The Lerd whom ye seek, even the Messenger of
the covenant, whom ye delight in, shall suddenly come into his temple. Behold,
I come quickly; hold that fast which thou have, that no man take thy crown,
Revel. 3. 11. Friends, look to your Crown: God has set a Crown of pure gold,
that is, of salvation, upon your heads; take heed that Satan rob you not of it:
Behold, I come as a thief: blessed is he that watches, and keeps his
garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame, Rev. 16. 15. Behold, I
come quickly: blessed is he that keeps the sayings of the prophecies of this
book, Rev. 22. 7. Behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give
every man according to his work, verse. 12. As the light comes out of the east,
and shines even unto the west, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be;
which will be with speed, quickly, Matthew. 24. 27. He has promised that he will
come, and come quickly.

Quest. But, may some say, Where is the promise of his coming? for since the
fathers and Apostles fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the
beginning of the creation.

Answ. Take heed what you say. This was the saying of scoffers that walked
after their own lusts* See 2 Pet. 3. 4.

Quest. But, may some say, There are a great many things to be fulfilled and
accomplished before Christ comes in this manner; as. The calling of the Jews,
The bringing in of the Gentiles, The time of restitution of all things, spoken
of in Acts 2. 20, 21. and diverse other things, spoken of in Matthew. 24. Also,
Satan is to be cast into the bottomless pit, and to be shut up there, and to
have a seal set upon him, that he should deceive the Nations no more, till the
thousand years should be fulfilled: after that, he must be loosed for a little
season, Rev. 20. 1, 2, 3.

Answ. To all these Objections, I answer thus: It is true, there are the Jews
to be called, and the fullness of the Gentiles to be brought in; but when this
shall be, no man knows: and, for ought that we know, it may be quickly, in a
very short time, in the twinkling of an eye. And as for the restitution of all
things, which is to be fulfilled before the coming of Christ; that may be as
soon, for ought that we know. And as to those things spoken of in the 24 of
Matthew, which are to be fulfilled before the coming of Christ; I say, The most
part of them are already fulfilled, and the rest are about fulfilling, and will
be fulfilled in a very short time. And as to Satan's being bound, and cast into
the bottomless pit, and there to be shut up, and sealed, that he should deceive
the nations no more till the thousand years be fulfilled: I say this, That
Satan has been bound already, and cast into the bottomless pit, and there was
shut up and sealed, that he should not deceive the nations: I say, he was,
comparatively to that which he is now; and that he is let loose again: If ever
the Dragon was let loose, he is let loose now; and he is now gone out to deceive
the nations which are in the four quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog, to
gather them together to battle, the number of whom is as the sand of the sea:
And they shall go upon the breadth of the earth, and compass the camp of the
Saints about, and the beloved City; and fire shall come down from God out of
heaven, and devour them. And after this, the devil, that deceived them, shall
be cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and the false
prophet are, and shall be tormented day and night for ever and for ever. And if
I be out in this, then I shall say thus, That a thousand years with the Lord
are as one day, 2 Pet. 3. 8. And by the way note this, That I do not believe
that it is so to be understood, that Satan shall be so shut up, as that he
shall not decive some.

If it be so, That which any of you has already, hold fast, until Christ
comes, Rev. 2. 25. You that are Professors in deed, and not in show only, hold
fast your good Profession; let not Satan drag you out of your Profession, into
earth: Hold fast, and repent: if thou shall not watch. I will come on thee as a
thief, says Christ; and thou shall not know what hour I will come upon thee,
Rev. 3. 3. Watch ye therefore when the master of the house comes, lest coming
suddenly, he find you sleeping. And what I say unto you, I say unto all,
Watch; Mark 13. 35, 36, 37. Watch therefore; for ye know not at what hour your
Lord will come, Matthew. 24. 42, 43, 44. But know this, that if the good man of
the house had known in what watch the thief would come, he would have watched,
and would not have suffered his house to be broken up. Therefore be ye also
ready: for in such an hour as ye think not, the Son of man comes. Surely Jesus
Christ is not far off, but will steal in upon us unawares, when we look not for
him: Therefore watch, with oil in your lamps. And to encourage you to watch,
consider that place of Scripture in Luke 12. 37. Blessed are those servants,
whom the Lord when he comes shall find watching; verily I say unto you, that
he shall gird himself, and make them to sit down to meat, and will come forth
and serve them. And if he shall come in the second watch, or come in the third
watch, and find them so doing, blessed are those servants. But if that servant
shall say in his heart, My Lord delayeth his coming; the Lord of that servant
shall come in a day when he looks not for him, Luke 12. 45.

If it be thus, Be patient unto the coming of our Lord: be ye patient also; for
the coming of the Lord draws nigh; it is at hand, James 5. 7, 8. It was nigh in
the Apostles times; it is nearer now. For ye have need of patience, that after
ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise. For yet a little
while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry, Heb. 10. 36, 37.
Certainly he is not far off, but will steal in upon us, when we never expect
him.

If it be so, wait and look for Christ's coming. Ye come behind in no gift,
waiting for the coming of our Lord, 1 Cor. 1. 7. Looking for and hasting to the
coming of God, wherein the heavens being on fire, shall be dissolved, and the
element shall melt with fervent heat, 2 Pet. 3. 12. Look for him from the
clouds; expect him to come down in a cloud of darkness into your spirits: for
he will break through your darkness, and turn it into light. Wait: who knows but
that he may come down in a cloud of darkness into your hrarts?

If it be so, Little children, abide in him, that when he shall appear, we may
not be ashamed at his coming, 1 John 2. 28. For as the days of Noe were, so
shall also the coming of the Son of man be. For as in the days that were before
the flood, they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage,
until the day that Noe entered into the ark, and knew not until the flood came,
and took them all away: so shall also the coming of the Son of man be, Matthew.
24. 37, 38, 39. The very God of peace (therefore) sanctify you wholly: and I
pray God that your whole spirit, soul and body may be preserved blameless unto
the coming of our Lord* 1 These. 5. 23.

If it be thus, Then Occupy till Christ come. God has given every one of us a
Talent; let us improve our Talents; and let us not say, when Christ comes (as
one of those Ten did) Lord, here is thy Talent, which I have kept laid up in a
napkin: for I feared thee, because thou art an austere man, that thou take
that up thou layest not down, and reapest that thou did not sow; but let us
give him his own, with overplus; Luke 19. 20, 21. Let us not be as one of those
Husbandmen to whom God committed his Vineyard till he came; that when God
should send one of his servants, or his Heir, for the fruit of his Vineyard,
that should beat or wound any of his servants that he sends, or kill the Heir,
and cast him out of the Vineyard; lest he come and destroy us, Luke 20. 9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14, 15.

And it shall come to pass in that day, that the light shall not be clear, nor
dark.

There are three things in these words, to be enquired into:

First, What that day is. It is the day of God's coming, of his appearance; as
appears by verse. 5.

Secondly* What is meant by light here* I may be taken either for a natural or
spiritual light.

Thirdly, What is meant by that expression, The light shall not be clear nor
dark. The meaning is, It shall be a medium betwixt both: part clear, that is,
precious; and part dark, that is, darkness; not altogether clear, nor yet
altogether dark: we cannot say that it shall be clear, nor yet can we say it
shall be dark; but it shall be betwixt both.

But it shall be one day: Or, The day shall be one; that is to say, One
perpetual day. The Prophet's meaning is, that there shall be continual light in
the Church of Christ under the Messiah; though sometimes more dim and dark then
at other times, yet ways some light. Or, one perpetual day may be taken thus;
In which there shall be no darkness at all: Rev. 22. 5. And there shall be no
night there; and they need no candle, neither the light of the sun: for the
Lord God gives them light. And they shall reign for ever and ever. Or, it may
be taken for a singular day, to wit, of Christ 's death, when the Sun was
darkened at noon: Amos 8. 9. And it shall come to pass in that day, says the
Lord God, that I will cause the sun to go down at noon, and I will darken the
earth in the clear day. Which thing God did; and so remained three hours: see
Matthew. 27. 45. Now from the sixth hour there was darkness over all the land,
until the ninth hour. Or it may be taken for the day of Christ's coming: and
the reason of it, are the words following, Which shall be known to the Lord. Of
that day and hour knows no man, no not the angels in heaven, but my Father,
Mat. 24. 36.

Not day nor night: It shall not be day, neither shall it be night. What then
shall it be? It shall be somewhat of either.

But it shall come to pass, that at evening-time it shall be light. When we
look for nothing but darkness to approach, when dark night draws on, then light
shall break forth: when we look for darkness, then behold glorious light. See
Isai. 60. 19, 20. The sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for
brightness shall the moon give light unto thee; but the Lord shall be unto thee
an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory: the Lord himself shall be unto us
an everlasting light: thy sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy moon
withdraw it self: for the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and the days
of thy mourning shall be ended. See Revel. 21. 23. And the city had no need of
the sun, neither of the moon, to shine in it: for the glory of God did lighten
it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. In the eveningtime, when we little
expect light, this everlasting glorious light shall break forth.

The Prophet further goes on, to discover what shall be in that day.

And it shall be in that day, that living waters shall go out from Jerusalem.
Jerusalem here, is to be taken for the City of God, his Saints. The living
waters here, are waters that have life in them, which are the abundance of the
Spirit: see Joh. 7. 38. He that believes in me as the Scripture has said, out
of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. These shall flow out of the
Saints: see Ezekiel. 47. from the first verse to the seventeenth. Afterward he
brought me again unto the door of the house, and behold, waters issued out from
under the threshold of the house eastward: for the forefront of the house stood
toward the cast; and the waters came down from under from the right side of
the house, at the south side of the altar. Then brought he me out of the way of
the gate northward, and led me about the way without unto the utter gate, by
the way that looks eastward, and behold, there ran out waters on the right
side. And when the man that had the line in his hand went forth eastward, he
measured a thousand cubits, and he brought me through the waters: the waters
were to the ancles. Again he measured a thousand, and brought me through the
waters: the waters were to the knees. Again he measured a thousand, and brought
me through the waters: the waters were to the loins. Afterward he measured a
thousand, and it was a river, that I could not pass over: for the waters were
risen, waters to swim in. And he said anto me, Son of man, have thou seen this?
Then he brought me, and caused me to return to the brink of the river. Now when
I had returned, behold, at the brink of the river were very many trees, on the
one side, and on the other. Then said he unto me, These waters issue out toward
the east country, and go down into the desert, and go into the sea: which being
brought forth into the sea, the waters shall be healed. And it shall come to
pass, that every thing that moves, that lives, which moves whithersoever the
river shall come, shall live; and there shall be a very great multitude of
fish, because these waters shall come thither: for they shall be healed, and
every thing shall live whither the river comes. And it shall come to pass,
that the fishers shall stand upon it, from Engedi even unto Eneglaim: they
shall be a place to spread forth nets; their fish shall be according to their
kinds, as the fish of the great sea, exceeding many. But the miry places
thereof, and the marshes thereof, shall not be healed; they shall be given to
salt. And by the river, upon the bank thereof, on this side, and on that side,
shall grow all trees for meat, whose leaf shall not fade, neither shall the
fruit thereof be consumed: it shall bring forth new fruit, according to his
months, because their waters they issued out of the sanctuary; and the fruit
thereof shall be for meat, and the leaf thereof for medicine. So that you see
what these waters are; they are such as are not passable, healing waters,
waters of life. See Joel 3. 18. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the
mountains shall drop down new wine, and the hills shall flow with milk and all
the rivers of Judah shall flow with waters; and a fountain shall come forth of
the house of the Lord, and shall water the valley of Shittim. The Mountains,
here, are the Saints: for they are so called in Scripture. The New Wine which
they shall drop down, is new discoveries of the Spirit. The Hills are the
Saints likewise, caught up into high enjoyments of God. Their flowing with
Milk, is nothing but the Spirit breaking forth in an abundant manner in them,
in another consideration. The meaning of that saying, A fountain shall come
forth of the house of the Lord, is this: There shall be such a fountain of
living waters, that is, of the Spirit, flow forth from the Saints, as shall not
be dry. See Revel. 22. 1. And he showed me a pure river of water of life, clear
as crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God, and the Lamb. Which speaks the
same thing; only it holds forth the pureness of those waters. In the midst of
the streets of it, and of either side of the river, was there the tree of life,
which bare twelve manner of fruits, and yielded her fruit every month; and the
leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations.

Half of these waters shall go toward the former or Eastern sea, and half of
them toward the later sea, or hinder sea. The Eastern Sea, here in the letter,
is the Lake of Sodom; and the hinder Sea is the Mediterranean sea. But take it
in the mystery, and the meaning is this: By the former Sea are meant those that
are forwardest in the ways of Christ: by the hinder Sea, those that are
hindermost in the ways of Christ. Or, the former Sea, and hinder Sea, may be
taken for the Gentiles: The abundance of the sea shall be converted to thee:
See Isai. 60. 5. It speaks this clearly, A general and large pouring forth of
the Spirit.

In summer and in winter shall it be. When it is Summer, and when it is Wintet
with a soul, these waters shall never be dried up; no, not in the hottest time
of Summer, as your natural Summer-streams are.

And the LORD shall be King over all the earth. He shall alone be acknowledged
and worshipped, he shall alone reign and rule; none but the Lord.

In that day shall there be one LORD, and his Name one. That day is to be
understood of the day of God's coming, and of the appearance of Christ.

There shall be one Lord. Now there are many Lords, but then shall there be
only the true God acknowledged. There shall be one Lord, or, The Lord shall be
one. Now he is twain; then he shall be one.

And his Name shall be one. Now Twain, then One. O what a glorious state will
that be, when there shall be but One Lord and One Name worshipped! Then shall
be no other Name professed, but only the Name of the Lord. Though all people
now profess another God, and walk in the name of his God (Micah 4. 5.) yet they
shall then walk in the Name of the true God alone.

Question. What is it to walk in the Name of the Lord?

Answer. It is to walk in the power, majesty, wisdom, knowledge, light, and
life of God.

If it be thus, that the light shall not be clear nor dark, neither day nor
night, in the day and coming of Christ; Then think it not strange, if it fall
out so, as surely it will. But in the evening it will be light. When the night
begins to approach, and gross darkness to follow, then light will break forth,
even the everlasting light of God himself. A strange thing is, Friends, when a
man is in spiritual blindness, betwixt darkness and light: sometimes he thinks
he sees, and sometimes he thinks he sees not; he cannot tell. In the evening it
shall be light; when a soul least looks for it. Who would look for light to
break forth in the evening! But it is true that it shall; therefore, wait for
it.

If it be so, that living waters shall flow forth from Jerusalem, half of them
toward the former sea, and half of them toward the hinder sea; Then this may
serve to discover the abundance of the Spirit that shall be poured forth in the
later days; A fountain of living waters shall flow forth from Jerusalem, to
water the world with; The mountains shall drop down new wine, and the hills
shall flow with milk, and all the rivers of Judah shall flow with waters. The
Church of Christ shall be so filled with the Spirit, as it shall be in them as
a Fountain; and it shall come flowing sorth from them, toward the former sea,
and later sea. This shall be in Summer and in Winter; it shall be always, it
shall constantly flow forth from them toward the world.

If it be so, You that want the Spirit, wait for it: if you believe, out of
your belly shall flow rivers of waters; a fountain of living waters shall flow
forth from you, to water the dry and parched ground.

If it be thus, This may soon discover who shall reign in that day, The Lord
alone shall reign; he shall be King then over all the earth; then our Lord will
be exalted. Now men reign, and are exalted; but he will throw them down, and
exalt himself. And his Name shall be one. His Name is not one now; there are
other names besides his, worshipped: but God will throw them down, and His
alone shall be lifted up.

The POSTSCRIPT.
THere are three things which moved me to write this Postscript:

The first was, To declare and make known, that that which I have written
against the Priests, was intended only against those that are base and vile,
and such as take Tithes, and are proud, ignorant, idle, blind Priests, such as
are for Gain; that feed Themselves, and not the Flock; that Go, before they are
Sent; that teach for hire, and the like.

The second thing was, To take off those things that have been laid to my
charge by Some, concerning my first Book; which are these:

First, They affirm that I say in my Book, that I take heaven to be the light
and glory of God; which is true: and that Satan in heaven, is Satan in the very
light and glory of God; which I deny: For it is an impossible thing, and cannot
be. Though this I cannot but subscribe to, that is to say, That he will
administer to souls in that state, and teach souls to make false applications
and misapprehensions of things.

And besides, if they would look diligently into my Book, and search narrowly
how things are spoken there, they would find that I speak a quite contrary
thing: for I say, that Satan in heaven, is Satan in glory; and Satan in glory,
is Satan in an angel of light. As in these words, And there appeared another
wonder in heaven; the meaning is not, that there appeared really a great Red
Dragon in the light and glory of God; but the meaning is, John being taken up
by the Spirit into heaven, that is, into the light and glory of God, he saw the
appearance of the great Red Dragon there; but not really the Dragon, in the
very light and glory of God.

The second thing that they lay to my charge, is, the Title of my last Book,
which is, A WONDER, AND NO WONDER: They admire how I can make that which Is a
Wonder, to be No Wonder.

This is a poor thing to give an Answer to: But I will satissie them so far, as
to tell them, I make A Wonder, No Wonder, thus: It is a Wonder to those that
are not acquainted with what Satan in heaven is; for they stand and admire at
the thing: But it is not a Wonder to those that know what Satan in heaven is;
they do not admire, neither do they at all wonder at it, because they know it,
and are well acquainted with it.

And the reason wherefore John called it A Wonder, was, Because he knew not
what Satan in heaven was, he was not acquainted with Satan in an angel of light.

Consider that place in 2 Cor. 11. 14* And no marvel: for Satan himself is
changed into an angel of light.

The rest of the things they lay to my charge, are words in my Book which are
falsely printed; for which the Printer indeed is to be blamed, not I.

The third thing that moved me to write this Postscript, was, To answer a poor
weak saying of one whom I forbear to name, which was this: There are many that
take upon them to write now a days, but I know no warrant for any of them to
write, seeing there are so many learned, able, and godly men, that do write;
unless they could write some New Truth, that was never heard of before.

To the first, I ask you this: Is all Truth in learned godly men? Have none but
they a warrant to write? May not a child of God, that has no Learning at all,
be endued with the Spirit, and power from on high, and so be made as fit as
they to preach and write? Is not the same Spirit in one, as in the other?
Certainly you have lost your Senses; you seem to hold that which many ignorant
Priests do; that is to say, That none are so able to deliver and write Truth,
as themselves are. I am sure that godly learned men will not assume this to
themselves, but will esteem others above themselves. There is that revealed,
many times, to a poor, ignorant, weak Christian, that learned Christians are
ignorant of: and I have seen that written by a Babe, the like whereof I never
saw come from learned Professors, though they were godly. I speak not this to
discourage them, or to set light by them; but to take off partiality: and my
end in answering the foresaid saying, was (God knows) That those that heard it,
might not be led aside by it, but that they might see the vanity of it, and
that it proceeded either from Ignorance or Envy

To the second, I say, There is no Truth new, that is to be written; but that
which is written, and shall be written, is the old Truth. It is true, in one
sense, old Truth may be new; as in that sense, I write to you a new
Commandment: it was new to them, because they had not practiced it before; but
yet it was the old Commandment, which was, That they should love one another.
Now he that writes, must write old Truth, that was heretofore, or else he must
write a Lie: There is nothing new under the sun. There are many hidden old
Truths which you and others know not, though ye and others think ye know them;
and therefore they may write them, and declare them, if they be called to it of
God. And those that think themselves to know most, know least, yea, are very
fools: nay, a man may write those things that you and others happily know to be
Truth: for though you and others know them to be Truth, yet happily others do
not; so that he writes the things he has seen, felt, and handled: but for any
to write the things of another (as he may) which he has not seen nor felt,
this is not lawful.

FINIS.

