THE SPEECH AND Confession, of Sr HENRY HIDE (Ambassador for the King of
Scotland, to the Emperor of Turkey) at the place of execution, against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhill, on Tuesday the 4 of March, 1651. with the manner of
his deportment on the Scaffold; his kissing of the Ax and block; his prayer;
and Oration to the People, touching his Master the King; As also the manner how
he was first taken in Turkey, by the English Merchants, and sent prisoner to
the Parliament, in the London-Dragon. With the Charge exhibited against him at
his Trial.



London, Printed for G.H. and are to be sold in Cornhill, 1651..

THE Speech of Sir Henry Hide, Agent for the King of Scotland, to the Emperor
of Turkey, on the Scaffold at the place of Execution, against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill, onn Tuesday March 4. 1651.
SIr Henry Hide (late Agent for the King of Scotland, to the Emperor of
Turkey) having for these two years last past, been very active in foreign
Countries, for the advancing of his Masters prerogative and power against the
Parliament of England; and also endeavoring (what in him lay) to obstruft all
trading and commerce between the English Merchants, and others; and in order
thereunto, some time he spent at Smerney in Turkey, for the better
accomplishing thereof; but finding his negotiations and consultations to be no
way feacible, he rode from thence to the city of Constantinople, soliciting the
Viceroy about many things of great and dangerous consequence; but the
Merchants (occasioned by many fears and jealousies) having made a great
discovery of his design; and being likewise informed that he was determined to
seize and secure their ships, etc. for the use and service of his Master; they
immediately resolved to send forth a considerable party to intercept him in his
return from Constantinople to Smerney; which accordingly they did (to his great
astonishment) and brought him aboard the Dragon, transporting the said Sir
Henry from thence to London, where by special authority, and command from the
Parliament, he was sent prisoner to the Tower; and after few days, brought to
a Trial before the High Court of Justice in Westminster Hall, and by Them
adjudged guilty of high Treason against the Commonwealth of England; receiving
this Sentence of Death, To have his head severed from his shoulders at the Old
Exchange, London, on Tuesday the fourth of March 1651. which accordingly was
performed, in the presence of many thousand spectators; the manner whereof,
together with his Speech, Prayer, and Deportment, in effect, follows.

On Tuesday being the 4 of this instant, Sir Henry Hide was brought from the
Tower, in a Coach, to the place of execution, being guarded with a Troop of
horse, and accompanied by the Sheriffs of London, and the Lieutenant of the
Tower; when he came upon the Scaffold, he put off his hat to the spectators,
deporting himself with great cheerfulness, and undantednesse of spirit: then
turning himself about, he desired to see his Coffin, which was accordingly
showed him, a black mourning cloth being also prepared to cover the same. Then
turning himself again to the people, and leaning over the railes of the
Scaffold, spoke as follows.

Good People,
YOur coming hither to day is to behold a sad spectacle, where you may
apparently discern an Object of pity; I am by a law condemned to die, and I
thank my God that has appointed me this death for mine offense, for I have
always lived a sinner, and offended my God, for which I humbly implore and
desire a general remission and forgiveness. I am come hither to pay the wages
of death, and to sacrifice my life for my obedience and loyalty to my Master
the King, for whose sake, I was ever willing to adventure both life and
fortunes. But as for those things laid to my charge, of having a design against
the English Merchants, I here protest my innocence thereof; neither did ever
the least thought of evil or prejudice arise within my breast, against this my
Native Country of England; but always desired its prosperity and happiness;
under a quiet and peaceable Government, etc. Much more was said to this
purpose, and delivered with great applause and earnestness of spirit to the
spectators: Having ended his speech, he turned himself about to Sheriff
Tichburn, who was all in mourning, and after some queries and answers, uttered
many divine and excellent expressions; desiring them to join in prayer with
him; and kneeling upon his coffin, with his hat in his right hand, and his
black mourning gloves in the left, most fervently besought the Lord by prayer,
humbly supplicating himself before his Divine Majesty, in manner and form as
follows.

His immediate and fervent Prayer before his Execution.
O Lord Jesus, which art the only health of all men living, and the
everlasting life of them which die in thee; I wretched sinner do submit my self
wholly to thy blessed Will; and being sure that that thing cannot perish which is
committed to thy mercy; willingly now I leave this frail and wicked flesh, in
sure hope that thou will most gloriously restore it to me again at the last
day, in the resurrection of the just: I beseech thee most merciful God, that
thou will by thy grace make strong my faith against all temptations, and defend
me with the buckler of thy mercy against all the assaults of Satan. I see, and
know, that there is no hope of salvation, but by Thee, O God, and thy Son, the
Savior of the World, into whose hands I recommend my spirit; for my confidence
and trust is in thy most merciful goodness: O Lord, I have no merits, nor good
works, that I may allege before thee: Of sins and evil works (alas) I see a
great heap; but yet through thy mercy, I trust to be in the number of them, to
whom thou will not impute their sins; but receive them as inheritors of thy
everlasting kingdom. O thou sweet Jesus of Heaven, that wast born for my sake,
and gave thy most precious blood to be shed upon the Cross for my sake,
humbly I beseech thee, in these thy sufferings, graciously to vouchsafe an
interest to me; and grant, O most merciful Father, that when death shall shut up
the eyes of my body, yet the eyes of my soul may still behold and look upon
Thee; and when Death has taken the use of my Tongue, yet my Heart may cry, and
say unto Thee, Lord into thy hands I commend my soul; Lord Jesus receive my
soul.

Having ended his prayer, he rose from his Coffin whereon he kneeled, and
turning to Sheriff Titchborn, gave him a salutation: Then the Executione came
to him, and asked him forgiveness: Sir Henry replied, I freely forgive thee,
and all mine enemies; and as a signal thereof, here is 3 l. for thee. Then the
Executioner took the Block, and placed it on the Scaffold, and Sir Henry
prepared himself for the same, pulling off his Cloak, Doublet, and Band, and
gave them to his man; which done, he went to the block, and kneeling down, laid
his neck thereon, to try how it would fit: suddenly he arose again, taking his
last farewell of the minister, who came along with him, and the rest of his
friends; and kneeling down again the second time, the Executioner spread a red
Scarf over the block, desiring the sign; to which he answered, By the
stretceing forth my hands: Then, after kissing the Ax and block, casting his
eyes up to heaven, earnestly cried out, Lord Jesus receive my soul; and
patiently submitting to the block, immediately gave the sign, which the
Executioner diligently observing, at one blow severed his head from his
shoulders; the head moved three times after it was off; but neither body,
hands, nor feet once stirred Presently after the blow was given, both head and
body were put into a Coffin, and so carried away from off the Scaffold.

FINIS.

