A true Copy of Sir Henry Hides SPEECH ON THE SCAFFOLD, Immediately before his
Execution before the EXCHANGE, on the 4th of March, 1650.

Taken in Shorthand from his mouth, BY JOHN HIND.

LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole, at the Sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil by
the Exchange. MDCL.

REader, Take notice, This Speech following is published in those very words
that the Gentleman delivered them; and though there be some abrupt breakings
off, and other expressions not so smooth as might have been, yet I could not
with honesty alter a word; and therefore have tied my self to his own
Expressions, that I may neither abuse the World, or the dying man, or my self.
THe Gentleman came in a Coach to the Scaffold, attended by the Lieutenant of
the Tower, and the Sheriffs of London; and also in his company one of his
Servants and Doctor Hide.

Sir Henry Hide. I Am now come to put in practice the Christian Profession; and
as I owe a Death to Nature and Sin, now I pay it upon the score of Grace.


Dr. Hide. Blessed be God that has enabled you to it: God has and will enable
you.


Sir H. Hide. Looking round on the People, he said, A populous City, God bless
it, and grant they may live to his Grace. Then turning to his Man, he said,
John, I pray now though I have not been a good Master to you, be you a good
Servant, and accompany me with your Prayers, and help me both in Body and
Mind. John, Have you my things about you, John?

Then staying for his Servants, they being not on the Scaffold, he said I had
rather have my Servants then Strangers.

Then the Lieutenant of the Tower coming to him, he said, Pray Sir rejoice with
me: I thank Almighty God I am brought hither to suffer for him.


Lieut. of the Tower. I am glad you are so comforted: Gods will be fulfilled in
all things.


Sir H. Hide. If God call me to him, and I glorify him, it is well: I seek
only the company of your Christian Prayers.


L. of the Tower. I shall not be wanting in that, God willing.


Then the Chyrurgion coming (but not his Kinsman, who was called for) he said,
My Kinsman is of no use, you may be useful about my Body. I hope Mr. Sheriff
that you will give order I may have a little more room here.

Sheriff. Yes, yes, Sir.


Sir H. Hide. And likewise for liberty of speech; and that it shall please you
(for I am not acquainted with the Forms here of England) that I may speak my
one sense (I am now going into the presence of Almighty God) a very little,
without any disturbance.


Sheriff. Why Sir, you shall.


Sir H. Hide. John, where is my Coffin?


John. It is here, Sir.


Sheriff. Sir, it seems these men cannot be found.


Sir H. Hide. But if Mr. Barret could be found.


After some stay, Mr. Barret being not found, the Sheriff spoke to him, saying,

Sheriff. You have your liberty, you know your time.


Sir H. Hide. Where is the place of standing, that way or this way? (pointing
toward the Exchange and the Poultrey.)


Sheriff. Which way you please: you may stand which way you will, but that way
you must lie (pointing toward the Exchange.)


Sir H. Hide. I am indifferent: It is not the way to Heaven where a man stands.


One brought word to him that there was no help to be had.

Sir H. Hide. That is no hindrance to my felicity.


Dr. Hide. God enable you, that you may find that joy and comfort which is due
to the glory of his Holy Name; he will not forsake you that have put your trust
in him.


Sir H. Hide. I will open my heart and my mouth with thanksgiving (if this
Gentleman please to give way.)

Then turning toward the Poultrey, he put of his Hat, and said, Glory be to
God on High, on Earth Peace, Good Will to men.

CHristian People, I come hither to die, I am brought hither to die; and that I
may die Christian-like, I humbly beseech the assistance of your Christian
Prayers, that by the benefit of them my passage may be the more easy; yet
because men in that condition, which it has pleased God to reduce me, carry
more credit to their Speeches: In the discharge of my Duty toward God, I shall
use a few words, and so dispatch.

I pray all of you join with me to praise this Almighty God, to whom I desire
to render all hearty thanks; as for all his Mercies, so in particular for this,
That he has brought me hither: That whereas I owe a duty to Sin and to Nature,
that now I can pay the account: A debt to Nature, I can pay it upon the account
of Grace. And because it is fit to render an account of that Hope that is in
me, I shall tell you, to the praise of Almighty God, That I have been born and
bred up in the Doctrine of the Church of England, I have no Negative Religion,
believing to be saved by the only Merits of my Savior Jesus Christ (putting
off his Hat) and whatsoever else is professed in the Doctrine and Discipline of
the Church of England, authorized by Law; humbly beseeching Almighty God to
restore unto this Church her Peace, Prosperity and Patrimony, whereof I have
been an Obedient and a Loving (however an unworthy) Son: And now both my Hope
being confident, and my Faith perfected, there remains only Christian Charity;
Charity we carry into Heaven, Charity on Earth, and that I leave, beseeching
all whomsoever I have offended (whether I have or no) to forgive me, as I from
the bottom of my Heart do them whomsoever; blessing Almighty God for the happy
Advantage he takes to bring me nearer to Heaven; blessing Almighty God that he
has given me this Advantage, as he has been merciful to me before the
Foundation of the World, in my Savior, so that now he has in Mercy honored
me, with a suffering for his Name, in obedience to his Commandment.

On this day seven-night I was summoned before that Justice, which condemned me
on Friday last, praised be Almighty God, that by this way he has brought me
the nearer to Himself (putting off his Hat) My Charge I presume is public, as
my Punishment is visible: if there have been any thing in the Management of my
part, being unskilful, having discontinued my own Country many years, I shall
beseech the Christian Charity of all you my beloved Countrymen, to impute it
unto the right part, The ignorance that is in this skilful way of managing: It
was objected unto me there, That I had a vanity of delighting to speak in
strange Tongues. I was best skilled in the Italian (but free from that vanity I
thank Almighty God) and therefore I would in defense of my life (if it had been
the Custom here, or the Judges favor) have used that Language.

It was objected, That I did not so freely as a through-paced Cavalier, own my
Master: I was told since I came into England (for other skill I have not in
your Laws) that a legal Denial in Law might be tolerable; I hope I did not
exceed the Bounds of that in anything, for God forbid that I should be ashamed
of serving so good, so pious, so just a Master (putting off his hat) for that
therein I rejoice, and I humbly beseech Almighty God, to fill my heart and my
tongue, and all that hear me this day, with thankfulness for it.

As to the Business, that another Construction had been made and believed here,
then what was there, the Righteous God knows it; if any weakness is in the
management, those were mine: I was sent to serve and protect, not to injure
any, and as God acquits me of the intention in matter of Fact, as having done
any manner of evil that way, however here understood, blessed be his holy Name,
(putting off his hat) so those Gentlemen of the Turkey Company, if they would
but seriously consider, for they know it very well, the impossibility of my
doing them any manner of harm. Whereas that of the Embassy objected against me,
that my Master never honored me withal, I was never worthy of it, I was his
Messenger an Internuncio, for the Conservation only of his good Subjects, of
all the Merchants, until such time as he could confirm that Gentleman now
Resident, or to send any other; and they themselves know that there was
impossibility in me (as I bless God there was an innocence in me) unto any such
intention to do them any harm; for my Masters Commands were point blank the
contrary; I was only sent for their good, as I never owned the Title, so the
very Letters themselves speaking no other: I never did so much as think of any
manner of Address unto the Grand Seignior, but gave him the Letter from my
Master; the rest of the English Nation that were there present, may, when they
please, assert so much. This I would insert, that those Gentlemen, as they have
been losers by the miscarriages of others, may now have no breach of their
Charity with me; but if it be, as it seems it is now in this Country, a Sin to
be Loyal, I hope my God has forgiven that, when it is upon harmless
Employment, not invading any, according to his just Masters Order; for indeed I
have been always bred up in that Religion, my Allegiance has been incorporated
into my Religion, and I have thought it a great part of the service due from me
to Almighty God, to serve the King (putting off his hat.) I need not make any
Apology for any thing in relation to the present things in England, for were I
(as I spoke before my Judges) were I as evil as my Sentence has here made me
black, it were impossible for me to have prejudiced any body in England, or to
England belonging, in that employment; but I bless God for his infinite Mercy
in Jesus Christ (putting off his hat) who has brought me home to him here in
this way, it was the best Physic for the curing of my Soul, and those that
have done it, have no more power then that of my body. I leave nothing behind
me, but that I am willing to part withal; all that I am going to, is
desirable: And that you may all know that Almighty God has totally wrought in
me a total Denial of my self, and that there is that perfect Reformation of me
within, and of my own corruptions by the blessed Assistance of his holy Spirit,
I desire Almighty God in the abundance of the bowels of his Mercy in Jesus
Christ, not only to forgive every Enemy, (if any such be in the world, here or
wheresoever) but to bring him into his bosom so much good and particular
comfort, as he may at any time, whether the Cause were just or unjust, have
wished me any manner of evil, for I take him to be the happy Instrument of
bringing me to Heaven. It is tedious, but I have an inward comfort, I bless
Almighty God: (pray Gentlemen give leave, speaking to some that pressed upon him)
I should never do it but to give satisfaction to all charitable Hearts. I have
been troublesome.


Sheriff. You have your liberty to speak more, if you please.


Sir H. Hide. But as to that part, Mr. Sheriff, that did concern the Denial (as
it was affirmed by Master Attorney General) of my Masters employment, Truly
landing at Whitehall I told that Council, there was just Commissions to an old
Officer by the blessing of God, I have by me, and I have other good things that
God has blessed me withal, more then all the good Christians in the world,
that are not the Grand Seignior's Slaves; and we that are Merchants abroad, we
allow our selves any sufferance that may induce to our own safety, enlargement
of Trade, or preservation of what is ours. Why I had by the grace of my
gracious Master a confirmation of my old Commission of Consulage in Greece; but
as to the Embassy, no more then my Credential Letters did speak, nor no more
then that I attempted, an Internuncio they call it in those places, which is a
Messenger between the one and the other King. They both unhappily dyed of
several deaths, and both violent too; and it is a custom not unknown to you,
Master Sheriff, and other Gentlemen that practice in the world, that Princes of
course, for the continuation of Amity, do send Messengers where there is peace,
that the Transaction of those public Expressions of recipocrol Affections may
be performed; but for Embassy, God forbid I should own it, I never had it,
however they have used it as the happy means to bring me to God this day. I
beseech God in the bowels of my Savior, to forgive those people that have done
it, as I owe them no harm, so God pay them home with all the good of this, and
an everlasting Life.

As for Power, I have been long absent here in England, I meddle with none:
Sufficient for me is Gods Grace to the Salvation of my Soul.

I have been always fearful of offending Almighty God, according to the Grace
he has given me: But to learn a New-Religion, and New-Ways (that I must say
Master Sheriff to you, and all others that hear me) I cannot dispense with my
Conscience to give offense to Almighty God. I am now (if it may be with your
Commission, Master Sheriff) to pour out my Soul to Almighty God in two or three
words (the place is straightened.) If I knew wherein to give any satisfaction to
any thing whatsoever, wherein I have offended or no, I am here in the fear of
God to do it. I forgive with all my Soul, and my forgiveness is clear, as I am
now going to receive Happiness at the hand of my Savior: But if I thought it
were satisfaction to Sir Thomas Bendish, and all the Company, or any who may
think they have offended me, I am come Master Sheriff to pay that Obedience
willingly; that Debt I owe to Nature, to pay it upon the score of a Subject;
because Conscience within me, tells-me not, that for the intentions of serving
my Prince, that I could deserve such a Death, though Ten thousand times more
other ways.


Doctor Hide. There was some suspicion that you might impart the way you were
upon to some of those Servants that were with you.


Sir Henry Hide. I humbly thank you for remembering me of it, and if any be here
of the Turkey Company this day, or any Friend of theirs, I shall desire them
from a dying Man, to take this truth, That neither my Brother, my innocent
Brother that is with me, nor other Gentlemen with me in my company, have
contributed any thing to their disturbance; it was my own business, whatsoever
has been done, that has been to evil, or loss, though I deny both of them in
my Intentions: I come not here to accuse any man, nor to excuse my self, but to
praise God for all his deliverances; yet I know I shall do God a great deal of
Service, and them a great deal of Justice, in not involving any of my company
in any thing of mischief. I cannot answer Objections; I find a man may be in
Turkey, or any place, all the World over, where they will give that Language
which they hold fitting; but this is beneath me. Blessed be Almighty God, that
has called me to the Knowledge of him, and this ready Obedience which I pay,
and merciful accepting of my Savior, and patient Death: And I beseech you all,
whatever you are, That you will accompany me with your Prayers, whereby my Soul
may be assisted within me, in that passage to my Savior whither I am going. I
am weak of Body; I have discontinued long from the Kingdom; I am unacquainted
with new Forms; I have desired to serve God according to his Commandments after
the Old way: I have begged mercy of God for all my offenses to him; and I have
had my pardon sealed from Heaven by the Blood of my Savior: I beg pardon of
all whosoever, whether I have offended them, or no: I truly forgive them, and
have besought Almighty God to pour his blessings upon them. I accuse no man, I
find fault, nor quarrel with no man; neither with the persons that were the
occasions, they were but the Instruments; neither at the persons condemning. I
accept thankfully the Sentence of Death upon my self; and I beseech Almighty
God, that I may be the last that may suffer upon this score, or upon any other.

Master Sheriff, If there be any thing wherein I can give any other
satisfaction to any Christian whatsoever, in any kind, as I spoke in general,
I bless Almighty God from my own Heart, now so assisted, by the especial
Operation, and Motions, and Dictates of the Holy Ghost: if I can know any
thing, wherein, or how to be now in my dying (not having served God so well in
my life) serviceable to the Church of God, of Christ, and the full satisfaction
of any whatsoever, I am here ready: I am unacqainted, but in my ecstasies to
Heaven, there is that Glory I am going to. I beseech Almighty God, that he will
give me Grace to bless his holy Name; as for all, as for Jesus Christ, and in
him all things, so particularly for this, That he has thought me worthy to
bring me hither for my Faithfulness to my Master, for doing what I was
commanded by my Master, that is the most Pious, and most Just Prince in all the
World. My Master has suffered bitterly in England; and if there be any failing
in his Service, the fault is only mine. God knows I have done nothing in the
business, but by the instance of the Merchants; I delivered my Letters, and
there they lie: To other things I am a Stranger. I hope that God will give me
the Grace of Perseverance in that Christian Religion; in that Loyalty to my
Prince; in that Love to all the World, that now (being to give up my Account to
him, that) I may with comfort be received in the Arms of his Mercy.

If there be any thing, Master Sheriff, that I may give satisfaction in, I am
ready to do it according to the poor Talent I have. I will receive my
punishment in the way God has prepared for me; and many ways I have been taken
up. Truly I am bound to all that see me, and many thousands more since I came
into England, not an uncivil look (we had strange reports abroad) not an
uncivil look from any: God repay them all, and return them from the Throne of
his Grace into their own bosoms. And God in particular bless that Honorable
Lady, who was the occasion of the coming of my Lords Grace of Armagh, with the
Confirmation of those glorious and eternal Messages of Comfort which now I am
going to enjoy: being thankful to all those that know me, and know me not; for
since I am come hither, whereas I might have received prejudice in respect to
my Loyalty (which is not the way, now) I have from them all received courtesy,
the Lord repay them. I thank God I am otherwise bred, and my Allegiance has
been incorporated, imbodied into my Religion; and besides the great desires of
other Gentlemen, that I might not go out of the world, but that the world might
see that the grace of God has had a perfect Reformation in me, and a willing
and thankful Submission to his Will, therefore I repent me not of it; but I
beseech Almighty God to bless and prosper all people whatsoever that to this
Kingdom belong. As my Speech is imperfect, so is my Health. I have forced my
self in this Discourse to give that satisfaction which I could. And I beseech
you, Mr. Sheriff, if you can hear of any Gentlemen that are wronged, what I
offer here, I am to answer it; and I beseech you join with me in your Christian
Prayers, that I may have a passage whither I am now going to give an account,
not only of every deed, but of every word.


Then turning to his Man, he said,

Sir H. Hide. John, which is the Executioner?


The Executioner being brought to him, he said,

Sir H. Hide. Honest Friend, I have no quarrel with you, you are the welcome
Instrument, do your work; only let me see the place, that I may fit my self,
for I have an infirm body.


Sheriff. You shall when you have prayed; if you please to pray first.


Sir H. Hide. I desire to see the Block, I can pray afterward. Here Mr.
Executioner is that Money that is left; here is Four pounds for you.


Then being showed the Block, he kissed it, saying,

Sir H. Hide. It is unworthy for me to put my Head where my Masters was.
Blessed be God, Blessed be his Holy Name (putting off his Hat) I have an
infirmity in my Body, but God has enabled me inwardly. Pray Mr. Sheriff let me
have a little more room.


Sheriff. Go to Prayer, and we will clear the room.


Sir H. Hide. I have (I thank Almighty God) done those Christian Offices
belonging to me, at home; I am come hither only to dye.


Then kneeling down, he said the Lords-Prayer.

Then having prayed a short space, he stood up, and turning to the Executioner,
said,

Sir H. Hide. Honest Friend, I pray give me direction what I am to do, and do
your Office: You will cure all Diseases presently; pray direct me.

Then the Executioner going to spread the Scarf over the Block, he said.


Sir H. Hide. Put it not on now, but by and by.


Dr. Hide. God Almighty strengthen you.


Sir H. Hide. God reward you all.


Then the Executioner going to put up his Hair under his Satin Cap, he thought
he had been taking of it off: Whereupon he said,

Sir H. Hide. Must I have my black Cap off? It is very cold: all these Diseases
will be cured, the Lord be thanked.


Then going to lie down, his Man not helping him, he said,

Sir H. Hide. John, help me a little I pray: Did not I tell you I could neither
rise nor fall; lay me down, and lift me up again, John.


Then rising again upon his knees, he spoke to the Executioner, having the Ax
in his hand,

Sir H. Hide. Pray Sir give me the Ax.


And then taking the Ax in his hand, he kissed it, and returned it to the
Executioner again, saying,

Sir H. Hide. I will only say, Lord Jesus receive my Soul; and when I lift up
my Right Hand, do your work.

And then lying down again, after a little space he lift up his Right Hand, and
the Executioner at one stroke severed his Head from his Body.


FINIS.

