A DISCOVERY Of the Latitude of the loss of the EARTHLY PARADISE BY ORIGINAL
SIN.

Occasioned by a Disputation betwixt Mr. Matthias Rutton, Min: of Boughton
Munchalse in Kent, and the Author hereof; branched out in these particulars, as
follows:

I. First, An Examination of his Apologetical Letter, with a full Answer
thereunto.

II. Secondly, Six arguments to prove that Original Sin exposed Adam and his
Posterity but to the first death.

III. Thirdly, A Discovery of the false and corrupted Ministers by Ten
Characters.

IV. Fourthly, a Discovery of the true Ministers by Ten Characters.

By George Hammon, Pastor to the Church of Christ meeting in Biddenden in Kent.

But of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it: for
in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die, Genesis 2.17. And in the
sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, until thou return unto the ground, dust
thou art, and to dust shall thou return. London, Printed by To: Ibbitson, for
Francis Smith, and are to be sold at his Shop in Flying-Horse Court in Fleet
street, 1655.

The Epistle Dedicatory
To Mr. Matthias Rutton Minister of Boughton Munchalse, and to the rest of his
Brethren (the Clergy) who have ecclipsed and darkened the Doctrine of the Gospel
by the humane traditions received from the Fathers.
SIR,
I Having received your apologetical discourse (in a Letter sent to a friend of
mine) in reference to what discourse you and I formerly had, in the which
Letter you discovered your self to be a great Antagonist unto the truth and the
Ministry thereof: Moreover it does appear by your Letter, that it is your
Pulpit discourse frequently to calumniate the people of God; upon the
consideration whereof, I thought my self bound in duty to spend some time in
showing the difference betwixt true and false Ministers by several characters,
to the end you may see your selves to be such (as you accuse the Ministers of
Christ to be) viz. the false corrupt Ministers, and so consequently the
Ministers of Satan, to the end you may cease to pervert the right way of the
Lord, and repent of your abusing Gods People and Ordinances; for assuredly,
Sirs, your turning of things upside down, will cause the Lord to turn you out
of his presence, unless you repent, for God in all ages has been very zealous
of his order, hence it came to pass, that the Lord threatened the Priests of
old to show them his back and not his face in the day of their calamity; the
reason was, because they had caused the People to stumble from the ancient
path, to walk in a way not cast up, and doubtless it you look into the ancient
path of Christ, which he and his Apostles and Disciples walked in, you will
find that you are got far out of that path, for they did not teach for hire, to
make themselves the Rabbis of the times, but were willing to demean
themselves, and be the servants of all men for Christ's sake: neither did they
cast up such a Path as Infants baptism, to make whole Nations to be a Church,
but did command persons to come out from the multitude, and thereby compacted
Christ's Churches together of sanctified Stones, that is to say men separated
from the National multitude by repentance, faith and baptism, which became the
spiritual house: Moreover Sir, whereas you abuse the People of God, by casting
reproachful ignominious slanders on them, know, the Lord takes it as done unto
himself, they being as dear to him as the apple of his eye, and if Samson would
be revenged of the Philistines for his eyes, surely the Lord will be revenged of
such as labor (as much as in them lies) to pluck out his eyes; Sirs are you
not like unto those Pharisaical Priests, that Christ reproves, which did build
the toombs of the prophets, and garnish the Sepulcher of the righteous,
pretending great love to them, and yet notwithstanding persecute the friends of
Christ, which walk in that way which Christ has left them to walk in, by your
sect and example, I say, if the blood of the righteous should be required of
such a generation, repent you and break off your sins by righteousness, before
the wrath of the Lord break out, and there be no remedy: But to pass that, and
come to the matter in hand, I have perused your Letter, and given you a full
answer to it in the following treatise; one thing I strange at, that you should
so much forget your self, as to charge me, that I fell upon you with abusive
words for a Sermon you delivered, in the which you said, you proved me, and
such as I were to be the Ministers of Satan, when in very deed and truth, I
knew not that you had delivered such a Sermon, neither did I begin with you,
but after you had answered to some questions that were propounded to you (by
another) and that in your speech you had cast reproachful speech upon the
people of God, I could do no less but answer to your speech, but not with
abusive words, as you may see more at large in the answer to your Letter, and
several other things you did mistake your self in, but I have showed you them
in their time and places, as before mentioned; Moreover, Sir, take this word of
advise, that if your memory be so shallow, that you cannot retain any thing
without Book, when you have the like occasion again, take down what is spoken
in writting, so that you may affirm the truth, for I do assure you to speak
untruth is a shame and reproach to any people, but more especially to such as
profess themselves to be the Ministers of Christ; and as to original Sin which
was a thing we contested about, I have also showed you in the following
treatise what punishment it brought upon the Sons of men, and what death it was
that was threatened as to be the punishment of it, the which death reigned over
all from Adam to Moses, and yet righteous Noah and several others were not
damned; so desiring your conversion, much more than your confusion, I rest, but
not to be your servant and all men's for Christ's sake,

George Hammon.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
THere is enclosed in this little Treatise many weighty particulars, the which
did concern all persons to look into in former ages, but more especially we
that live in the last age; If therefore thou shall read this Treatise with a
single heart, and an impartial affection, doubtless it will be worth thy time
and pains. Moreover, I do desire that thou would search the Scriptures, and
bring those things that are contained herein to them, that so by the Touchstone
of Gods Word thou may discern between Truth and Error, and thereby thou will
become obedient to that Command of the Lord, which is, Try all things, and hold
fast that which is good. Remember that the Bereans were counted more noble than
the men of Thessalonica, because they received the words of Paul, (which was
counted as strange doctrine) and searched the Scriptures daily, to see whether
those things were so or no: even so, although many of these particulars may be
counted erroneous, yet prove thy self a noble Berean, to search the Scriptures
to see whether it be so or no. Moreover, do not count it a strange thing, that
the truest Doctrines that ever was should be questioned, and counted Heresy;
for the learned Scribes and Pharisees did question Christ, to know where he had
his Doctrine, and said He has a Devil, and is mad: The Apostle Paul also was
called a pestilent fellow, a teacher of strange Doctrines, a ringleader of
Sectaries, a turner of the world up-side down, and what not? Yet, as the
Apostle says, After the manner they called Heresy, so worshipped he the God
of his Fathers, believing all that was written: Even so say I, that if any
thing that I have written in this Treatise do not agree with the Word of God,
and the doctrine according to godliness, I shall give thanks to any man that
will inform me of it, and also renounce it; but, as the Apostle Paul says in
another case, I judge I have the Spirit of God, and speak the Truth. Moreover,
Christian Reader, know that we are in the last age, upon whom the very end of
the world is come, in which last age that great howr of temptation shall be,
the which shall try all them that dwell upon the face of the whole Earth;
therefore very profitable for us to look into the Prophecies, of the last
Times, that being forewarned, they may be fore-armed; and in order to the
stability of thy mind, I have in the following Treatise set before thy view,
the glorious Paradise the which the Lord gave unto his Son Adam: and although
he lost it by transgression, yet I have showed thee that it shall be restored
again by the Lord Jesus (into that primitive glory) at his second appearance
and Kingdom. Moreover, I have showed you what a glorious inheritance God will
give to his Son Jesus, which is the Man from Heaven: So that although the
earthly Man's earthly Paradise was glorious, yet the heavenly Man's heavenly
Paradise shall be far more glorious; it is that new Jerusalem, the Walls
whereof are garnished with all manner of precious stones, the Streets whereof
is pure gold, like to transparent glass, the which Paradise shall not be of
the Earth, or from the Earth, although it shall be placed upon the new Earth;
but (as I have showed in the Treatise) it shall come down out of Heaven from
God, being that City which faithful Abraham looked for, which had foundations,
whose maker and builder was God, it shall be the glorious habitation of Christ
in the day of his reign, and all that are saved shall walk in the light of it,
which City has no need of the Sun, Moon, or Stars; for the Lamb shall be the
light of it. Courteous Reader, assure thy self, that the Godly, who have died in
the Faith, did see these things in promises, although they were afar off, and
did embrace them, and did acknowledge themselves Strangers and Pilgrims on the
Earth, and they that say such things, declare plainly that they seek a Country
which is a heavenly one; wherefore God is not ashamed to to be called their
God, for he has prepared for them a City: and it was that glorious inheritance
which made faithful Moses slight Pharaohs Royal Diadem, and refuse to be
called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter, choosing rather to suffer affliction with
the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; for he had
an eye to the recompense of reward, so that faith is the evidence of things not
seen. Moreover, courteous Reader, I desire thee not to slight the matter
contained herein, because of any prejudice thou may have against the Author;
so desiring the Lord to open thy understanding, I shall rest, but not to pray
for thy endless happiness by Christ in glory.

Thy unworthy Friend G. H.

The Sum of a Dispute betwixt a Teacher of the Anabaptists, and the Minister of
Baughton, where by Providence they met August 16. 1654.
THe Anabaptist, as appeared by his heat, being much troubled at a Sermon
delivered by the Minister, wherein he proved plainly by Scripture, That such as
he was, were the Messengers of Satan, and delivered Satan's Message, fell upon
the Minister with abusive words; afterward they entered into Disputation, the
Question was, Whether there were any such Sin as Original sin; the Anabaptist
denied it; the Minister urged an Argument from the example of David, confessing
that he was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did his Mother conceive him, Psalm.
51.5. to prove there was.

The Anabaptist answered, That the meaning of that place was this, not that
David himself was corrupted, or defiled with sin, but that he was shapen and
conceived in a sinful Woman. Which answer will appear to any man that has but
common sense, to be not only false, but also most absurd and ridiculous; for
David, as will plainly appear to him that reads that Psalm, speaks only of
himself, confesses his own Sin only, and this Original sin, as the root and
fountain of all the rest; there was not so much as a thought of time betwixt
his Natural being, and his Sinful being, Corruption did accompany the very
first degree of his Conception, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my
Mother conceive me: And he prays for the forgiveness of this sin among the
rest.

After many words past, the Anabaptist, unsatisfied, objected, That the
Minister never read of any Child that was Damned, therefore no such Sin which
deserved eternal Death; his reason was, because eternal Death is only the wages
of actual sin; which the Minister denied, and instanced in Esau, reprobated
from all eternity, Romans 9.11, 12, 13.

The Anabaptist answered, That that was for Esaus actual transgression, and
cited Jeremy falsely; but the words named are in Amos 1.3.6.9. For three
Transgressions of Damascus, and for Four, I will not turn away the punishment
thereof; and so the sixth and ninth of Gaza and Tyrus; which text is as far
from the purpose as Baughton is from Rome. It appears plainly from the Apostle,
that the words cited by the Minister, Esau have I hated, are concerning Gods
purpose in Election and Reprobation, and not for any actual Sin committed by
Esau, or good done by Jacob, for the Children not being yet born, mark that,
neither having done good or evil, mark that, that the purpose of God according
to election might stand, verse. 11. it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau
have I hated. What will the Anabaptists say now? they say it is unjust for God
to Damn those that never committed Actual Sin, the Apostle would stop their
blasphemous mouths, verse. 14. What shall we say then, is there unrighteousness
with God? God forbid, says he, Has not the Potter power over the Clay, to
make one Vessel for honor, and another for dishonor, ver. 21.

The Anabaptist still obstinate, the Minister urged another Argument to prove
some Children were Damned, and not for Actual sin, therefore for Original, and
therefore there was such sin as we call Original; the Argument was taken out of
Jude, verse. 7. where it is said, that Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities about
them, suffered the vengeance of eternal fire; in which Cities, no doubt but
there were some Children which never had sinned actually, and these with the
rest suffered the vengeance of eternal fire.

The Anabaptist answered, by showing the meaning of Eternal; The word Eternal,
says he, is there to be understood for consuming, which is as ridiculous and
absurd as the rest; our ordinary fire is consuming, it consumes the Wood, or
other matter that nourishes it, and so at last it self is extinguished; but
this eternal fire never goes out, neither does it consume those it burns; the
wicked burn eternally, that is, for ever, and are never consumed; so the answer
implies a contradiction.

To make this his Exposition good, he cited a place of St. Mat. 10.15. It shall
be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the Day of Judgment, than for
that City, that will not receive the Apostles; more tolerable, that is, says
he, (being helped by one of his Disciples) Sodom and Gomorrah shall be excused;
but that Exposition they can never make good; more tolerable, said the
Minister, that is, they shall not receive so severe a Sentence, they shall
receive lesser Damnation, but not be wholly excused. This he proved by reason,
for more is the Comparative degree, and is a relative term, and respects the
same thing; then strenghened this reason by Scripture, Mat. 23.14. Ye shall
receive greater damnation there is Damnation for them because they devoured
widows houses, but greater damnation, because they made long prayer their
pretense; more tolerable, then, does not imply that they were wholly excused,
but received lesser punishment.

The Anabaptist then began to urge an Argument, that no Children were Damned;
the Minister perceiving that this was to run round in a circle, not able to
endure the cold longer, being not yet fully recovered of sickness, the
Anabaptist began to cry Victory, by railing on the Ministers.

Were not those people given over to a reprobate sense, to strong delusions, to
believe lies, they could never force such interpretations upon Scripture. The
Lord open their eyes, that they may see the truth, and convert, and be healed.

Mat. Rutton Min.

An Answer to a Letter of Master Matthew. Rutton, Minister of Baughton (as he so
calls himself) sent to a friend of mine, in order to the Vindication of a
Dispute between him and myself at Baughton, where we accidentally met, to his
friend Master Mat. Rutton, as follows.
SIR:
WHereas you were pleased to affirm in your Letter I was troubled about a
Sermon you delivered, in the which you writ, you proved such as I am to be the
Ministers of Satan, for the which cause you say I fell upon you with abusive
words; Sir, I pray you do not forget your self, for I began not with you,
neither did I give you any abusive words, neither did I know that you had
delivered such a Sermon as you confess, in which you rendered me, and such as I
am, to be so odious; although I had heard before that you did usually rail
much, as your Predecessors did against Christ and his Apostles, saying, they
were Deceivers, pestilent Fellows, and turners of the World upside down, though
Michael the Archangel, when he was Disputing with the Devil about the body of
Moses, did not bring a railing accusation, but left it to God, with these
words, The Lord rebuke thee. But I pray remember, that your Neighbor, of whom
you at that instant received Tithes, after he had paid it, asked you in much
mildness of speech, Why you did rail so much against the Baptists; and you
presently said, they were Anabaptists, for you said the word in the Greek
signified again, and you Baptizing Persons again are called Anabaptists; at the
which words I could no less than make answer, saying, That for my part I did
dis-own Baptizing of any persons again, who were once truly Baptized according
to Christ's appointment; and more-over I said, That sprinkling a little water in
a Childs face in its Infancy, was not Baptism, but a cousening shift brought
in by Pope Innocentius the Third; and then you replied, and said, That Baptizo
signified Sprinkling, as well as Dipping, the which I denied, and showed you,
there was no correspondency between the word Baptizo and Rantizo (in their
significations) to prove one and the same thing, Baptizo signifies to plunge,
or overwhelm, Rantizo, to sprinkle, or scatter.
the one signifying to dip, to plunge, to sink, to over-whelm in water; the
other word to sprinkle, to scatter here or there, or to disperse abroad on
diverse parts of the body; then all that you had more to say in the behalf of
that was, That it was set down so in the Book of Common Prayer, and when you
could say no more to that, you cried out against them, ( viz. the Baptists) for
broaching of gross Errors, and instanced that of Original sin, to which I said,
that for my part I did believe, That all the Sons and Daughters of Adam, were
not only under the guilt of it, but also groan under the punishment of it,
until this day; although you falsely writ in your Letter that I denied that
there was such a Sin as Original sin, and yet you may remember, that you made
me this answer, Though I did believe that there was such a sin, yet there were
many of my adherents that did believe there was no such sin; and Sir, then I
went on to deal plainly with you, and showed you what that first Sin of Adam in
Paradise, which is usually called Original Sin, did incur, and made all his
Children liable to, the which Adams sin brought not Condemnation to Hell on his
Posterity, but death of the Body, with Sickness, Sorrow, etc.
I affirm to be the first Death, with sickness, weakness, and all such
infirmities, with the loss of all Paradisical enjoyments, and not Damnation in
Hell; which is only the desert of sins against God manifested in Christ, which
brought a second state of life, and that you may see clearly in the
pronunciation of the Sentence by God to Adam, in Genesis 3. from the fourteenth to
the twentieth, where he tells him, That in sorrow he should eat bread, with the
sweat of his brows, until thou return unto the ground, for out of it wast thou
taken. This was the punishment God laid upon Adam and his Posterity for that
Sin; Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return. Hence it comes to pass,
that both righteous and unrighteous suffer alike, whereby we may see Gods
Justice must be satified; and so much briefly as to the Sin which you call
Original, or more properly to the punishment thereof.

And now in order I shall come to the one and fiftieth Psalm, verse. 5. these
words, Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me.
In which words there appears no such thing as you say, that David there
confessed any sin, or guilt of any sin, as he stood in the loins of his
Parents, unless that first sin, which, as I have showed you, brought but the
first Death; neithe have they any less perfection in quality of nature, by the
which they are put into a worse capacity, to stand, or fall, as to the loss of
the enjoyment of that eternal inheritance, although I grant the first thing
they do when they are capable of a Law (and temptations do approach) they like
their first Father Adam, break the Law of God, as he did; and these words have
I spoken as in order to the making way for the opening of the words before
mentioned; for in the first verse David is a Petitioning to God for Mercy and
Pardon for that sin which he had committed in killing Uriah, and taking Bathsheba
his Wife unto himself, in the which Petition he uses three Arguments, as we may
so say.

The First is from the multitude of Gods Mercies, in these words, According to
thy loving kindness, according to the multitude of thy mercies, verse the first.

The Second is from his acknowledging of his Sin, saying, My sins are ever
before me, verse. 3. as if he should say, They are the greatest trouble that I
have in the World, they are always in my way; so that we see the second Motive
that he uses to attain Mercy, is by confession of his sin, with great zeal and
ardency of spirit, he well knowing that God had promised, That he that
confesses and forsakes his sin, should find mercy.

And the Third and last Argument which he used (in this Psalm) to move God to
have mercy upon him, in blotting out his transgressions, was from the
brittleness of his Nature, and the weakness of that Lump that he was made out
of; As if he should have said, Father, thou know I am of the Earth earthly,
which is subject to much weakness, and frailty, and therefore he beyond all
other reasons, in this last reason, verse. 5, says, Behold! as if he should
have said, Lord, take notice, as well consider how defective the Mould was in
the which I was formed (which to me appears to be his Mother Eva, in whose
loins was David, and all other shapen, for God made all Mankind at once, and
not his Mother that bare him) that thereby thou considering my frame, may in
pity blot out my transgressions. This expression of David is not used alone,
but has the like import, Psalm. 103. v. 12, 13, 14, in these words, ver. 12. As
far as the East is from the West, so far has he removed our transgressions
from us, And in the fourteenth verse, he gives the reason why the Lord is so
gracious, in these words, For he knows our frame, that we are but dust; so
that I conceive in this fifth verse. of the one and fiftieth Psalm, which you
cited to me in these words, Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my
mother conceive me, is no more but the proneness of David's Nature, by reason of
the weakness of the matter that he was made of; and that is the same that he
desires God to take notice of, or behold, whereby he might graciously remit
that sinful Act that he had committed, unless you meant that Sin which
believing men and women suffer for, which is the sin against the first
Covenant, which did consist of an earthly Paradisical glory, which I did to
you, and do still affirm, That both Adam, and all his Posterity consideredly as
they were in his loins, did not only commit it, but also suffer for it, which I
did then (and do still) affirm to be the first Death, by which Pollution and
Corruption run through all the parts of the outward man. Adams Sin brought no
pollution or disability on the Spiritual part of Mankind.


But as I have said, no pollution or disability in the least has it brought to
the Spiritual part of man, whereby the Conscience or spirit of man should be
defiled, neither actively, nor imputatively; not actively for this reason,
because the Spiritual part of man is not involved in the loins of Adam, whereby
he does be get it, but it is formed in man by God, Zach. 12.1. so according to
the Word of the Lord, when he speaks concerning the dissolution Man is not
made incapable to act good by Adams sin.
of that Mortal lump that man begets, says, then Dust shall return to dust,
and the Spirit to him that gave it; so that as man begets only the Natural
part of man, and not the Spiritual, and thereby the Spiritual part being not in
form and matter in the loins of Adam, therefore the Spiritual part could not be
polluted, but the Natural part being in matter involved in the loins of Adam,
was polluted, corrupted, and deformed; from whence arises all the corruption
of Nature, as Blindness, Deafness, and Lameness, and all such like Corruptions,
which shall remain, until this corruptible body shall put on incorruption; so
it is clear, that the Spiritual part of the Sons of Adam did not sin in Adam
The Fathers iniquity makes not the Child liable to the second death.
by action, because it was not in being.

The second Reason why the guilt of Adams sin cannot lie upon the Spiritual
part of any, so as to make them stand guilty before God of a second Death, is
from the reproof the Lord gave to a Generation of men of your judgment, that
thought the Child must dye for the Fathers sins, that when the Lord did
threaten the punishment of the sins of the Fathers upon the Children, that you
blindly, (with those whom the Lord reproves Ezekiel. 18.2, 3.) do conclude, that
it must needs be the punishment of the second Death, therefore the Lord says,
he would have that Proverb used no more, The fathers have eaten sour Grapes,
and the Childrens teeth are set on edge, but the soul that sins shall dye.
So much briefly as for the second reason.

But whereas you said, that there was no thought of time betwixt the Natural
being of David, and the sinful being; if you mean his sinful being, by that
matter that he received from Adam, it is granted, but if it be of the Soul, or
inward part, which had its being from God, it is denied from the two Reasons
already rendered.

Further, one Reason more; Any Creature that is defiled in the inward man, is
not fit for the Kingdom of God; but Children are fit for the Kingdom of God at
the very birth of them; therefore Children are not defiled or corrupted in the
inward man.

Further, You affirmed in your writing, that I said that you could never read
in Scripture that any Children were damned, and therefore no such Sin Original
to Damn; to which say you, you instanced that of Esau, who was reprobated from
all Eternity; to the which I answer, I do indeed confess you said so, but I
have learned, that your say so is no sufficient proof; for the ninth of the
Romans, the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth verses, which you cited to prove
the matter, prove no such thing; for let any Soul seriously read that place,
and see whether that place say, that God reprobated Esau before he was born,
or had done good or evil; We may take notice that Paul in that place makes use
of two portions of Scripture, the first is Genesis 25.23. and the next is Mal.
1.2, 3.

But first to the first place, that speaks of Esau before he was born; now in
this place we may take notice that Rebecca had been barren, and Childebearing
was somewhat strange to her being barren, so that in verse twenty two it is
said, the Children struggled within her (which was a Type of that variance and
difference that was to be in time betwixt Jacob and Esau) and she said, If it
be so, why am I thus? as if she should have said, What is the cause of this
struggleing, since it is so that I have been barren, and the text said, She
inquired of the Lord; now follows the matter that was spoken of Esau before
he was born, verse. 23. And the Lord said unto her, two Nations are in thy
womb, and two manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels, and the one
people shall be stronger than the other people, and the elder shall serve the
younger. Now I pray consider, Does this say that God has reprobated Esau
before he was born? and this was all that I find was said of him before he
was born. Pray may not a younger brother far surmount in external enjoyments,
insomuch that thereby the elder may come to serve the younger, and yet both of
them saved, if the elder do not misdemean himself to God? so, though Jacob have
that great possession of the Land of Canaan, and Esau have the inferior
possession of Edom, yet, may not Esau be saved if he do not abuse his talent?

And the second place that Paul uses is, Mal. 2.3, in these words, as it is
written, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated, Romans 9.13. Now we know,
that it is no where else written, Esau not hated before he was born.
Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated; and this was long after Jacob and
Esau were dead; though Paul make use of these two places, as Genesis and
Malachy, both at one instant of time, yet the sentence in Malachy was written
hundreds of years since that of Genesis i and concerning Esau after he was
dead, and had done many evil works, as Obadiah the tenth.

Thus you may see your mistakes in the Scriptures by your little reading, or
less exercising of your understandings in them; and as you say, I falsely cited
Jeremy, when the place was in Amos; I say you falsely accuse me, for I cited
Malachy, Obadiah, and Amos, and the place cited in Jeremy was about the Potter
and the Clay.

Sir, one absurdity take notice of, in the which you may see you make God a
Liar, when as God swears, ( Ezekiel. 33.11.) that he desires not the death of
the wicked, but rather that they would return and live; you say he is so far
from meaning what he says, that he has appointed from eternity the greatest
part of men to be Damned, Contrary to that, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3, 4, verses, 2 Pet.
3.9. with a multitude more of Scriptures that might be added. You say that the
Anabaptists, as you call them, will say that it is unjust for God to condemn
those that have not committed actual Sin; to which I answer.

The Apostle would stop their blasphemous mouths with Romans 9.14. in these
words, What, is there unrighteousness with God? God forbid. Moreover you add,
verse. 21. in these words, Has not the Potter power over the Clay, to make one
vessel to honor, and another to dishonor; and in these words you think you
have met with us to the purpose, and therefore are bold to call us blasphemous;
but Sir, give me leave to tell you without offense, That if you know as well
how to feed the Flock, as you do to take off the fleece, you would have seen
that the Apostle had not brought this place to have proved that God might have
been righteous, and yet for all that damn where there is no actual sin; for
Sir, take notice, that in this place he speaks not to Children, or such as had
not committed actual sin, but to the rebellious house of Israel, whom he
compares to Clay marred in the Potters hands; so they were in the Lords hands,
and he did intend to make them honorable Vessels, he did (as we may say in
reference to his Majesty) do all what he could to them, use all the means that
he had to bestow upon a people to make them Honorable, yet still they were
marred in his hand, that is to say, rebellious and refractory. You may see this
proved fully in these two portions of Scripture, in the room of many more that
might be given, Isa. 5. from the first Verse to the eighth, Ezekiel 16, from
the fifth to the fourteenth. Now to come to the eighteenth of Jeremiah, from
the first verse and so onwards, you may see they are the very words that the
Apostle Paul makes use of to answer that Objection, Romans 9.19. which says,
Thou then wilt say unto me, why does he yet find fault, for who has resisted
his will? Answer, Nay, but O man, who art thou that reply against God? Shall
the thing formed say unto him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? Has
not the Potter power over the Clay, to make one vessel to honor, and another
to dishonor?

Now this take notice of well, Disobedience the cause that men become Vessels
of dishonor.
that the Apostle goes now to answer that Objection, verse. 19. in these words,
Who has resisted his will; and shows them plainly, that they were the people
that had resisted his will; if he had not showed by infallible proof, that they
were the people that had resisted Gods will, then the Objection had lain still
unanswered, but now he answers it, as if he should have said, O ye murmuring
stiff-necked house of Israel, have you a word to speak against God for his
Justice in cutting you off, and making you a dishonorable people? did not the
Lord say unto you long ago by his Prophet Jeremiah, Chap. 18. verse. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5. when he compares you to the Clay, and himself to the Potter, you being
stubborn or refractory in the hand of the Lord, and would have none of his
instructions, when he called you to walk in that good old way, but your answer
was, You would not walk therein, Jerem. 6.16. did not the Lord prophecy to make
you another vessel as seemed him good? which in all likelihood was to be a
Vessel of dishonor, for it seems good unto the Lord, when persons will not be
allured by Mercy, to be cut off by the Axe of his Justice, Mat. 3.10. John
15.1, 2, 3. Verses, therefore who art thou, or how can thou find fault,
saying, Who has resisted his will? when it is evident that thou have so
resisted his will, being Clay marred in the Potters hands. But if the Objection
be made, That he had mercy on some of the House of Israel, and so made them
Vessels of honor, and yet some he made Vessels of dishonor; To that I
anwser, It is very true, that he did make some of that Lump Vessels of honor,
but they were such as were pricked in their heart for their sins Act. 2.37
, and did purify their heart through believing, and obeying the truth, and so
Christ became the Author of their eternal Salvation, Heb. 5.9. 1 Pet. 1. verse.
22. for it was that which the Lord has promised Souls that did purge
themselves from the unbeleef in their hearts, as you may see, 2 Timothy 2.20. But
in a great House there are not only Vessels of Gold, and of Silver, but also of
Wood, and of Earth, and some to honor, and some to dishonor, verse. 21. if a
man therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honor,
sanctified and meet for the Masters use, and prepared unto every good work.

And now I shall give you a brief review of those words that the Apostle Paul
makes use of, Romans 9. they are the words of the Prophet Jeremy, Jer. 18.1. to
17. and so onwards, And the Word of the Lord came unto me saying, Go down to
the Potters house, and there will I cause thee to hear my words; and I went
down to the Potters House, and behold he wronght a work on the wheel; and the
vessel that he made with clay was marred in the hands of the Potter, and he
made another Vessel as seemed the Potter good to make it; then the Word of the
Lord came unto me saying, O House of Israel, can I not do with you as this
Potter, says the Lord? Behold, as the clay is in the Potters hands, so are ye
in my hands, O House of Israel. At what instant I speak concerning a Nation, or
Kingdom, to pluck up, or destroy; If that Nation turn from their evil, I will
repent of the evil I thought to do unto them; but in what instant I speak
concerning a Nation or Kingdom, to build or to plant it, if they do evil in my
sight, then will I repent of the good wherewith I said I would benefit them;
now therefore go, speak to the men of Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusalem,
saying, thus says the Lord, Behold, I frame evil against you, and devise a
device against you; return every one of you from his evil way, and make your
ways and your doings good, but they said there is no hope, but we will wa^^^
after our own devices, etc. and in verse, 17. he threatens to show them his
back, and not the face in the day of their Calamity, the which we may see the
Lord brought upon them, and yet he was just when he judged; and thus you see
the Apostle answers the Objection, and shows the Jews, Romans 9. what the Lord
had determined concerning them, and also made known by the Prophet Jeremy that
he could, according to the truth of his Justice (if they remained obstinate in
doing evil in his sight) make them a dishonorable Vessel, as well as the
Potter could make that Clay (which was not yielding, and conformable to his
hands) a vessel of dishonor. Thus I have showed you the words of the Prophet,
and the meaning of the Apostle, that he does not stop the mouths of those
persons that say, the Lord of the whole earth cannot do unrighteousness, and
therefore cannot Condemn the Child, and cast it into Hell for the Fathers sin;
neither can he Reprobate any but for their actual sin; but he stops the
mouths of those Jews, and all such as they are who do question why God might
find fault, although they before have given him just cause of offense, Mal.
3.8.

The next thing you affirm, Sodom not suffering punishment in Hell fire.
is not true, wherein you said I did affirm, That that fire which Saint Jude
calls eternal fire, was meant only consuming fire; though it was consuming
indeed, yet I did not affirm that to be the only meaning of it, but you may
remember, I said by the word eternal fire, was meant such a fire as was not
kindled by man, neither did it happen in the City by accident, but it issued
forth from God, being not kindled by man, and so was as eternal as himself, for
the breath of the Lord was ever a fire to his enemies, Dan. 7.10. From hence it
is said of him, in Hebr. 11.29. Our God is a consuming fire; the which fire did
destroy the Natural bodies of the Sodomites, and that eternal fire was not
Hell, as you blindly conceive; but it was such fire as the Prophet commanded to
come down from Heaven to destroy the Captains, and their Fifties, which was as
eternal as that of Sodom, being without kindling by man, or without end, and it
came not out of Hell, but from Heaven; and so you may see it, Genesis 19.24. in
these words, Then the Lord rained upon Sodom, and upon Gomorrah, brimstone and
sire from the Lord out of Heaven; and this was for the destruction of no more
but their Natural bodies, for it is not Gods way to afflict the punishment of
Hell before he has tried Souls at the general Judgment, which shall not be
till after the Resurrection; for the Sentence against the first sin, and the
punishment thereof (which was the first death) was not inflicted upon Adam till
after God had legally tried him; and Sir, let me tell you, that the very Devils
are not yet in Hell, but their punishment is reserved until the Day of
Judgment, Reprobate Angels and reprobate men not yet in punishment.
Jude verse. 6. Matthew. 8.29. Why art thou come to torment us before the time?
Which shows plainly, that the punishment of reprobate Angels, and reprobate
Men, is not yet inflicted, but has reference to time; and Sir, if I should ask
you where Hell were, what answer would you give me? you would happily tell me,
it was where the Wrath of God was, and then I shall conclude, that Hell were
under your Coat, for Christ says, Ioh. 3.36. That he that believes not, the
wrath of God abides on him for ever.

And truly Sir, if your faith should be tried by your works (as James says it
must be) then doubtless you would be found altogether unbeleeving; and if so,
then according to the former words of our blessed Savior, That the wrath of
God abides on such; so that if you do conclude Hell to be in all places where
the Wrath of God is, (though I do indeed conclude, that there shall be a
material place of Hell, where the Wrath of God shall remain perpetually) then
Hell must of necessity be at the place aforesaid.

And if you do conclude it to be on the Earth, or under the Earth, as some
foolishly have conceived, then it is most evident, that the Devils are not yet
in Hell, for he is called the Prince of the Air; and hence it comes to pass,
that the Devil is many times cast down by the Judgments of God; so that if you
have any reason to prove Hell to be yet in being, then you might have some
better ground, to say the Sodomites with their Children are in Hell, but having
no reason to prove the first, you have little reason to say the second.

But if you should suppose that Luke Parables prove not things.
sixteenth would prove it in the Parable, I will show you that that will be no
proof, for it was but a Parable, and I can as well affirm that the Trees went
forth on a time to anoint a King over them, Judge. 9.8. And they said unto the
Olive tree, reign thou over us. You may read unto the sixteenth verse, and see
a large Discourse of it, which is a Parable as well as that, Luke sixteenth,
and so proves nothing, but is for illustration, and so that place Luke
sixteenth is for illustration, by the which the Lord does show what shall be
the condition of poor afflicted Souls that suffer in this Life, and also the
condition of such who hate the poor afflicted people of God, and take their
pleasure in this Life; so that God calls things that shall be in time, as if
they were in present being.

Hence it comes to pass, that the Angel cries out, Babylon is fallen, Revel.
14.8. and so Revel. 18.2. which Voice from Heaven was sixteen hundred years
ago, and yet I doubt not but you would conclude with me, that Rome which is
there called Mystery Babylon is not yet fallen; and so also John says, Revel.
20.11, 12. That he saw the general Resurrection, and the last Judgment; so
that you may see God calls things that shall be, as if they were; and thus I
have answered your great Objection, Luke 16.22. But now because there is a
Generation of Men, which affirm, That there is no Hell now in being, nor never
shall be, and thereby are hardened in their ungodly practices, I shall show you
in a few words my judgment concerning Hell, that all men may see I abhor such
an ungodly opinion.

In the first place I shall speak a little Hell not in being till the coming of
the Lord
of the time of its being, and that I find in Scripture shall not be till the
coming of the Lord Jesus Christ to judge the world, 2 Thessal. 7. verse. 8.
where the Lord is said to come in flaming fire, to punish such as disobey him
in his Gospel, and Jude 14, 15. verses, Behold, the Lord comes with ten
thousand of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all. Which shows, that
neither Judgment, nor the execution of Judgment (which is the punishment of
Hell) shall be until the coming of the Lord; see also, Revel. 22.12. He shall
come quickly, and his reward shall be with him, to give unto every one
according to his works. See Mat. 25.29, 30, 31. So much briefly for the time of
Hell in its being, although much more may be said.

Secondly in brief, for the place of Hell, which I conceive shall be on Earth,
where sin was committed; for which I refer you to Isaiah 24.21. which says,
And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord will punish the Host of
High ones which are on high, and the Kings of the earth on the earth. It is in
that day when he shall reign gloriously in the Hill of Zion, when the Sun
shall be ashamed, and the Moon confounded.

And further, we know Hell is called utter darkness, viz. when the Lord has
withdrawn, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, which are but for signs and seasons, and
for days and years; and these words show that they are limited as to time,
which when they are taken away, the Earth will be utter darkness, and so the
place where the Lord will punish. Further he says, he will gather all Flesh to
the valley of Jehosaphat, and plead with them there, and so much briefly to the
place.

Now because I have thus said, that Hell is not yet in being, let not any
ungodly Soul be hardened in his ungodly practices, to think that when they dye
they shall not go to Hell, thou may come there too soon; for if so be that a
thousand years to the Lord be but as yesterday, and yet he have knowledge of
time, then ten thousand years is but a moment to those which have no knowledge
of time; but in the Grave there is no remembrance of time, so that from Adams
death which was the first man, unto the time of his Resurrection, will be to
him but a moment of time.

But if by these words you should conclude that I hold the Mortality of the
Soul, I shall speak a word to it, although I have spoke to it before, yet a
word now in its place may be seasonable, and that is this, All that is man
dies, and is mortal; neither do I know, and I believe you will be troubled to
find, that any other thing returns to God, than that Spirit, which is neither
of man, nor from man, but was freely given from God, which indeed is immortal,
and yet is in no capacity to receive joy, until the body is perfected with it.
I could speak much to this particular, but that I see two sorts of persons that
are ready to run upon the extremes, which for want of true understanding in
that point do run into great absurdities.

In the last Clause of your Letter you say, The Anabaptist would have urged
another Argument to prove no Children damned, but you say you refused it, and
said, that was but running round.

To which I answer, That it did appear to me you were very weary indeed, and
could not answer to one Argument, and therefore much less to many more. You
writ to me that you were scarcely recovered of Sickness, and so that was one
ground why you could not. We use to say, Sir, a bad shift is better than none,
but while you were a talking of the flesh, namely contesting about your Tithes
with your Neighbor, which was none of your Flock, you seemed to be very well.

But Sir, I marvel not much at your Apology, for I scarce ever met with any of
your Coat but they had urgent business that wanted them at home, or a great way
to Ride, or a Sermon to Teach, or some such like excuse; but were any of you at
any place where you might have varieties for your Belly, or moneys for your
Purse, and no Sectaries in the way (as you call them) to trouble you, you would
not be in such great have. Furthermore, you said I cried Victory by railing
upon you, Sir, I pray you do not make me like your self, which usually do rayl
in your Pulpit, as I am informed, and by your own confession; but I shall give
you a review of those words, which you call railing.

You may remember, when you were mounted on your Horse, and ready to be gone,
when you could say nothing unto me, you had thought to stop my mouth with these
words, saying unto me, you profess God has spoke to you, let us see you show a
sign.

Although I never had a tittle in my speech to that purpose, my answer was this
(which you call railing) that you are like to that adulterous Generation that
seek a sign, and none shall be given them.

And furthermore I said, That if you were as careful to read the Scriptures,
and being frequent in them, as you were, to look after your Tithes, you might
have remembered, that John the Baptist, who was a very great Prophet, did show
no sign or mark at all, yet all that that he said was true, Joh. 10.41. and
this was the sum of that I said, which you call railing.

The last thing you say, appears to be full of confusion, for in the first
Clause of your last Verse, in which you say, that such as we, are given up,
The meaning thereof is this, That God has given us up to be cast out of his
favor, not only intending to harden us, but also to harden himself against us,
not intending any means shall do us good, cutting us from mercy, delighting in
our destruction; this is meant by giving up to a reprobate sense.

And yet now in the last Clause of your Verse you pray, That the Lord would
open our eyes; so that in one place you cast us as far as you can into Hell,
and say, That God has done so in his account already. Do I wrong such a
generation of men; if I should call them Babels Brats? I leave the Reader to
judge. But as for your prayer I matter it not, whether you pray for us, or
curse us (which is your most usuallest practice) for I know that the prayers of
such are abomination, according to the Word of the Lord, Prove. 28. verse. 9. I
shall speak no more to the Letter at present, but exhort you to repent from
your dead works, and believe the Gospel, and be Baptized for remission of sins,
before the Decree pass, and there be no remedy.

The Servant of all men (for Christ's sake) George Hamman.


Now Sir, having answered your Letter, I shall not leave you so, but shall
further clear the truth of what I have affirmed by word and writing, and that
by several Reasons or Arguments, as follows.

Arg. 1. That opion that affirms God may change in what he has absolutely
Decreed, is false, and erroneous; but your Opinion, that Original sin brings
Adam and all his Posterity, God not changeable in his Decrees.
liable, or guilty to the second Death, (and yet we see Adam and all his
Posterity are not punished with the second Death) makes God changeable in what
he has absolutely Decreed; ergo your opinion is false and erroneous.

The Major part of the Argument I suppose will not be denied, and that you
know well that God changes not, and therefore the Sons of Jacob are not
consumed.

The Minor I shall thus prove, from Genesis 2.17. which faith, But of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil thou shall not eat of it, for in the day thou eatest
thereof thou shall surely dye, or, in dying thou shall dye. Here we may see God
did absolutely Decree. and also declare his Decree, That if Adam did transgress
that Law, he should dye.

Now if that Death included there do presuppose the second Death as well as the
first, then if all do not dye the second Death as well as the first, Gods
Justice is not satisfied, but his Decree frustrated, for God cannot bring any
secondary means to frustrate that which he has absolutely Decreed, or
disappoint the satisfaction of his Justice. When I say he cannot, my meaning is
this, That the Will of God, with the Attribute of his Truth, does guide the
Attribute of his Power, so that he can do nothing but what is righteous,
according to truth.

If God may bring a secondary means to disappoint the satisfaction of his
Justice, he may as well bring a secondary means to disappoint the satisfaction
of his Mercy, whereby the Justice of his Mercy be not executed.

In plaineness of words, my meaning is this, That if the Lord would after he
had said Adam should dye (and all his) eternally, and yet afterward prepare
life and glory for so many of them as would accept of it; may he not as well
prepare a Hell for persons who have continued faithful unto death, whose reward
is a Crown of Life?

But now to answer an Objection or two.

Obj. 1. The first Objection is from the example of Ninivie, for the Lord said,
Forty days and Ninivie shall be destroyed, and yet it was not destroyed; from
which word many conclude, that God does change in his Decree.

Ans. God does not change his Decree, but does decree to change his
Dispensation according to the actions of the Creature.
To this I answer, That God did not change his Decree, but did decree to change
his Dispensation of Mercy or Judgment according to the Creatures obedience, or
disobedience; for God had declared his Decree long before Jonah was sent to
Ninivie, That at what instant be spoke of a Nation, or Kingdom, to pluok up, or
destroy, if they did repent of their evil, he would repent of the evil he
thought to do unto them, Jerem. 18.7. but we see Ninivie did repent, from the
King on the throne, to the Beggar on the dunghill. And hence it comes to pass,
that God could not destroy them, though he told Jonah he did intend such a
thing as concerning them; and thus we see God does not alter in his Decree,
although he does Decree to alter his Dispensation of Mercy or Judgment,
according to the Creatures actings.

Hence it comes to pass, though Adam should have enjoyed all Paradisical glory,
and not been rooted up for ever, yet for his disobedience he was rooted up, and
drove out of the Garden, with the loss of all that aforesaid enjoyment; and God
that sees things before time that shall be in time, and calls things that
shall be as if they were, saw Adam the very same day that he did Transgress,
not only dying (in dying thou shall surely dye) but also saw Adam and his
posterity returned unto Earth from whence he was taken; so the Sentence is
true in his account, that calls things that shall be as if they were. So much
briefly to the first Objection.

Obj. 2. The second Objection is, That the Promise did intervene Adams Sin, and
the Sentence.

Ans. I answer, That makes not to the taking away of the Punishment of it;
hence it comes to pass, though the Promise has been made flesh, and dwelt
amongst us, and has been dead and risen again, yet no whit of the punishment
is abated; so that God can as well cease to be, as he can cease to be
unfaithful in the true execution of the Attributes of his Justice or Mercy.

But I conceive the reason why the Promise did intervene, was, because he would
not leave his Creatures without some comfort, as if he should have said, Adam,
there was a time when thou might have eaten of every Tree in the Garden,
unless that Tree in the midst, and in pleasure, and not in sorrow, but now
thou shall eat in sorrow all the days of thy life, until thou returnest unto
that lump of Earth from whence thou wast taken, therefore thou may see what
thou have got by harkning to the voice of the Serpent, and thy Wife, yet this
let me speak to thy comfort, The Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents
head; that is, though the Serpent had thought by his subtilty to have buried
thy honor in the dust for ever, and so to have destroyed the work that I had
been doing Six, days, in one hour, yet I will have him to know, that my Wisdom
is unsearchable, and my ways past finding out; that I have found a way to
involve my Son in the flesh, not to take upon him the Nature of Angels, but the
Seed of Abraham, whereby he may take away the Victory from the Grave; though
thou must needs dye, and be like water spilt upon the ground, yet I have used a
means that thou shall not be for ever expelled, 2 Samuel 14.14.

So, know this to thy comfort, and set the Serpent know this to his shame,
though my word be established in the Heavens, that the Heavens and Earth shall
pass away, yet not one word of mine shall pass away unexecuted, and so I shall
take the words of the Lord before named, 2 Samuel 14.14. and show you why God
brought in the promised Seed, to intervene sin and the sentence, that is,
though his Decree cannot be broken, nor his Justice go unsatisfied, but that
Man must dye for that Original Sin, no man or woman to be exempted, but must
all be banished by death.

But Jesus Christ was to bring life and immortality to light; herein is the
saying made good, O Death where is thy sting! O Grave where is thy Victory! the
sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law, but thanks be to
God, who has given us victory through Jesus Christ our Lord.

This place the Apostle uses, 1 Cor. 15. to prove the very thing that I am now
a proving of. If you should ask me, whether Christ brought nothing for the Sons
of Men more than a Resurrection, I should answer yes, many things, he brought
heavenly Paradisical glory for all such as would accept of it upon those
conditions that he offered it. Much more might be said to this Objection and
Argument, but my time at present is precious.

Arg. 2. If the Sin against the First Covenant made the Sinners liable but to
the first Death, then Adam, and all since in his loins, were liable but to the
first Death.

But the Sin against the first Covenant made the Sinners liable but to the
first Death.

Ergo Adam and all his posterity stand guilty by that Sin only of the first
Death.

To the proof of this Argument I shall give you to understand what I mean by
the first Covenant, and that you may see, was excellent enjoyments (I mean)
excelling in Prerogative beyond all other Creatures, insomuch as they were all
under him, and whatsoever name he gave them they shall be called by; and also,
had he not sinned, he should have enjoyed that pure earthly Paradisical
enjoyment, which was the glory of the first Covenant, from which glory he fell
by transgression of that Law, or that Original Sin, as you so call it.

First, Adams sin being only against the first Covenant brings not Condemnation
to Hell.
That he sinned against no other Covenant but that Covenant, because there was
never no Covenant made of a second Life, or a second Glory, not till after Adam
had sinned, and therefore could not sin against such a Covenant, it being not
made, nor he in a capacity to sin against any such thing.

So that Sir, take notice of this one thing by the way, that as the Grave, and
the misery tending thereunto, as sickness, weakness, and such like infirmities,
is that which a Creature receives as punishment for the sinning against that
pure earthly Paradisical Covenant.

So the Gulf of Hell, Punishment in Hell only for transgression against the
second Covenant
with eternal misery, is the punishment of Sin committed against that second
Covenant, the which is a Covenant of heavenly Paradisical glory; so that as the
glory of the second Covenant does surmount the glory of the first, so the loss
of the thing Covenanted, with the punishment thereunto, does far surmount the
enjoyment of the first, with the punishment annexed thereunto.

Now to prove my Minor Proposition by a plain rext, as Genesis 3.19. In the sweat
of thy face shall thou eat bread, until thou returnest to the ground, for out
of it wast thou taken, dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall return, Compare
this with the seventeenth verse of the same Chapter, where he says, Cursed is
the ground for thy sake; and also tells him, that it shall bear thorns and
thistles. So if you take good notice what the Lord denounces as punishment to
him and his seed, (which is only earthly) and inflicted only upon the outward
man, no whit eternal, neither inflicted upon the inward man; and thus I have
proved my Minor Proposition, that Adams Sin was but against the first Covenant,
which sin lost but the enjoyment of the first Life, with that earthly
Paradisical glory.

Arg. 3. Adam and all his enjoyments before he fell were but earthly.
If Adam in his best condition (as he stood in Paradise before the Fall) were
but an earthly man, and all his enjoyments were but earthly enjoyments; then he
could lose no more than what he had to lose, which was earthly.

But Adam in his best condition was but an earthly man, all his enjoyments were
but earthly enjoyments.

Ergo all that he lost was butearthly enjoyments.

The Minor I shall thus prove, 1 Cor. 15.44. There is a Natural body, and a
Spiritual body, so it is written, the first man Adam was made a living Soul,
the last man Adam was made a quickening spirit, verse 45. howbeit that was not
first which is Spiritual, but that which is Natural, and after that which is
Spiritual, verse. 46. The first man is of the earth earthy, the second man is
the Lord from Heaven, verse. 47. Thus you see the first man Adam was but
earthly, and also his enjoyments as earthly as himself.

Obj. If it should be objected and said, That the Lord made Adam an immortal
Soul.

Ans. To which I answer, that God breathed into Adam the breath of Life, and so
he became a living Soul; it should appear he was a dead Soul before, for many
times in Scripture the Mortal part of Man is called the Soul, Joshua 10.28. it
is proved in, and so oftentimes in the ninth, tenth, and eleventh Chapters of
Joshua, and Adam and all his Posterity had such mortal Souls, that had not
Christ risen to have brought a Resurrection, that is to say, that mortal Body
out of the dust, we had been like the beasts that perished, 1 Cor. 15.18. And
so much briefly to the third Argument.

Arg. 4. The Fourth Argument, To prove why Adams sin did not bring any of his
Posterity to be liable unto the second Death. If the punishment due to that
Original sin of Adam in Paradise be no other than what God has declared in the
Sentence, which is no other but upon the outward man, then none of the Sons of
Adam shall be Damned for that sin of Adam in Paradise.

But that punishment due to Adam in Paradise is no other than what God has
declared in the Sentence, Genesis 3. ergo none of the Children of Adam shall suffer
in Hell for that Sin; and that it was but a loss of earthly enjoyments, with
deformities, and corruption, I have proved it at large.

Arg. 5. To prove that Sin in Paradise did not make him, or any of his
Posterity liable to eternal Death, is as follows.

That Opinion, The affirming that Adams ^^ brought the second Death, justifies
the Devil to speak truth, and makes God a Liar.
which (in the extent of it) will make the Devil to speak truth, and God to
lie, is an absurd and blasphemous opinion.

But the Opinion that says, That that Sin of Adam in Paradise makes all the
Sons of Adam guilty, and liable to eternal Death, affirms that the Devil
speaks true, and the Lord lies:

Ergo that Opinion is absurd and blasphemous. The Major will be easily granted.

The Minor I shall prove, for God says, Genesis 2.17. If thou eatest thou shall
surely dye, but the Devil said, Genesis 3. to the Woman, Ye shall not dye, but be
like gods, etc. Now if this Death, that the Lord said they should dye, be meant
punishment in Hell, (as you blindly conceive) and yet we see that all Adams
posterity, which sinned in him, or are become sinners by him, are not punished
in Hell, which you say is meant by that Death, then God speaks not true, in
saying they shall surely dye, when he intends they shall not.

And the Devil speaks true when he says they shall not dye, and we see they
do not so dye; if that Death which God says they shall surely dye, be meant
the second Death, this is to make the Devil speak true, and God a Liar. O
horrid Blasphemous Opinion! be ashamed of it.

Obj. Peradventure you will say, That God sent Christ to take away the guilt
and punishment of that Original sin, which is as false and ridicnlous as the
other.

O blind guide! is this any more in effect than to say, That God sent his Son
to make the Devils words appear to be true, and his own false? the Devil said
they should not dye, God said they should.

Now that they might not indeed dye, you say, God sent his Son that they might
not dye, which is no less than to make God a Liar. And so much briefly to your
blasphemous opinion.

A word or two what I say to this, and that is in these words, Thou shall
surely dye, is only meant the death of the material Body; and hence it comes to
pass, that as well the righteous as unrighteous dye, none exempted, he regards
not the person of any; so that it appears clearly, our God is a God of truth,
that clears not the guilty, and that the Devil, according to the words of
John; is a Liar, and has been so from the beginning.

Arg. 6. The last Argument is as follows, That Opinion which crosses plain
texts of Scripture in the plain meaning of them, is false, and erroneous.

But that Opinion which affirms, That all Infants as they come into the World
are guilty of such a Sin as makes them liable to the second Death, namely, to
be punished in Hell, and so lie under the Wrath of God, is against plain texts
of Scripture, in the plain meaning of them.

Ergo such an Opinion is absurd und erroneous.

Only the Minor will be questioned, the which I shall prove from Matthew. 9.14.
where Christ faith, Little Children are heirs to the Kingdom of Heaven, Take
notice, Sir, these were not Believers sprinkled Children, neither were they
Baptized, neither were they brought for that purpose. Thus you see your Opinion
speaks against plain text of Scripture, Christ says, They are heirs of the
Kingdom of Heaven.

And as for the answer of that Objection in Psalm. 51.5. I refer you to the
place where I have answered it, in its time and place, in the letter.

And now I shall take notice of an absurdity that will follow, and so will
leave, as to the Arguments you do affirm in this your Opinion, That all Infants
that dye in their Infancy, none excepted, must needs be damned; for you did
affirm, That David was guilty of that Sin that brought Damnation, and if David
were guilty, then all Children, for David in your sense was an Elect Person,
and yet if he had died in his Infancy he had been damned, according to your
expression from Psalm fifty; so that upon this account all Children in their
infancy stand at enmity with God; and if so, then show me what reconciliation
there can be according to Scripture account, without the manifestation of
Repentance and Faith toward God, for Christ faith, Except you believe, you
shall dye in your sins, John 8.24. which Children cannot do, although you would
blindly conclude from Matthew. 18. that those little ones there were Children,
which cannot be proved; for though Christ did take a little one, yet he took
not little ones, and neither are little ones capable to suffer for Christ, and
so consequently not capable to be offended.

Secondly, Faith is a persuasion of the mind, flowing from the understanding,
but Children having no understanding can have no faith, so that God says, I
speak not to your Children, which neither know nor understand; and so much for
the absurdity which necessarily will follow, That all Infants must be damned,
if that which you say be true, and so I shall leave as to that particular.


Characters of the false Ministry.
THe next thing that I shall enter upon, is to show the Characters of the false
and corrupted Ministry, whereby they that run may read, and know them by their
fruits.

First, 1 Character.
you shall know them by their teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of men;
the Lord in old time did complain against such Persons, as you may see, Jer.
5.30, 31. in these words, A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the
Land, the Prophets Prophesy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means,
and the people love to have it so, and what shall be done in the end thereof?
Thus you may see the Prophets of old did prophecy the vision of their own
Brain, and the Priests of Old, they must bear rule by their means, that is to
say, their false Divinations must go for truth, and it being pleasing to the
flesh the people loved to have it so. So it is with the false corrupted
Ministry in our days, the Prophets of old, or more properly ancient Fathers,
as they so call them, they in their several Councils have determined certain
Articles of their own invention, imposing them on men's Consciences as
infallible truths (when God never spoke any such thing in his Word) the Priests
they bear rule by their means, and conclude, they must needs be truths, it
being the judgment of their reverend Fathers, as Luther, and Calvin, and St.
Austin, and the like, and it being grown in custom amongst the people, they
love to have it so; like as the people of old, who lusted after the Fleshpots
of Egypt. I shall only particularize a few of their Traditions, and so pass
the first Character.

The first is, Infants Baptism, which never had a footing in Gods Word, nor
their Custom, which is of late by sprinkling.

Another Tradition of Man is, their separating from their ancient Churches, (as
they so call it) and make a kind of new Garment with old Cloth; my meaning is
this, that many of the best sort of Priests (as they so think themselves,
although I look upon them to be the very worst) separate from their ancient
Church, for all they own their Fundamentals to be true both in Faith and
Practice; will not the old Episcopals rise up in Judgment and condemn you, O
ye wise Presbyters! that have learned to separate from a Church true in
Fundamentals (as you say) when She fails in no hing but Circumstance? is this
not getting out of one shape into another, and yet still hold correspondency
with the Customs of the Limes? would you not fain shape your selves into the
likeness of the Gospel Ministry, if you could? No marvel, for Satan also
would transform himself into an Angel of Light; and thus by your Traditions,
you make void the Commandment of Christ, which did not command the Minister of
the Church of Pergamus to separate from the aforesaid Church, although some of
them held the Doctrine of Balaam, and also of the Nicolaitans; but that which he
was to do, was to repent, and help reform. Time would be too short for me to
speak of your old Traditions, even the Customs of the Church of England, and
your crossings in Baptisms, and such foolish tricks, which you your self are
almost ashamed of, although it be part of your Trade, by which you have had
your living; or your Traditions, whereby you have deceived Souls for many
Generations.

The second Character by the which 2 Char.
you may know a false Minister is, They are such as are Men-pleasers, they will
speak as great men will have them speak, that thereby they may keep in favor
with them howsoever; this you may see by Ahabs false Prophets, in that of 2 Chronicles. 18.10. and thereby will be a means to imprison the true, if it be
possible, as you may see Verse. 23, 24, 25. Chap. 24.20, 21. Also see it
pertinent in Jerem. 27.14, 15, 16. So are also our corrupted Ministers in the
time of the Gospel; the Priesthood there were the cause of Christ's being
taken, and the Ministers of the Gospel to suffer; and so it is in our days, the
Priesthood get in favor with the great men of the times, and by their means
the Ministers of the Gospel, and the rest of their poor afflicted Brethren,
suffer, both in Person and Estate, as by that Human Tradition of theirs, as
namely Tithes, or forced Maintenance, which never was appointed by God for the
maintenance of a Gospel-Minister.

The third Character whereby you 3 Char.
may know the false corrupt Ministers. Christ tells you in Matthew. 7. They come
in sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves (that is to say)
they make the people believe that they are the Ministers of Christ, and have
great care of the Flock, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves; that is, in
their hearts they intend to make a prey of the flock; so that their greatest
care is for to get the fleece, although they pretend great care of the flock;
and they may be very well likened to the false Prophets of Old, that the Lord
complains against, Jer. 13.4. O Israel, thy Prophets are like the Foxes in the
Desert, ye have not gone up in the gaps, neither made up the hedges; for the
House of Israel, they did not care to come where there was any work for them to
do, but every one looked for gain in his quarter; wherefore the Lord calls those
Priests of old greedy Dogs, that will never have enough. Even so it is with
the Priesthood in our days, they stand not up in the gap to defend their cause,
neither to safeguard their people (from the Wolves, as they call them)
Peradventure you hear them often rail in their Pulpits, but if they meet any of
them that they call Wolves (although many of their flock be there present) they
will not stand in the gap to defend that which they call truth; this makes it
appear they are but Hirelings, and care not for the flock, but look after the
fleece; so that let their flock be where they will, or do what they will, if
they meet with them at Shering time, it is as much as they care for.

The Fourth Character is, 4 Char.
You may know a false Prophet by the ignorance of their people, they are such
as lead silly women captive, who are ever learning, and never able to come to
the knowledge of the truth. This we may see by the poor National people, that
go to Church (as they so call it) some forty, fifty years and upwards, and when
all is done, they can scarce render an account of the hope that is in them,
they know not, as to say, their right hand from their left in the things of God.

Obj. If it be Objected and said, That it cannot be meant the Priests of the
Nation, because they that are reproved there, are of that sort that creep into
Houses, which lead silly women captive, which the Priests of the Nation think
they are not, and so lie not under that reproach.

Ans. To which I answer, That the Scripture does not reprove such as preach in
Houses, but such as creep into Houses; but I shall a little show you what
creeping Creatures are, and that I find are Froggs. Hence it came to pass that
the Froggs of Egypt did not abide in Pharaohs Court only, but also they crope
into his Kneadingtrougles; and I find in the sixteenth of the Revelations,
that those unclean spirits like Froggs went creeping unto the Kings of the
earth, to gather them together to Battle, which has been the trade of the
Priesthood all along, to beget war in the Nation, to use the privatest and
subtilest way to bring about their enterprise, which may be called ereeping;
and further, though they come not much amongst the poor of the flock in their
Cottages, yet in the Houses of the rich they will creep often enough.

The second thing in order to the answering of the Objection is this, That Paul
condemned not preaching in Houses, for then he had condemned his own practice,
for he preached from House to House often, and often in his own hired house, as
Acts 28.30, 31. And further he tells them, in Chap. 20. ver. 20. I have kept
nothing back, but have showed you, and taught you publicly, and from house to
house. And Chap. eight, and the last, And in every house they ceased not to
preach Jesus Christ. So that they are not counted Leaders of silly women, that
preach from house to house, or in their hired house, but they are Leaders of
sillly Women, that creep into Houses, as I have before showed you. This might
also serve to reprove another sort of false Prophets, but I pass, and hasten to
the Fifth Character.

The Fifth Character to discover the 5 Char.
false corrupted Ministry, is this, You shall know them by their Pride and
Covetousness, the Apostle says, In the last days there shall be those who will
be self-lovers, and not only so, but proud and covetous withal, having a form
of godliness without any power. And so are the Priesthood in our time, proud,
in that they love the chiefest Seats at the Feast, and greetings in the Market,
and to be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi; and their Covetousness appears in this,
In that they reap where they never sow, covet the goods of such as are no whit
partakers of their Ministry, and yet notwithstanding they will have a form of
godliness, and make their people believe they lean upon the Lord, and that God
is amongst them in their worship, like unto the corrupted Priests of old, Mich.
3.11. The Priests teach for hire, and the Prophets Divine for Money, yet will
they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord amongst us? no evil shall come
unto us. And so much for the Fifth Character.

6 Char.
The Sixth is You shall known them by their implacable hatred against the
Ministers of the Gospel, and the simplicity of the Gospel, they are always
crying out to the Magistrate, a Sword, a Sword, that so they may be found
guilty of the blood of the Saints, and Prophets, they being of the Babylonish
crew; This was the disposition of the false Prophets, and corrupted Ministry
of old, as Lament. 4.3. they are such as cause the blood of the Just to be
shed in the midst of the street; and so is it with the Priesthood of our times,
which nothing will serve their turns, had they the power in their hands, but
the Lives or Liberties of the people of God; witness their railing at them in
their Pulpits, and backbiting them in private, on purpose to set the people at
enmity with them, crying, away with them, like unto the malignity of the
spirits of their Fathers of old, fearing, that if such continue, their trade
and great goods will come to naught.

7 Char.
The Seventh Character by which the false corrupted Ministry may be known, is,
They are such as take up the Ministry for filthy lucre sake (that is to say)
when they come to a people, if they will not give them so much by the year,
they will not be their Minister, they leave small Livings to go to greater, and
so their great and weighty Call lies in the heavy Purse; you shall seldom
(or never) hear them say, Woe be to me if I preach not the Gospel; (although I
am in hunger and nakedness) but woe unto you people, if you pay me not my
Tithes, I will get a Summons against you, and so lie under that reproof that
says, He that puts not into their mouth, they prepare war against, so
that they feed themselves with the fat, and cloth themselves with the wool,
and kill them that are fed, Ezekiel. 34.2, 3. etc. And so much for the Seventh
Character.

The Eighth Character, 8 Char.
whereby you may know the false corrupted Ministers, is, They are such as
receive their Ministry by way of Trade, and not by way of Gift; they buy it,
on purpose to sell it again; if Simon Magus were in the gall of bitterness, who
thought to purchase the gifts of the Holy Spirit for Money (and yet we cannot
find that he had an intention to sell it again) then how lie such under the
gall of bitterness, who would fain buy it, on purpose to sell it again? so that
as the Ministers of Christ receive their Gift by virtue of his ascending up on
high, Ephesians. 4.8. they being under his teaching and guiding; so the false
Ministers receive their Instructions and Teachings from Cambridge and Oxford by
virtue of sums of Money, and so as I have before said, they have not the
Ministry by virtue of Gifts from God, but by virtue of such Human helps. And
so much for the Eighth Character.

9 Char.
The Ninth Character whereby you may know the false corrupted Ministers, is,
They are such as their covetous practice, and ill-gotten goods (many times)
indureth not to the second Generation; for the Lord has said, he will plead
both with Fathers and Children; so that many times misery falls upon the
outward man, both to Fathers and Children, for such things; you may see what
the Lord denounced against the corrupt Priests and Prophets of old, in Jer.
2.8, 9. The Priests said not where is the Lord, and they that handled the Law
knew me not; the Pastors also have transgressed against me, and the Prophets
prophesyed by Baal, and walked after things that did not profit; wherefore I
will yet plead with you says the Lord, and with your Childrens Children will I
plead. So it is with the Priests in our times, they ask not whether the Lord be
in the place, but whether there be a good Benefice, and yet notwithstanding we
see often times that the Lord has so pleaded with them and their Children,
that they have been exposed to great want. And so much to the Ninth.

The Tenth and last Character, 10 Char.
whereby you may know the false corrupted Ministers, is, They will pretend much
love to Christ and his Apostles, as though they owned their persons and ways;
but the Children of God, (such as walk in Christ's ways, which he has left both
by precept and example) they hate, revile, and persecute, as much as in them
lies; so it was with the corrupt Pharisaical Priests and Scribes of old, as
Mat. 23.29, 30. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, because you
build the tombs of the Prophets, and garnish the Sepulchers of the righteous,
and say, If we had been in the days of our Fathers, we would not have been
partakers with them in their blood, wherefore ye are witness to your selves,
that ye are the Children of them that killed the Prophets, verse. 31. Here you
may take notice, that though the Pharisaicall Priests and Scribes of old did
pretend great love to the Prophets, and righteous men that were before them,
condemning their Fathers for persecuting of them, yet you may see they were the
men that owned a Murder against Christ, and also persecuted his Disciples. It
was the Priests that gave Judas the thirty pieces of Silver to betray his
Master, Matthew. 26.3. compared with 14, 15. Also they were the men that gave
large Money to the Soldiers, to say, His Disciples stole him away while we
slept. So the Priests of out time, they make as if they were friends to Christ
and his Diseiples, and yet they are the greatest Agitators of the reproach and
sufferings that is brought upon such as walk in that way which Christ and his
Apostles have left by precept and example. And so much for the Tenth and last
Character.

Now having briefly showed you the Characters of the False Ministers, I shall
come now to show you the Characters of the True, the which has so great a
difference from the False, that they that run may discern it; and so briefly to
the first.

The first Character of the true Ministers is as follows. They are not only
sent by Jesus Christ to preach, but also Gifted by him, whereby they are
enabled to preach at all times instant, in season, and out of season; they do
not want a great Library of Books, neither do they want a weeks time to preach
a Sermon, neither do they preach other men's Works, and so receive not their
Ministry of man, or from man, as the Apostle Paul says, Gal. 1.1. but receive
it as a free Gift, as you may see, Ephesians. 3.8. And so much in brief to the
first.

2.
The Second Character whereby they are known, is, As they are Gifted by him, so
they preach his words only, going forth with the words of his Commission,
preaching Repentance and Faith, and having thereby made Disciples they Baptize
them, according to the command of Christ, Mat. 28.19. Go teach all Nations, and
Baptize them; showing clearly, that persons must be taught before they are
Baptized; it is also pertinent, Mark 16.15, 16. compared with Acts 2.37, 38,
39. Chap. 8.12. verse. 37 with many other Scriptures, which will not only prove
it to be a precept of Christ, but also the practice of the Ministers of Christ
in the Primitive times; and so in our time; so they Constitute Churches (if it
may be so called) not by Generation, but by Regeneration, my meaning is this,
That they do not make Church Members by succession (as Believers Seed) but by
faith, and profession, which does entitle Persons to be Abraham's Seed, and
Heirs according to promise. And so much briefly to the second Character.

3.
The Third Character whereby they are known, is, As they go forth with his
words and Commission, so they are contented with what Wages he gives them;
they take not up the Ministry for filthy Lucres sake, but are willing to
suffer hunger and cold, and many such like things, if they are called,
thereunto; they do not ask the People to whom they preach, what they will give
them, but are willing to labor with their hands to supply their wants; this
you may see was the carriage of the Apostle Paul, who was a Minister of Christ,
and a pattern of good works to the Ministers that should succeed him, as you
may see, Acts 20.33. I have coveted no man's Silver, or Gold, or Apparel, ye
your selves know, that these hands of mine have communicated unto my wants, and
to them that are with me; so it is with the true Gospel Ministers in our time,
they are willing to lay themselves out to preach the Gospel frequently in
several places, and yet notwithstanding, are as willing to let their hands
communicate to their wants, and to their Family, to the end they may make the
Gospel of Christ without charge, and also not to lay a stumbling-blocke in the
way, to cause them that are weak to fall; and in a word, they seek not the
Fleece, but the Flock, as the Apostle Paul says, not yours but you. And so
much to the third Character.

4.
The Fourth Character whereby you may know the true Ministers of the Gospel,
is, They are men of the lowest rank, and of the weakest capacity, or prudency
in Natural things, whereby the Children of this World are wiser in their
Generation than they; therefore if you will know the true Ministers of the
Gospel, or find them our, you must not go amongst the wise Rabbis of the
times, but you must look amongst the weak, despised, rejected people, for in
their weakness Christ has promised to manifest his strength, and has also
said, He will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and destroy the wisdom of the
prudent; you shall see these Scriptures in the room of many, first by
Prophecy, secondly fulfilled, Psalm. 82. in these words, Out of the mouths of
babes and sucklings thou have ordained strength, Isa. 28.7. Mat. 11.25. there
Christ gives thanks, that God had begun to make good his Promises, saying, I
thank thee O Lord, Father of Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid these things
from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes; therefore the
Apostle says in 1 Corinthians. 1.20. Where is the wise? where is the Scribe? where
is the disputer of this World? Compared with Verse 26. which says, For you
know, your calling Brethren, that not many wise men after the flesh, nor many
mighty, nor many noble are called, but God has chosen the foolish things of
the World to confound the wise, that no flesh should glory in his presence,
verse. 29. etc. according as it is written, that he that glories may glory in
the Lord. As if he should have said, That forasmuch as Persons are ready to set
up the Creature, and look so little at the Creator, I will now give Strength,
and Wisdom, and Gifts to men of the least account, (as in reference to Human
Part) that Persons may not attribute praise to the Creature, as to his Wisdom,
or Learning, or such like things, but may attribute praise only to me the
Creator, for the less fleshly parts, or Human Wisdom is seen in the Creature,
the more the gifts of Gods Spirit is magnified. And so much of the Fourth
Character.

The Fifth Character, 5.
You shall know them by their being rejected of the Wise and Learned men of the
Times, whereby they be often in Tumults; nay you shall know them by their
rejoicing in those things which others count shame, as you shall find by the
carriage of the true Ministers of old, Acts 5.40, 41. When they had called the
Apostles, and beaten them, they commanded them that they should preach no more
in the Name of Jesus, and they departed from the presence of the Council,
rejoicing, that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his name, also in
2 Cor. 6.4. You may see there how persons prove themselves to be Ministers of
Christ, in these words, But in all things approving our selves the Ministers of
God, in much patience and afflictions, necessity and distress, in stripes, in
imprisonments, in tumults, in labors. So the Apostle, though he were in favor
with the chief Priest when he went to Damascus, yet no sooner did he turn to
be a Preacher of Christ in simplicity, and forsook the old Jewish form, but he
was fain to escape out of their hands in a Basket out of a Window, being
afterward taken, was smote by the High Priest (who once owned him) So it is
with the Ministers of our time, no sooner do they forsake the Ceremonies of the
Nation, but presently they become a prey (especially of the Priesthood of the
Nation) so that he that runs may read the true Minister from the false. And
so much to the Fifth Character.

The Sixth Character, 6.
is, They are always counted Broachers of new Doctrine, Heretics, and turners
of the World upside down, their Doctrine called Heresy, and they Ringleaders
of the Sectaries; so it was in the Primitive age, and so it is now; that it is
so now the continual outcries of the Priesthood of the Nation against the
Ministers of Christ doubtless sounds forth, or otherwise I shall willingly be
corrected by the Christian Reader; and that it was so in the Primitive time, I
shall prove clearly, as from two or three instances of Scripture, in the room
of many more, Acts 24.5. which says, We have found this man a pestilent
fellow, a mover of seditions amongst all the Jews throughout the World, and a
Ringleader of the Sects of the Nazarens, this was spoken by Paul, Acts 17.6.
the last clause, in these words, Those that have turned the world upside down
are come hither also, Acts 28.22. Concerning this Sect we know, That it is
every where spoken against, Chapter 22.22. Then they lift up their voices and
said, Away with such a fellow, it is not fit that he should live, chap. 25.24.
And Festus said, King Agrippa, and all men that are here present with us, ye
see this man about whom all the multitude of the Jews have dealt with me about
at Jerusalem, and also here, crying, that he ought not to live any longer.

So that you may see plainly, that as the Ministers of the Gospel then were
looked upon as pestilent Fellows, and the Ringleaders of the Sectaries in that
time, by the wise learned Jews; so are the Ministers of the Gospel looked upon
in our days, by the blind formal people of this Nation. And so much to the
Sixth Character.

The Seventh Character of the true Ministers, 7.
is, they are not ashamed of the meanest ways or Ordinances of Christ, though
they are contemptible to the Wise men of our times, Romans 1.16. 2 Timothy 2.11. the
Gospel Ministers do not pick out those for such Doctrines as please the fancies
of men, as the Apostle says, If I yet please men I am not the Servant of
Christ. They preach the Gospel in the plain mean way of it, for the which they
suffer reproach, nevertheless they are not ashamed, for they know whom they
have believed, even their Lord and Master who went before them, leaving them an
example, Who turned not away his face from shame and spitting, Isa. 50 4, 5, 6.
Heb. 12.2, 3. Phil. 2.6. 2 Cor. 8.9. So that you may know the Ministers of the
Truth by their boldness for the Truth, being not ashamed to preach Christ in
his low despised ways, at all places, where the Lord sets a door open unto
them. And so much for the Seventh Character.

8.
The Eighth Character whereby you may know a true Minister, is, They never call
for a Magistrate, or Temporal Lord, to encounter with their Enemies, (or more
properly Christ's Enemies) Christ has prohibited them, teaching them another
Lesson, That he that takes the Sword shall perish by the Sword; so that the
Weapons of their Warfare are not Carnal, but Spiritual; so that when they meet
with Truths Enemies they take the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of
God, and that is the Weapon by the which they put the enemies to the worst, and
by that Sword at the last Christ's enemies shall be destroyed, Revel. 2.16.
Chap. 19.15. and this is the Magistrates Sword, or Champion that the Ministers
of the Gospel (in case of opposition) fly to. And so much for the Eighth
Character.

9.
The Ninth Character whereby you may know a true Minister, is, They are not
Lords over Gods heritage, that is to say, they will not Lord it over their
fellow Brethren, neither do they desire the pre-eminence over the inferiorest
Member in the Church; they are indeed the Churches Servants, and not their
Lords, they can be content to suffer want, when happily the Church, or some of
them, are fed to the full; they can be contented to be abased when the Church
does abound, they make not a prey of their Flocks, they labor not to be rich;
nay they can cease from their own wisdom, they can willingly be counted fools
for Christ's sake, they seek not the goods of the Church, but their good; not
yours but you, as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 12.14. Much more might be said as
concerning the Self-denial of the true Ministers of the Gospel, but I shall
pass to the Tenth and last Character.

The Tenth Character of a true Minister is as follows; 10.
They may be known by the hardship that will follow them, by reviling, by
scoffing, by buffetings, by tumults, they shall be a byword in the mouth both
of men, women, and children; for Signs and Wonders in the Nation where they
live, as it has been prophesied of them, Isa. 8.18. I and the Children that
thou have given me, are for Signs and Wonders. The Phrases of Carnalmen are as
follows; What, such a Fellow a Minister? a Cobbler, Tailor, or Tincker, and
such like Mechanics, are they fit for Ministers? Where had such Fellows their
Learning? Are they not blind leaders of the blind, say the wise Carnalists of
our time? and by such like terms they set the World in an uproar against them;
Was it not so with Christ, and the true Ministers in the Primitive time? Did
not the wise Jews, and Scribes, and Pharisaical Priests deride Christ, and call
him the Carpenter, and Carpenters Son, and wondered from whence he had his
Doctrins? Did not the Wise learned men of the Jews call his Disciples ignorant
and unlearned men, which knew not the Law, and were accursed, and yet
notwithstanding Christ did choose Mechanics, as Fishermen, and the like, and
did reject the wise and learned, and yet that was a hard thing to be received
in those days, and so it is in ours; and you may see that Christ was a poor
Christ in Carnal men's account; His face was more marred than the Sons of men,
he had no form nor comeliness, when any looked upon him, that they should desire
him, Isa. 53.1, 2, 3, 4. so are his Ordinances and his ways mean, that if men
look upon them with a Natural eye, there is no form or comeliness; and so it is
with the Ministers of the Gospel, as I have showed you; he calls not the
rich but the poor, not the wise but babes, not the learned but the ignorant,
that he may make such to know Doctrine; that the wise men may stumble, and
fall, and be taken, but as it is written, He that glories let him glory in
the Lord; and so much briefly to discover the false Ministry, and the true; so
that he that will view this with an impartial eye, or single heart, may
clearly discern who are the true Ministers, and who are the false, to that end
they may not be misled, but may be followers of the Lamb wheresoever he goes,
that thereby they may have him to be their refuge when all falsehood shall be
discovered, and the refuge of lies swept away.

MYstery Babylon, the Romish Whore,
That has filled the World with thy false Doctrines store,
Thy cousening shifts are almost out of date,
And thou shall weep when as it is too late.
All Nations that of thy Cup have drunk are mad,
And in their hearts still after thee do gad;
The Merchants of thy ways do much complain,
That by thy ruin they shall lose their gain.
The Merchants of her Ware that rich are grown,
By taking fleece from sheep that is not your own;
Your Riches, Pride, and Honor will decay,
And like a dream will vanish clean away:
You Merchants as I proper you may call,
Remember that your Trade will have a fall,
For he that has the righteous Offspring fed,
Has suffered yours oft-time to beg their bread.
Sir John Presbyter that are grown so great,
And think the art fastened firm within thy Seat,
Thy time shall be but for a little space,
But Daniels Little Horu shall thee displace.
Daniels Little Horn is budding out,
That will thee and thy Predecessors rout,
Before whom Papal Prelate, and Presbyter shall fall,
That his Dominion may be over all.
O England, look what Shepherds you have got,
That love the Fleece far better than the Flock.
Instead of feeding, kill such as are fed,
O England see that you are much misled.
Thy shepherds certainly are of that sort,
That Paul unto Philipia did report;
Whose God's their belly, who earthly things do mind,
For he says misery will be their end.
But Sion, and thy Pastors, that seem to mourn,
And to the World the objects are of scorn,
A word of comfort unto thee I say,
Thy Servants they shall be; and thee obey.
O Sion, be thou joyful in thy King,
For if a certain thou shall reign with him,
And for thy suffering, thy reward shall be for aye,
In the Land of Promise, double everlasting joy.
George Hammon.

Syons Redemption Discovered, Wherein is made plain these PARTICVLARS.
1 The last and general return of the Jews out of their captivity, and of the
building of the City and Temple. 2 The manner of the rise of the Man of Sin,
called the Vile Person, or the Antichrist, proved not to be the Romish Babylon.
3 The spoiling of the Jews for a small time, and the taking of their City and
Temple. 4 The manner of the Son of Righteousness arising, and the gathering
together of his Army. 5 The great War upon the Mountains of Israel, and the
destruction of Antichrist. 6 The glorious Reign of Christ and his Saints upon
Earth a thousand years. 7 A clear description of New Jerusalem, not built by
the Jews at their return out of Captivity. 8 The restoration of the creation
into their Primitive Purity. 9 The Signs of the Times of the accomplishment of
these Prophesies. 10 A profitable Application of the sum of these Particulars.
By GEORGE HAMMOND Pastor.

LONDON.

Printed by R. Ibbitson for Fra. Smith, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Flying horse Court in Fleet street. 1655.

Sions Redemption Discovered.
The last and general return of the Jews out of their Captivity, and of the
building of the City and Temple.
THe Lord has promised that the Jews shall return and enjoy their own Land,
and build and repair the former Desolations, of which the Scriptures are full:
For thus says the Lord, behold, I will bring again the Captivity of Jacobs
Tents, and will have mercy on their dwelling places, and the City shall be
built upon her own heap, and the place shall remain after the manner thereof,
That the Cities of Judah shall be built as in the former days.
Jerem. 30.18. Moreover, that you may see that this is a Prophecy of the last
and general return of the Jews, the Lord does declare that he will not only
bring those that were carried in the Northern parts, being subdued by the
Roman, or Persian, or Turk, but speaks also of all coasts of the Earth, meaning
also all those that were carried away by Salmanaser out of Samaria, so that
there might be one sheepfold together upon the Mountains of Israel: Behold, A
Prophecy of the return of the Ten Tribes, that there may be one sheepfold on
the Mountains of Israel.
I will bring them from the North Countries, and from the coast of the earth,
for God will save Sion, and build the Cities of Judah, that they may dwell
there, and have it in possession; the seed also of his Servants shall inherit
it, and they that love his name shall dwell therein; the Towns and Cities of
Judah, and Jerusalem shall be re-edified, and shall be no more destroyed by
the hands of men, Ezekiel. 36, 10 11. Jerem. 31.40. compare verse 8.9, 10, 11, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16 17, 18. 1 Chronicles. 17 9. Amos 9.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. So that hence
we may see here is a glorious time for the Jews to enjoy at the appointed time,
at the accomplishment of these Prophecies; then shall that saying be made
good, Ten men shall lay hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, and say, we
will go with thee, for we have heard that God is with you, Zech. 8.22. Then the
hatred of Ephraim shall depart, and the adversary of Judah be cut off, Ephraim
shall not envy Judah, neither shall Judah vex Ephraim, Isa. 11.13. Arise and
shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee;
Behold, darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people, but the
Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee, the
Gentiles shall come unto thy light, and the King to the brightness of thy
rising; Lift up thine eyes round about, and see, all they gather themselves
together, they shall come to thee, thy Sons shall come from far, and thy
Daughters shall be nourished at thy side, then shall thou see, and flow
together, and thine heart shall fear, and be enlarged, because the abundance of
the Sea shall be converted unto thee, the forces of the Gentiles shall come unto
thee, the multitude of Camels shall cover thee, the Dromidaries, or Middian, and
Epha, Meaning that their Children and riches shall be brought back from the
Land of their enemies as aforetime.
all they from Sheba shall come, they shall bring Gold, and Incense, and they
shall show forth the praise of the Lord; and the Sons of them that afflicted
thee shall come and bow unto thee, and all that despise thee shall fall down at
thy feet, and they shall call thee the City of the Lord, the Sion of the Holy
one of Israel; whereas thou have been forsaken and hated, so that no man passed
by thee, I will make thee an eternal glory and joy from Generation to
Generation, Isa. 60.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Compare verse. 14, 15. cha 66.20, 21, 22.
Jerem. 31.24. verse 31, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40. 2 Samuel 7.10. Ezekiel. 37.20, 21,
22. Zeph. 3.13. compare 19, 20. Zech. 14.11. Ezekiel. 36.10, 11. from these
Scriptures it is very clear, That at the last and general return of the Jews,
their Cities shall be built, and although they may meet with some difficulties
after the building thereof (as I shall show you) yet in the time of their
return and building they shall have great assistance from God, as is clear from
the current of Scripture. Moreover, although the Man of Sin shall trouble them
after their return, yet it shall not be as afore-time, but they shall be
nourished by God from the fierce wrath of the Dragon, and they shall be a Crown
of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal Diadem in the hand of their God,
Isa. 62.3. And they shall call them the Holy People, the redeemed of the Lord,
and thou shall be called Sought out, a City not forsaken, verse. 12. So having
showed you by these Scriptures that the Jews shall return and build their City
upon her own heap, I shall now also show you that there shall be a Temple built
at the last and general return of the Jews, from these three Reasons as
follows.

The First is from the Vision that the Lord showed Ezekiel in the time of
Isreal's Captivity, 1 Three Reasons why the Temple shall be built again.
for it is usual with the Lord to follow his people with Mercy, so that in the
valley of Achor there may be a door of hope; so the Lord dealt with John, when
he was driven into the Isle of Pathmos. But to pass to Ezekiels Vision, We may
take notice that in the fortieth of Ezekiel, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Verses, that the
Lord brought Ezekiel in a Vision into the Land of Israel, and setting him upon
an high Mount showed him the frame of a City, in the which City also he saw a
man whose countenance was like Brass, and he had also a measuring reed in his
hand. Moreover, that this was a Prophecy of the last and general return, see
chap. 37.38. and that also without controversy, Ezekiel did see a Temple built
as well as a City, as you may see proved already from Chap. 41.1. and verse. 4.
from which we may see clearly there was a Temple, and so as I said before, so I
say now, read and consider well the three precedent Chapters, and you shall see
that it was the last and general return out of Captivity that there was
Prophesied of; from the same account it is clear, That there is to be a Temple
as well as a City.

Obj. If it be objected and said, That there were Priests and Sacrifices
mentioned in that Prophecy, to that I answer, and say, It is true, but after
the Jews return out of their Captivity, they shall wait for their Messiah in
their Sacrifices, until such time as the Man of Sin shall spoil them, and take
it away, and place up abomination in the room, for I cannot find from
Scripture that the Jews shall be converted by a Gospelpreaching, although I
know the two Witnesses shall prophecy one thousand two hundred and sixty days.
Now that these two Witnesses shall preach Gospel Ordinances, or a Crucified
Christ, Repentance, and faith to the Jews, in such a manner and way as he was,
The Jews shall not be converted by a Gospel preaching.
or is preached to the Gentiles, that I much question, for as much as I see not
the Scripture making good such a thing, but in many places does cross such an
Opinion as to my understanding, for the Lord Christ said, They should see him
no more till they said, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord; as
for the Gospel they are enemies for your sake, but as touching Election they
are beloved for the Fathers sake, for the Gifts and Callings of God are without
repentance; So that when they see the Lord come in the Clouds, even the great
King that they looked for, then they shall know that it was he that they and
their Fathers have rejected, as well as Peter knew Moses and Elias, which he
never saw before; so that at that time the Spirit of Prayer and Supplication
shall be poured out, and they shall mourn. So when the Redeemer comes to Sion,
at that time shall transgression be turned from Jacob, Matthew. 23.39. Romans
11.25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. verses, Isa. 27, 6. compare verse. 9.
chap. 25.7, 8, 9. Zech. 12.10. Moreover if it should be demanded of me, What
shall be the work of the two Witnesses? I answer, That their work will be to
establish the Jews against the slights of the Man of Sin, that shall affirm
himself to be the Christ, and dissuade the Jews from believing in him, reviving
those old Prophecies which have been in obscurity by reason of the
misunderstanding of the people to whom they were made, The work of the
Witnesses to prove the Man of Sin to be the Antichrist, and not the Messiah
that they look for.
for doubtless the Jews at this time do earnestly expect their King, and
should they not have some to instruct them, and to expound the Prophecies, or
Prophecy of them, It is very like they might do ill enough, especially because
of that great appearance of the Man of Sin, what by his great Armies, and the
false Signs that shall be wrought by his false Prophets, that shall cause Fire
to come down from Heaven in the sight of men, to deceive them that dwell upon
the earth, so that their work will not be to preach Ordinances, but to prove
that the great person that then shall be exalted amongst them, is not the
Christ that they look for, but the Antichrist, or the vile Person, or the first
Gog, or the Man of Sin, though he have several Names, yet is he but one Person,
which was foretold by Enoch the seventh from Adam, and also by Ezekiel and
Daniel, Esaias and Joel, and also by Peter and John, which was to stand up in the
last days, and also fall upon the Mountains of Israel; and so I shall pass
both from the Answer to the Objection, and the first Reason, and come to a
Second, to show you why there is to be a Temple built, as well as a City.

A second Reason is, because John in his Revelation saw a Temple, and was to
measure it, Revel. 11.1, 2, 3. in these words, And there was given to me a Reed
like unto a Red, and the Angel that stood by said, Arise, and go measure the
Temple of God, and the Altar, and those that worship therein, but the Court
which is without the Temple leave out, and measure it not, for it is given into
the hands of the Gentiles, and the Holy City shall be trod under foot forty two
Months. Hence you may also see there was a Temple, which Temple John was to
measure; now, that this was a Prophecy of the last times, is clear from verse
18. and as the text reads it, the Court without leave out and measure not; the
ancient Translations read it, the inner Court, or the Court within the Temple,
leave out, and measure it not, for it is given into the hands of the Gentiles,
and the Holy City shall they tread under foot forty and two Months, the which
if so, it may appear to us clearly, That before the Jews have finished their
inward Court, which is the Holiest of Holiest, the Man of Sin will take it out
of their hands, and spoil them of the enjoyment of it, for the term of forty
two Months, which is three years and a half, upon the account of thirty days to
a Month, the which time and times, and half a time, the traveling Woman will
be drove into the Wilderness, and the remnant of her seed persecuted, and this
vile Person shall then set up his Image, which shall by the power of the Devil,
speak, and cause as many as will not worship the Image of the Beast to be
killed, Revel. 13.13, 14, 15. chap. 16.14. but some have expounded this place
thus, and have said, The outward Court is the Ordinances that were not to be
measured, that is to say, not to be accounted of, so as to be practiced, and
the Holy City was the Church which was to be trod under foot; to which
Exposition, I say, That I never could find God in Scripture comparing the
Gospel Ordinances to an outward Court, it is well if they can find it who do
affirm it; neither do I find in the New Testament where the Gospel Church is
compared to a Holy City; Christ has compared it to a City, but the word Holy
is not used in that place; but doubtless this Holy City spoken of here, Revel.
11. is meant Jerusalem, which in Scripture is frequently called a Holy City, as
you may see if you peruse these Scriptures following, Psalm. 24.3. Isa. 27.13.
Chap. 48.2. Dan. 9.24. Joel 2.1. Chap. 3.17. Obadiah 6. Zephany 3.11. Mat. 4.5.
Chap. 27.53. So that it will appear, that the Temple spoken of in Revel. 11.1.
was the Temple of that beloved City, or Holy City Jerusalem, which is also as
clear that it was a Prophecy of the last times, if we compare Ezekiel with it;
so that both Ezekiel and John in their Discoveries of the Prophecy of the last
times, do show, that there was a Temple as well as a City; and so I shall pass
to the third and last Reason.

The Third Reason why there is to be a Temple at the last and general return of
the Jews, is from the words of the Apostle Paul unto the Thessalonians, where
the Apostle says, That the Man of Sin shall sit in the Temple of God, which
Temple is the glorious holy Mountain before mentioned, even the Temple
Jerusalem, as Dan. 11.45. and that this Temple, and the Man of Sin, is to be in
the laft Age, is clear, for the Man of Sin is to be destroyed, says the
Apostle, by the brightness of his coming, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. Dan. 7.9, 10, 11, 12.
until the which time of Christ's coming he shall assume to make the Temple the
Throne of his Glory; and so these are the three Reasons in brief why there
shall be a Temple built as well as a City; First, because the Lord showed
Ezekiel a Temple after the Vision of the dry Bones, which was the last return
of the Captives.

Secondly, He showed John one, and appointed him to measure it in his Vision.
And,

Thirdly, By the revelation of the Holy Spirit says, the Man of Sin shall make
his Seat there, and hold it till Christ comes. Moreover, the Prophet Malachy
says, That the Lord that was looked for shall suddenly come into his Temple.
And so much briefly, to prove that the Jews shall return again to build their
City and Temple.

The manner of the Rise of the Man of Sin, called the Vile Penson, or the
Antichrist, proved not to be the Romish Babylon.
Secondly, The manner of the arising of the Man of Sin, he shall arise out of
the Fourth and last Monarchy, the which Fourth Monarchy shall consist of seven
Heads, that is, the whole Monarchy shall be ruled by seven unanimously, by
Royal authority, but in this unanimous agreement, or seventh Head, shall
continue but a little space, but one of the Seven shall make himself the
Eighth, and yet of the Seventh, and shall go into perdition; and this is that
which was set forth in that Image that Daniel saw, Dan. 2. but more plainly
laid down in the lowest part of the Image, as in the Feet and Toes, ver. 41.42,
43. and in the midst of those Kings (that is) while those Kings are a striving
for their Dignity, the God of Heaven will set up a Kingdom, The manner of the
Man of Sins arising.
which shall break and destroy that great King Gog, which shall be the Eighth
and last. Moreover, this vile Person, or Man of Sins rise, is with all
deceiveableness, and unrighteousness, fair words, and feigned speeches,
deceiving the hearts of the simple; and before he comes to be this Eighth
and last King, he is but a Little Horn, full of eyes, Dan. 7.7, 8. professing
Knowledge and Light in the Mystery of God, and yet at last he has a mouth
given him to speak great words against the God of Heaven. The very manner of
his arising does declare him to be a great Person at the last, for at his first
arising three of the Ten Horns were plucked up by the root, that is, three
Kingdoms do fall before him, or are resigned up into his hands, and so grows
great, and by that means he comes to be one of the Seven that shall rule the
whole Monarchy, and shall not be contented with that, as I have showed you, but
by his power shall take away the other Six parts, and so changing the
Government from the hands of seven into one, he is called the Eighth, and of
the Seventh, and so shall remain till the Son of Righteousness shall dismiss
his Reign, by casting him off into the Lake of fire, Dan. 7.8. compare verse
24. chapter 8.25. Revel. 17.11. He shall succeed in time the raiser of Taxes, but
they shall not give him the power or honor of the Kingdom, but by flattery
shall he obtain it, not by a joint consent of the people of the Province, but
shall receive his Power and Authority by a small number of people. And when he
has entered into the fattest place of the Province he shall break League,
Covenant, and Protestation, and work deceitfully; yet to carry on his design
he shall do that which his Father has not done, nor his Fathers Father; for
by stirring up of his courage and valor, he shall take much riches out of the
Southern Country, and to get the affections of those people of the Province
where he lives, he will scatter the Prey amongst them, to the end that his
Army may grow great, that thereby he may take strong Holds, and senced Cities;
and this is the very way whereby he shall grow great, and be helped forward,
and exalted into the Throne, even in the holy Mountain, Dan. 11.24, 25. ver.
43.45. and so by his Victories he shall grow great, and exalt himself, and at
last exalt himself above God, and shall honor the god of Forces, that is, look
upon the power of his Army, to be the great Power, that is to say, by his own
strength he has obtained that which he does enjoy, and so shall puff out
great swelling words of vanity against the God of gods, acknowledging no other
God but himself, and shall place his Throne above the Stars of Heaven; for the
proof of it, see these Scriptures as follows, Isa. 14.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17,
18, 19, 20. Dan. 11.36, 37, 38, 39. 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. Revel. 17.11. compare
fourteen, Also to carry on his design, he shall have a false Prophet that
shall work great Signs and Wonders to deceive those that have not narrowly
looked into the Scriptures, and are not well grounded therein, for it is the
great Hour of temptation to try all them that dwell upon the face of the earth,
Revel. 3.10, 11. Great Pharaoh was a lively Type of this last and great Enemy
of Israel, for we may find that he had many Magicians which did many lying
Signs and Wonders to harden the hearts of his People, Exodus 7.11, 12. So has
the Man of Sin a false Prophet, as I have showed you before, and also in his
Province many that can work by Magic Art, which love to be in Kings Courts, as
Pharaohs Magicians did; and that there shall be lying Signs or Wonders in that
time, see these few Scriptures in the room of more, Dan. 8.25. Mat. 24.24.
Revel. 13.14, 15, 16. Chap. 16.14. So by these signs and lying Wonders he shall
make the World believe that he is the Christ, until both he and his false
Prophets shall be taken alive, and cast into the Lake that burns with fire
and brimston.

If it should be Objected and said, That this is meant of the Romish Babylon,
I shall give you three Reasons by the which you may see that the Man of Sin, or
the last Antichrist before mentioned, is not the Romish Babylon.

First is, The Man of Sin proved not to be the Romish Babylon; by Reasons
followfng.
because in Scripture the Lord gives the Romish Babylon the name of a Woman,
but in all places of Scripture he calls the last and great Antichrist by the
name of a Man; and I will prove these two in order, the which will make good
the first Reason. Come down and sit in the dust, O Virgin daughter of Babylon,
thy nakedness shall be uncovered, thy shame shall be seen, I will take
vengeance, and will not meet thee as a man, Isa. 47.1, 2, 3. See more verse. 9.
Jer. 51.8. Prove. 2.16, 17, 18. Chap. 3.4, 5. See more, Revel. 17.4. And the
Woman was arrayed in Purple and Scarlet, upon her forehead was a name written,
Mystery, Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots, and abominations of the
earth, verse. 5. And I saw the Woman drunken with the blood of the Saints, and
Martyrs of Jesus, verse. 6. See more, Chap. 18.3, 4. Isa. 51.18, 19. And the
next thing to prove is, That the Antichrist is called by the name of Man, as
you may see, Isa. 14.12. compare 16. How art thou fallen from Heaven, thou
Lucifer, Son of the Morning? how art thou cut down to the ground, thou that
did weaken Kingdoms? They that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee, and
consider thee, saying, Is not this the man that made the Earth to tremble, that
did shake Kingdoms? And so as the Scriptures did foresee that he would assume
to himself such a Power, was pleased to style him by the name Man, as you may
see in the Scriptures following, Ezekiel. 38.17. Dan. 11.24. 2 These. 2.3. From
these Scriptures you may see, that the last Beast, which is the Antichrist, is
called by the name Man, and that the Romish Babylon is called by the name
Woman. And so I pass to the second Reason.

Secondly, The great and last Antichrist, or the Man of Sin, cannot be taken
for the Romish Babylon, because the Romish Babylon did, and does acknowledge
God, and his Son Christ, although they worship him in a false manner; but the
great and last Antichrist acknowledges no God, neither will he Worship any,
but exalt himself above every god and acknowledges no God but himself, who
shall be then the God of Forces, and as the Prophet Daniel says of him, The
King shall do what he list, he shall exalt himself against all that is God,
and shall speak mavelous things against the God of gods, and shall prosper
till the wrath be accomplished, for the determination is made, Dan. 11.36, 37.
2 These. 2.4. Dan. 7.8. Jude 5. From hence you may see, that this last and great
Antichrist shall advance himself above every god, not acknowledging the God of
Heaven; but the Romish Babylon as aforesaid, does acknowledge a God, and
Worship him, though in a false manner. And so much briefly to the second Reason.

The Third and last Reason why the great and last Antichrist may not be took
for the Romish Babylon, is, because the Romish Babylon shall be destroyed by
the ten Horns of the last Beast, that is to say, by Ten Kings that have
supported her; or in a word thus, That the Romish Babylon shall be destroyed
before the appearance of Jesus Christ, but the great and last Antichrist shall
not be destroyed until the Lord Jesus come and destroy him upon the Mountains
of Israel, as I shall show you in his time, and place. And now to prove that
the Romish Babylon shall be destroyed before the coming of Christ, you shall
see it out of Revel. 17.16. And the Ten Horns that thou saw upon the Beast,
shall hate the Whore, and make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh,
and burn her with fire, for God has put it into their hearts to fulfill his
will, and agree, and give their Kingdom unto the Beast, until the words of God
shall be fulfilled, verse. 17. And the Woman that thou saw is that great City
that reigns over the Kings of the earth. And you may also see more from
Revel. 18.9. and more might be added, but this to prove briefly, That the
Romish Babylon shall be destroyed before the coming of Christ, by the Ten
Horns that support the Beast, for which cause the Romish Merchants, (viz.) her
Clergy, and the Kings of the Earth, shall weep for her, and lust after her,
although the Beast shall overpower them, and make them destroy her; but the
Heavens shall rejoice over her, and the Holy Apostles (that is the Churches
then in being, and the Gospel-Messengers) showing clearly, That the Romish
Babylon shall be destroyed before the appearance of Christ, Revelations 18.19,
20.

The next thing to prove is, That the Man of Sin, or that great and last
Antichrist, is to remain until the coming of Christ; so says the Apostle, That
the Lord shall destroy him with the brightness of his coming. And so says Dan.
7.9, 10, 11. Chap. 11.41. compare Chap. 12.1, 2. Revel. 19.19, 20. so from
these Scriptures you may see plainly, That the Man of Sin shall remain till the
very time that Christ shall take his great Power and Reign; so that neither of
these Opinions can be true, that says, That the Romish Babylon is the
Antichrist, or that says, That the last and great Antichrist is risen, and
already past. So thus I have proved the last Antichrist not to be Babylon. A
word or two to prove him to be called the King of Babylon, or the King of
Assyria, and that you may see, the Prophet Esaias has the title of both in the
fourteenth Chapter, and verse fourth, in these words, Thou shall take up this
Proverb against the King of Babylon, and say, How has the Oppressor ceased?
how has the golden City ceased? the Lord has broken the staff of the wicked,
and the scepter of the Ruler, verse. 5. He who smote the people with a continual
stroke, he that ruled the Nations in anger, is per secuted, and none hinders,
verse. 6. So here we see he is called the King of Babylon; and in verse 24, 25,
26. in these words, The Lord of Host has sworn saying, Surely as I have
thought so shall it come to pass, and as I have purposed it shall stand, that
I will break the Assyrian in my Land, and upon my Mountains tread him under
foot, then shall his yoke depart from them, and his burden depart from off
their shoulders. This is the purpose that is purposed upon the whole Earth.
Hence you may see, that he is also called the Assyrian, and that you may see it
is meant the last Antichrist before spoken of, from the fourteenth Verse of the
same Chapter, and fifteenth. And see more, verse. 32. in these words, What shall
one then answer the Messengers of the Nations, for the Lord has founded Sion,
and the poor of the people shall trust in it. And that foundation in Sion, or
Sion so founded, so as it may be an object for the people to trust in, which
will not be until the Lord Jesus is laid as a foundation, or set as a King
upon the Holy Hill of Sion; and then the poor of the people shall trust in him,
and lie down under the shadow of his wings in peace, and none make them afraid;
and so much briefly as to the discovery of the manner of the rise of the Man of
Sin, and also for the proving of him not to be the Romish Babylon, and so pass
briefly to the Third, which is the discovery of the taking of the City and
Temple from the Jews for a small time.

The spoiling of the Jews for a swall time, and the taking of their City and
Temple.
Now when the Jews are returned into their own Land, and have brought their
substance with them, and having no King amongst them, the Man of Sin shall have
this evil thought come into his mind for to take from them their substance,
and to make Jerusalem the throne of his glory, professing himself to be the
King they wait for, but through their knowledge they will not believe him to be
their King, for the which cause he shall spoil them, and take away by force
their City, setting up his Seat in the glorious holy Mount. I shall give you
some lively Prophecies that shall make good this Particular, as brief as may
be, In that day, says the Lord, I will assemble her that halteth, and her that
was driven out, and her that was afflicted, now why do thou cry out aloud, is
there no Knig in thee? Is thy Counselor perished? for pains have taken thee,
as a woman in travel. Be in pain and labor to bring forth, O Daughter of Sion,
like a Woman in travel, for now thou shall go forth out of the City and dwell
in the field, and thou shall go even to Babylon, there shall thou be delivered,
there shall the Lord deliver thee from the hands of the enemies; now therefore
are many Nations gathered against thee, that say, Let her be defiled, and let
our eyes look unto Sion, but they know not the thoughts of the Lord, neither
understand they his counsel, for he shall gather them as sheaves into the
floor; arise and thresh O daughter of Sion, for I will make thy Horn Iron, and
thy hoofes Brass, and thou shall beat in pieces many people, and I will
consecrate thy gain unto the Lord, and thy substance unto the Lord of the whole
earth, Micha 4.6, 7. compare verses 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. You may see also from
Ezekiel 38.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. in these words, Be thou prepared, and prepare
for thy self, thou and all thy company that are assembled unto thee, be thou a
guard unto them, after many days thou shall be visited, in the latter years
thou shall come into the Land, that is brought back from the sword, and is
gathered out from many people against the Mountains of Israel, which have been
always wast, but it is brought forth out of the Nations, and they shall dwell
safely all of them, thou shall ascend and come like a storm, thou shall be like
a Cloud to cover the Land, thou and all thy bands, and many people with thee;
thus says the Lord, It shall come to pass, that at the same time shall things
come into thy mind, and thou shall think an evil thought, and thou shall say,
I will go up into the Land of unwalled Villages, I will go to them that are at
rest, that dwell safely, all of them dwelling without walls, having neither bars
nor gates, to take a spoil, to take a prey, to turn thine hand upon the
desolate places that are now inhabited, and upon the people that are gathered
out of the Nations, which have gotten Cattle, and Gods, and that dwell in the
midst of the Land.

Hence we may see, that after Isreal's last and general return, and their
bringing their riches with them, as they once did out of the Land of Egypt,
that this Gog, which is the great and last Antichrist, as you may see, for he
says it is in the latter days, even in the very last before the coming of
Christ, as you may see, Ezekiel. 38.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. And that he shall take the
prey, and spoil Israel for a small time, even until Christ deliver them, is
clear from the Prophet Zecharies words, Zech. 14.1, 2, 3, 4. Behold the day of
the Lord cemeth, and thy spoil shall be divided in the midst of thee, and I
will gather all Nations against Jerusalem to battle, and the Cities shall be
taken, and the Houses rifled, and the Women ravished, and half of the City
shall go into Captivity, and the residue of the people shall not be cut off
from the City, then shall the Lord go forth and fight against those Nations, as
when he fought in the day of Battle, and his feet in that day shall stand upon
the Mount of Olives, which is over against Jerusalem; From these Prophecies you
may see that the Man, that great and last Antichrist shall spoil the Jews for a
small time, and take from them their City, and place his Tabernacle in the
glorious holy Mountain, Dan. 11.45. which the Apostle Paul says shall be the
Temple, for that will be the place of his Seat or Tabernacle, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
Much more might be said to this Particular, but I hasten to the Fourth
Particular, in the which I shall discover the manner of the rising of the Sun
of Righteousness, and the gathering together of his Army; and shall also prove
that he is a man, and so he shall come and reign. But to pass that, and to
the thing in hand, which is the manner of his arising, and the gathering of his
Army.

The manner of the Sun of Righteousness arising, and the gathering together of
his Army.
When the full appointed time of the Father shall approach, and the measure of
Sin is full, or Iniquity at the height, (as now it is getting up a great pace,
by reason of a generation of ungodly men, that deny that there is any God or
Devil, and so take liberty to profaneness) then the Lord shall send his Son,
even the anointed man (or the Man Christ Jesus) for so he may be properly
called, for as man he did rise from the Dead, and as man he did eat and drink
with his Disciples; as man he ascended, and sat at the right hand of the
Father, and as man shall descend and Judge the World, and reign; and as man he
shall deliver up the Mediatorship unto the Father, and be in subjection to the
Father, when he has so delivered it up, Luke 24.39 compare verse. 42, 43. Acts
3.20. Chap. 17.31. 1 Cor. 15.24, 25, 26, 27, 28. from hence you may see if you
well perusethese Scriptures, that the Lord Jesus our King, as he was a man, and
is, so he shall reign as a Man, although the Man of men, as we may so say,
being the first born from the dead; for consider him as God, he cannot be sent,
nor appointed by any, neither be in subjection unto any, but being a man, in
whom the Godhead is completed in, he is in a capacity to be sent by the
Supreme and Almighty Father; but now to the manner of his coming to redeem
Israel, and restore them into their Kingdom, when he is risen, from the right
hand of the Father, he shall appear in the Clouds, and shall cause the Angel to
sound the Trump, even the last and great Trump, at the which sound all the
godly that are asleep in the dust shall forthwith arise, (and no more, for the
rest of the Dead lived not again until the thousand years were finished, Rev
20.5,) and then all the living (even such as are godly) shall forthwith be
changed, and caught up to meet the Lord in the air; but the ungodly Dead shall
lie in the dust, and the ungodly Quick shall remain upon earth, which makes
good the words of our blessed Savior, Two shall be in a bed, the one taken,
and the other left; two in a field, the one taken, and the other left, Matthew.
24.31. Compare verse 40, 41. 1 Thessalonians. 4.14, 15, 16, 17. Rev. 1.7. chap. 20.5.
So when Christ has thus raised the dead Saints, and changed the living into a
glorious immortal state, then shall they forthwith be caught up into the
Clouds, and meet with the glorious Angels, and so shall become that glorious
Army that John saw, Revel. 19.11. in these words, And I saw Heaven opened, and
behold a white Horse, and he that sat upon him was called faithful and true,
in Righteousness does he judge, and make war, and the Armies which were in
Heaven followed him upon white Horses, clothed in fine Linen, white and
clean, verse 14. Thus shall he ride in great glory triumphantly in the air,
till he comes over against the Mount of Olives, and there shall he descend
with his glorious innumerable Army that follow him, and there shall he be the
great King, or Prince Royal of the whole World, agreeing to the Prophecy of
Scriptures that Prophecy concerning him, Behold, the Lord my God shall come,
and all his Saints with him, and his feet shall stand in that day upon the
Mount of Olives, Zech. 14.4, 5. When the Son of Man shall come in his glory,
with all his holy Angels, then shall he sit in the throne of his glory, Matthew.
25.31. Also Enoch the seventh from Adam, prophesied saying, The Lord comes
with ten thousand of his Saints, Jude 14. and when the Jews shall see him come
in this excellent glory, then shall that saying written concerning the Jews
come to pass, Lo this is our God, we have waited for him, he will save us,
this is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his
Salvation, Esa. 25.9. so that this will be the voice of them that remain in the
City, and as for those that are Captivated by the Man of sin, they shall be
redeemed out of the Land of their enemies by the Lord Jesus himself; at that
time shall that saying be fulfilled that is written, The redeemed of the Lord
shall come to Sion, with Songs and everlasting joy upon their heads, they shall
obtain joy, and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall fly away, Isa. 35.10.
Chap. 51.11. So much briefly as touching the manner of the Son of Righteousness
arising, and the gathering of his Army, and so pass to the Fifth Particular,
which is the engagement of the two Armies, namely, the Son of Righteousness,
and the Man of Sin, with the total overthrow of the Man of Sin upon the
Mountains of Israel, and the restoration of the Kingdom into Isreal's hands.

The great War upon the Mountains of Israel, and the destruction of the last
Antichrist.
Now as to the engagement of the two Armies, And I saw the Beast, and the Kings
of the earth, and their Armies gathered together to make War against him that
sat on the Horse, and against his Army, and the Beast was taken, and with him
the false Prophet that wrought Miracles before him, with which he deceived them
that had received the mark of the Beast, and them that worshipped his Image;
these both were cast alive into a Lake of fire burning with brimston, Rev.
19.20, 21. From hence we may see, the Lord Jesus Christ comes full of fury and
wrath, as the Prophet says of him, Behold the name of the Lord comes from
far, his face is burning, and the burden thereof is heavy, his lips are full
of indignation, and his tongue as a devouring fire, his breath as an
overflowing stream shall reach to the midst of the neck, to sift the Nation
with the five of vanity, and put a bridle in their jaws, causing them to err,
Isa. 30.27, 28. Again you see, Isa. 63.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Who is he that comes
from Edom in dyed Garments from Bozra, that is glorious in his apparel,
traveling in the greatness of his strength? I that speak in righteousness,
mighty to save; wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like
him that treads the Wine Press? I have trodden the Wine Press alone, and of
the people there was none with me; for I will tread them in mine anger, and
trample them in my fury, and their blood shall stain all my raiment, for the
day of vengeance is in mine heart, and the year of my Redeemed is come; I
looked but there was none to help, and I wondered that there was none to
uphold, therefore my own arm brought Salvation, and my fury it upheld me; for
he put on Righteousness as a Brestplate, and as a Helmet of Salvation upon his
head, and he put on the garment of Vengeance for clothing, and was clad with
Zeal as a Cloak; according to their deeds, accordingly he will repay fury to
his Adversaries, recompense to his Enemies, to the Islands he will repay
recompense, for it is the year of the Lords vengeance, and the year of
recompense for the controversy of Sion; I beheld till the Thrones were cast
down, and the ancient of days did sit, whose garment was white as Snow, and the
hair of his head like unto pure Wool, his Throne was like the fiery flame, and
his Wheels like burning fire; a fiery flame issued and came forth from before
him, thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
stood before him; the Judgment was set, and the Books were opened. I beheld
then because of the noise and great words which the Horn spoke, I beheld even
until the Beast was slain, and his body destroyed and given to the burning
flame; let the Heathen be awaked and come down to the valley of Jehoshaphat,
for there will I sit to judge all the Heathen round about; put you in the
Sickle, for the Harvest is ripe, come get you down, for the Press is full, the
fat over-floweth, for the wickedness is great, multitudes in the valley of
Decision, for the day of the Lord is near in the valley of Decision; and the
Angel thrust in his Sickle into the earth, and gathered the Vine of the earth
and cast it into the great Wine Press of the Wrath of God, and the Wine Press
was trodden without the City, and blood came out of the Wine Press even to the
Horse bridles, by the space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs, Isa. 59.16,
17, 18. Chap. 34.8. Dan. 7.9, 10, 11. Joel 3.11, 12, 13, 14. Rev. 14.19, 20.
From hence you may see what great slaughter the Lord will make with that great
Antichrist and his Army, when he comes to try Sions Controversy. Moreover,
see from the Prophet Ezekiel, Therefore thou Son of Man Prophecy against Gog,
and say, Thus says the Lord, behold I am against thee O Gog, the chief Prince
of Mesheck and Tubal, I will turn thee back, and leave but the sixth part of
thee, and will cause thee to come up from the North parts, and will bring thee
upon the Mountains of Israel, and I will smite thy how out of thy left hand,
and cause thine Arrow to fall out of thy right hand; thou shall fall upon the
Mountains of Israel, thou and all thy Bands, and the people that is with thee:
I will give thee unto the ravenous Birds of every sort, and unto the Beast of
the field to be devoured, thou shall fall upon the open field, for I have
spoken it says the Lord. And thou Son of Man, thus says the Lord speak unto
every fethered Fowl, and to every Beast of the Field, assemble your selves, and
come gather your selves on every side to my Sacrifice, that I do Sacrifice to
you, even a great Sacrifice upon the Mountains of Israel, that you may eat
flesh, and drink blood; ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink the
blood of the Princes of the earth, of Rams, of Lambs, and of Goats, of
Bullocks, all of them the fatlings of Bashan, and ye shall eat fat till ye be
filled, and drink blood till ye be drunken of my Sacrifice which I have
Sacrificed for you, Ezekiel. 39.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Compare verse 17, 18, 19. Isa.
34.5, 6. all which Scriptures, and many more, do show that great destruction,
and total fall that the last and great Antichrist shall have upon the Mountains
of Israel. A word or two to show that the Jesus the King shall restore their
Kingdom into their hands, even the Jews; He shall stand and feed in the
strength of the Lord, and in the Majesty of the name of his God, and they shall
abide, for now shall he he great unto the ends of the earth, and this man
shall be our peace, when the Assyrians shall come into our Land, and when he
shall tread in our Palaces; the Lord of Host has sworn saying, Surely so
shall it come to pass, as I have purposed so shall it stand, that I will break
the Assyrian in my Land, and upon my Mountains tread him under foot, then
shall his yoke depart from off them, and his burden depart from off their
shoulders, for the Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel,
and set them into their own Land, and the strangers shall be joined with them,
and they shall cleave to the House of Jacob, and the people shall take them and
bring them to their place, and the House of Israel shall possess them in the
Land of the Lord, for, Servants and Handmaids, and they shall take them
Captives whose Captives they were, and they shall rule over their Oppressors,
Isa. 14.1, 2, 3. compare 24, 25. verses. So we may see, that it was no Childish
question that Christ's Disciples asked him, whether he would at that time
restore the Kingdom to Israel, though it were a matter too inquisitive for them
to ask such a question, for to know the Times and Seasons; but here you may
see, that there is an appointed time of the Father in the which it should be
accomplished; and indeed David was a lively Type of Christ, which had no sooner
dispaced the Jebusites, and cast them out of Sion, but he made it his own Seat,
and the place for his Family. So likewise it will be with the Lord Jesus, that
no sooner shall he appear upon the Mountains of Israel, but he shall destroy
that last and great Jebusite, or the Man of Sin, or the great and last
Amichrist, more properly called, and give it unto the Jews for a Possession,
that they may dwell there and have it in possession; The seed also of his
Servants shall inherit it, and they that love his name shall dwell therein,
Psalm. 69.35, 36. so that hence I have discovered briefly that great War upon
the Mountains of Israel, with the total ruin of the last and great Antichrist,
and the restoration of the Kingdom into the hands of Israel; and leaving of
these few Scriptures for the further proof of this thing, I shall pass to the
Sixth Particular. Isa. 33.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Ezekiel. 38.18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Rev.
11.10. chap. 6.15.

The glorious Reign of Christ and his Saints upon Earth a thousand years.
The Discovery of the glorious Reign of Christ the great King, and the Saints
upon the Earth, and the great peace that shall be in his day.

Christian Friend, here is that, the consideration whereof is sufficient to
bear up thy spirit in the worst of times, it was that which made the Apostle
Paul not count his life dear to him that he might finish his course with joy,
so that he was contented to suffer with him, because he knew he should reign
with him; but for the better understanding of this glorious reign, I shall
divide this subject into several parts.

The first is, That Christ shall reign as King on the Earth, even in Jerusalem.

Secondly, That the Saints shall have an high Prerogative, so as to reign on
earth, even as Christ. And

Thirdly, I shall put these two together, with some other considerable
particulars, showing you that Christ and the Saints Dominion shall be alike,
and that they shall reign alike, they being joint Heirs of one and the same
Kingdom alike, only he in all things shall have the pre-eminence; and so I
pass to the first, That Christ shall have a Kingdom on earth, and in
Jerusalem. This we may see the Angel did declare, or make known unto the
Virgin, saying, For lo, thou shall conceive in thy Womb, and bear a Son, and
thou shall call his name Jesus, he shall he great, and he called the Son of
the most High, and the Lord God shall give unto him the Throne of his Father
David, and he shall reign over the House of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom
shall be no end, Luke 1.31, 32, 33. From hence you may see, that the Lord Jesus
Christ shall enjoy David's Throne, which was not Spiritual, and in Heaven, but
on earth, and in Jerusalem; even so the Lord Jesus Christ in the same place
shall reign Spiritually and Temporally over the very same people; the Prophet
also affirming the very same thing says, Then shall the Sun be ashamed, and
the Moon confounded, when the Lord of Host shall reign in Mount Sion and in
Jerusalem, before his ancients gloriously, for behold the day comes says the
Lord, that I will raise up unto David a righteous branch, a King shall reign
and prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice in the earth, in his day
shall Judah be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is the name
whereby they shall call him, the Lord our righteousness. Isa. 24.23. Jer.
23.5, 6. Thus you may see plainly, that the Lord Jesus which is called the Son
of David, shall possess the Throne of David. Moreover, you may see what the
Prophet Micha also says to the proof of this truth, In that day says the Lord
I will assemble her that halteth, and gather her that is driven out, and her
that I have afflicted, and I will make her that halteth a remnant, and her that
was cast off, a strong Nation, and the Lord shall reign over them in Mount
Sion, for henseforth and for ever, and there was given him Dominion, and Glory,
and a Kingdom, that all People, Nations, and Languages should serve him;
agreeing with the Psalmist which says, Yet will I set my King upon my holy
Hill of Sion, I will declare the Decree, the Lord has said unto me, Thou art
my Son, this day have I begotten thee; ask of me, and I will give thee the
Heathen for thine inheritance, and the outmost parts of the earth for thy
possession; thou shall break them with a rod of Iron, and dash them in pieces
like a Potters vessel, Psalm. 2.6, 7, 8, 9. Dan. 7.14. Micha 4.6, 7. For behold,
I create new Heavens, and a new Earth, and the former shall not be remembered,
nor come into mind, but be you glad and rejoice in the thing which I create,
for behold I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy, and I will
rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people, and the voice of weeping shall be
no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying, and he shall stand and feed in
the strength of the Lord, and in the Majesty of the name of the Lord his God,
and they shall abide, for now shall he be great to the ends of the earth, Isa.
65.17, 18, 19. Psalm. 67.4. Jerem. 3.17. Isa. 62.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. These
Scriptures, and many more that might be added to the proof of the first
Particular, That the Lord Jesus Christ shall reign on the earth in Jerusalem.

The second thing is to prove, That the Saints also shall receive a Kingdom,
and reign on earth. Unto the proof of this I shall begin with the words of our
blessed Savior, which says, Ye are they that have continued with me in my
temptations, I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me,
that ye may eat and drink at my Table in my Kingdom, and sit upon Thrones
judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. Whereunto he adds also another sentence in
the Apocalypse, very pertinent to the proof of this, saying, He that overcomes,
and keeps my works to the end, I will give him power over the Nations, and
he shall rule them with a rod of Iron, and shall break them like a Potters
Vessel, even as I have received of my Father, Luke 22.28, 29, 30. Revel. 2.26,
27, 28. From hence we may see, that as the Lord gave unto his Son Jesus, a
Kingdom in reference to his Sufferings, and his obedience unto him; even so
Jesus the Christ will give his people a Kingdom, in reference to their
sufferings, and obedience to his will; and that this is to be on Eatth I shall
give you a plain text, even as says the Spirit of Christ in these words, And
they sung a new Song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the Book, and to open the
Seals thereof, because thou wast killed, and have redeemed us to God, by thy
blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation, and have made
us to our God Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on the earth. Moreover,
they shall enjoy that Sovereignty so long as the Sun and Moon indures, for so
says the Lord, by his Prophet, in these words, And in the days of those
Kingdoms shall the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom that shall never be
destroyed, and this Kingdom shall not be given to another people, but it shall
break and destroy all these Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever, and the
Kingdom, and Dominion, and Greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heavens
shall be given to the Saints of the most High, whose Kingdom is an everlasting
Kingdom, and all people shall serve and obey him, Dan. 2.44. Cap. 7.27, 28.
Revel. 5.10. from these Scriptures we may see, that the Saints shall enjoy a
Kingdom, in the which they shall reign, and rule the Nations with a rod of
Iron; so that the wicked shall be as ashes under the soals of their feet. And
this Kingdom also we see is to be held on earth, neither can there be any other
interpretations given upon these Scriptures without great abuse to the plain
meaning of the Spirit in these Scriptures. If it be objected and said, That
these Scriptures bespeak, or fore-shew the flourishing condition of the people
of God, while they live in this corrupt Tabernacle of flesh, I shall deny, and
make this answer, That it is the portion of the Saints (nay all of them) to
suffer in this Life, and the nigher the appearance of Jesus Christ, the greater
shall the suffering be, so that through many tribulations they shall enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven, Dan. 7.21. 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. Acts 14.22. 2 Timothy 3.12. Rev:
6.9, 10, 11. and many more Scriptures I might give as to the proof of this, for
there shall be such Trials for the godly, that should not the days be
shortened, no flesh would be saved, but the Lord shall cut the work short in
righteousness, so that when his people are in great trouble, then he shall
stand up as a Deliverer, Dan. 11.1. Matthew. 24.21.22. View well these
Scriptures, and you shall see that that opinion is false, that affirms, That
the Saints shall flourish in such a condition before mentioned, while they live
in this corrupted Tabernacle of flesh; and so I pass to the Third Particular,
showing you how Christ and the Saints, shall reign together in the Kingdom, and
shall begin with the words of the Apostle, which says, that the Saints are
joynt-heirs with Jesus Christ, in these words, If Sons then Heirs, Heirs of
God, and Joynt-heirs with Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may
be glorified together, Romans 8.16, 17. Now we know a Joynt-heir is an equal
sharer, or when two are made alike in the enjoyment of one thing, for so faith
the Apostle, Now are we the Sons of God, but it does not appear what we shall
be, but when he shall appear we shall be made like him, 1 John 3.1, 2, 3, 4.
they shall be like him in Glory, in Majesty, in Honor; in a word, every way
like him, only he in all things shall have the pre-eminence. Moreover, I shall
add a plain text of Scripture, in the which we shall see that the Saints and
Christ shall reign together, in these words, Blessed and holy is he that has
part in the first Resurrection, for on such the second Death shall have no
power, but they shall be the Priests of God, and of Christ, and reign with him
a thousand years. The which also agrees with the words of the Prophet, that
says, A King shall reign in Righteousness, and Princes shall decree Judgment,
and Saviors shall come up of Mount Sion, and judge the Mount of Esau, and the
Kingdoms shall be the Lords, Revel. 20.6. Isa. 32.1. Obadiah 21. therefore let
the Saints be joyful in glory, let them sing aloud upon their beds, let the
high praise of God be in their mouths, and a twoedged sword in their hands, to
execute vengeance upon the Heathen, and punishment upon the people, to bind the
Kings in chains, and the Nobles in fetters of Iron, that they may execute upon
them the Indgement that is written, this honor have all the Saints, praise ye
the Lord; so that it is a faithful saying, if we suffer with him, we shall also
reign with him, Psalm. 149.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. 2 Timothy 2, 12. So having showed that
Christ and the Saints shall reign together unanimously; I shall also show you
that excellent peace that there shall be in the time of his reign throughout
the Earth, as says the Prophet, The whole Earth is at rest and quiet, they
shall break forth into singing, the Mountains and Hills shall bring peace unto
the people, by Justice he shall judge the poor of the people, and he shall
save the Children of the needy, and subdue the Oppressors, they shall fear thee
so long as the Sun and Moon indureth, from generation to generation; he shall
come down like the rain upon the new-mowen Grass, and as the showers that
water the earth, in his days shall the righteous flourish, and abundance of
peace so long as the Moon indureth; his Dominion shall be from sea to sea, and
from the rivers to the ends of the earth, and they that dwell in the Wilderness
shall kneel before him, and his enemies shall lick up the dust; in that day it
shall be said, we have a strong City, salvation has the Lord appointed for
Walls and Bulworks; open ye the Gate that the righteous Nation that keeps
the truth may enter in; thou will keep him in perfect peace whose mind is
stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee, Isa. 14.7. Psalm. 72.3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9. Isa. 26.1, 2, 3. From hence we may see, what great peace there shall be
in the term of Christ's reign; there is good reason why there shall be such
great peace, upon these two accounts; the first is, Because the Devil shall be
bound, and shall not stir up Nations to War, which is his practice when he
is loose. The second Reason is, Because that at the great destruction of God,
(the Great Antichrist) all the Weapons of War shall be burnt, and those that
remain which were not brought up to War upon the Mountains of Israel, shall
be converted into other service; namely, Their Swords shall be beat into
Plowshares, and their Spears into pruning hooks, for Nation shall not rise up
against Nation, neither shall they learn war any more, Ezekiel. 39.9, 10. Isa.
2.4. Mich. 4.3. Revel. 20.3. From hence it comes to pass, that the people in
that day shall be led forth in peace, and the Mountains shall break forth
before them into singing, then shall the Law go forth out of Sion, and the Word
of the Lord out of thy Jerusalem; then shall the saying be made good that is
written, All thy Children shall be taught of God, and great shall be the peace
of thy Children. So that be will extend peace to her like a River, and the
glory of the Gentiles like a flowing stream, Isa. 2.3. cap. 54.13. cap. 55.12.
Isa. 66.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Psalm. 127.7. and. 125.5. Nah. 1.15. and so I shall
leave these Scriptures, and the Fourth, and pass to the Fifth thing in order,
which is to show you the people whom Christ and the Saints shall thus rule with
a rod of Iron, and that is the ungodly, even such as have afflicted the people
of God, and the Sons of them who have afflicted the people of God, for so says
the Prophet, The Sons also of them that afflicted thee shall come bending unto
thee, and all they that despised thee shall fall down at the soals of thy feet,
and they shall call thee the City of the Lord, the Sion of the holy one of
Israel. Agreeing with that of Malachy, To you that fear my Name shall, the Sun
of righteousness arise with healing under his wings, and ye shall grow forth
like Calves in the shall, and ye shall tread down the wicked, for they shall
be like dust under the soals of your feet, for thus says the Lord, after this
glory has he sent me unto the Nations which spoiled you, for he that touches
you touches the apple of mine eye, for behold, I will lift up my hands upon
them, and they shall be a spoil to their Servants, and ye shall know that the
Lord of Host has sent me. Sing and rejoice, O Daughter of Sion, for I will
come and dwell in the midst of thee, faith the Lord, Mal. 4.2, 3, 4. Zech. 2.8,
9, 10. Hence you may see, that the enemies of God and his people shall be
subdued by Christ, and the Saints, like as the Egyptians of old were spoiled
by the Israelites when they came out of Egypt, so shall all the ungodly
Egyptians be spoiled at the last, as you may see, Exodus 3.22. Cap. 11.2. Isa.
33.1, 2, 3. When Israel was to go out of the Land of Egypt, the Lord commanded
them to ask every one of his Neighbor jewels of Silver and jewels of Gold, and
the Lord gave them favor in the sight of the Egyptians, so that they did
obtain what they demanded; by the which the Israelites were enriched by the
spoil of the Egyptians; and so it shall be at that day, with the people of
God, they shall enjoy the spoil of their enemies, for they are the true Heirs
to the riches of the World present, and that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. 1 Corinthians. 3.22. Math. 19, 29. So that they shall eat the riches of the
Gentiles, as also says the Scriptures, Ye shall be named the Priests of the
Lord, and men shall call you the Ministers of our God, ye shall eat the riches
of the Gentiles, and be exalted with their glory, Isa. 61.6. Here we see, that
the Lord is pleased to give them the riches of the Gentiles, (that is to say,
the riches of Sinners) that although they heap up Silver like the dust, and
raiment like the clay, yet the just shall put it on, and the innocent shall
divide the Silver, so that their gain shall be consecrated to the Lord, and
their substance unto the Lord of the whole earth; therefore shall thy Gates be
open continually, neither day nor night shall they be shut, that men may bring
unto thee the riches of the Gentiles, that thy Kings may be brought for the
Nations, and Kingdoms that will not serve thee shall parish, and those Nations
shall utterly be destroyed, Job 27.16, Isa. 60, 11, 12. Cap. 66.11. Zech.
14.14. Revel. 21.24. From hence we may see, that riches, and glory, and honor,
and a Kingdom, nay and Crowns also, shall be cast down before Christ, and the
Saints which shall be at their steps. King Solomon in his glorious Reign was a
lively Type of King Jesus in his glorious Reign, and we know in King Solomon's
Reign there was great plenty of riches and glory, such as was not in Jerusalem
before or since; and that there shall be so in Christ's Reign, was set out by
those who came from the East to Jerusalem to worship Christ, which when they
had found him, opened their Treasures and presented Gifts, Gold, Myrrh, Matthew.
2.11. which shows to us, That when the Lord is King in Jerusalem, how persons
shall come from the utmost parts of the Earth, to submit to Christ's and the
Saints royal Dignity, and present unto them the choycest of riches, which
agrees to the Scriptures before mentioned; so having discovered that Christ
and his Saints shall reign in Jerusalem, and of that excellent peace and
sovereignty that they shall enjoy in their time, with riches, and the glory of
the Gentiles. I pass now unto the Seventh Particular, which is the description
of the New Jerusalem.

A clear description of New Jerusalem, not built by the Jews at their return
out of Captivity.
The very consideration of this New Jerusalem is sufficient to ravish the
hearts of all such as are heavenly-minded, it was that which did stay and
support the minds of the suffering Saints of old, and indeed it is sufficient,
because it is of such an excellent situation that it is to be admired, as the
Psalmist faith, Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth is Mount
Sion, on the side of the North is the City of the great King, God is known in
her Palace for a refuge; which City in the Mystery is no more but that New
Jerusalem, which shall be the City of the great King, Psalm. 48.2. compare Psalm.
47.8. even so New Jerusalem shall come down from God out of Heaven, and being
situated about Sion, it is Metaphorically called mount Sion, because Sion of
old did represent it, which was David's Throne, the which David and his Throne
was a lively type of Christ, and his Throne, and as David placed himself in
Sion, with his Family, so Jesus Christ will place himself in that New
Jerusalem, with his Family, the which Family consists of risen saved
glorified Saints; the which agrees with the Word of the Lord that faith, The
people that are saved shall walk in the light of it, and the Kings of the earth
shall bring their glory and honor unto it, and there shall in no wise enter
into it any that defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination, or makes a
lie, but they which are written in the Lambs Book of Life, Rev l. 21.24, 25,
26, 27. but now I shall pass briefly to a review of that glorious City New
Jerusalem, the which is treated of, Revel. 21. beginning at the tenth verse,
And he carried me away in the Spirit unto a great and high Mountain, and showed
me that great City, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of Heaven from God,
having the glory of God, and her light was like unto a stone most precious,
even like a Jasper stone, clear as Crystal, and had a wall great and high and
had twelve Gates, and at the Gates twelve Angels, and names written thereon,
which are the names of the twelve Tribes of the Children of Israel; on the East
three Gates, on the North three Gates, on the South three Gates, and on the
West three Gates; and the wall of the City had twelve foundations, and in them
the names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb, and he that talked with me had a
golden reed to meajure the City and the Gates thereof, and the wall thereof,
and the City lies four square, and the length is as large as the breadth, and
he measured the City with the reed twelve thousand Furlongs, and the length,
and the breadth, and the height of it are equal, and he measured the wall
thereof an hundred forty and four Cubits, according to the measure of man, that
is of the Angel, and the building of the wall of it was of Jasper, and the City
pure Gold, like unto clear Glass, and the foundations of the wall of the City
were garnished with all manner of precious Stones; the first foundation was
Jasper, the second Saphir, the third Chalcedonie, the fourth an Emerauld, the
fifth Sardonix, the sixth Sardins, the seventh Chrysolite, the eighth Beryl,
the ninth Topas, the tenth Chrysophrasus, the eleventh a Jacinth, the twelfth
an Amethyst; and the twelve Gates were twelve Pearls, every several Gate of
one Pearl, the streets of the City were pure Gold, as it were transparent
Glass; and I saw no Temple therein, for the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb
were the Temple of it; and the City had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon
to shine in it, for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb was the
light thereof, and the Nations of them that are saved shall walk in the light
of it, and the Kings of the North shall bring their glory and honor into it,
and the Gates of it shall not be shut at all by day, and there shall be no
night there, and they shall bring the glory and henour of the Nations into it;
there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles, neither
whatsoever works abomination, or makes a Lie, but they which are written in
the Lambs Book of Life, Rev. 21.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21,
22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. From hence we may take notice of the splendency of this
glorious City, and the excellency of the foundations; and doubtless this was
the City that our blessed Father Abraham looked for, when he did so dis-regard
his native Country, and Fathers house, that he forsook it, and was a Sojourner
in the Land of Promise, a strange Land, as he is recorded of in the Epistle to
the Hebrews in these words, By faith he abode in the Land of Promise as in a
strange Country, as one that dwelt in Tents with Isaac and Jacob, as heirs of
the same Promises, for he looked for a City having a foundation, whose maker
and builder is God, Heb. 11.9, 10. From hence we may see, that God did show
Abraham that glorious City, New Jerusalem, that afterward he and all the
faithful should inherit for their Possession, the which he did see by faith,
for faith is the evidence of things not seen, and the ground of things hoped
for; so that his hope being so firm in that Inheritance that he should enjoy,
it made him set light of all earthly inheritances, And they that say such
things, declare plainly that they seek a Country, wherefore God is not ashamed
to be their God, for he has prepared for them a City, Hebr. 11.14. Compare
sixteen. And certainly that City that has foundations whose maker and builder
is God, the which also God has said he has prepared, is the very City that
John saw come out of Heaven from God, which shall be the place of Christ, and
the risen Saints residence, which does agree with the words of the Spirit of
Christ, that faith, He that overcomes I will make a Pillar in the House of my
God, and he shall go no more out, and I will write upon him the name of my God,
and the name of the City of my God, which is New Jerusalem, which comes down
out of Heaven from my God, and I will write upon him my new name, Revel. 3.12.
So that hence we may see, that as God gave his earthly Son (which is Adam) at
the first an earthly Paradisical Inheritance, or Situation, so he gave his
second Son, that heavenly Man, a heavenly Paradisical inheritance, or
situation, which is no other than the New Jerusalem, situated upon the new
Earth; and that this New Jerusalem is not Heaven it self, as some do conceive,
(although it be heavenly) is clear, for Christ faith, it shall come out of
Heaven from his God, and it is the dwelling place of Christ, and the Saints,
until the Mediatorship shall be delivered up into the hands of the Father; but
when Christ shall deliver up the Mediatorship unto the Father, then they shall
be invested into the highest degree of glory. And having showed you a brief
glimps of the glory of the New Jerusalem, I shall give you several Reasons why
that Jerusalem that shall be built upon her own heap by the Jews at their
return, is not the New Jerusalem which mention is made of in Rev. 3.12. chap.
21. and so to the first Reason, which is;

1 Because that the City Jerusalem, that is to be built at the Jews return,
shall be built by men's hands, as also faith the Prophet, And they shall build
the old wast places, and raise up the former desolations, and they shall repair
the City that was desolate, and wast for many Generations, and the Sons of
Strangers shall build thy walls, and their Kings shall minister unto thee. And
that this is a Prophecy of the last and general return, you may see, for the
text faith, They shall not build and another inhabit, but they shall long enjoy
the work of their own hands, Isa. 60.10, 11. cap. 61.4. cap. 65.21, 22, 23.
From which Scriptures you may see, that that City in the which the Jews shall
inhabit, is built with hands, but the New Jerusalem mentioned Revel. 2. chap.
21. shall be built without hands, as you may see, Heb. 11.10. So much to the
first Reason.

The second Reason is, because the materials of the New Jerusalem is Gold, and
Silver, and precious Stones, and Pearls, Rev. 21.18, 19, 20. but the materials
of the other Jerusalem is Wood, and such like, Ezekiel. 41.16.

The third Reason is, because in the New Jerusalem there was no Temple, but the
glory of God, and the Lamb was the light of it, Rev. 21. 20. but in the other
Jerusalem there was a Temple, Ezekiel. 41.14, 15. Reve. 11.1. 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.

The fourth Reason is, because in the New Jerusalem we find mention of no
trees but the Tree of Life only, Revelations 22.2. Cap. 2.7. but in the other
Jerusalem there was every Tree good for food, Ezekiel. 47.12.

The fifth Reason is, because in the New Jerusalem there shall be no need of
the Sun, nor Moor, for God is the light of it, neither shall there be any
night there, Revel. 21.23. Compare Chap. 22, 5, but in the other Jerusalem
there shall be night and day, and thereby there shall be an account of years;
they shall have the use also of the Sun, and the Moon, in which time they shall
have their perfect strength, shining forth most excellent in their splendour, as
you may see, Isa. 30.26.

The sixth Reason is, because that the New Jerusalem shall come down out of
Heaven from God, as I before have spoken, as faith the Scripture, And I John
saw the New Jerusalem come down from God out of Heaven, prepared as a Bride for
her Husband, Revel. 21.1. That is, it was a City lacking no reparation, or
beautifying, but it was sufficiently trimmed, decked, and beautified, which is
called by the Spirit, trimmed as a Bride for her Husband; but the other
Jerusalem wanted both re-edifying, trimming, and beautifying. And so briefly I
have given you a review of that New Jerusalem, and have proved it not to be
that Jerusalem that shall be built upon her own heap. I have showed you also it
cannot be meant Heaven, because it came down from God out of Heaven; neither
can it be meant the Saints, as some have supposed it because the Saints are
said to walk in the streets of it, which streets are pure gold like to clear
glass; the Saints also are said to have the name of it written in their
foreheads, but there shall in no wise enter into it any that defiles, or
makes a lie, but such as are written in the Lambs Book of Life. The which
shows (and much more I could speak to it) that it is a material City, yet not
Heaven it self, though heavenly, as I have said; neither cin it be the Saints,
but the City that the Saints shall enter into. Blessed and thrice happy are
they that have their portion in it. And so I pass to the Eighth Particular.

The restoration of the Creation into the Primitive purity.
The truth of this Particular need not much be questioned, that is to say,
Whether the Lord will restore the whole Creation into its Primitive excellency,
(when I say the whole Creation, I mean Man, though happily not every man, also
the Beasts of the Field, and the Earth, into that condition that they were in
the time of Adams innocence) I say there is no question to be made of the truth
of this Particular, for all the Prophets that ever writ, have writ more or
less to the affirming of this to be true, as I could instance in them all in
particular order, but because it will take up much time, I shall give you one
plain text of Scripture, that does affirm, that all the holy Prophets have
spoken of this great restoration more or less, the text of Scripture is in Acts
3.20.21. in these words, For I will send Jesus Christ, which before was
preached unto you, whom the Heavens must contain until the restoration of all
things, spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since the world began.
From hence you may see, that all the Prophets ever since the world began, did
fore-tel, or Prophecy of the restoration of Man and Beast into their first
excellency; which also agrees with the words of Paul that says, We know the
whole Creation groaneth with us, and travelleth with us in pain together until
this present time, because the Creature was made subject to vanity, not of its
own will, but by reason of him that has subdued it under hope, because the
Creatures themselves shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into
the glorious liberty of the children of God, Romans 8.20, 21, 22. From these
words we may take notice, that the Creatures with Man shall be delivered from
that groaning condition which they were made subject to by reason of Adams
transgression, and that there shall be a perfect restoration of all Creatures,
unless it be the Serpent, and such men as live and dye in the stare of
unbelief, and thereby deprive themselves of that good which otherwise they
should enjoy. But for the better understanding of this truth, I shall divide
the Creation into three parts, that is to say, the Creature Man, the creature
Beast, and the creature Earth, and shall treat of them in order.

And first of the Creature Man, that he shall be restored unto that Primitive
state, that is to say, all manner of corruption to be done away, as namely,
Sickness, Weakness, Faintness, Lameness, Blindness, and all other things that
are as Corruptions, or defections in Nature, and then shall the saying be made
good that is written by the Prophet, Then shall the eyes of the blind be
opened, and the ears of the deaf unstopped, then shall the Lame man leap as an
Heart, and the tongue of the dumb shall be loosed; for in the Wilderness shall
waters break out, and rivers in the Desert; neither shall the inhabitants of
the Land say, I am sick, and the people that are therein shall be forgiven
their iniquities, Isa. 32.24. cap. 35.5, 6. they shall not dye in their nonage,
in that juncture of time, but shall live an hundred years old without frailty
in Naure, whereby they shall see their Childrens Children in great peace, as
the Prophet says, There shall not be thence an infant of days, or an old man
that has not filled his days, but the child shall dye being an hundred years
old, but the Sinner being an hundred years old shall be accursed; even such as
do not submit to that great King Jesus, Isa. 65.20. Ezekiel. 14.12. so that the
weakness, and corruptions, and frailty of Nature shall be clear taken away, so
that those Jews that live in the flesh, (and others, which is to say the
Gentiles, who also are living at that time in the flesh) shall not dye by
reason of any malady overcoming their Nature, but by virtue of Gods
appointment, in that set time before mentioned; the envy also of the Sons of
men shall depart away, so that one shall not envy another as afore-time, Isa.
11.13. And so I shall briefly pass to the second thing.

Which is, That the Beasts of the field shall also be restored from the
bondage of their corruption, into that liberty that they did enjoy in the time
of Adams innocence; the envy of them also shall be taken away, so that the
Lamb and the Kid shall lie down in peace with the savage Beast, the Lion shall
not destroy the Lamb, neither the Leopard the Kid. There was a lively Type of
this thing in Noah's Ark, and so shall it be when Jesus Christ the Ark (that is
to say, the safety of his people) is lifted up as an Ensign in the Nations, for
so says the Prophet, With righteousness shall be judge the poor, and reprove
with equity, for the meek of the earth, and he shall smite the earth with the
rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall be slay the wicked,
and righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle
of his reins; the Wolf also (hall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall
lie down with the Kid, and the Calf, and the young Lion and the fatling
together, and a little child shall lead them, and the Cow and the Bear shall
feed the young ones, and lie down together, and the Lion shall eat straw with
the Ox, and the sucking Child shall play on the hole of the Asp, and the
weaned Child shall put his hand on the Coskatrice Den, they shall not hurt or
destroy in all my holy Mountains, for the earth shall be full of the knowledge
of the Lord, Isa. 11.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Cap. 65.25. Hence you may see, that
there is a time wherein the Creatures shall be restored into the Primitive
state; for in the Garden of Eden, in the which they were first placed, they lay
down in peace, and did not destroy each other. The reason why they did destroy
one another afterward was, because of the Curse that Adam brought upon the
whole Creation by the transgression of the Law of God Hence it comes to pass,
that the Creature Man destroys one another, and the Creature Beast, but in
the beginning it was not so, neither shall it be so in the time of the perfect
Redemption, as is clear from the forementioned Scripture.

Obj. But if it should be objected and said, That this is meant by the
flourishing state of the Church while they remain in this Tabernacle.

Ans. To which I answer, I have already proved, That all or every one of the
godly shall suffer persecution in this Life, that although many shall run to
and fro in the last days, and be purified and made white, yet the wicked shall
do more wickedly, and shall wear out the Saints of the most High, so as there
shall be such troubles as there has not been since there has been a Nation
upon the Earth, insomuch that if the Lord should not shorten these days, and
hasten his coming, no flesh should be saved, Dan. 7.21. cap. 8.31. cap. 11.35.
cap. 12.1. and 10. Matthew. 24.21, 22. Acts 14.22. 2 Timothy 3.12. Rev 6.11. Rev.
12.17. Rev. 13.7. and so I shall leave these Scriptures to be perused, and pass
to the third Particular.

The third Particular is, That the Earth also shall receive her strength to
bring forth, as in its Primitive time, that is to say, before it was Cursed, by
reason of the transgression of Man, as also says the Prophet, Instead of
thorns shall come up the Fir Tree, and instead of the Brier shall come up the
Mirtletree, and it shall be to the Lord for a name, an everlasting sign that
shall not be cut off, then shall he give thee rain of thy seed that thou shall
sow the ground withal, and bread of the increase of the earth, and it shall be
fat and plentious; in that day shall thy Cattle feed in large Pastures, the
Oxen likewise, and the young Ass that ear the ground shall eat clean
Provender, which has been winnowed with a Shovel and with Fan, and there shall
be upon every Mountain, and upon every high Hill, rivers and streams of water
in the day of the great slaughter, when the Towers fall. Moreover, the light of
the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun shall be
sevenfold, as the light of seven days, in the day that the Lord binds up the
breach of his people, and heals the stroke of their wounds, Isa. 55.13. Chap,
30.23, 24, 25, 26. From hence we may see, that the earth shall be restored unto
her Primitive purity, for thus says the Lord concerning it in the Prophecy of
Isaiah, in these words, For the Lord shall comfort, Sion, he will comfort her
wast places, and he will make her Wilderness like Eden, and her Desert like the
Garden of the Lord, and they shall say, this Land that was desolate is become
like the Garden of Eden, and the wast, and desolate, and ruined Cities are
become fenced, and as inhabited. The Wilderness and the solitary places shall
also blossom as the Rose, I will open Rivers in high places, and Fountains in
the midst of the Valley, I will make the Wilderness a pool of water, and the
dry Land springs of water, I will plant in the Wilderness the Cedar, the
Shittah-tree, and the Myrtle, and the Oyl-tree, and I will set in the Desert
the Firre-tree, and the Pine, and the Box-tree together. Moreover, The Plow-men
shall overtake the Reapers, and the treaders of Grapes him that sows Seed,
and the Mountains shall drop down sweet wine, Amos 9.13. Isa. 41.18, 19, cap.
35.1, 2. Ezekiel. 36.35. Isa. 51.3. From hence we may see, that the earth shall be
restored into its Primitive purity.

Obj. But if it be Objected and said, That here is mention made of Plowing and
Reaping, and therefore cannot be a perfect redemption. To the which I answer.

Ans. First, That Adam himself when he was in his Innocence was to dress the
Garden, and to receive the fruit thereof; and whether or no this were not such
an employment as might keep the Garden in such a capacity, as whereby he might
receive the fruit from it, I leave the Reader to judge, Genesis 2.15.

Secondly, As I have already said, That there are some that will deprive
themselves by their transgressions, the which the Prophet says shall be their
Plowmen, Isa. 61.5. and Vine-dressers. Moreover I say, That the strength of
their nature shall be such, that nothing that they do shall or can be a burden
unto them, but shall be a pleasure unto them; like unto a man walking in his
Garden, and taking off a degenerate Plant, which is no burden unto him, but
rather his pleasure, for in the time of that perfect Redemption there shall be
no kind of weakness or faintness whereby any thing that they shall do will be
a burden, as says the Lord, In that day shall the Lord defend the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, and ho that is feeble amongst them at that day shall be as
David, and the House of David shall be as God, as the Angels of God before him,
Zech. 12.8. Isa. 40.29, 31. And so much to the Objection, and to the Eighth
Particular, and so I shall pass to the Ninth, which is the signs of the times
of the accomplishment of these Prophecies.

The Signs of the times of the accomplishment of these Prophecies.
Doubtless the Lord has not hid from his Servants those things that he will do
in the latter days, nor the time when they shall be performed, though the day
and hour knows no man, no not the Angels, yet the times and seasons may be
known by the signs. Moreover, it is lawful and commendable for the people of
God to look into the Signs of the times, for as much as we see the Lord Jesus
Christ reprove such as do not, saying, O ye Hypocrites, ye can discern the
face of the sky, but cannot discern the signs of the times, Matthew. 16.3.
therefore I shall briefly give you some few signs, that shall be as it were the
Item of the Day of Christ, or the Morning Watch, and so to the First in order.

The first Sign of the second coming of Christ, is the unsetledness of Kingdoms
and Nations of the earth, the Government sometimes here, and sometimes there,
sometimes in the hands of one, and sometimes in the hands of another, men much
striving for Honor and Kingdoms; in the midst of those days shall God set up
his Kingdom that shall never be destroyed; and that the earth shall be thus
unsettled, reeling to and fro, is clear from the Word of the Lord which says,
The earth shall reel to and fro like a drunken man, and be removed like a Tent,
and the iniquity there of shall be heavy upon it, so that it shall fall and
arise no more, then shall the Sun he ashamed, and the Moon confounded, when the
Lord shall reign in Mount Sion, and in Jerusalem before his ancients
gloriously; at which time the little stone hewed out of the Mountain without
hands shall become a great Mountain, and fill the whole earth, Dan. 2.35, and
ver. 44. Isa. 24.20. compare 23. From whence we may see, that the unsetledness
of Nations and Kingdoms upon the earth, and striving for Honor, and change of
Governments, is a lively sign of the second coming of the Lord Jesus to be near.

The second Sign of the coming of Christ, Is by the abounding of wickedness or
iniquity in the World, as now we see it in a great height, even by such as are
worn out in their expectation, or waiting for Jesus Christ, who did not like
that good condition that they were put in, but having departed from the Faith,
and are given up unto all manner of uncleanness. O the ungodly Practices, and
horrid Blasphemies that are now committed in England, what by abusing the
worthy name of God, speaking reproachfully of him, and his Son Christ, and
slighting those Laws and Ordinances which are given forth to be practiced till
his second and great coming, with the abusing of themselves in uncleaneness and
Lusts of the flesh, amongst which they contend for the community of Women,
which is none of the least of their Uncleanenesses, and make themselves worse
than the savage Beasts. Of that sort are the rude Ranters, and the blasphemous
Quakers, the which have cast off Civil Humanity, and this generation of men are
the men that will cause the Lord to arise, and take vengeance upon the earth,
for so says the word of the Lord, in these words, And Enoch also the seventh
from Adam Prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord comes with ten
thousand of his Saints, to execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that
are ungodly amongst them of all their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodlily
committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly Sinners have spoken
against him. So that we may see, that the Lord will send his Son in flaming
fire against all ungodly men, but chiefly they that walk after the Lust of the
flesh in uncleaneness, as he once did destroy the world, and such like Sinners
with an overflowing Flood, Genesis 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Jude 4. compare 14,
15. 2 Pet. 2.4. compare 10. cap. 3.3. compare 10. See also verse. 7. From hence
you may see, that that ungodly generation of men that are now in the World, is
a lively sign of Christ's coming. And so I pass briefly to the third.

The Third sign of Christ's coming, Is the Echo or sound of these two things in
the World, as namely, the Preaching of the Gospel about in the Nations, and the
Wars, and rumors of Wars that do accompany it, for when these two things
go together, then Christ says the end is very nigh; and although the Gospel
have been preached before in a private way, that is to say, in some particular
Nation, or privately in that Nation, yet never was the Gospel preached to
Nations and Rulers as it is in our days.

Obj. If it should be Objected and said. That the Gospel has been preached in
Nations a great while by the Ministry of the Nation? To which I answer.

Ans. That as the Congregations of the Nation was never called a Church of
Christ, nor her Teachers the Ministers of the Gospel, neither has that kind
of Doctrine which they have preached been called the preaching of the Gospel;
If it should be demanded of me, what it is, I should answer to them in their
particular order; First, the National Church is called by the name of the
Cities of the Nation, which is a borrowed word from Christ's Church, Ye are a
City set upon an Hill, Mat. 5.14. Rev. 16.19. and that this City of the Nations
is meant the National Church is, because they shall begin to decay and sink,
and shall also be destroyed at the time that Babylon shall come in remembrance
before God, whereby she shall receive the Cup at his hands; for the Nations, or
the National Church, has been stained, is, and shall be, with the corruptions
or pollutions of Romes Doctrine, Jer. 51.7, 8. Again, if you shall ask me what
the National Ministers are called in Scripture, I shall show you as follows,
they are called Merchants of the Earth, or the Angels of the Waters; now the
word Angel signifies Minister, as Revel. 1.20, and the Waters signify
Nations, for so says the Spirit, The Waters that thou saw are Multitudes,
Nations, and Tongues, Rev. 17.15. so it is clear, that the Angels of the Waters
are meant the Ministers of the Nations, so that they are neither called
Ministers of Christ, nor Ministers of the Gospel, but the Ministers of the
Gospel are called by another name in the same place, even the Angel of the
Altar, and that Christ is our Altar is clear, see Heb. 13.10. Rev. 16.7.
Thirdly, Why their Preaching is not called Gospel-preaching, although they make
use of the Gospel, is, because they teach for Doctrine the Traditions of their
Fathers; and the Apostle calls not such Gospel-preaching, but says to the
Galathians, I marvel that you are so soon moved away from him that called you
into the grace of Christ unto another Gospel, which is not another, but there
are some that trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ, Gal. 1.6, 7.
so that those persons that do pervert any of the sayings of Christ, according
to Scripture account, cannot be called the Ministers of the Gospel, nor their
Preaching Gospelpreaching, which the Ministers of our Nation have done, that is
to say, mingled the Commands of Christ with their Traditions, and so cannot be
meant that Gospel-preaching which shall be the forerunner of Jesus Christ;
but that the Gospel shall be preached again in the plain way of it, that is to
say, in the way which Christ appointed when he ascended up on high, is clear,
Mat. 24.14. Rev. 14.6.

The Fourth and last Sign of the second coming of Jesus Christ, is those false
Signs and Miracles that shall be wrought by the false Prophets, for a little
before the coming of Christ there will be a Generation of men that will deny
the way and Ordinances of the Gospel, because they are not accompanied with
Miracles, and so shall deny the power of the Word. The Devil seeing this, he
shall empower the false Prophets, whereby they shall do great Signs and lying
Wonders, to deceive by multitudes all incredulous persons, who will believe a
lying Sign before they will believe that Word that was confirmed by Signs; for
when persons do not like to retain God in their knowledge, God is pleased to
send them strong delusions to believe a Lie; and that there are many such now
in our days that have denied the Truth that once they owned, and are grown to
such a height as that they do show many lying Signs; if any shall question the
truth of this, let them but go to London, and go to those Meetings that they
call the Quakers Meetings, and they shall see it apparently enough. But now to
prove that false Signs, and lying Wonders before-runners of Christ's coming, see
from these Scriptures following, Mat. 7.22. Cap. 24.24. 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. Rev.
13.13, 14. Cap. 16.14, 15. Friends, I should add some more Signs of Christ's
coming, as the gathering together of the Jews into their own Land, which
certainly might easily be proved, did we but understand the consultation that
there is amongst them, but the returning of the Fleet from the Straights will
give us more certain intelligence as to that thing; and so I shall leave these
few Signs unto your consideration, and pass to the Tenth and last Particular.

A profitable Application of the Sum of what is forementioned.
Christian Reader, I having showed you what excellent enjoyment the Lord has
laid up for his people, even for such as seek him, as for hidden treasure. Since
the Lord has set before thine eyes such a Kingdom, and such an Immortal Crown
of Life, be exhorted to run with patience the race that is set before you, What
if though troubles do beset a Christian life, yet these light afflictions which
are but for a moment, work in us a far more and exceeding weight of glory.
Dear Christian, be of the mind of the worthy Apostle, that counted all things
as dung and dross in comparison of the excellent knowledge of his Christ,
reckoning that the sufferings of this present time were not worthy to be
compared to the glory that shall be revealed. See, thy blessed Savior has led
thee an example of sufferings, Who for the joy that was set before him, endured
the Cross, despised the Shame, and is nowset down at the right hand of the
Father. I say, consider him who endured such Buffetings, such Crowning with
Thorns, nay such spitting on, and yet turned not away his back from the smiter,
nor his cheek from him that plucked off the hair, Isa. 50.6. 2 Cor. 4.26, 27,
28. Romans 8.17, 18. Heb. 12.2, 3. Again in the second place, let me exhort thee
to stand always upon thy watch, for the Day of Christ, or the day of thy
Dissolution is a very uncertain day, for as it was in the dissolution of the
old World, so shall it be in the coming of Christ; for the day before the
Flood, they are, they drank, they married, and gave in Marriage, until the
Flood came and took them all away. Even so was it with the Sodomites, they
continued in their security until the wrath of the Almighty broke out, and
there was no remedy. Moreover, when Lot forewarned his Sons in Law of the
Wrath of God upon the City, he seemed to them as one that mocked, Genesis 19.14.
Matthew. 24.37, 38, 39, 40. Moreover the Apostle says, That the Day of the Lord
shall so come as a Thief in the night, that when they shall say peace and
safety, then sudden destruction comes upon them, as travel upon a Woman with
Child, and they shall not escape, 1 Thessalonians. 5.1, 2, 3. So, forasmuch as the Day
of the Lord is so uncertain, let us labor for a watchful Spirit, for it is a
duty of a very high concernment, both from the example of the Saints that have
gone before, and from a command of our blessed Savior and his Apostles, as you
may see from these Scriptures, Psalm. 102.7. Psalm. 103.6. Isa. 21.5. Hab. 2.1.
Mat. 24.42. Cap. 25.13. Mar. 13.33, 34, 37. Acts 10.31. 1 Cor. 16.13. 1 Thessalonians.
5.6. The Apostle also gives two maine Reasons to urge Christians to thar duty
of watchfulness; the first is from this consideration, That the end of all
things is at hand, in these words, saying, The end of all things is at hand,
watch and be sober, 1 Pet. 4.7. The second Reason is, because says he, your
Adversary the Devil like a roaring Lion runs about, seeking whom he may devour;
whom resist be steadfast in the faith, 1 Pet. 5.8. the Spirit of God lays down
the danger that will follow security, and says, If thou shall not watch, I
will come upon thee as a Thief, and thou shall not know, whenever I will some
upon thee, Revel. 3.3. therefore blessed is he that watches, and keeps his
Garment, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame, Revel. 16.15. Therefore,
for as much as it is a duty of such concernment, let us labor to watch, to the
end we may know the Signs of the times, so as that they overtake us not as a
Snare, whereby we be deprived of that glorious Crown that is set before us. And
so I pass to the second Use.

Secondly, Use 2.
Be informed, Christian Reader, of the vanity, or emptiness of all enjoyments,
unless such enjoyments as shall be brought at the revelation of Jesus Christ at
that day, under these two considerations; The first is, The instability, or
breviousness of their continuance. Secondly, from the little peace, or
Soul-satisfaction they speak to a Soul when they do enjoy them, and so to the
first thing considerable, which is the instability, or breviousness, or short
continuance of the enjoyments of all things below that inheritance. We shall
take notice first of the Wise-mans words that says, Will thou set thine eyes
upon that that is not, verily riches make themselves wings and fly toward
Heaven, riches are not for ever, and the crown of them does not endure to every
Generation; for as we brought nothing into the World, so it is certain we shall
carry nothing out, so that every man walks in a vain show, getting goods,
knowing not who shall enjoy them; and thus spending their days in wealth, in a
moment go down to the Grave, and his bones being full of the Sins of his youth,
which shall lie down with him in the dust, Job 20.11. Cap. 21.13. Psalm. 39.6. 1 Timothy 6.7. Job 1.21. Prove. 23.5. Cap. 27.24. From hence we may see, that we have
no continuing City here, but all our in joyments are very brevious and full of
frugality; so that we are like unto Dreaming men, that dream they enjoy much,
and wake, and behold they have nothing. So it is with all men that have not
assurance of that Kingdom to come, that Riches and Honor before mentioned,
although they may have much riches in this world, yet when the Lord says,
Return you children of men, they return to dust, and be as if they had not
been, and all the riches that they have enjoyed is but to them a Dream, as the
Psalmist says, How are they brought to desolation, as at a moment, they are
utterly consumed with terror, as a Dream when one awaketh; so Lord when thou
awakest, thou will despise their Image, Psalm. 73.19, 20. Heb. 13.13. Psalm.
90.3, 4, 5, 6. Again, will thou set thy heart upon honor, that is as vain as
the former: for men of high degree are vanity, and men of low degree are alike,
when they are put in a balance they are altogether lighter than vanity; their
inward thoughts is, that their houses should continue for ever, and their
dwelling pleces unto all generations, they call their Lands after their own
names: nevertheless man being in honor abides not, but is like the beast that
perishes, this their way is their folly, yet their posterity approve their
sayings, like Sheep they are laid in the grave, Death shall feed on them, and
the upright shall have dominion over them in the morning, and their beauty
shall consume in their graves from their dwellings, though while he live he
bless himself, and men will praise thee when thou do well to thy self, he
shall go to the generation of his Fathers, and never see light, the man that is
in honor and understands not, is like the beast that perishes. Psalm. 49. 11,
12, 13, 14. compared with 18. Again, will thou set thy heart on pleasure, that
is vain, and but for a moment; therefore Moses did choose rather to suffer
afflictions with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasure of Sin for a
season: knowing assuredly, that those that live in pleasure were dead while
they lived, and so were an ill savor in the nostrils of God, Heb. 11.25. 1 Timothy
5, 6. and so having showed you the instability, and the breviousness of all the
things of this life, I shall also show you the vanity, and the little peace
that they speak to a Soul here, or at the great day of Account, but rather
trouble and vexation of Spirit; as you may see from the words of him that had
the greatest experience that ever any before or since had, as you may see by
the discovery of what he did enjoy, in that which follows, I said in my
heart, Go too now, I will prove thee with mirth, therefore enjoy pleasure, and
behold this also is vanity. I said of laughter, it is madd, and of mirth, what
does it? I sought in my heart to give my self to Wine, yet acquainting my heart
with Wisdom, and to lay hold on Folly till I might see what was that good for
the Sons of men, which they should do under the Heavens all the days of their
life. I made me great works, I builded me houses, and planted me vineyards, I
made me gardens and orchards, and planted trees in them of all kinds of fruits,
I made me pools of water, to water therewith the wood that brought forth trees,
I gat me servants, and maidens, and had servants born in my house; Also I had
great possessions of great and small Cattle, above all that were in Jerusalem
before me, I gathered me also silver and gold, and the peculiar treasure of
Kings and Princes, I gat me men-singers and womensingers, and the delights of
the Sons of men, as Musical Instruments, and that of all sorts; so was great,
and increased more than all that were before me in Jerusalem, also my wisdom
remained with me, and whatsoever my eyes desired, I kept nothing from them, I
withheld not my heart from any Joy, for my heart rejoiced in all my labor, and
this was my portion of all my labor; then I looked on all the works that my
hands had wrought, and on the labor that I had labored to do, and behold all
was vanity, and vexation of spirit, and there was no profit under the Sun; for
riches profit not in the day of wrath, but righteousness delivers from death,
Prove. 11.4. Ficclesiast. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. From hence you
may see, and many more Scriptures that might be added, the vanity and
non-profit (as well as the brevity) of all the enjoyments, below that excellent
inheritance that shall be given to the Saints at the appearance of Jesus
Christ, and therefore gird up the Ioins of your mind, and hope to the end. And
so I pass to the Third Use.

The Third shall serve to reprove, 3 Use.
thou art reproved poor Soul, whosoever thou art, that art so foolish, that
have a prise put into thy hands, and do not engage thy heart to make use of
it, the Lord will reprove thee at his appearance, because thou have not made
use of that Talent he gave thee, and will command that thou shall be bound, and
be cast into utter darkness, where there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth
for ever. O let that sad president of Esau be a warning unto thee, the which
when he had sold his birthright, afterward, when he would have inherited the
blessing, he was rejected, and found no place of repentance, though he sought
it carefully with tears. Heb. 12.26, 27. Genesis 27.28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34,
35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40. From hence we see, that persons are reproved that do so
much hunt after the enjoyment of the world, so that they thereby lose their
heavenly inheritance; More you may see also from the words of our blessed
Savior, wherein he reproves an ungodly generation of men, that strive to be
rich in this world, when they are not rich in the graces of God, he says, Thou
Fool, this night shall thy Soul be required of thee, and then whose shall all
those be that thou have labourea for? Luke 12.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. See more
in the Parable, But Abraham said, Son remember that thou in thy lifetime
receivedst thy good things, and Lazarus evil things; but now he is comforted,
and thou art tormented, Luke 16.15. From which words we may see, that such as
delight more in the enjoyments of the things of this life, then they do in
suffering for Christ's sake, and the Gospel, looking at that glorious Kingdom
that shall come, when Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the holy Prophets,
and all the faithful Saints shall enter into that inheritance of glory, they
shall be cast out to utter darkness, and banished from the presence of God and
the holy Angels for ever, Matt. 8.11. 12. cap. 13.42, 43. So we may see such
Souls are worthy of reproof, which when the Lord has bestowed a Talent upon
them, and given them time and means of grace, and yet do not engage their
hearts to make use of it. And so I pass to the fourth Use.

The fourth use is a word of caution 4 Use.
that I shall desire thee, Christian Reader, to lay to heart, which is no other
than the same that our blessed Savior gave to his Disciples in these words,
Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting, and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, lest that day come
upon you unawares, for as a snare it shall come upon all them that live upon
the face of the whole earth; Watch ye therefore and pray always, that ye may be
counted worthy to escape those things that shall come to pass, and stand
before the Son of man. Luke 21.34, 35, 36. What a sad thing will it be for
Souls that are not prepared for their great Bridegroom, when the noise shall be
made, the Bridegroom comes? therefore take heed of careless security: Take
heed, watch and pray, for thou know not when the time is. Moreover, Blessed
is that servant, that when the Lord comes is found watching. Mat. 25.13. Lu.
12.37. Mat. 26.41.

5ly; The fifth use is an use of direction; In order to the attaining of this
heavenly inheritance, first seek it before and above all things in the world,
and then I can assure thee thou shall find it, the which if thou do find, it
will fill the closet of thy Soul with glorious and durable riches; for proof of
this, that thou shall find it, and that thou shall be made rich by it; see
Prove. 8.17, 18, 19. 20. in these words; I love them that love me, and those
that seek me early shall find me, riches and honor are with me, yea durable
riches and righteousness; My fruit is better than gold, yea fine gold, and my
revenue than choice silver; I lead in the way of righteousness in the midst of
the paths of judgment, that I may cause those that love me to inherit
substance, and I will fill their treasure; So that those that seek first the
kingdom of Heaven, and the righteousness thereof, and seek it as hidden
treasure, that is to say, above all things in the world, without doubt the Lord
will rise and rain everlasting righteousness upon such souls Hosea 10.12. Prove.
2.3, 4, 5. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Mat. 9.33. So much to the first means, in order to
the attainment of this inheritance.

The second way to attain to this inheritance may be observed from the wise
Merchant man, who, when he had found the Pearl of great price, sold all that he
had to gain that price; so also must thou, when thou see an excellency in
Jesus Christ, thou must break off thy sins by righteousness, and part with all
that is near and dear unto thee, for he that comes to Christ, and hates not
Father and Mother, Wife and Children, Lands and living, nay and his own life,
cannot be his Disciple; not that I mean that thou should hate the person of
thy Father, or thy Mother, or Wife, or Children, and the like, neither did
Christ mean so in that speech of his, but to cast them out of their affections
when they come in competition with Christ, but still to honor and respect
their persons, though slight their counsel, Luke 14.26, 27. Mat. 10.34, 35, 36,
37, 38. so that this is the second way to attain this Heavenly inheritance or
Pearl of great price: Thirdly as thou must forsake all, and break off thy sins
by righteousnesle, so thou must increase in thy piety and virtues, thou must
not stand still, but thou must add to thy Faith, Virtue, Knowledge, Temperance,
Patience, and Godliness, for so an entrance shall be administered into his
heavenly Kingdom. 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. so that from hence thou may
see, that the way or means to enter into that heavenly inheritance, is to grow
in grace, not to stand still, not be lukewarm, not to have a name to live, and
be dead, but to excel in virtue.

The fourth: and lastly as thou must seek that inheritance above and before all
things, and as thou must forsake all things for the attainment of that precious
inheritance, when thou have found it, so as to part with all, and break off thy
sins by righteousness, and as thou must also grow in Graces, adding to thy
Faith, Virtue, and so forth: So in the fourth and last place thou must go on,
and persevere till death, not turn back, or be weary, or faint in thy mind, for
that is the way to inherit that glorious inheritance, even that immortal crown
of life, and to sit down with Christ in his Throne, where thou shall abide for
ever and ever 2 Timothy 4.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Jam. 1.12. Rev. 2.10. cap. 3. v. 9.
compared with 12. v. 2.7. cap. 21.7. And so I shall pass unto the sixth use.

The sixth use is a use of inducement 6 Use.
to win thee or move thee to prise that Kingdom, which is to be at the
Revelation of Jesus Christ, for then the Tabernacle of God shall be with men,
and he shall dwell with them; as also says John in these words, I heard a
great voice from Heaven, saying, the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will
dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and he will be their God, and
God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain, for the
former things are passed away, and the redeemed of the Lord shall come to Sion
with Songs, and everlasting Joy shall be unto them; and the great King of the
whole earth, who is the Son of the most high, and the great Bridegroom of the
Bride, shall gird himself and make them sit down at meat, and they shall reign
with him, as long as the Sun and Moon endures, Luke 12.37. Rev. 21.3, 4, 5.
Esa. 35, 10. these privileges in that kingdom shall be above Angels, for not
unto the Angels has he put into subjection the world to come, whereof we
speak, but that he has put it into subjection to the Saints is clear, as you
may see from these Scriptures Psalm. 149.6, 7, 8, 9. Obedi. 21. Mal. 4.3, 4, 5.
Rev. 2.26, 27. from hence we may see the great gainers Saints will be, if it be
so that they lose all the enjoyments of this life, provided they do but attain
that inheritance, 1 Timothy 4.8. cap. 6. ver. 6. 1 Cor. 3.22. But on the other
hand, if thou should lose that inheritance, and the glorious presence of
that infinite glory, which was so glorious, that when Peter and John saw but a
glimpse of it, they said, It is good for us to be here; I say, if thou
should loose chis enjoyment, although by it thou may gain all the
friendship in the world, and the riches and quintessence thereof; yet thou
would be a great loser, Matt. 17.4. Mark 8.36. Christian Reader, thou art
not traveling to an earthly Kingdom or Inheritance, but unto Mount Sion, and
unto the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, to an innumerable
company of Angels to the General Assembly and Church of the first born, which
are written in Heaven, and unto God the Judge of all things, and the Spirits of
Just men made perfect, where thou shall enjoy the presence of God, in whose
presence there is fulness of Joy, and at his right hand pleasure for
evermore, Psalm. 16.11. Heb. 12.22, 23.

The second inducement is from the Freeness of the giver of this Inheritance,
that whether thou art rich or poor, high or low, noble or ignoble, thou may
attain to this Inheritance; for the Lord commands his Messengers to offer it
freely to every Creature, Mar. 16.15. Rev. 22.17. Moreover he proclaims this
his loving kindness by the Prophet, saying, Oh every one that thirsts, come
ye to the waters, and he that has no money, come buy Wine without money, and
without price, why do you lay out your money for that which is not bread, and
your labor for that which profits not? Esaias 55.1, 2. From hence we may take
notice of these two things, First how the Lord exhibiteth himself freely to
every Creature; and blames such as are contented with Husks, when they may have
the Bread of Life freely.

The third Inducement or Motive to move thee, or encourage thee to seek after
this Inheritance, is from the consideration of thy condition, when the Lord is
pleased to cast his eye of pity upon thee; it is not at that time when thou
appearest amiable or lovely by reason of thy virtues and graces which is in
thee, but when thou wast a deformed Creature, by reason of lying in the blood
of the pollution of thy Sin, and it was also when no eye pitied thee; neither
could Angels or men do thee any good: In this appeared the love of God (indeed)
as says the Apostle; We know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though
he were rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that you through his poverty
might be made rich, thus the Lord Jesus made himself of no reputation, and took
upon him the form of a Servant, and became obedient to death, even the death of
the cross; (and as the Apostle Paul says) this his great love did extend it
self to us, when we by Nature were the Children of wrath, as well as others,
scarcely for a righteous man will one dye, yet peradventure for a good man some
would even dare to dye; but God commends his love to us, in that while we
were Sinners Christ died for us. Romans 5.7, 8. 2 Cor. 8.9. Phil. 2.6, 7, 8.
Ezekiel. 16.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. So that hence we may see the time when the Lord was
pleased in his mercy and pity to look upon us, and offer unto us this rich
inheritance.

Fourthly, and lastly, be moved above all things to seek this kingdom, because
of the indurablenesse of it, for it will never fail chee, but will remain with
thee for ever and ever, as says the Psalmist, The Lord knows the days of the
upright, and his inheritance shall be for ever; The Apostle Peter also to
confirm this saying, says, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a
lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an
inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in the
Heaven for you; wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, and be sober and hope
to the end for the grace that shall be brought to you at the revolation of
Jesus Christ, the which shall be an ample recompense of reward for all the
sufferings that thou shall meet with (for the profession of his name) in this
life, Psalm. 37.18. 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. comp. 13 v. Rev. 21.6. Rev. 22.12. Heb. 11, 16

The seventh use is to set forth the 7 Use
misery and terror that will fall upon all such as sin against such great
mercy; were there no more but a deprivation of them from the presence of the
glorious God, and that Heavenly Jerusalem, it might be sufficient to be a Worm
never dying, and a fire never quenched; but there is also Tophet prepared of
old, he has made it deep and large, the pile thereof is fire and much wood,
the breath of the Lord like a stream of brimston does kindle it, Isa. 30.33.
Agreeing with the words of the Apostle that says, Or despisest thou the riches
of his goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the
goodness of God leads thee to repentance, but after thy hardness and
impenitent heart treasurest up wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation
of the righteous Judgment of God? Romans 2.4, 5. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8. What a forlorn
condition will that Soul be in, whoever he be, that has slighted the means of
Grace, and cast behind his back all those sweet invitations of the Gospel, when
the Lord Jesus Christ shall come forth, to summon all to appear before the
Judgment Seat, to give an account before the Tribunal Seat? Will not such
Souls call for the Mountains to fall upon them, to hide them from the presence
of God? Surely they will, and all such faces shall gather blackness; for thou
that have hated knowledge, and have not chosen the fear of the Lord, but have
chosen Pleasure, and all that thy heart has lusted after here below, and have
set greater account of the praise of Men than of the praise of God, this shall
thou have at the Lords hands, thou shall lie down in sorrow, where there shall
be weeping, and wayling, and gnashing of teeth; therefore labor to be wise
whilst thou may be happy, and in this thy day consider the things that belong
to thy peace, lest it be hid from thine eyes for ever, and thou mourn when it
be too late. Prove. 1.24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. Cap. 5.11. Luke 19.42.

The Eighth and last Use shall be for comfort and consolation to all those that
shall be Heirs of that Kingdom; Blessed are all they who are found watching
when the Lord Jesus Christ shall come, he will gird himself, and make them sit
down at meat, and he will come forth and serve them. Therefore be glad and
rejoice, for the Lord Omnipotent will reign. Blessed are all they that are
called to the Marriage Supper of the Lambt, for they shall enter into that
glorious City, even that heavenly Jerusalem, (which I have given you a glimps
of) where there shall be singing praises by the Saints, where there shall be
everlasting joy, and substantial (or perfect) felicity; therefore I say,
Blessed are all the Dead that dye in the Lord, for they shall be glorified at
his appearance. Even so Amen, Come Lord Jesus come quickly.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 68. line the 20. read obtain for owned, p. 72. l. 24. r understanding for
wisdom, p. 77. l. 11. r. Ore Chase for out those, p. 78. l. 6. r. Sword for
Lord, p 94. l. 24. r. that for but, p. 96. l. 23. r. to for of, p, 124. l. 7.
r. their wickedness for the wickedness, l. 8. r. great multitudes twice, p.
126. l. 9. for is King r. their King, p. 127. l. 21. for dispaced r. displaced,
p. 137. l. 2. r. upon for up of, p. 139. l. 21. r. of Jerusalem for of thy
Jerusalem, p. 140. l. 24. r. the Lord of Hosts after the glory, p. 150. l. 3.
r. from God, p. 174. l. 28. for when ever r. what hour.


