TO THE PARLIAMENT OF ENGLAND SCOTLAND and IRELAND.
The humble Petition of Henry Harbotle, on the behalf of himself and above 100
of the poor Tenants within the Barony of Langley in the County of
Northumberland.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners being Tenants of, and within the said Barony, of right
ought to hold, and their Ancestors time out of mind have held their respective
Tenements in fee by Copy of Court-Roll of the said Barony, as may appear, not
only by Records and their Copies in the time of Henry the eight (ready to be
produced) but also by Survey taken 12. Eliz. upon the attainder of Thomas Earl
of Northumberland, Lord of the said Barony; upon whose attainder the said
Barony came to the Crown; under whom your Pettioners said Ancestors, quietly
held and enjoyed their said Estates, paying only the rents reserved upon their
said Copies. And were upon every Descent or Alienation by the Stewards of the
said Barony (who held by Patent from the Crown) admitted Tenants according to
the Custom of the said Barony, until the 16 Iac. In which year one John Murray
Esquire, one of the Bedchamber to King James (having before gotten the said
Barony settled upon Feoffees for his use, and knowing that by the Title of the
Crown he could not destroy the Petitioners custom of Copyhold) exhibited his
Bill of complaint before the Lord Verulam in Chancery against your Petitioners
said Ancestors, and therein most falsely declared, that he was at the time of
the exhibiting his said Bill, by virtue of a conveyance from the coheirs of
the said Earl, seized of the said Barony in his demeasne as of Fee; and that
the Tenants thereof were only Tenants at the Wills of the Lords of the said
Barony, and not by Copy of inheritance; upon which suggestions, and others as
false (too long to be here inserted) obtained a most unjust Decree against some
of your Petitioners yet alive; and the Ancestors of the rest, for destroying
their said Copyhold of inheritance: And thereupon most barbarously and cruelly
persecuted your said Petitioners and Ancestors (by tying some of them neck and
heels together, and throwing them naked into the snow, and imprisoning a great
many in the Fleet here at London, and others in several prisons far remote from
their friends or habitation, where they suffered most inhumane cruelties)
until some of them had submitted to the loss of their Customs, by accepting
of Leases from him; which was no sooner done, but he then waved the title of
the coheirs; and desires his Feoffees to surrender their right back to the
Crown, which they did; and then within two months after their surrender he
takes from King James an Estate in Feesimple in his own name to him and his
heirs for ever, making no further use of the former pretended titles of the
Coheirs; and afterward disposes of his title to Sir Edward Ratcliff Baronet (a
man of the like cruelty; and whose Religion is such, that he openly professes
it is as lawful to kill a Protestant as a Veal-Calf, or a Dog.) For whose
Recusancie and Delinquencie, his Estate was by Act of Parliament appointed to
be sold, and the said Barony, being parcel of his Estate, was by the Trustees
in that behalf accordingly sold to one George Hurd, a person entrusted by and
for Sir Edward Ratcliff. Others there are of your Petitioners, who never
submitted to the said Decree; yet have enjoyed their Lands according to their
said ancient custom paying only their old Rents.

Your Petitioners for recovery of their just and ancient right made their claim
within the time limited by the Act for sale of the said Lands, before the
Committee for removing obstructions; but in regard it did not appear unto them
that the aforesaid Decree was reversed; they did conceave themselves bound up
thereby, and no way capable to allow of your Petitioners said claim, and there
upon dismissed it.

That your Petitioners are so impoverished by the late war, frequent plundring
of the Moss-troopers, and cruel exactions of their Lords; that they are no way
able to wage Law, or prosecute a Bill of review of the said Decree, although
admitted in forma pauperis: forty of your Petitioners at least, being not able
to make up 5 shillings in ready money.

And therefore your Petitioners most humbly beseech your Honors, to take their
sad condition into your pious consideration, and in regard of their aforesaid
poverty, that they may receive from your Honors, who are the fountain of
Justice in this Commonwealth; such Justice as shall upon the examination of
their case, appear to be agreeable with the ancient Laws of this Nation, and
the equity of their cause.

Jan: 1654 And they shall pray, etc.

