AN ANSWER TO THE ANIMADVERSIONS ON THE DISSERTATIONS TOUCHING IGNATIVS'S
EPISTLES, and the EPISCOPACIE in them asserted.

By H. HAMMOND, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Richard Royston, at the Angel in Ivie-lane. 1654.

AN ANSWER TO THE ANIMADVERSIONS on the Disputations concerning EPISCOPACY.
THE INTRODVCTION.
Nu. 1. I Had thought I had concluded the Readers trouble and mine own, when I
had gotten to an end of the Assemblers Exceptions, but by that time I had
transmitted those debates to the Printer, and from him received one Sheet of
the Impression, I found my self called out anew by a Preface (to a Book of a
very distant subject, The Saints verseverance) wherein is inserted, a Discourse
touching the Epistles of Ignatius, and the Episcopacy in them asserted, and
some animadversions on Dr. H. H. his Dissertations on that subject: And this
Preface (and these contents of it) le^t it might be less discernable, thought
fit to be expressed in the Title page, and subscribed by John Owen, servant of
Jesus Christ in the work of the Gospel.

2. And although the speedy return of such tasks is not overgratefull to me,
yet because 1. I conceive it is his pleasure that we should enter this
commerce: And 2. because the work of the Gospel is so glorious an employment,
that I cannot be averse or flow to the giving all possible satisfaction to any
which professes to labor in it: And 3. because, if the Reader so consent,
this discourse may be annexed to the former debates with the Provincial
Assembly, being likely to be on the same heads, which are there spoken to, I
shall not doubt thus speedily to undertake the labor of it; and if his
Animadversions prove any way useful to me, I shall acknowledge by whom I have
profited, retract most readily what he shall give me cause to retract, and
never multiply any debates, which may be thus more compendiously ended, being
confident that no miscarriage of mine (of which yet I am not conscious to have
committed any in the Book of Dissert.) will be able to prejudice the main truth
which is there defended, the Institution of Bishops by the Apostles.

CHAP. I.
Of the Apostolical Canons.

Sect. 1.
The Controversy about them. The Codex Canonum. What is meant by Apooryphal,
and so by Genuine Canons. The two mistakes of the Praefacer, which produces
his Animadversion. What is meant by the title, Apostolical Canons. The
Praefacers ungrounded suggestion against the writings of the first times.

Numb. (...). TO set out then, with all speed that may be, on this new Stage,
not knowing of what length it may prove, the first Animadversion I find my
self concerned in, is in Praef. p. 6.
these words.

The first Writings that are imposed on us after the Canonical Scriptures, are
the eight Books of Clement, commonly called, The Apostles Constitutions, being
pretended to be written by him at their appointment, with the Canons ascribed
to the same persons. These we shall bu^ salute; for besides that they are but
faintly defended by any of the Papists, disavowed and disclaimed as Apocryphal
by the most learned of them, as Bellarmine de Script. Eccles. in Clem. who
approves only of fifty Canons of eighty five. Baronius, An. Dom. 102* 14. who
adds thirty more, and Bi^ius with a little enlargement of Canons in Tit. C^n.
T. 1. Con. p. 17. and have been thoroughly disproved and decryed by all
Protestant writers that have had any occasion to deal with them; their folly,
and falsity, their impostures and ^triflings have of late been so fully
manifested by Dallaeus de Pseudepigrap^i^ Apost. that nothing need be added
thereunto. Of him may Dr. H. H. learn the truth of that insinuation of his,
Dissert. 2 c 6. sect. 3. Canone Apostolico secundo (semper inter genninos
habito) but of the confidence of this Author in his assertions afterward.

2. I am not here much surprised 1. with this charge of untruth; and 2. this
promise, that my confidence in asserting shall be discovered, knowing that it
was one of Aristotle's insinuations in his Elenchs, at the beginning of a
Dispute to endeavor to put the Respondent in passion, and then he might easily
have fallacies imposed on him, (...). If this were his design, I have more
reasons than that one, to hope his pardon, if I do not thus gratify him. And
although there be not one word said in this place, to prove either of these
charges, but I am appointed to learn one from Mr. Daille, whose book I have not
been so curious as to see, and to expect the other afterward from the
Prefacer; yet being concerned to know that veracity and humility are my duties,
as I am a Christian, and that I ought not to live one minute under the scandal
of having offended against either of them, and having yet no motive to retract
that expression in the Dissert. I am obliged to render an account of my using
it. And it is this.

3. In the second Canon of the Council in Trullo. An. 681. I find a conciliarie
affirmation of eighty five Canons under the title of (...), the Canons of the
holy and honorable Apostles before us. And what was there confirmed is farther
ratified by the second Council of Nice, An. 787. which cites the 53d of those
Canons. And this I take for a testimony of the Eastern Churches reception of
that number of 85 Apostolical Canons at that time. Whereas in the Western
Churches, both before, and after this time, although the Canons of the Apostles
were by the Eastern communicated to them, yet that number was not received, but
in a Council of seventy Bishops at Rome, under Pope Gelasius, somewhat before
500 years after CHRIST, the Book of the Apostles Canons, was defined to be
Apocryphal. By Apocry^hal here I conceive to be meant such as are not
obligatorie, w^ch are not so owned, or received by the Church, as to be entered
into Codex, ordinarily known by the name of Corpus Canonum* (...), in Bibl,
Number. 112.
Ph^ti^s his style, The body of Synodical Canons, their Novell. Constable 131.
(...) in Justinia^ their Rule of Discipline, in like manner as the Books of
Canonical Scripture (to which (...). Nov. 131. See Anton. Augustine. l 1. de
^mend. Gratiani, Dial. 11.
Justinian added the (...), or definitions of the four first General Councils)
made up their Rule of Doctrines: That there was such a Codex, we find in the
fourth General Council (that of Chalcedon) when the Book of Canons, as well as
the Bible, was solemnly brought in at the opening of the Council, and * called
for to be read before them as occasion required. And it is sufficiently known
what Justellus observes, That the Christian Church was ruled of old by a double
Law, Divine, the Books of the Canonical Scripture, and Canonical, the Codex of
Canons: And those Canons that were not received into that Codex, though they
might hold the authority due to ancient pieces, be esteemed worthy the reading
and observing, were yet styled Apocryphal, i. e. useful, though not
obligatory, reverenced for their Antiquity, but not allowed the power, or title
of Laws, as the body of the Canons is known to be, (...), we observe them as
Laws, says Justinian, and they are thence called Nomocanon, and Canon Law.

(...) That this is the meaning of the word Apocryphal, I shall conclude from
the story of the fact; for soon after this sentence of that Council of Rome,
within very few years, we know that they were set up and received in that very
place, where they had been thus looked on as Apocryphal: For Dionysius Exiguus
about the year 527. made a collection of Canons, ex Graecis exemplaribus.
Canones Ecclesiasticos -- composuit, quos ^odie usu celeberrimo Ecclesia Romana
complectitur, out of the Greek copies he composed Ecclesiastical Canons, which
at this day the Church of Rome embraces, and uses most honorably, as
Cassiodore his contemporarie and consort says of him, Divin. Lect. c. 23. In
this collection he set fifty of these in the front, under the title of
Apostolical Canons, prefacing this concerning them, In principio Canones, qui
dicuntur Apostolorum de Graeco transtulimus, quibus quia plurimi consensum non
praebuere facilem, hoc ipsum ignorare vestram noluimus sanctitatem, quamvis
postea qu^dam constituta Pontificum ex ipsis Canonibus assumpta esse videantur:
In the beginning we have translated out of Greek the Canons, which are said to
be the Apostles, to which because very many have been hard to give assent, we
have thought fit to mention so much to you, though afterward* some
constitutions of Bishops seem to have been taken out of these very Canons. Here
it is evident, 1. that what was a few years since looked on as Apocryphal, is
within a while received into their Codex, cel^berrimo usu, said Cassiodore at
that very time. And 2. whilst it was not in the Codex, yet Constitutions of the
Bishops were taken ^ut of them, which argues to me, that they were not to be
rejected, as to be disliked, but only so, as not to be obligator^, any farther
than as some new Decrees of the Church should give them their authority. So
again in Isidore Mercator's Collection, he prefaceth thus, Propter ^orum
authoritatem c^teris concil^s praepos^imus Canones, qui dicuntur Apost^l^rum,
lic^t a quibusdam Apocrypha dicantur, quoniam plures eos recipient, and sancti
Patres eorum sententias Synodali authoritate roboraverunt, and inter Canonicas
posuerunt constitutiones. In respect of their authority we have before the rest
of the Councils past set down the Canons of the Apostles, so called, though by
some they are said to be Apocryphal, because more receive them, and the holy
Fathers have confirmed them by authority of Council, and placed them among
Canonical Constitution* Where the opposition is clear, betwixt Apocryphal on
one side, and confirmed by Councils, and placed among Canonical constitutions
on the other side.

5. One thing only I can foresee to be by Mr. Daille or any man objected
against this, viz. the Censure that In Praef. ad Council. Toler. See Gratian. d.
16. c. 1 and Anton. Augustine. de ^m^nd. Gr^tian. l. 1. dial. 6. p. 47. ^dit.
Par. 1607.
Isidore Hispalensis has past upon the Apostolic Canons, in these words
(which I see are thought by some learned men to refer to that Council at Rome
under Gelasius, but whether by Mr. Daille, I know not) Eodem nec seeds
Apostolica recepit, nec sancti patres illis assensum praelucerunt, pro co quod
ab haereticis sub nomine Apostolorum compositi dignoscuntur: The Apostolic See
received them not, and the holy Fathers have not allowed them their assent,
because they are discerned to be framed by haereticks under the name of the
Apostles. Here I shall offer my conjecture (and submit it to better judgments)
that Isidore speaks not of the first fifty Canons, which were certainly before
his time (who was a member of the Council of Toledo in Spain, An. 633.)
received into the Roman Codex, as has already appeared, nor consequently
refers to the Synod under Gelasius (which, upon other reasons I acknowledge,
spoke even of those fifty) but of the whole number of 85, for in those latter
35 it is, and not in the first fifty, that the Apostles are praetended to be
the Authors of them, viz. Can. 82. Where they call Philemon's servant (...),
our Onesimus, and Can. 85. (...), the Acts, or Canons of us the Apostles,
whereas no such thing is so much as intimated in the first fifty: For as for
those words in the fiftieth Canon which refer to the Apostles, (...), according
to the sentence of Christ, and our constitution by the spirit, it is evident
that they are in Turrian's Edition, inserted, and added to that Canon, after
the words, with which Dionysius Exiguus his old collection and translation
ended. And so in the former part of the Canon [(...), for he said not unto us]
(as if the Writers were the Apostles) it is certain that the [(...) to us] is
inserted: And accordingly in Balsamon's Text and Comment, which I have before
me, the Canon is entire without either of those insertions. To all which I may
add, that the matter of all those first fifty Canons, and the very form of
words, is such, as gives not the least occasion to think them composed by
haereticks (certainly not put under the Apostles names by those haereticks) as
Isidore affirms of those of which he speaks.

6. This is to my understanding the meaning of the Controversy concerning the
number and authority of these Canons, which were to be accounted Apocryphal,
and which not, and so likewise which Genuine, and which not, and to this
Controversy it is, that my insinuation and my words refer, and the second
Canon being one of those former 50, which though they have been counted
Apocryphal in one sense, were yet Genuine in another, i. e. none of the later
addition of 35. which are called by learned men novitii and adulterate, I
thought I had reason (and cannot but still think it) to say that that second
Canon was semper inter genuinos habitus, always accounted genuine, i. e.
received and acknowledged among the Canons of the Ancient Church by those who
controverted, and rejected the other 35.

7. Thus much may perhaps suffice to remove the two mistakes, which by some
indications I conceive to have produced this Animadversion: For 1. when in the
words immediately precedent, he says, they are disavowed and disclaimed by the
most learned Papists as Apocryphal, this I suppose must be his meaning, either
that by that Synod at Rome under Pope Gelasius, they were defined to be
Apocryphal (and then as there is truth in that, so I may be permitted to have
told him what I conceive meant by Apocryphal in that place those that were not
yet received into their Codex) or else that the rest besides the first 50 are
disclaimed by the most learned Papists, so I learn from my Lord Primate, that
they are by Humbert in his Answer to Nicetas, Sancti Patres Canones Apostolorum
numeraverunt inter Apocrypha, exceptis capitulis quinquaginta, quae decreverunt
regulis Orthodoxiae adjungenda. The Holy Fathers have numbered the Canons of the
Apostles among Apocryphal writings, except only fifty Canons, which they have
decreed to be annexed to the rules of the true doctrine, i. e. to the Book of
Canons received by them: (Where again, by the way, the notion of Apocryphal is
evident, as opposed to those which are received into the Codex, Regulis
Orthodoxiae adjungenda) And so by Bellarmine, whom he names in the front of
those most learned Papists, and of him says expressly and truly, that he
approves only of 50 Canons of 85 (de script. Eccles. in Cl^m.) And then again,
I have now minded him of that which was before evident, that the second Canon,
which was cited by me, was one of those fifty, and so not disproved by that
learned Papist. As for the other two, Baronius, and Binius, whom he names to
the same purpose as those who have disavowed and disclaimed them as
Apocryphael, I shall not accuse his confidence, but must think he was in some
haste, that he could do so, Baronius being by him acknowledged to add 30
more, and Binius to have made a little enlargement of Canons, which sure does
not intimate that they disavowed, or disclaimed the fifty.

8. So when he says of them, that they are faintly defended by any of the
Papists, I shall desire to know (among many others, Bovius, Lamb. Gruterus,
Stapleton Haleander, etc.) what he thinks of Turrian, whether he were a Papist
or no, and whether he were a faint defender of them, nay whether Monsieur
Daille take no notice of his zeal for them? If he do not, I shall very much
wonder at it: If he do, I shall have the more reason for my question, how he
that sends me to be taught by M. Daille, had not learned so much from him, that
there was some Papist, by whom they were not faintly defended? So again when he
says that they have been thoroughly disproved and decryed by all Protestant
writers that have had any occasion to deal with them, I might certainly mind
him of more Protestants than one that have been far from decrying them. I shall
not mention, as I might, the several Bishops of our Church, since the
Reformation, and our Divines in their writings, that make their Appeals to them
frequently, and with as pompous forms of citations, as I have done [semper
inter genuinos habito] I shall not add the learned Hugo Grotius, because I
know not whether any, or all of these may not be deemed by him to be no
Protestants. Only what does he think of Frigevillaeus Gautius? He certainly
An. 1593. in his second part of his Palma Christiana (dedicated to Queen
Elizabeth) c. 1. and 2. was far from disavowing, and decrying those Canons: How
little short he came of Turrian himself, I shall not now tell him, lest he be
disavowed as no Protestant, for so doing, but leave him at his leisure to
inquire, whether one such example might not have taken off from the generality
of the affirmation [decryed by all Protestants] or indeed whether D. Blondel's
vouching them in the manner which I shall by and by set down, might not have
had some force in it, if he had taken notice of such things. But all this by
the way, as an Essa^, that some other men, as well as H. H. may be confident in
asserting.

9. Secondly, When immediately after his Animadversion on my words, he mentions
his Exceptions to the Books of Apostolical Constitutions and Canons taken out
of Daille, and the learned Usher, it is apparent that these all belong to the
Books under Clement's name, called the Apostles Constitutions: But then it must
be remembered, that that Book of (...), or Constitutions is another thing,
clearly distinct from the Book called the Apostles Canons, and there is but one
way imaginable to involve the later under the censure that belongs justly to
the former, and it is this, That in some Copies the Constitutions and Canons
are put together into one Volume (and that (...) (...) (i. e. in the volume of
Clements Constitutions) (...). Numb 112.
Photius his time) and that in the end of the Canons, there is a solemn
confirmation of the Constitutions. But then it must be remembered again, that
these are later Copies, which so confound them, and I take not them to be
genuine, and that Canon is the eighty fifth of that Book, and so no part of
the first fifty, which I suppose to be the only genuine Canons, and
consequently that none of the ridiculous things in the Constitutions is
imputable to that former Collection, but indeed, on the contrary, that one
expression in that eighty fifth Canon, which prescribes the keeping them (...).
close, because of some mysterious passages in them, is justly thought by
learned men to betray them both (the later 35 Canons, and the Constitutions so
magnified by them) to be of a much later Edition, than that which they pretend
to.

10. And thus I hope I have vindicated my self, and given the grounds of my
Assertion, And for the confidence, I did not, I confess, expect to be charged
with any immoderate degree of it from any, nor do I yet discern how those few
words in the Parenthesis (semper inter genuinos habito) could be deemed so
criminously guilty of it, or that he that undertook to be my Monitor, having
in so short a time proved so much more guilty of it, should in any reason think
himself the most competent for that office.

11. To help him to any appearance of reason, and so to qualify him thus to
charge me, some want of observation of vulgar style must be necessary, either
in not adverting what is ordinarily meant by their title of Apostolic Canons,
or some other the like. That he takes the meaning of that title to be their
pretension to be written by the Apostles, or by Clement at their appointment, I
conclude from the words with which he begins that Paragraph [The first
writings, that are imposed on us after the Canonical Scriptures, are the eight
Books of Clement, commonly called the Apostles Constitutions, being pretended
to be written by him at their appointment, with the Canons ascribed to the same
persons] and if according to this his notion, he conceive me by the word
genuine to affirm that they are rightly so ascribed, he is mistaken.

12. That those Canons, whether to the number of 85. or but of 50 were written
by the Apostles, I never meant, but neither is that the meaning of those that
cite them, and call them as I have done, by the vulgar name of Apostolic
Canons: If there be any doubt of this, I shall prove it by competent
testimonies, whether among Papists or Protestants. Of the former, in stead of
many, I instance only in that account, which Gabriel Albispine in his
Observations renders of it, * Lib. 1.
that some of these Canons (the fifty he means) being made by the Successors of
the Apostles (the Bishops of the Ancient Church) who were called (says
Tertullian de Praseript.) Apostolici viri, Apostolical men, Apostolicorum
primum Canones, dein nonnullorum Latinorum ignorantia, aliquo^ literarum
detractione, Apostolorum dicti sunt, They were first called the Canons of the
Apostolicks, after by the ignorance of some Latin Writers, and by the taking
away of a few Letters, they were called the Canons of the Apostles.

13. Among Protestants I might instance in the Archbishop of Armagh, here cited
under the name of the Learned Usher, who by stiling the fifty, Veteres Canones
Ecclesiasticos ^b antiquitatem Apostolicos doctos, the old Ecclesiastical
Canons for their Antiquity styled Apostolical, and distinguishing them from the
thirty five nova Capitula and novitii Canones, new Chapters, and novice Canons,
clearly justifies all that I have said: But I have no reason to go any farther
than Dr. Blondel himself, with whom I had then to do, and I am sure it is
ordinary with him to cite these Canons under the title of Apostolic, and so to
yield them their authority (yet I suppose is not thought by his Colleague Mr.
Daille to have made the Apostles themselves the Authors of them) you may see it
twice together in two lines, Apol. pro sent. Hieron. page 96. Anno Dom. 363.
Laodicano Canone 56. secundum Apostolicum 38. cautum fuit, Care was taken by
the Council of Laodicaea, Can. 56. according to the 38th Apostolical Canon,
calling it first an Apostolic Canon, and then affirming it the rule by which
the Laodicaean Canon was made, and so clearly giving it a greater Antiquity
than that Council: And immediately again, Apostolico 33d (long antequam
Ancyrae conveniret Synodus) in the 33d Apostolic Canon, long before the Synod
met at Ancyra, which we know was in the year 314 and what was acknowledged to
be long before that, must be of a pretty antiquity, although it were not
written by the Apostles.

14. It Is true indeed some have thought fit to use greater exactness of speech,
as the Council of Paris, Anno 580. calling them Gregor Tur^ner^ H^st. ^ra^ lib.
5. (...). 18.
Canones quasi Apostolicos, the Canons as it were Apostolic; and Dionysius
Exiguus, and Isidorus Mercator, Canones qui dicuntur Apostolicorum, the Canons
said to be the Apostles. And Hincmarus Rhemensis says, they were A primis
temporibus traditione viritim Apostolicorum virorum, mentibus commendati; From
the first times by tradition of Apostliocal persons commended to the minds of
men, from man to man, and a devotis quibusque collecti, collected by all devout
men. See Council. Gallic. l. 2. p. 473, 474. And as for those which pretend the
whole 85. as well as the Constitutions to have been peun'd by Clemens, there is
little doubt but they did, by so doing endeavor to impose false ware upon the
Church, but still this praejudgeth not my affirmation of the former fifty,
that they were always accounted genuine. Not meaning thereby that they were
written by the Apostles, or at their appoint-ment by Clemens (I say not a word,
that so much as insinuates either of those to be my sense, and I can justly
affirm it was not) but genuine, i. e. truly, and without contradiction (as
(...) and (...) are taken for Synonyma's in this matter) what they were by the
Church generally taken to be, i. e. Canons of ancient Bishops (before the times
of the General Councils) of Apostolical persons, success^rs of the Apostles, in
Churches, where they praesided, called Apostolical Churches.

15. I add no more of a matter so clear, yet before I proceed, I shall desire
the Author of this Animadversion, to consider how unjustly his Censure has
fallen (in the page immediately praecedent) on the Writings of the first times,
immediately after the Apostles fell asleep. His words are these, I must be
forced to preface the nomination of them (the first Writers) with some
considerations: The first is that known passage of Hegesippus in Eusebius. Eccl.
Hist. l. 3. 26. (...). Setting out the corruption of the Church as to Doctrine,
immediately after the Apostles fell asleep, whereof whosoever will impartially,
and with disengaged judgments search into the writings that of those days do
remain, will perhaps find more cause than is commonly imagined with him to
complain.

16. Here is a ^ad jealousy raised against all Antiquity, even of the purest
times next the Apostles, and indefinitely without any limitation, on the
writings of those days that remain, (...), i. e. all that are extant, in one
common mass, and yt (besides that one saying of Hegesippus) no one word added
to found it on (but only dubious, suspicious expressions [will perhaps find
more cause than is commonly imagined] to warn all how they give any trust to
the purest Antiquity. Whereas all that Hegesippus there says, is only this
(which they that pay most reverence to Antiquity, take as much notice of as he
could wish) viz. that the poison of the Heretical, or Apostatical, or
Atheistical Gnostics, in express words, the (...) the sect of the Gnostics,
falsely so called (the same that had been mentioned by St. Paul to Timothy) and
(...), the Atheistical seducers did openly set up against the truth of Christ,
as soon as ever the Apostles were dead. Which being by Hegesippa^ terminated in
the known despisers and persecuters of the true Church and Orthodox professors,
the grievous Wolves that worried the flock, and those constantly resisted, and
combated with, preached against, and written against by the Fathers and ancient
Writers, and never observed by any man to have gain^d on them, or infused any
the least degree ^f their poison into them, or their Writings, which are come
to us (which to undertake to make good against any opposer is no high pitch of
confidence, again to be censured in me) It is a sad condition that the just and
the unjust, the false Teachers and the Orthodox Professors should fall under
the same envy, be involved under the same black censure, those that watched
over the flock as Shepherds, and often laid down their lives for the Sheep, be
again defamed and martyred by us their unkind posterity, under pretense,
forsooth, that they were in the Conspiracy of the Wolves also. I leave this to
his, and the Readers consideration, and so proceed to the next charge.

CHAP. II.
Of Ignatius's Epistles.

Sect. 1.
The comparison betwixt them and the Epistles of Clement, and Polycarpe. Of
Salmasius and Blondel being the first that rejected them. Of the Vir
doctissimus, answered by Vedelius. Of Bishop Mountague's censure of Vedelius.
(...): Of Salmasius's Contumely, Title of Learned Grammarian. Illecebre. (...).
Consnlting Authors to serve our own turns.

Numb* 1. THE next charge I find in the eighth page of this Preface, in these
words.

A late learned Doctor in his Dissertations about Episcopacy, or Dispute for it
against Salmasius and Blondellus, tells us, that we may take a taste of h^s
confidence in asserting, Dissert. 2. cap. 23. 1. That Salmasius and Blondellus,
mortalium omnium primi, thought these Epistles to be feigned or counterfeit.
And with more words, cap 24. he would make us believe Unicum D. Blondellum aut
alterum fortasse inter omnes mortales Wallonem Messalinnm c. 23. sect. 3.
that these Epistles of Ignatius were always of the same esteem with that of
Clemens from Rome to the Corin^^ians, or that of Polycarpus to the Philippians,
which we have in Eusebius, and then he adds, in the judgment of Salmasius and
Blondellus, Solus Ignatius (...), cujus tamen Epistolae pari semper cum illis
per universam ab omniaevo patrum nostro^um memoriam reveren^ia excipiebantur:
nec prius a mortalium quovis in Judicium voc^bantur (mul^o minus ut in re
certa, and extra dub^ posita inter plane (...) and (...) rejici^bantur) quam
Presby^ Anglicani patribus suis contumeliam facere coepissent, iisque aut
suppetias far, a^t rem gratam facere (quibus illecebris adducti nescio) hi
du^ non ignobiles Presbyteranae causae hyperaspistae in selpsos recipissent. Of
his two learned Antagonists one is dead, and the other almost blind, or
probably they would have dealt not much more gently with the Doctor for his
Parenthesis (quibus illecebris adducti nescio) then one of them formerly did
(Salmasius de subscribendis and signandis Testamentis, seu specimen Consul.
Animad. Heraldi, cap. 1. p. 19. Nuper quidam etiam nebulo in Anglia,
Capellanus, ut audio, Regis, Hammondus nomine, libro quem edidit de Potestate
Clavium, Salmasio iratus, quod aliam quam ipse sententiam probet ac defendat,
haud potui^ majus convicium, quod ei diceret, invenire, quam si Grammaticum
appellaret) for his terming him a Grammarian, yet indeed of him (such was the
hard entertainment he found on all hands) it was by many supposed that he was
illecebris adductus (and they stick not to name the b^ he was caught withal)
wrought over in a manner to destroy the faith of that which he had before set
up and established.

For the thing it self affirmed by the Doctor, I cannot enough admire with what
oscitancie or contempt he considers his Readers (of which manner of proceeding
this is far from being the only instanc:) that he should confidently impose
such things upon them. He that has written so much about Ignatius, and does so
triumph in his authority, ought doubtless to have considered these concernments
of his Author, which a eobvi^us to every ordinary Inquirer: Ved^lius his
Edition of Ignatius at Geneva came forth with his Notes in the year 1623. long
before either Salmasius o^ Blondellus had written any thing about the
suppositi^iosness of these Epistles; in the Apology of Ignatius whereto
prefixed, he is forced to labor and sweat in the Answer of one, whom he
deservedly st^cs virum Doctissimum; (arguing not contemptibly) that Ignatius
never wrote any such Epistles, and that all those which were carried about in
his name, were false and counterfeit.

But perhaps the Doctor had taken caution of one of the Fathers of his Church,
that a Genevensiqus istis Typographis praeter frauds and sucos and praestigias
non es^ quod quicquam expectemus (Montac. Appar. l. 5. sect. 4^. p. 19.) and so
thought not fit to look into any thing that comes from them.

Especially may this be supposed to have some influence upon him, considering
the gentle censure added in the next words by that Reverend Father of his
Church, concerning the endeavor of Vedelius, in his Notes on that Edition.
Neque audax ille and importunus Ignatii Censor quicquam attulit ad paginas suas
implendas praeter inscit^am, and incuriam and impudentiam singularem (ne saevi
magne sacerdos) dum ad suum Gene^ vatismum antiquitatem detorqu^t invitissimam,
non autem, quod oportu^ Calvinismum amussitat ad antiquitate^. And what I pray
you is the reason of his Episcopal censure? That he should deal with poor Ved^s
in that language wherewith men of his order and authority were wont to deal
with preaching Ministers at their Visitations? why this poor man in that
passage which you have in the Epistle to the Magnesians (in that Edition p.
56.) where treating of the Ancient Fathers expectations of the coming of
Christ, retains the common reading of (...), referring the word to their
expectation of seeing him come in the flesh, which upon the testimony of our
Savior himself, they desired to see, and saw it not, not correcting it by a
change of (...) into (...), so referring it to their faith in Christ, and
salvation by him* as in his judgment he ought to have done. (...), A little
thing would provoke the indignation of a Prelate against any thing that came
from Geneva.

I say I would suppose that this might divert ou^ Doctor from casting his (...)
Veaclius, whose defensative would have informed him that th^stles ^^d been
opposed as false and counterfeit, before ever Salmasius or Blondellus had taken
them into con^de^ation; but that I finding hi^e^imes ^ing on tha^ Geneva
Edition.

For whereas Cap. 2. sect. 2. he tells you that he intends to abide only upon
the Edition of Is^^^ Vossius in G^eek, published from the Archives of the
L^b^a^y of Laurence di Medi^es, and the Latin Edition published by Bishpp
Usher ou of our Library here at Oxford, yet cap. 8. being pressed with the
testim ny o^ the writers of the Epistle to the Magnesians, calling Episcopacy
(...) plainly intimating a comparative Novelty in that order to others i^ the
Chu^ches, and fearing (as well he might) that his translation of (...) into the
ordination of a young man, would scarce be received by the men of his own
praejudice (for surely he never supposed that he should impose on any other, by
such gross figments) he prefers the Vedelian Edition (where these words are
not so used) before it, and informs us, that ^ic legend^ (as it is in the
Geneva Edition) suadet to^a Epistolae ser^es. Now this truly is marvelious to
me (if the Doctor consulteth Authors any farther, than merely to serve his
present turn) how he could ever advi^e with that Edition of Vedelius, and yet
so considently affirm, that Sa^s and Blondellus were the first that rejected
these Epistles as feigned and counterfeit.

2. The sum of this charge is* 1. that I would make men believe that Ignatius
his Epistles were always of the same esteem with that of Clement, and of
Polycarpe. 2dly That (...) say that Salmasius and Blondel were the first that
thought these Epistles (of Ignatius) to be feigned and counterfeit. 3dly That
this is in me a confidence in asserting, an admirable piece of oscitancie and
contempt of the Reader, confidently to impose upon him, and all this against
express evidence, when 4thly long before either of these, Vedelius was fain to
answer a vir doctissimus, arguing that Ignatius never wrote such Epistles, and
this the more to be admired, because 5thly it appears that I had advised with
that Edition of Vedelius, where those arguments are propounded, and answered,
and yet say that Salmasius and Blondel were the first that rejected these
Epistles. To these five branches of the original, and grand charge are added
incidentally these other passages. 1 That if Salmasius were not dead, and
Blondel almost ^lind, they would probably have called me knave for using this
Parenthesis (quibus illecebris adducti nescio, I know not by what invitations
they were brought to do what they did) adding of the former, that indeed it is
by many supposed that he was illecebris adductus. 2 That Bishop Montacute
inveighs bitterly against the Geneva Writers, and particularly against Vedelius
his Censures on Ignatius. 3 That my interpretation of (...) by the ordination
of a young man, is a gross figment. 4 That it is doubtful whether I do
consult Authors any farther than is for my own turn.

3. To these particulars, which will soon be found to be of no very weighty
importance, yet such as they are, I shall punctually make my reply.

4. For the first, I shall not need labor for proofs to balance the
estimation of Ignatius's Epistles, either with that of Clemens, or Polycarpe:
For, beside that here is not a word objected against it, nor so much as the
ordinary charge of confident asserting affixed to this part of my speech, but
my words are barely repeated without any exception to them. The thing may be
manifest to any that shall, for Clemens, peruse the Testimonies out of ancient
Writers, concerning his first Epistle, that to the Corinthians, set down to his
hand by Mr. Patrick Young, before his Edition of that Epistle, and then compare
them with those concerning Ignatius's Epistles prefixed by the Archbishop of
Armagh to his former Edition of Ig^ati^, and to that add but this one place of
Eusebius, E^cl. Hist. l. 3* c. (...). where speaking of those Writings reserved
to his time, wherein the Apostolic doctrine was (...) by way of Records
delivered to them, he instanceth in Ignatius ((...), in the Collection of
Epistles which he had formerly mentioned from Polycarpe) and in Clement' s
Epistle, which in the name of the Church of the Romans he sent to the Church of
the Corinthians, and was (...), received and confessed by all, which passage does
directly assert this exactness of tarallel betwixt them two, as equal in
conveying Apostolic Doctrine to us.

5. To which I may add, that the prejudices our present volume of Ignatius's
Epistles are under, are not greater than those which lie against the Epistle of
Clement, set forth from Tecla's ^opie. I shall instance in sour: 1 Among the
examples of generous Christian sufferers of that Age, proposed to be treated of
((...), Page 7.
(...). Let us come to the eminent persons which are nearest us, let us take
the generous copies of our age) immedately after Peter and Paul, and those that
came in to them, are mentioned (...), the Daughters of Danaus and Dirce, of
whom it is said, that having suffered sore, or cruel contumelies, or
punishments, they came to the constant course of Faith, and being weak in
body, received a generous reward

6. This is so unfit for the place wherein it is found in Tecla's copy (and we
have no better, or other to mend it by) that Mr. Young has set a mark upon it,
as that which he cannot allow to be genuine Clemens.

7. Secondly: Speaking of the Sea, he has these words, (...) Page 28.
(...) (...), Patric. Junius.
(...), the Ocean unbounded to men, or, which men cannot pass over, and the
world that are beyond it.

8. Thirdly: Speaking of the Resurrection, he not only offers to contemplation
the Resurrection, which every day brings us, Page 34
(...), the night lies down to sleep, the day rises again, but also the (...)
the wonderful sign which is in Arabia, the Phoenix, which being (...), but one
of the species, lives five hundred years, then drawing near to death, makes a
nest of Frankincense and Myrrh, and other Spices, and goes into it, and dies;
then out of the corruption of the flesh grows a Worm, which being fed with the
moisture of the dead creature, grows to perfection and wings, then carries the
nest where the former bird was entombed (and embalmed as it were) from Arabia
to Egypt, to Heliopolis, and in the day time in the presence of all men, lays
it upon the Altar of the Sun, and returns again. And the Priests looking into
their Records, and keeping exact calculation of the time, find that at the end
of five hundred years this is done. And all this, says he, afforded us by GOD,
who (...), by this bird shows the magnificent greatness of his promise.

9. These two latter are the objections of Photius himself Biblioth. n. 126.
(...), says he, one may find fault with him in these; adding also another
(the 4th which I proposed to mention) that as the second Epistle under his name
(which N. 113.
elsewhere he says (...), is rejected as supposititious) (...), inserts some
passages as from Scripture, which are strangers to it, so (...). N 126.
this first Epistle is not perfectly free in this matter.

10. These four prejudices notwithstanding (and a fifth also by him mentioned)
it is the same Photiu^ his judgment, that it is (...), an Epistle worthily
esteemed, (...) Biblioth. n. 113.
(...), thought by many worthy of such reception as to be read publicly.

11. And so it has among all men generally been entertained, and Mr. Yong's
Edition of it justly looked on by this Prefacer, as a genuine piece, abundantly
testified to of old, a writing full of ancient simplicity, humility and zeal,
and testimony solemnly fetched from it, to prove the but two Orders in the
Church, and the power of the People in Ecclesiastical affairs.

12. Now, as on one side all these objections may, I suppose, have very
competent Answers adapted to them, and I think for the first three Mr. Yong's
Notes may be sufficient, that the Danaides and Dirce was an insertion of some
Scribe taken in from the Margent into the Text, that the Ocean was the British
Sea, and the Worlds beyond it these Islands, that the Story of the Phoenix is
no Fable, but vouched by very great and ancient Authors, though perhaps
fabulosis aucta (and M. Blondel, I hear, has written a Dissertation in defense
of it) so I am to think that all the objections against Ignatius, as far as our
Copy, which we adhere to, is concerned, are answered also.

13. And so still the parallel remains complete betwixt Clement's one Epistle
set out from the King's Library, and Ignatius's seven set out from the
Medicaean Greek, and our old Latin Copies.

14. And for Pol^carpe and him, the comparison will be more easy by viewing
the testimonies by the Lord Primate produced out of the Ancients concerning
each of them, prefixed before the one common volume of both their Epistles: And
indeed of them two, the advantage is clearly on Ignatius's side, because as
generally they that make mention of the one, join the other with him, with the
same reverence, only giving the precedence to Ignatius ( Nunquid non possum
tibi to^^; vitum Scriptorum ser^em commovere Ignatium, Polycarpu^ c 9.
St. Hierome ad Helvidium may stand for many; Can I not, says he, summon the
whole Catalogue of ancient Writers, Ignatius, Polycarpe --) So Polycarpe
himself in his Epistle gives his testimony and commendations of Ignatius and
his Epistles, and from him it is that originally we fetch our collection, and
just esteem of them. I hope I shall not need to add more to justify my
con^idence in that matter.

15. Secondly: For my affirming that Salmasius and Blondel were the first that
thought these Epistles of Ignatius to be feigned and counterfeit (which is the
one thing that must bear all the weight of my accusation for confidence in
asserting, confidence in imposing upon Readers, oscit ancie, or contempt in
considering them) my account will be soon given, by viewing my periods, on
which this charge is laid, and they are three; two set down in his Text, one in
his Margent: The two former are fully and truly cited by him: That in the
Margent is set down imperfectly, and lies thus in the Dissert. (it should be)
c. 23. sect. 3. In his qui^pe (Rebus in Ecclesia^ primaeva gestis, ut an
Ignatius Epistolas scripserit) unicum D. Blondellum, aut alterum fortassis
inter omnes mortales Walonem Messalinum rectius judicare, quam patres
universos: This is to conclude, that in matters of fact done in the first Ages
of the Church, one Blondel, or perhaps his second Salmasius, pass a righter
judgment than all the Fathers.

16. The plain sense and drift of these words is this, that when there was a
Copy of Ignatius produced, which had in it the several sentences, which the
Fathers (all, without exception of one) cited from Ignatius, by which it
appears that those Fathers universally gave credit to these Epistles in this
form, in which D. Blondel, and Salmasius reject them; and when this was taken
notice of by Blondel as an objection against his discourse [his ipsis Epistolis
Patres fidem adhibuisse, That the Fathers gave credit to these very Epistles]
and that answered by Blondel, with a Quid tum! Quam multa minime suspicaces ac
imparatos and fefellerunt semper, and quotidie fallunt? What matter for that?
How many things both have always deceived, and do daily deceive persons, that
are not suspicious, and upon their guard? From this answer of Blondels I
conclude, that if he has reason on his side in it, then the judgment of one
or two Modern Writers, Blondel and Salmasius is to be preferred before all the
Fathers, and that in a matter of story, a narration of things done in the
Primitive times, wherein the Fathers lived, and from whence these others are so
many hundred years distant.

17. This conclusion of mine, as it is most undeniably deduced from Blondel's
words, and is, I think, a competent evidence of the unreasonableness of his
proceedings (for it is obvious to all men, who are the most competent Judges or
Witnesses of matters of fact, sure they which are nearest the times, and have
the most uniform consent of others that speak of it, not they that are but
singular Affirmers, and at a vast distance from it) so it is a full
interpretation of my meaning, not that Blondel and Salmasius were the first of
men, which ever opposed any Volume of Ignatius's Epistles, or that thought them
(I mean again, any that go under that name, or any volume of such, set out by
any) feigned or counterfeit, but that they were the first which rejected those
more emendate Copies, found upon trial to accord with all that the Fathers cite
from them, and so which are by themselves confessed to be the very Epistles,
which the Fathers used, and owned as Ignatius's.

18. An evidence of the truth of this I shall produce from Blondel's own words
in his Preface p. 40* where mentioning how greedily he laid hold of the
Laurentian Copy, lent him by Vossius in Manuscript, how he transcribed it with
his own hand, collated it diligently with the places cited from these Epistles
by the Ancients (and if it were done studiose diligently, those Ancients must
be, Polycarpe, Irenaeus, Origin, Eusebius, Athanasius, Hierome, Chrysostom,
Theodoret, etc.) at length he confesses se gratulatum seculo nostro, quod illud
ipsum exemplar quo ante 1300 annos usus erat Eusebius, novam ipsi propediem
affulsuram lucem sponderet, that he congratulated our age, that that very
Copy, which Eusebius used 1300 years ago, promised now to bestow new light
upon the Age.

19. Here it appears, that in his dispassionate, impartial judgment (founded
on prudent consideration, and his having used the best means of judging) this
Copy, which Blondel rejected, was the Copy that the Ancients owned,
particularly Eusebius: And of his rejecting this Copy (not any other, formerly
published among us) it is most evident that I speak in all the places of the
Dissertations, and consequently that unless some other man can now be named,
which rejected this Copy (the Laurentian I mean, set out by Vossius, to which
the old Latin one published by the Lord Primate is answerable, though a
barbarous translation) or the Copy which Eusebius and the Fathers used, before
Blondel and Salmasius rejected it, I have affirmed that which is exactly the
truth, and am guilty neither of confidence, nor imposing, nor oscitancy, nor
contempt of the Reader.

20. And then, I pray, how was I concerned in the negations and arguments of
the Vir doctissimus, which Vedelius answered, which must needs belong to the
Epistles then extant, and carried about in Ignatius's name, and could not, by
divination be confronted to this Edition of Vossius, or to the Laurentian, or
our old Latin Manuscripts, which may well be presumed to have never been heard
of by him, or Vedelius either, and yet are the only volume of Ignatius's
Epistles there spoken of by me, and of which my affirmation proceeds. As for
this vir Doctissimus, I have now been able to consult Vedelius, and * there I
first find that he has neither Name nor Ap^l pre Ignat. cap. 4.
Book delivered to us, and that in all probability he never published any word
to that purpose. And for what has past betwixt private men in more private
Letters, I know not that I was obliged to take any notice, if I had remembered
that Anonymus ineditus vir doctissimus. 2 That this unus quidam vir doctissimus
is mentioned as the only person (and opposed to the alii, others, that expressed
their doubts and scruples only) which extra omne dubium ponit, affirms
positively, and without doubting, suppositionem harum Epistolarum, that these
Epistles were supposititious, or that Ignatius never wrote such Epistles,
whence by the way I am secured from the other instances which are by the
^refacer after brought to say the same thing which that vir Doctissimus had
done (...) for Vedelius was as ignorant as I, an plures ejus mentis fuerint,
whether there were any more of that mind with him. Lastly, that this vir
Doctissimus durst say, that Ignatius never wrote any Epistles at all, which is
to me an assurance that as learned as he was, he never knew any thing of
Polycarpe's collection, or of the ancient Writers citations out of them (which
if he had, he might as well have said, that Polycarpe, and the rest of those
ancients never wrote neither) and consequently that his ignorance secured him
from being guilty of that which I charge on Blondel and Salmasius, viz.
rejecting all the Fathers with a [Quid tum?] and these Epistles in despite of
all the authority which the Fathers were acknowledged to have given them. This
ought to have been adverted by my Monitor, and then he might certainly have
spared himself, and the Reader, and me the several gainlesse pains that his
sharp Animadversion has, in several kinds cost each of us.

21. As for his amplifications, backward and forward, on this head of
discourse, that perhaps I had received caution never to look into any thing
that comes from Geneva, and yet that that could not be the truth, because I had
occasionally insisted on that Edition of Vedelius, though now it be far from
needing reply; yet (...) shall be willing to oblige him, by telling him the
whole truth, and making him my Confessor in this matter. That it is now near
thirty years since that I read over diligently that whole volume of Vedelius,
with all his Exercitations annexed to it, that I did it in my entrance on the
study of Divinity, beginning with him as the first Rcclesiastical Writer then
extant; for Clement's Epistle was by Mr. Young seven or eight years after
published. This vindicates me from his jealousy, that perhaps I took caution
from Bishop Montague never to look into Book that came from Geneva.

22. For although I began not that study so, as to fall under Bishop Abbot's
censure (in the top of the tenth page produced) that Calvin had helped me to a
mouth to speak (any more than it is true of me, that I am still opening my
mouth against Calvin) yet truly my first Author, used in my search of the
opinion of the Ancient Church, was delivered me by Vedelius from Geneva, and so
from Geneva it self I first learned the three Orders of men in the Church to be
of Apostolic institution, which, as far as concerns the second of them (by him
and ever since called Presbyters) the Scripture had not taught me.

23. If this be not enough, I next acknowledge, that when this Prefacer told me
of the vir Doctissimus, that Vedelius was fain to answer, I had not any such
thing in memory, and though I am sure I formerly read it, because I now see it
is in that Book, yet it is due to his Animadversions, that I had not utterly
lost it: From this occasion I shall not have temptation to lose time in
bemoaning my self, that my memory is so frail, both because of the many
thousand things which I have read, and heard, and utterly forgotten, this was
as fit to be one, and as easy to be spared as any, and if it had been
explicitly in my memory, it had been perfectly useless to me in this matter, I
could not reasonably have interposed any mention of him, or added his name with
any truth to those two of Blondel and Salmasius (the two men which peculiarly
rejected the Laurentian (or Eusebian) Copy, Blondel having a transcript from
Vossius, and Salmasius a sight or it from Blondel) and also because I see other
men's memories are as frail as mine, and that in things both of present use, and
fresh observation: Witness my Monitor himself, who, whilst he is a chiding, or
admiring me for oscitanc^, and contempt of my Reader, etc. tells me that Bishop
Usher published his Latin Edition of Ignatius out of the Oxford Library,
whereas that Archbishop, that best knew, professes Page 16.
it was from two Manuscripts, one belonging to Caiw College in Cambridge, the
other to Bishop Montague: This were too mean a (...) to mention, but that,
besides that it is an example, that men that are the severest on others
no-slips, may themselves be guilty of as great, as they judge in others: It is
also a way of giving some account of that speech of Bishop Montagues, which
fall so tartly on Vedelius, and is here thought fit to be brought in, in the
Prefacers digression. For bating the asperity of the language, which I do as
little commend in either Father, or Son of the Church, as any, the Copy which
he had by him of so venerable Antiquity, might by him very reasonably be
thought a more Scholarlike, and less deceivable way of correcting Ignatius's
Epistles, than Vedelius's single conjectures, and prejudices, which made him,
as that Bishop thought, willing to conform Antiquity to the Doctrines then
received at Geneva.

24. And this will appear yet more reasonable in the particular, which is here
said to have occasioned that bitter speech of that Bishop, where, in Videlius's
reading, it is said of the Fathers of the Old Testament, that they came (...),
ad vacuam spem, says Vedelius, to a frustration of their hope, but the
Bishop's Latin Copy reads, in novitatem spei, to the newness of hope,
evidencing the reading to be with an easy change (...), to the newness, and
so it is in the Laurentian Greek which is now extant. Now as again (...) might
be an easy change for (...) (which that Bishop it seems liked best (...) and
either of those readings might well pass, either that they joined with us
Christians in the same common hope Evangelical, or came to the newness of ^ope,
i. e. hoped for mercy on the same terms of new Evangelicall obedience, on which
we now hope for it, and so set on purifying, as St John says he will do, that
has this hope in him, so truly the other of [(...)] would hardly be kept from
being blasphemy, cannot possibly be salved, as this Prefacer would salve it, by
referring it to their expectation of Christ's coming in the flesh, which, says
he, upon the testimony of our Savior himself they desired to s^e, and saw it
not. But 1. I pray where does our Savior testify this, that they desired to
see it, and saw it not? I suppose in those words of Luke 10. 24. For I tell you
that many Prophet^ and Kings have desired to see those things which you see,
and have not seen them. But will this justify or maintain the (...), the
frustration of their hope, or at all prove, that they had such hope of seeing
Christ come in the flesh? Men may desire that which they do not hope, the
goodness of the thing once apprehended, is enough to raise desire, but hope
must be founded in some promise, or else it is but either wish, on one side, or
on the other, presumption.

25. But then secondly, to justify Vedelius in his retaining of (...) there is
more necessary, viz. to consider the Context as it lies in the Epistle published
by him, and then the whole passage will be found to be this, (...) -- If
therefore they who conversed in the ancient writings came to a frustration of
hope, expecting Christ (as the Lord teaches, saying, If ye believed Moses, ye
would have believed me; for he wrote of me: and Abraham your Father was
exceeding glad that he might see my day, and he saw it and rejoiced; for before
Abraham was I am) how shall we -- By this Context it is now evident, 1. how
impossible it is that the Vedelian reading of (...) can stand; for Abraham, who
is the instance, did not miss of his hope, what he hoped for he obtained, he
had promise that he should see Christ's day, viz. see it (...), in the spirit,
not carnally in the flesh, see it in destinatione divina, in God's destination:
And that promise (...), that he should see it, put him in an (...), an
exultation of joy, and neither hope nor joy were frustrated; for it follows, he
saw, and was glad. Secondly: how seasonably the testimony of Christ was here
produced by this Prefacer, in these words of his [referring to their
expectation of Christ's coming in the flesh, which, upon the testimony of our
Savior himself they desired to see, and saw it not] I demand, Does the
Vedelian Edition so refer to any such testimony of Christ, which ends with
[saw it not?] does it not quite contrariwise produce the testimony of Christ
concerning Abraham, affirming of him that [he saw it?] which is competently
distant from the Prefacers Text of, they saw it not. Again, are not these words
of our Savior concerning Abraham's seeing (in spirit) and satisfying himself,
and rejoicing at that sight, perfectly agreeable to the general purport of the
Gospel? Is it not the Doctrine thereof frequently expressed, that Christ was
known by the Fathers of the former ages, by the title of [(...), he that was to
come] and that till the fulness of time was come, though they did (as the
Vedelian Copy adds) (...), expect to see Christ, yet not so as to see him come
in the flesh, but lived by Faith, as Abraham sojourned, assuring themselves,
that he would be really exhibited to their posterity, being for themselves
content to see him (...), in the spirit, and by no other eye but that of Faith?
And then can it be said, that they were frustrated in their hope? that what
they hoped, they received not: or hoped for that which they did not receive?
Simeon indeed had it revealed to him, that he should not see death before he
had seen the Lord's Christ, Luke 2. 26. but this was about the time of the
designed exhibition of him, and accordingly he did see him, and embraced him,
and was not frustrated of his hope: But this promise was never made to Father
Abraham, and those of the former ages, nor to those Prophets and Kings, Luke
10. and so having no promise of this, they entertained not themselves with
hopes of it (though they might with desires, submitted to Gods wiser choice)
and consequently never came thus (...), to the emptiness, or cassation, or
frustration of hope. So that to maintain the Vedelian reading of (...), it is
evident that the following words must be, not (...), he saw, but (...), he saw
not, the direct contradictorie to the words as they were spoken by Christ. My
Lord Primate tells us from a Manuscript in Baliol-Colledge Library, that rather
then the Scribe there would adventure (so near blasphemy, as) to write ad
vacuam spem, the interpretation of (...) to avoid, or cassate hope, he those to
insert a [not] in that Latin Copy, and wrote ad non vacuam spem, to a hope not
void: This again shows how intolerable that reading is of (...), whereas the
other (...), which our Laurentian Copy gives us (being retained, and not
changed into (...)) is perfect clear sense, and elegantly agreeable to the
Context, (...), says he, (...) -- the most divine Prophets lived according to
Jesus Christ* and then soon follows, (...) -- If therefore they that conversed
in those old things i. e. lived under the Law of the Jews) came, or advanced to
the newness of hope (i. e. as before, lived according to Christ, an
Evangelical, Christian life) etc. (...), how shall we live without him, whose
disciples in spirit the Prophets were, and expected him as their Master (but
sure by so doing were not frustrated in their expectation.)

26. All this has been said to render it reasonable for my Monitor to be less
severe to the writings of others, and from hence to observe, that one
digression does unnecessarily, and unluckil* sometimes, beget another, and
therefore that it is the safest course to keep close to the matter we have
before us, which yet I am not permitted to do, having still three parts of
this branch of digression more, which I am obliged to give account of.

27. In the next place then, for the probability that my two adversaries
Salmasius and Blondel, if they had not been one dead, the other almost blind,
would have dealt not much more; gently with me for my Parenthesis (quibus
illecebris adductinescio) then one of them did (calling me knave) for my
terming him Grammarian, I am able also to give him some Answer, and an account,
I think, satisfactory to that whole matter. 1 By assuring him that I knew how
Salmasius had dealt with me in that passage to Heraldus, before my setting
about the Dissertations, that this was so far from imbittering my style against
him, that I did the more carefully watch over my pen, not to say any
reproachful thing of him, but rather to commend his second thoughts in the
matter of Presbytery, which he was willing to testify in some passages of his
Defensio Regia, and truly this was it, which I shall not say I learnt from
Ignatius, though I confess it looks very lovely in his divine expressions,
(...). To their anger do ye return meekness, to their speaking big be ye
humble, to their fierceness be ye tame, not desiring, or attempting to
immitate them Epist. ad Ephesians. It Was the lest that I thought my self obliged to
do, in obedience to our Saviors precept, Mat. 5. 44. of blessing and praying
for those that curse and despightfully use us, from whence I must conclude,
that contum^lies are our adminitions of duty, even that of taking those who
power them upon me, into my special intercessions.

28. Secondly: That my terming Salmasius formerly a Grammarian, with the
addition of Learned, was in the sincerity of my heart meant as a title not of
diminution, but of honor to him, he was a very learned man in several parts
of good literature, especially skilled in Greek and Latin words, and phrases,
and customs, and his Plinianae exercitationes had long since given me that
notion of him, as equal thus far to any of his age, and fit to be named with
Scaliger and Casanbon of the preceding. And knowing I that Grammaticus was
anciently a title of ^our among learned men, witness Suetonius his Book de
Illustribus Grammaticis; and 2. that of (...)) there are three parts, (...),
(the two later of which being peculiarly his ex^ies, were fully comprehended in
the general title of Grammarian) and lastly, that being neither Divine nor
Physician, nor Lawyer by profession, I could not fitly make either of those his
title, I thought it most agreeable to all these reasons to style him learned
Grammarian, especially having so little reason, as I then had, to commend his
knowledge in Theology. This it seems was so represented to him from England,
that having no other reason (that I am conscious of) to quarrel with my
behavior toward him, he was content to reproach me, upon that style: And all
that I shall say to it, is, that I had rather be in the so^lest manner
reproacht without cause, then to be commended for ill doing, or to be justly
censured by any.

29. Thirdly, when I said of him and Blondel (quibus illecebris adducti nescio)
I do not think my self to have wronged them, or used them contumeliously: Not
wronged them, because I verily believe there were motives properly styled
illecebrae (I mean not bribes from England) which brought them to do what they
did: And as I did not think fit then to express those motives, being 1 matters
of fact, of which at this distance, I could not have perfect knowledge or
evidence, and so could truly say [quibus nescio] and 2 being personal matters,
which I love not to publish, farther than the matter it self reveals and
declares them, so I shall not choose now out of season, and less pertinently
to enlarge on that matter: I shall only add, that Salmasius lived, and
Blondel saw, many months, some years, after the publishing of the
Dissertations, and neither of them thought fit to fall into such passion so
causelessly, nor, that I ever heard, sent the Author of these Animadversions
their Letters of Attorney to do it for them, so that I am to acknowledge what
he has done in this, to be an act of his own inclinations, but have no manner
of like return to make him for it.

30. How justly the many which he mentions have supposed that he was illecebris
adductus, and from what evidence they name the bait, or with what truth it is
suggested that he had ever set up and established that faith which his Defensio
Regia endeavored to destroy, are things so far removed from the subject before
us, the authority of Ignatius's Epistles, and so unlikely to be concluded by
our disputes, that I think we may by consent let them alone: Otherwise the
then present lownes, and improsperity of the cause, which he defended, would
offer it self for a very competent argument to infer, the love of truth more
than expectation of any temporal advantage, to have persuaded the writing of it.

31. The second incidental branch concerning Bishop Montague and Geneva has
been as incidentally, but more largely discharged already.

32. The third concerning my interpretation of (...) for the ordination of a
young man, might surely have been spared, when it is by him confessed, that
rather than I could think fit to adhere to it, I chose to prefer Vedelius's
Edition, which reads (...), the appearing youth of their Bishop, before this
reading of the Laurentian in that place, and that done by me in the first
place, to remove all force of Salmasius's argument, there present before me,
all that followed being ex abundati, more then needed, and not proposed, as the
truth of the matter, but (...) to supersed^ all possible reply in it.

33 But my Monitor runs too hastily into ill language, which yet he dislikes so
much in Bishop Montague (gross figments is no very nice expression) else he
might have seen enough produced by me, to have prevented, or allaied the storm
of his displeasure.

34. Salmasius to take advantage from those Epistles, both against Episcopacie,
and the Epistles themselves, finds in the Laurentian Copy (...), spoken of
Damas's Episcopacy, hence he infers that Episcopacy was there styled a new
Order, and that the Epistles were written in a later age, then that of
Ignatius, and so that Episcopacy was of that later institution. To this
purpose, says he, the word (...) cannot belong to his age, and (...) signifies
new, and brings 2 Timothy 2. 22. where (...), which we truly render youthful
lusts, signify, says he, novae aut novarum rerum cupiditates, new desires, or
desires of new things. To this whole way of arguing I confess I could not
afford the least degree of consent, and still think that that learned
Grammarian did never more passionately (...), than in this heap of
inconcludencies. To these therefore I answered by degrees proportioned to the
several steps of his procedure: 1 That the Laurentian seemed not the right
reading, but the Vedelian, not (...), however rendered, but (...), his appearing
youth: This the whole course of the Epistle exacted, Damas then Bishop of the
Magnesians being a young man, and Ignatius desiring his youth might not bring
contempt upon him, and therefore advising expressly, not to d^spise the age of
their Bishop, and this acknowledged by Salmasius himself to be the purport of
the Epistle.

35. Secondly: That if the utmost that could be desired were granted, both that
(...), were the right reading, and that it were justly rendered a new order, yet
what was instituted by the Apostles might pass for new in Ignatius's days,
who dyed very few years after St. John, and both of them in the reign of
Trajan, or that however what was in Ignatius's days (and to that Rivet
referred it, novellus ordo, sive (...), (...) loquitur Ignatius, (...)) even so
new as to be but ust the^ instituted, was yet pretty ancient, very little
distant from Apostolical (Ignatius himself being styled an Apostolical person)
and without controversy long before that famous Epoch of 140 years after
Christ, to which Blondel affixes the rise of Ep^scopacy.

36. Thirdly: That (to avoid all the force of his argument) I was not obliged
to affirm, that (...) belonged to age, on one side, or that (...) signified
(...) on the other. For in case that were granted to be the right reading (not
absolutely; for that was prevented, but ex hypothesi, if it were) yet (...)
might more agreeably to the context, and the nature of the word, signify
Ordination; and for (...) in that place to Timothy by him cited, it evidently
signified not new (for what could the Apostle mean in forewarning him to
abstain from new lusts, were not ancient as dangerous?) It was much more
reasonable to think young Timothy was advised to beware of such sins as are met
with among young men (which was the reason that young men were not ordinarily
made Bishops) and consequently, as to that again, both the Context, referring
to the (...), the age, i e. the youth of Damas their Bishop, and the nature of
the word being a denominate from a young man, (...) from (...), would persuade
rather to render it so there also; and so (...) would be the ordination of a
young man; and so I am sure the learned Primate renders it, juvenilem
^rdinationem, and Vossius, who reteins the old barbarous Latin, yet in his
Notes has these words, Non debere eo^conti, i. e tanquam commodato accipere.
and ad se pertrahere (...) illam juvenis istius Episcopi, which sure in his
Paraphrase of (...), and (...), and punctually agrees with my interpretation
also. And the Analogy with the use of the word (...) (being an (...) but once
used) in Scripture would much better agree with this, than the rendering it a
new Order.

37. And now I shall be very well content to be told by the Reader, of what
persuasion soever, what figment, or how gross it was that I endeavored to
impose upon him, when I began first with a profession, that I did not assent to
that reading, and then only added, that I did as little assent to Salmasius's
interpretation, but could not be deemed absolutely to like the interpretation
produced by me, but only ex hypothesi, and in comparison with that of his
affixt to St. Paul's words to Timothy, where (...) was used; nay, that rather
than I would make use of my own, though backed with the concurrent judgment of
such learned men, I chose to forsake the Laurentian Copy in that particular,
which in others I generally adhered to.

38. There remains one part of the suggestion still, the doubtfulnesse which
the [if] imports, whether I consult Authors any further than merely to serve
my own turn. To which I answer 1. by professing that I seek truth from Authors,
and no proofs, or confirmations of any thing, but what I verily believe to be
such. 2 That I may well be believed in this profession, because I am of no
party, which either has appeared to want such supports, or if it did, could
probably tempt any man, with competent rewards, to undertake so vile an office,
as is writing and consulting Authors to maintain that, which the conscience
doubts of, or knows to be false. Lastly; That the particular, whereon this
suggestion is founded, can be no just cause of this suggestion: For 1. not
having Vedelius's Edition of Ignatiu by me, when I wrote the Dissertations, I
had yet the Lord Primates first Edition of the Epistles, which is known to
contain the Vedelian Text of the Epistles, but has not his Exercitations,
where the Vir doctissimus was mentioned: And 2. the whole matter concerning
that vir Doctissimus being already perfectly cleared, and that if that passage,
and those arguings of the vir Doctissimus in Vedelius had actually occurred to
my memory, it had not been in the lest degree pertinent to the subject of my
then present affirmation, it must now be as unseasonable for me farther to
vindicate my integrity herein, as it will be uncharitable in any, without any
new cause to doubt of it. This only I must observe for mine own use, both from
the beginning, and the end of this Animadversion, that my Monitor is one of
them whom I am by obligation of Christian Charity, bound to bless and pray
for, and I shall do it, either in my own choice of words, (...), or in any
other form he shall praescribe me. And so much for this Section.

Sect. 2.
Answer to Testimonies of Mr. Calvin, the Centuriators, and Dr. Whittaker. Of
Lent. ^he occasions of Ignatius's Epistles. His journey from Antioch to Rome.

Numb. 1. BUt this Act is not yet at an end, there is, it seems, more of this
Animadversion still behind, following in these words.

But yet a little farther: The first Edition of these Epistles in Latin, was
Augustae Vindelicorum, An. 1529 in Gree^ a^ Basil 1566. Before which time I
suppose the Doctor expects not that any opposition should be made to them,
considering ^he heaps of filth and dung, that until about that time were owned
for the Offspring of the Ancient Fathers.

Upon their first appearing in the world what is the entertainment they
receive? One who was dead before either the Doctor, or either of his
Antagonists were born, and whose renown among the people of God will live when
they are all dead, gives them this welcome into the world; Ignatium quod
obtendunt, si velint quicquam habere momenti, probent Apostolos legem tulisse
de quadragessim^ and similibus corruptelis, nihil naeniis istis quae sub
Ignatii nomine editae sunt putid^us: Quo minus tolerabilis est ^o^um
impudentia, qui tal^bus larvis ad fallendum se in^^^uunt. Calv. Instit. lib. 1.
c. 13. sect. 29.

What ever be the jugement of our Doctor concerning this man (as some there
are, of whom a learned Bishop in this Nation long ago complained, that they are
still opening their mouths against Calvin, who h^lp them to mouths to speak
with: Abbot. ad Then.) He will in the judgemen^ of some be so far accounted
some body, as to take off from them the confident Assertion, that Salmasius and
Blondellus were mortalium primi that rejected these Epistles.

The Centuriato^s of Magdenburg were esteemed to be some bodies in their days,
and yet they make bold to call these Epistles into question, and to tender
sundry arguments to the impairing their credit and authority. This then they
Cent. 2. cap. 10. de Episc. Antioch. at primum de Ignatio.

Lectori pio and attento considerandum relinquimus quantum sit illis Epistolis
tribuendum. Non enim dubitamus quin in lectione earum cuilibet ista in mentem
veniant: primum quod fere in omnibus Epistolis, licet satis copiosis, occasio
scribendi prete^mittitur, nec vel divinare licet, quare potissimum ad hanc vel
illam Ecclesiam literas voluerit mittere. Deinde ipsius poregrinationis ratio
non parvum injicit scrupulum considerantibus quod multo rectiore and breviore
itinere Roman potuerit navigare, ut testatur vel ipsius Pauli exemplum --
Expende quam longum sit iter Antiochia ad litus Ae gei pelagi se recipere,
thique recta rursum versus septentrionem ascendere, and praecipuas civitates in
litore ^itas usque ad Troadem perlustrare, cum tamen Romanum iter sit
destinatum versus occasum. Tertio res ejusmodi in istas literas inspersae sunt,
ut ad eas propemodum obstupescat Lector, etc. Haec cum alias non somnolento
Lectori incidant, nos existimaverimus, etc.

Thus they at the worlds first awaking, as to the consideration of things of
this kind.

To them add the learned Whittaker, contra prima de perfect. Script. Quest.
sexta c. 12. Where after he has disputed against the credit of these Epistles;
jointly, and severally, wi^h sundry arguments, at length he concludes, Sed de
his Epistolis satis multa, and de hoc Ignatio quid judicandum fit, satis ^x iis
constare potest quae diximus. Ista Papistae non audent t^eri -- To whom sundry
others might be added, convincing Salmasius and Bloud^llus, not to have been
mortalium primi that called them into question.

2. What is here brought out of Calvin, the Centuriators, and Whitaker, must
still be remembered to be by the Prefacer produced to prove the falseness, and
ungrounded confidence of my assertion, that Salmasius and Blondel were
mortalium omnium primi, the first of men that called them into question: And my
answer must certainly be the same, which in the last Section it was, that it
must be remembered what Copy of the Epistles it was which Salmasius and Blondel
rejected, and of which I spoke when I affirmed them to be the first that did
so, viz this Laurentian Manuscript Copy, set out after by Vossius (agreeing
with our two ancient barbarous translations, which the Lord Primate had met
with in England, that very Copy) which Blondel acknowledged to be the same
which Eusebius 1300 years ago (and the other ancient Fathers) had used, and
gave belief unto, and by that means was forced to cast off the Fathers with a
[Quid tum! What then!] to say that they were deceived, and imposed upon in that
belief, and without doing so, had no possibility of doubting the genuinenesse
of this Copy.

3. So that the plain result and sum of my affirmation must evidently be
this, that the Laurentian Copy of these Epistles, according with all that the
ancients cited from the genuine Epistles of Ignatius, and by Blondel's
collating them found to do so, i. e. in effect the Eusebian Copy of Ignatius,
and as such acknowledged by Blondel, was never rejected by any before Salmasius
and Blondel rejected it.

4. This being the only true setting of the case between me, and my
Adversaries, I shall now need add no more but this one question, whether the
Author of these Animadversions can now think, that this was the Copy of
Epistles which either Mr. Calvin, or the Centuriators, or Dr. Whitaker rejected
in the places by him transcribed from them? I might make my question a little
more difficult to be answered by him, in the affirmative, whether in case such
a purged Copy of those Epistles had been brought to any of them, which they had
been forced to acknowledge to be the same, or exactly agreeable to that, which
the Fathers (all that could be consulted, and gave testimony in this matter)
received as authentic Ignatius, whether, I say, on that supposition, they
would in any probability have rejected it, with a nil naeniis istis putidius,
and larvae, etc? But the question will be sooner at an end, if we consider the
matter of fact, as it lies before us, and therefore in that form he must apply
the answer (which he shall return either to me or to his own conscience)
whether Mr. Calvin ever saw this Copy, or any other the like, of which it may
be said, what of this appears, in relation to Blondel, that he acknowledged it
to be the same that Eusebius and the Fathers used and owned, and if he never
did see that, or any the like, whether he can be produced as an instance
against my affirmation, an example of those that rejected these, before either
I or my Antagonists were born?

5. Another Copy I acknowledge he rejected, and in compliance with that
judgment of his, Vedelius, that long after followed him at Geneva, and trod in
his foetsteps, endeavored to purge that volume of Epistles, meaning, I
suppose, to make it such, as if Mr. Calvin had lived, he would not have
rejected. To which purpose it may now be remembered, that Vedelius being pressed
with Calvin's authority for the rejecting these Epistles, he answers, that they
are mistaken, who think Calvin spoke against the Epistles, and cites Rivet's
Critica sacra c. 1. to prove Calvinum non in Ignatium, sed in quisquillias and
naenias depravatorum Ignatii invectum esse, that Calvin inveighed not against
Ignatius, but against the trash that the depravers of Ignatius had imposed upon
him. This I have recovered by consulting Vedelius about the vir doctissimus:
And this, he that sent me thither, might have seen if he had pleased. But
beyond what Vedelius could attempt, the providence of God has favored this
age, and afforded it better commodity to reduce these Epistles to the ancient
genuine form, and of that only it was that I spoke, and of that Mr. Calvin
could not divine to speak, and so there is an end of that instance.

6. The same answer evidently absolves me from the other two Instances of the
Centuriators, and Dr. Whitaker: for 1. both those, as Vedelius says, do not
reject, but only doubt of them. 2. They are again the corrupt copies (those
that by me are acknowledged to be such) of which their doubt is made, viz. the
Copyes which were out in their days, long before Vedelius undertook to cleanse
the Augaean stable, and much longer, before Vossius, and the Lord Primate more
dexterously, and succesfully performed it. And so there is nothing behind, which
may assume to make good the least part of the charge against me, whether of
confidence or oscitancy, or what else was thought fit to be laid upon me; I may
again be able to look Scholars or sober men in the face, till I make forfeiture
of my credit by some future miscarriage.

7. Yet because in the Instances here produced, that of Calvin and of the
Centuriators there are mentioned some exceptions to these Epistles, to which
our present Copy may still seem liable, I will not omit to make him my return
(though ex abundanti, and extra orbitam) to those also.

8. And first for that of Calvin, that they which attribute any thing to
Ignatius's authority, must first prove that the Apostles made any law for
observing Lent: It is easily answered (without entering into any dispute
concerning the antiquity of that Fast in the Church of Christ) by observing but
these two things, that the place ordinarily produced to that purpose being out
of the Epistle to the Philippians, in these words, [(...), Dishonor not the
Feasts, despise not the quadragessimal Fast, for it contains an imitation of
Christ's conversation] 1. This Epistle is none of the seven certainly genuine,
which we have from Polycarp's collection, or which we adhere to in our account
or plea for Ignatius. 2. That the Author of that Epistle whosoever he was, does
not make Lent to stand by any Law, or Institution of the Apostles, but only as
an act of imitation of Christ, who fasted forty daie^ in the wilderness.

9. Nay when the Book of Constitutions, which is thought to bear such Analogy
with the Epistles affixt to Ignatius, speaks of the same matter, and adds
(...), Legislation [(...), it contains a commemoration of Christ's conversation
and Law-giving] I do not believe that this at all referres to any command or
institution of Christ or his Apostles in this matter of observing of Lent, but
that as Christ's fasting in the Wildernes^ Mat. 4. was a preparative to his
entering on his Prophetic office, Mat. 5. where, in that divine Sermon on the
Mount, he gave Evangelicall laws to his Disciples, the Holy Ghost, having
formerly descended on him and consecrated him to it, Mat. 3. so the
Quadrigessimal Fast was observed in the Church to commemorate both these, the
Laws that he gave as well as the Fast that he prepared for them. And so no part
of the suggestion from Mr. Calvin holds against our pretensions, the Epistle is
not by us reckoned as Ignat Epist. nor the Institution of Lent said by that
supposititious Epist. to be instituted by the Apostles, and so that is
sufficient security to us from that first exception.

10. Next for those exceptions of the Centuriators, I shall take them in order
as they lie. The first is, that almost in all the Epistles the occasion of
writing them is ^mitted, nor can any man divine why he should send Letters to
this or that Church rather than any other.

11. To this I answer, that, to my understanding, the occasions of every of his
Epistles are as evidently legible, and discernible in them, as in most of the
Apostles Epistles they are. In them they are not set down by way of syllabus,
at the beginning, nor in any more visible gross way of transition, but are
closely coucht in the manner that the Authors of them thought fittest, and are
discernible to a careful observant reader, and so are they here also.

12. The first, that to the Church of Sm^rna, is to confirm them in the Faith
against the infusions of the G^osticks, which by this time (as appears by St.
John's first Epistle) oppugned the reality of Christ's birth, and death, and
resurrection, to whom he therefore confronteth the true doctrine vindicated in
every branch, and vehemently inculcates the (...) and (...), truly, and in the
flesh, against the (...) the bare appearing to suffer, etc. which, faith he,
(...), some unbelievers or unfaithful Apostate Christians, evidently the
Gnosti^k haereticks affirmed and taught.

13. And here by the way appears more fully the injustice of that suspicion,
which at the beginning of his view of Antiquity, the Author of this Preface
was willing to infuse into the Reader, as if haeretical corrupt doctrine would
be found to have crept into the writings of the Sea Chap (...) s^
first times, that remain to us, whereas the plain truth is, that those
heresies, which so earl^ were gotten into the Church, and began (...) to oppose
the truth, were by those first writers as punctually confuted, as [reality] and
[in the flesh] can be thought to be opposed to the (...), the bare appearance.

14. To the same head of discourse it pertains which so l^ws, that these
haereticks reject the Eucharist upon the same grounds, not believing the
reality of Christ's death* And that the one compendious way of arming the
Orthodox against all their poisonous infusions, was to adhere to their Bishop
and Officers of the Church under him, and not to do any thing in
Ecclesiastical matters without his direction or commission: It being certain
that these Haereticks attempted to move the settled Faith, and practices, and
that the Governors of the Church were by the Apostles instituted to preserve
unity, and true doctrine, and had their rules and grounds of faith deposited
with, and committed to them.

15. To this he adds things very particular both to him, and to that Church of
Smyrna, that he took notice of their prayers for the Church of Syria, that he
was now hastening to his Martyrdom, being at the writing hereof at Troas on
his journey to Rome; that in his coming from Antioch the whole tempest and rage
of the persecutors having fallen upon him, the Churches of Syria had now
obtained their (...), a peaceable enjoyment of the Christian Assemblies.

16. A thing particularly taken notice of in Histories, that whilst Trajan now
stayed at Antioch, to consult of his affairs, and war with the Parthians, upon
the Letter of Tiberianus President of the prime Nation of Palestine, Trajan
gave order to him, (...), that he should leave off killing the Christians, so
^aith Cron. lib. 11.
Johannes Antiochenus, adding (...), that he gave the same order to all the
rest of the Governors, and concluding, (...), and the Christians had some
truce from their persecutions. So Suidas in the word (...). Trajan gave the
Christians some truce, cessation of punishment, dating it from the time of
Tiberiana's Letter (which was certainly at this time of Trajans being at
Antioch, and Ignatius on his journey toward Rome, though being already
condemned, the mercy extended not to him) (...), ^aith he, from hence forth,
(...), Trajan forbad all under him to punish the Christians: So Tom. 2 p. 20*
Zonaras in the story of that time takes notice of this cessation, produced by
the suffering of many, (...), etc. The Emperor hearing of the multitude of
Chrstians that had been butchered, gave order for more mercy, (...), and so the
persecution became more moderate, which is farther evident by Trajan's Rescript
to Pliny, and Tertullian's Animadversions upon it, Apol c. 2.

17. And this they, which had prayed for them in time of their persecutions,
were now in all reason to acknowledge to God, as an answer and gracious return
to their prayers, and to perfect their Christian work toward them, he now
advises them to send a solemn Messenger with an Epistle to congratulate with
those Churches this blessed change, (...), that together with them he might
bless God for this tranquillity, or fair weather, which he had now given them,
(...), and that by the benefit of their prayers those others were now landed
safely at their desired haven.

18. Then he mentions the salutations of the Church at Troa^, from whence he
wrote, and names Burrhus, whom they had sent along with him, which again is the
yet more particular occasion of his writing to them at that time, at the return
of their Messenger and Officer, whom he would not dismiss without a Letter of
kindness and Christian care to them, who had showed so much of both to him, and
the Church committed to his charge: And then ends with as affectionate a
salutation, and as large an enumeration of all the several relations to which
he desired to be kindly mentioned, as any Christian heart could do at the time
of his last farewell to them.

19. And so what could have been more exactly performed, than that which these
Objectors cannot take notice of to be done at all? What could be more express
and visible, than the occasion and particular reasons of this address? And the
like might be as largely, and as evidently deduced in reference to the rest of
the Epistles, but truly that would be too long a work, and therefore let this
serve (...) for an instance of the no grounds of that exception.

20. The next exception is the ipsius peregrinationis ratio, the nature of his
journey from Antioch to Rome, the stages whereof, as they are discoverable in
these Epistles, are by the Objectors observed to differ from St. Paul's, and
not to be the nearest way that might have been chosen thither.

21. But to this the answer is obvious, 1. that what in the Epistles is
discoverable concerning his journey, and the several stages of it, is directly
agreeable to the relations of his Martyrdom, recorded by the most ancient and
punctual Historians, that have written on that subject: The Reader may consult
the ancient piece called Martyrium Ignatii, and he will find this exactly true,
without depending on the confidence of my affirmation.

22. Secondly: For many stages of this journey from Antioch toward Rome, they
are here the very same to Ignatius, which we find in the Acts, in the relation
of St. Paul's voyage, first from Asia, then after to Rome; St. Paul went from
Troas to Neapolis, from Neapolis to Philippi, Act. 16. 10. And so the Acts of
Ignatius have it exactly, Illinc (i. e. a Troade) ductus Neapolim, per
Philippenses pertransivit Macedoniam pedes: From Troas he was carried to
Neapolis, from thence he went on foot by Phillippi through Macedonia. So when
Act. 28. S. Paul comes to Regium, thence to P^teoli, thence to Rome, ver. 13,
14. It Is in like manner manifest by the Acts of Ignatius, that he was carried
the same way: And accordingly when he came in sight of Puteoli, it is said of
him, that he went hastily out of the ship, secundum vestigia ambulare volens
Pauli Apostoli, desirous to tread in St. Paul's steps: Mart. Ignat. page 44.

23. And for the variations in some part of the voyage, the account is easy
also: For in the Acts of Ignatius set down by Simeon Metaphrastes, as there is
an account given why Trajan sentenced him to that kind of death, to fight with,
and to be torn asunder with wild beasts, (...).
because he looked on this as the severest sort of death (and so most
proportionable to his rage against him, for his bold answers made to him at
Antioch, telling him that the Daemonia gentium Deos existimans, err^s. Mar^.
Ignat. (...). Niceph. l. 3. c. 19.
Gods he worshipped, were the Demons of the nations) and in like manner also why
this was not to be done at Antioch, but by sending him to Rome, lest it might
more stir up the love and admiration of the people toward him, when they that
knew him so well already, should now see him suffer for Christ's name so
miserably, (...).
whereas at Rome he might dye unknown, and unpitied and unremembred, so there
is also as clear a reason given, why being carried by ten soldiers from
Antioch to Rome, the next, or most direct way was not constantly chosen for
him, viz. that the journey might be the more tedious, and wearisome to him, and
by that means possibly his constancy might be broken or lessened) (...), says
he, mentioning it as the advice of Trajan's Council, that were then with him at
Antioch, (...), by the length of his journey he shall undergo the shrewder
punishment: To which purpose also St. Chrysostom mentions it as the artifice
of the Devil (in his * Encomium of Ignatius) that Bishops should not be Tom.
5. p. 502.
butchered in their own Cities, but carried far off to gather their Martyrs
Crown, (...), at once endeavoring to deprive them of all conveniences, and
withal hoping by this act, by the toil and lassitude of the journey to make
them more weak, and unfit for their final combat, which if it were the policy
and design of cruel persecutors (as in this particular 1. the narrations of the
fact say it was, and 2. a special passage in the Epistles to the Smyranaeans
may be some indication of it, (...), says he, (...), All my journey from Syria
to Rome I fight with wild beasts, expressing his meaning in the next words,
(...), by land and sea, night and day chained to ten Leopards: And 3. the
Centuriators have no objection against it) then sure there is no cause of
wondering, that the ten Leopards, the Soldiers that guarded him did not choose
out the shortest cut from Antioch to Rome, that their Map could have directed
them to. Nay, St Chrysostom is yet more express in it, (...), the D^vil
called him from Antioch to Rome, setting him a course to be run forward and
backward (that is the meaning of (...), as it is opposed to (...), as the
Scholiast on Pindar tells us) and that of a very tedious length, to this very
end, says he, by the length of the way and the time, (...), expecting to
prostrate and subdue his resolution, or constancy of mind, to make him renounce
the Faith of Christ, on which terms he was to be released by the decree of
Trajane; so says Nicephorus, (...), He sent him from Antioch to Rome to be
cast to the Lions to be devoured, unless he would abjure the Faith of Christ.

24. Thus unreasonable is it in matters of fact, the occasions and motives
whereof are not always visible to every man, placed at a distance from them,
to fancy and conjecture, what is probable or improbable, and accordingly to
reform the Records of Antiquity from our own guesses, many things being every
day done, which are not the most probable, and many things being probable and
credible enough, when all the causes and circumstances are known, which while
we continue in the dark, or see them with prejudices, may appear to be in some
degree, or in some other respect improbable.

25. A more particular account of the several stages of his long wearisome
journey, perfectly agreeable to these (...), and having now nothing of
difficulty in it, and withal expressly vindicated from the contrary conjectures
of the Centuriators, as also from the mistakes of Vedelius, the Reader may
consult in the Lord Primate's Notes on Martyrium Ignatii, which makes it very
impertinent for me farther to enlarge on it. Otherwise it were no hard task by
setting down the whole passage in the Centuriators, of which only a part is
here given us, to show the many misadventures those learned men were guilty of
in their improvident pursuit of this matter, as when they say he could not have
liberty long as ambages quaerere to go far out of his way in his journey, quia
captivus ducebatur, because he was carried captive (whereas no man thinks that
he chose this increase of his torment and toil for himself, yet might have it
imposed on him quite contrary to his choice; by the severity of the Emperors,
or his Councils directions, as has been said) And again, that there is no
mention of his following the Emperors Army, nor relation in story that the
Emperor fetched such a circuit in his journey from Antioch to Rome, whereas
indeed the matter is clear, that he was committed to a guard of Soldiers,
commonly called by him the ten Leopards; and for Trajan, it is sure that he did
not at all return to Rome after this, but dyed in Cilicia. But this ex
abundanti again, more than needs to the vindicating of Ignatius, who may now be
at rest for a while, till he be soon called out again to a fresh combat.

CHAP. III.
Of the Corruptions in Ignatius's Epistles.

Sect. 1.
The emondate Editions. Their authority equal to the Epistle of Clement or
Polycarpe. (...). Theodoret's citation out of Ignatius about the Eucharist.
Jerome's about Christ's choosing the greatest sinners, Publicans.

Number. 1. THE Prefacer is pleased not to dismiss Ignatius so, but beginning
with some show of more moderation and temper toward him than he had observed in
others, he yet soon resolves that it shall not be very useful to him, or to
us, that expect to receive benefit from his suffrages in the defense of
Episcopacy: Thus then he proceeds.

2. I have not insisted on what has been spoken, as though (...) were wholly
of the mind of them who utterly condemn those Epistles as false and
counterfeit; though I know no possibility of standing against the arg^ments
levied against them notwithstanding the fo^em^n ioned D^ attempt to that
purpose, without acknowledging so much ^up ion in them, Additions, and
Detractions from what they were, when first w^ as will render them not so
clearly serviceable to any end or purpose, whereunto their testimony may be
required, as other unquestionable writings of their antiquity are justly
esteemed to be, That these Epistles have fallen into the hands of such unwo^hy
Impostors, as have filled the later Ages with labor and uavail to discover
their deceits, the Doctor himself gr^th Disse^t. 2. c. 2. sect. 6. Nulla (says
he) qu^dom nobis in^umb^t neces^itas (...) in tanta exemplarium and edit^onum
vari^t^t^ and ^stantia ni^. l usquam Ign^ interpola^um aut ad^utum ^s.

And indeed the foysted passages in many places are so evident, yea shameful,
that no man who is not resolved to say any thing wi^ proof or truth, can once
appear in any defensative ab^ them: Of this sort are the shreads and pieces ou^
of that brande^ cou^ piece of Clemens, or the Apostles Constitutions, which are
almost in ev^ Epistle packed in, in a bungling manner, oftentimes disturbing
the and coherence of the place: yea sometimes such things are thence tra^, as
in them are considerable arguments of their corruption and falsehood: So is that
period in the Epistle to the Magnesians taken from Clemens Con^. l 6. c. 2.
(...). This Abedaddan being mentioned next after Absolem's dying by the loss
of his head, is therefore supposed to be Sheba the son of Bickri, but whence
that counterfeit Clemens had that name is not known: That the counterfeit
Clemens by Abedaddan intended Sheba is evident from the words he assigns unto
him in the place mentioned, Abedaddan said, (...). And joins him with Absalom
in his rebellion: Such passages as these they are supposed to receive from that
vain and foolish Impostor: But if it be true which some have observed, that
there is not the least mention made of any of those fictious Constitutions in
the three first ages after Christ, and that the (...) mentioned by Eus^bius and
Ath^n^sius, as also the (...) in Epiphanius, are quite other things than those
eight books of Constitutions we have; it may rather be supposed that that
sottish deceiver rather raked up some of his filth from the corruption of these
Epistles, than that any thing out of him is crept into them. Other instances
might be given of stuffing these Epistles with the very garbidge of that beast.
Into what hands also the Epistles have fallen by the way, in their journying
down toward these ends of the world, is evident by these citations made out of
them by them of old, which now appear not in them. Theodor^t. Dial. 3. adver.
Haeret. gives us this sentence from Ignatius, (...). Which words you will
scarcely find in that Epistle to the Church of Smyrna, from whence they were
taken. Hierom also Dial. 3* cont* Pelag* has this passage of him, and from him
Ignatius, vir Apostolieus and Martyr scribit audacter, elegit Dominus Apostolos
qui super omnes bomines peccatores erant, which words as they are not now in
these Epistles, so as one observes, if ever he wrote them, as is pretended, he
did it audacter indeed. But of these things our Doctor takes no notice.

3. The things that are here said, I am not so nearly concerned in (not so
severe charges prepared and brought in against me) as in the former. I am but
thrice and incidentally mentioned: The first mention concerns my answers to the
arguments brought against Ignatius's Epistles; the second, my confession of the
corruptions and interpolations in them; the third, my not taking notice of some
special evidences which are by him mentioned against them. To these I shall not
need to prepare any large reply. A few words may suffice to avert these charges.

4. For the first, concerning my answers to the arguments brought against the
Epistles, which notwithstanding, says he, there is no possibility of standing
against the arguments, with out acknowledging so much corruption in them, etc.
I need but mind the Reader 1. that Salmasius and Blondel being the two men that
set themselves expressly to argue against the Epistles, I applied punctual
answers to every argument by them produced, and so that business must rest,
till either new arguments be produced, or intimation given, wherein any one of
those answers has been, or may be disproved or invalidated by any.

5. Secondly: That as there is no question made by me, but that former Editions
have been corrupted (otherwise there had been no use of the Lord Primates, and
Vossius's diligence, and pains in preparing, and setting out purer Copies) so
1. that being now done by them, and 2. the success being so remarkable, that
they have concurred in publishing a Latin and Greek Copy from several
Libraries, wherein the places cited from Ignatius by the Fathers, just as they
are c^ted by them; and then 3. the number of the Epistles being reduced to that
of Polycarpe's Sylloge or collection; and 4. our appeal to Ignatius being made
in this form, to this pure edition of these so testified Epistles, the same
that Blondel our Adversary acknowledges to have been used 1300 years ago by
Eusebi^, and which we have no reason to doubt but Eusebius received it from
them who received it from Polycarpe; all this, I say, being laid by way of
groundwork, there will, I now hope, be no confidence in making the comparison
betwixt these, and other unquestionable writings, and assuming that these
Epistles thus produced by us in defense of Episcopacy, are as fit to give in
their testimony, and by all reasonable men to be embraced, as any writings of
the same antiquity with them, which are most unquestionable, as Clemens and
Polycarpe, and other the like.

6. For when many writings are in later times put upon the world under the name
of Clemens Bishop of Rome, Epistles, Constitutions, etc. And when the writings
of the Ancients are found to make mention of his Epistle to the Corinthians, as
an undoubted writing of that holy man, and to recite many things from thence,
and when out of a Manuscript of Reverend Antiquity this Epistle of Clement,
thus concordant with those citations is lately published to the world, there is
no sober man which reasonably may, or that I know of, does appear to oppugn
the authority of this Epistle. And the case is the very same, and in no
particular that I discern, unequal, for Ignatius, as he is now published by
Vossius and the Lord Primate.

7. The same might be said of Polycarpe, but that I have already spoken enough
of this parallel betwixt Ignatius, and each of them in the first Section of the
second Chapter.

8 Then for the second thing, my confession of the Corruptions and
Interpolations of the Epistles, I wonder how it should be thought fit to be
taken notice of; it being certain that that confession of mine belongs not at
all to the Editions to which I make my appeal, but only to the former
Editions. And is it impossible for any Author that was once corrupted, ever to
be reformed, for that to be cleansed, which was once sullyed? It Is true it may
be a matter of labor and travail for Critics by their own conjectures to make
discoveries of such deceits, and therefore though Vedelius his Edition was fit
enough for the Prelatists pretensions, and withal that Author not liable to
suspicion that he should be partial for Episcopacy (I might well hope that what
came licensed from Geneva, would not have been disclaimed by those of the
Genevan party) yet I wished for a surer way of reforming Ignatius, than his
diligence, without the assistance of old Manuscript Copyes, could afford us:
But when this was done by two learned men (one of which, Isaacus Vossius, had
visibly no interests to misguide him) and the severest Inquisition was not able
to deprehend any considerable objection against the Edition, and when this was
it that I desired, and offered to be tried by, and insisted on the justness of
it, at the very time when I made that confession, how can it still be pertinent
to argue or infer any thing from my confession, that once these Epistles were
set out corruptly?

9. Or how can this Prefacer reasonably proceed to talk of the foisted passages
so evident and shameful, that no man, who is not resolved to say any thing,
without care of proof or truth, can once appear in any defensative about them?
Have I said a word in defense of those, that have any of those foisted passages
in them? Or may not I be able to appear in defense of the innocent blameless
creature, though I cannot of the shameless and prostitute? Certainly he that
had read the Dissertations so exactly, as to threaten a yet more severe censure
of the whole Book in a few days or hours, and so cannot but have adverted
that principal praecognoscendum in it, viz. what Edition of Ignatius it is,
which in such variety I appeal to, might well have spared vouching of this
confession of mine, of the corruptions of former Editions, it being to visibly,
and so perfectly reconcilable with all other my pretensions.

9. The third and last thing I am to account for, is, my not taking notice of
some special evidences, which are here mentioned against them: The first is the
mention of Abeddadan for Sheba, in the Epistle to the Magnesians.

10. But how can this be suggested against the Edition we appeal to, when it is
certain there is no such word in it, and when by the Lord Primate, that
endeavored to evidence the purity of this, and the corruptness of the former
Editions, this very word (...) is particularly Proleg^m p. 71.
produced as an argument, that those things are reformed here, which were
vitiated before? And when it is visible by the whole passage here set down,
that he had consulted the words of the Lord Primate (not in Ep. ad Magnes. p.
15.) it is not easily conceivable how he could still think fit to make this
evidence of the incorruptnesse of the Copy, an instance of the corruption of it.

11. So again when it is objected in the next place (as an evidence, what hands
these Epistles have fallen into by the way) that some citations are made out of
them of old, which now appear not in them, and of this sort two instances are
tendered, one a citation from Theodoret, the other from Hierome: It Is hardly
imaginable how he could think ^it to make such an objection.

12. The place cited by Theodoret is in the very same form in the old Latin
Copy, which the Lord Primate set out, and so in the Laurentian published by
Vossius, with very little change: Thus, (...), They depart from the Eucharist
and prayer, because they do not acknowledge the Eucharist to be the flesh of
Jesus Christ our Savior, which suffered for our sins, which the Father raised
up. All the difference is but this, that where Theodoret reads [(...), they
receive not the Eucharist and oblations] Our Copy of the Epistle to the Church
of Smyrna reads (...), they recede from the Eucharist and the prayer] (which is
to the same sense, which soever be the truest reading, and greater differences
there often are discernable in citation of places of Scripture in the Fathers)
and then how could he think fit to add [which words you will scarcely find
in that Epistle to the Church of Smyrna, from whence they were taken] I cannot
yet make any conjecture, what he should aim at in thus affirming, contrary to
every man's sight, which shall but read that Epistle, and therefore I cannot
farther apply fit remedy to it.

13. The case is evident; These words are wanting in the corrupt Copies of
Ignatius, and yet are cited by Theodoret out of him: This concludes, that there
were more perfect Copies in Theodoret's time, than our former had been, and now
the Copies lately published have these words in them, which is an evidence of
the accord between these Copies and that which Theodoret used; and so being an
argument for the incorruptness of these Copies, and the very thing which caused
the Lord Primate to make search in our English Libraries for those Copies,
because he found this particular place cited by three ancients of this Nation,
Wodeford, Robert Lincolniensis, and Tissington, it was not either very
reasonably, or very luckily produced, as an evidence against them.

14. The full importance of the speech it self has been formerly intimated,
viz. that the haereticks, which denied the reality of Christ's death and
Resurrection, did, consequently to their hypothesis, reject the Eucharist, and
prayers, or oblations of the Church, wherein that death of his was solemnly
commemorated, and the flesh of the crucified Savior Sacramentally offered, and
received, and so maintained to be by the Orthodox believers.

15. The other speech said to be cited from Ignatius by St. Hierome, may also
well be his saying, though I find it not in these Epistles: Our Savior, we
know, spoke many things which are not written in the Gospels, and some of them
are recited afterward by the Apostles in the Acts, and some recorded by the
Writers that followed the Apostles: And so well enough may some periods,
delivered to Ignatius, be preserved to us, not in his own Writings, but in the
Writings of other men; and this far from prejudicing the Epistles, which have
been transmitted to us, which may well be genuine, though all that was such be
not come down to us. As for the [audact^r] that it was a bold saying in him
that said it, I have little reason to be disturbed by that, because if Ignatius
said it, it is not my interest to inquire or examine, how boldly, and if he did
not say it, then nothing can be inferred from his saying it: But then after all
this, Christ, we know, called and chose one of his Disciples from the
Toll-booth, where they that sat were proverbially called sinners, and
generally accounted such beyond all other men, their very trade was (...),
filthy and sordid, says (...). l. 4. c. 44 59.
Artemidorus, and fit to be joined with that of (...) and (...), thieves and
cheaters; and in Theophrastus in his Characters, (...) and (...), whoremonger^
and Publicans, as in Scripture, Publicans and Harlots go together, and
accordingly when Musonius in Sto^^us p. 31.
Theocritus was asked what was the cruellest beast? he answered, Of those in
the Mountains, the Bear and Lion, but of those in the City (...), Publicans and
Sycophant^, and as of them the Poet concludes, (...), they are all, generally
all, Robbers, so the Jews are wont to cry out of them, that they are all (...)
thieves, wicked sinners: And then what boldness is there in saying of Christ,
who chose such, that he chose those who were sinners above all other men: It
being no way to the dishonor of Christ to have chosen such, who from the chief
of sinners, blasphemers, and persecutors, and injurious (as St. Paul says of
himself) converted, and became the most zealous servants and Disciples of
their Master.

Sect. 2.
The style, and barbarous words in these Epistles. Variety of styles.
Exuberance of affection. (...). Ignatius's title, an indication of the language
of that age. Compositions, and new forms in Scripture. The four Latin words
in these Epistles, paralleled by Hegesippus. The Church of Smyrna, and many
more in the New Testament.

Number. 1. THE next objection against these Epistles is taken from the style, and
the use of barbarous words in Ignatius, and it begins thus.

2. The style of these Epistles does not a little weaken the credit of them,
being turgent, swelling with uncouth words and phrases, affected manner and
ways of expression, new compositions of words, multiplying titles of honor to
men, exceedingly remote and di^^ant from the plainness and simplicity of the
first Writers among the Christians, as is evident by comparing these with the
Epistles of Clement before mentioned, that of Polycarpus in Euscbius, the
Churches of Vienna and Lions in that same Author and others. Instances for the
confirmation of this observation are multiplied by Blondellus, my designed work
will not allow me to insi^^ particulars. In many good words this charge is
waved, by affirming that the author of these Epistles was a Syrian, and near to
Martyrdom, and that in the Scripture there are sundry words of as hard a
composition, as these used by him, Ham. Dissert. 2. c. 3. And as he says, from
this kind of writing an argument of sufficient validity may be drawn to evince
him to be the Author of these Epistles. Hierome was of another mind speaking of
Dydimus, Imperitus (says he) sermon est, and non scientia, Apostolicum virum
ex ipso sermon exprimens, tam sensum nomine, quam simplicitate ver borum; But
seeing Ignatius was a Syrian, and near to Martyrdom (though he writes his
Epistles from Troas and Smyrna, which without doubt were not in his way to Rome
from Antioch, and yet every where he says he is going to Rome: ad Eph^s.
(...), which in the close he affirms he wrote from Smyrna, whither he was had
to his Martyrdom) what is it to any man what style he used in his writings,
what swelling titles he gave to any, or words he made use of. Who shall call
those writings (especially Ignatius being a Syrian) into question.

But perhaps some farther question may here arise (and which has by sundry
been already started) about the use of diverse Latin wo^ds in those Epistles,
which doubtless cannot be handsomely laid on the same account of the Author,
being a Sy^ian, and nigh to Martyrdom* (...), are usually instanced: words to
which no Roman^ Customs, Observations, Orders, nor Rules of Government do
administer the least occasion. Of these the Doctor tells you, he wonders only
that in so many Epistles there are no more of this kind. And why so? the
Epistles are not so large a volume, a very few hours will serve to read them
over; and yet I am persuaded that in all that compass of reading, in the Greek
Fathers, which our Doctor ownes, he cannot give so many instanc^s of wo^ds
barbarous to their language, no way occasioned by the means before mentioned,
as have been given in these Epistles. But he wonders that there are no more,
and some wonder that all are not of his mind. But he farther informs us, that
a diligent reader of the Scripture may observe many more Latin words in the
New Testament, than a^^ used in these Epistles; and for a proof of his
diligence and observation, reckons up out of the end of Passor's Lexicon,
sundry words of that kind made use of by the Sacred Writers. I fear unto some
men, this will sc^^ce be an Apology prevalent to the dismission of these
Epistles from under the cen^ure of being at least foulely corrupted. Of the
whole co^lection of words of that sort made by P^ssor, among which are those
especially culled out by our Doctor to confirm^ his Observations, there is
scarce one, but either it is expressive of some Roman Office, Custom, Money,
O^der, or the like: words of which nature pass as proper names, (as one of
those mentioned by the Doctor is, and no otherwise used in the New Testamen)
from one Country and Language to another, or are indeed of a pur^ G^eek
Original, or at least were in common use in that age, neither of which can be
spoken of the words above mentioned, used in the Epistles: which were never
used by any before or after them, nor is the^e any occasion imaginable why they
should: Parvas hab^nt sp^s Epistolae, si tal^s habent: I would indeed gladly
see a fair, candi^, and ingenious defensative of the style and manner of
writing used in these Epistles, departing so eminently from any thing that was
customa^y in ^he writings of the men of those days, or is regular for men in
any generation, in Repetitions, affected Compositions, Barbarismes, Rhyming
expressions, and the like: for truly notwithstanding any thing that hitherto I
have been ab^^ to obtain for help in this kind, I am enforced to incline ^o V^s
his answers to all the particular instances given of this nature; this, and
that place is corrupted, this is from Clement's constitutions, this from this
or that Tradition, which also would much better free those Epistles from the
word (...) used in the sense whereunto it was applied by the Valentinians long
after the death of Ignatius, than any other Apology I have as yet seen, for
the securing of its abode in them.

3. The, total of this double objection against turgencie of style and
barbarousnesse of words, is this, The objections formerly drawn by D. Blondel
from those two heads, and punctually answered by me Dissert. 2 c. 3. are again
called up, and some general heads of my answers slightly repeated, and scoffed
at, and put into as disadvantageous a dress, as he could choose for them, and
then the old answered arguments may stand good again, and all must be rejected
as supposititious, which has any of this turgent style, or these barbarous
words in it.

4. In full answer to this, I, that know best the force of my own answers, and
wherein their strength lies, shall very briefly give the Reader, that is not at
leisure to turn to the Dissertations, a view of them, and vindicate them from
any appearance of reply which here is made to them.

5. Three things are more distinctly objected by Blondel on this head, turgency
of style, new forms of compounded words, and a few, viz. four Latin words made
Greek.

6. To the first of these my answer is, 1. that the styles of men in the same
age are often very different, I add, as different and discernable to a curious
observer, as their hands or characters, or as their countenances, several lines
and features, and airs as it were, several dashes and forms visibly observable
in them. Accordingly we Cicer fam. Ep. lib. 9. Ep. 16.
read of Caesar, that if any passage were brought to him for Cicero's, which
was not Cicero's, he would constantly reject it. And the same could Ibidem.
Servius do, if any verse in the name of Plautus were recited to him, which
was not his. And we know it is the part of an Aristarchus, or skillful Critic,
and the common way of discerning such or such a writing, whether it be his,
whose it pretends to be or not, diligently to observe the style or character,
which could not be any probable way of judging, if all others, which wrote in
the same age, wrote the very same style: And so that which is here added of
comparing Ignatius his style with that of Clement and Polycarp, and the Church
of Vienna, is a very strange argument, just as if one should say, he that ownes
this Preface is not the Author of it, and bind him, for the justifying that he
is, to demonstrate the agreement of his style with all men that have written in
this last age in our language.

7. 2ly. When Blondel says, that the Author of these Epistles does nimis
Rhetoricari, too much rhetoricate; I answer, that it is hard to define the
bounds of Eloquence, within which it is obliged to contein it self. Cicero in
his Institution of an Orator commending that plenty, cui aliquid amputari
possit, where there is somewhat to spare, which is an evidence that that Master
of Eloquence is no way displeased with all exuberance; And to this particular
it was, that peculiarly I added the mention of his being near his Martyrdom,
and his flagrant desire of it, which might inflame his soul, and that send out
those warmer breathings or expressions, which might be as much above the
ordinary simplicity of speech, as he was at that time above the ordinary cold
temper of other men. And against this there is not the least word here objected
by this Praefacer.

8. For the second part of the objection, the new forms of compounded words,
observable in these Epistles, my answer is, that though Blondel set down 17. of
such words, yet many of them are of the same kind, compounded of (...), and
(...) and (...), and so arise by the same analogy, that fewer would do, and
consequently the multitude of them signifies no more than a smaller number of
the same. And of these it is observable, that the title, by which Ignatius was
vulgarly known at that time, was (...), one that carried God, and when Trajan
condemned him to death* it was upon this point and in this form, that he owned
that name, Ignatium praecipimus in seipso dicentem circumferre Crucifixum,
vinctum a militibas duci ad magnam Romam, My sentence is that Ignatius, that
says he carries about in himself the crucified, i. e. that calls himself
Theophorus, (as he did in that answer to Trajan's calling him Cacodaemon,
Nullus Theophorum v^cat Cacademo^em) shall be carried bound to great Rome, and
cast on the Theater to the wild beasts, as we find it in the relation of his
Martyrdom. Now this being then his ordinary title, the other like words are
directly of the same composition with that: (...), and from hence I argued (and
I still think probably) that his use of such compositions was an argument that
he wrote these Epistles, not that he wrote them not, it being evident by that
one word (so vulgarly then used to signify him) Theophorus, that such
compositions were then agreeable to the ears and genius of that age.

9. And the argument thus used by me, was neither not apprehended, or very
uneffectually answered, by opposing the words of Saint Hierome of Didymus, that
he expressed himself an Apostolical person by the simplicity of his language. So
Didymus might, and yet the argument conclude probably, that these Epistles were
written by Ignatius, because as he was vulgarly called (...), so words of the
like nature with that, (...) and (...), familiarly discernable in those
Epistles.

10. As for the other words by Blondel objected, which were of other forms of
composition, (...). My answer is, that none of these are at all Monstreus in
the language of a Syrian, that writes Greek, and that in the New Testament,
words are to be found, as distant from common language, and as extraordinarily
compounded as these, for instance, (...) and (...), in Saint Luke, (...) and
(...) in Saint John, (...), in Saint Peter, (...) in S. Paul, and (...), a word
made on purpose by Saint Paul, without example of the like (not only of the
same) in other authors.

11. To this answer of mine, here is no kind of reply, but of scoffs only,
[But seeing Ignatius was a Syrian, and near to Martyrdom (though he writes his
Epistles from Troas and Smyrna, which without doubt were not in his way to Rome
from Antioch, and yet every where he says he is going to Rome --) what is that
to any man what style he used in his writings -- and so in the mode of sarcasme.

12. But I wonder what caused this mirth, and in sadness demand, whether I
ever rendered it as the reason of his using those new compositions, that he was
near to Martyrdom, he cannot but know that that was the plea for the
exuberance of his affection, which might render the reason of the warmer
expressions, which Blondel had censured for too much Rhetoric; and to that it
was proper, though not to making of new words, which is the present business.

13. Secondly, why might not he be a Syrian, and write as a Syro-Graecian would
write, although his Epistles were dated from Troas and Smyrna? It Is sure enough
that he lived at Antioch, and that was the Metropolis of Syria, and the
soldiers carrying him bound to Troas and Smyrna, was not likely so suddenly to
change his dialect, or make him write more familiar Greek, than in Antioch he
would have written, and being called vulgarly (...) at Antioch, what wonder is
it that he should now write in the same style, use (...) and (...) at Smyrna?

14. Thirdly, For his going by Tr^as and Smyrna from Antioch to Rome, all
records of his journey make it certain, and if it were not the nearest way,
the account has been given of that in the former section, And so the Praefacer
might well enough have kept his countenance, and spared his Sarcasmes, Here was
nothing to discompose him, nothing ridiculous in all this.

15. Lastly, therefore, for the four Latin words turned into Greek, and used
in those Epistles produced by D. Blondel, (...), my answer is, 1. that there is
nothing strange in that, it might be as great matter of wonder, that in seven
Epistles there are no more of that kind.

16. To which here it is replied, 1. that the Epistles are not so large a
volume, a few hours will serve to read them over, 2. that no Roman Customs,
Observations, Orders, nor rules of Government did administer the least occasion
of the use of these words, and 3. that the like number cannot he produced out
of all the Greek Fathers that I own the reading of

17. To these I answer, 1. that as far from large as the Epistles are, there
might as probably have been more such words, as so many, seven Epistles, each
of them being much longer than some of the Apostles in the Scripture, if they
had had but one such word a piece (which sure each might as reasonably have as
any) this had almost doubled the number, which now we find in the objecters
own computation. And indeed three of these four being altogether in the
Epistle to Polyear^e (which if, with some, I should leave out of the Collection
of the Genuine, I should have enough behind to maintain Episcopacy) in all the
other six there remains but one, which in no immoderate proportion.

18. Secondly, That as in Hegesippus fragments left to us in Greek, Blondel
has taken notice of (...), as perfect and unexcusable a Latinisme as any of
these, so in the one Epistle of the Church of Smyrna (of a very moderate
length, concerning Polycarps Martyrdom (another piece of the same ages
production) we have (...), another parallel instance of the use of such words
at that time.

19. 3ly. The like words and phrases in the New Test. which is also no vast
volume (though not fit to be read ad clepsidram, the length of it measured by
the houre-glasse) are so many more than these that are accused, and produced
from these Epistles (near thirty for four) that this may well vindicate so
small a number, and make it more strange that there are no more than four,
than it ought to be that there are so many.

20. So in the next place for the four heads into which he brancheth the
causes of the use of Latin words among Greek writers, I answer 1. that if he
has observed four, other men may as lawfully observe some other, and are no
way obliged to marshall all they find of this nature, under one of his four
heads. 2. That if there be by him acknowledged four such heads of causes, I
may reasonably allow Ignatius to have used four such words, and render but
this one single reason for them all, that Antioch, being part of the Roman
dominion, and many that spoke Latin inhabiting there, four Latin words might
easily be transfused into common use among them, acceptum, depositum, desertor,
exemplar.

21. If this seem strange, let it be remembered, that if ^ot all, certainly the
three later of these very four are in vulgar use among us of England, derived
certainly from the same fountain whence Ignatius had them, and so may well be
allowed them, who had the same occasion, and the same liberty.

22. Thirdly, that three of these four, (...), are all Military words; as for
the first of them, it is clear, and for the other two, he might be informed from
Halloix, When Soldiers went on an expedition says he, in civitatibus peculia
sua castrensia deponebant, quae reversi recipiebant, Illa deposita
appellabantur ab eo qui deponebat, accepta ab eo qui accipiebat, confectis ergo
bellis illi deposita repetebant, hi accepta restituebant. And then what was
thus taken from the Militia, may well be reduced to one of the Prefacers heads,
the first, that of Roman customs, and so by his own rules these Latin words
might here be lawfully used, in a metaphorical passage especially, which was
all Military.

23. Lastly, what need I take the pains to turn over the Fathers, to parallel
these four words, when if I do succeed in the attempt, he has his reserve
[yea, but they are taken from one of the four heads mentioned by him, Customs,
Observations, Orders* or Rules of Government] (which are pre^tily comprehensive
indeed, as they may be applied) and when out of the very Greek Testament (which
was written nearer to the time of Ignatius than the Volumes of the Greek
Fathers were) I have already produced so many more, than are voucht from these
Epistles.

24. But to this it is said, 1. That as a proof of my diligence and
observation, I reckon sundry words of this kind out of the end of Passor' s
Lexi^. 2. That of that whole collection there is scarce one b^t either is
expressive of some Roman Office, Custom, Money, Order, or the like, or else a
proper name, as one mentioned by me, or indeed of a p^ Greek Original, or that
were in common use in that age. 3. That neither of these can be spoken of those
which are used in these Epistles.

24. To all these I make my rejoinder. To the first, 1. That it is as good an
evidence that there are such words in the New Testament, if Passor collected
them, as if I, or this Prefacer were supposed to have done it. I was not then
contending for commendation of diligence or observation, but demonstrating one
truth and vindicating another, and this might as effectually be done (without
my reading over the New Testament on purpose) by any other easier method, that
could offer it self unto me.

25. But then secondly: if this were so accurately done by Passor before me, my
advantage was the greater against Blondel, who might so easily have discerned
so many, and yet would take notice but of one in all the New Testament, viz.
(...).

26. Thirdly, That the Prefacer was not acquainted with me, nor knew so much of
my secrets, as that he can upon knowledge, or with truth affirm, what he does
without any peradventure, that I reckon them up out of Passor's Lexicon. I had
not converst with, nor, that I know of, was ever owner of that Author of his,
but did, as was necessary for me, that knew no more compendious way, write them
out of my ill memory, and imperfect Notes, taken at least twenty or thirty
years before: And accordingly the Catalogue then made by me was but imperfect,
and I have since found occasion to increase it, and when I meet with Passor,
may perhaps have reason farther to enlarge it (and if I do, shall be obliged
to acknowledge by whom I was directed to him.)

27. And so in the second part of the reply, the Prefacer has thought fit to
do, having added one head more, that of Money to the four which he had
formerly made use of, and not only so, but left room for more by a large form
of Analogy [and the like] and yet farther reckoned up three heads more, to
each of which he acknowledges the [like] to be equally imputable.

28. As for the proper name (that, I suppose, must be (...), Justus) as it is
true, that it is such, so it is certain that that Latin proper name is first a
Latin common Adjective, and being spoken of, in Greek, might as well hae been
translated into (...), as either Cephas is into (...), or Tabitha into (...) if
there had been any criminous barbarousness in using foreign words, or turning
them into Greek: As for the pure Greek Original, that some of the words are of,
if he mean any of those mentioned by me, I confess I know not what he means;
If he means those mentioned by Passor, I have no commodity to know, nor
obligation to account for it.

29. As for the last, that they were of common use in that age, I doubt it not,
and shall therefore hasten to the last particular, and give the like account of
that, and that I doubt not but the four words in Ignatius, were at Antioch,
where he lived, in frequent and common use at that time, and till that be
disproved, we are perfectly agreed upon the account, that it was very lawful
for Ignatius to use them. And this I hope may at last be sufficient to have
added to the former competent length of account, concerning the style of these
Epistles.

30. In the close, there is a mention of the word (...), another of D.
Blondel's exceptions, but of that I have spoken so largely, both to Blondel's
original objections, and to his replies (and there is not one word here said to
the confirming of his, or refuting of my pretensions, that I must not superadde
one word more of that subject.

Sect. 3.
The immoderate exaltations of Bishops objected to these Epistles. But belong
not to our Copies, save in one testimony, and that no way immoderate.

Number. 1. THe next charge against these Epistles is, the frequent commendation
of Bishops, etc. Thus it lies.

It is not a little burdensome to the thought of sober and learned men, to
consider how frequently, causelessly, absurdly in the midst of discourses quite
of another nature, and tendncy, the Author of those Epistles (or some body for
him) breaks in upon the commendation of Church Officers, Bishops and
Presbyters, exalting with titles of honor to the greatest Potentates on earth,
and comparing them to God the Father and Son, whereas none of the sacred
Writers that went before him, nor any of those good and holy men, who (as is
supposed) followed after him, do hold the least communion or society with him
in that course of proceeding, (...), Epist. ad Trall. Whereunto is immediately
subjoyned that Doctrine concerning Deacons, which will scarcely be thought to
be exege^^cal of Act. 6. (...) -- And (...). What the Writer of this passage
intended to make of a Bishop, well I know not, but thus he speaks of him,
Epist. ad Mag^^^. (...) (as the Apostle speaks concerning God, Heb. 6. 10.
(...). Thus indeed some would have it, who to help the matter, have further
framed such an Episc^pacy, as was never thought on by any in the days of
Ignatius, as shall afterward b^e made evident: And in the same Epistle this is
somewhat uncou^h and strange. (...). Whether the Lord Christ has bound any
such burden upon the shoulde^s of the Saints, I much question; nor can I tell
what to make of the comparison, b^tween God the Father, and the Bishop, Christ,
and the rest of the Church, the whole sentence in word and matter being most
remote from the least countenance from the sacred writings. Ep. ad Philad^l.
(...) (well aimed however) (...). The Epistle to the Church of Smyrna is full
of such stuff, inserted without any occasion, order, coherence, or any color
to induce us to believe that it is part of the Epistle as first written. O^e
passage I may not omi^, (...) (in the language of our Savior repudiating the
Pharisces corrupted glosses on the Law) (...). So Peter^ mista^e is corrected;
his reasons follow, (...) (as was Jesus Christ) and it is added, (...). How
well this ^ui^s the doctrine of Peter and Paul the Reader will easily discern;
Caesar or the King is upon all accounts thrust behind the Bishop, who is said
to be consecrated to God for the salvation of the world; him he is exhorted to
obey, and in express opposition to the Holy Ghost, the Bishops name is thrust
in between God and the King, as in a way of prae^minence above the latt^^, and
to do any thing without the Bishop, is made a far greater c^ime than to rise
up 2* against the King. As this seems scarce to be the language of one, going
upon an accusation to appear before the Emperor, so (...) am certain, it is
most remote from the likeness of any thing that in this affair we are
instructed in from the Scripture. Plainly this language is the same with that
of the false Impostor Pseudo-Clemens, in his pretended Apostolical
Constitutions. At this rate or somewhat beyond it, you have him ^anting l. 2 c.
2 (...). All Popes, with all ^s of persons whatsoever, Priests, Kings and
Princes, Fathers, and childen, all under the feet of this exemplar of God, and
ruler over me^, a pa^sag^ which doubtless eminently interprets, and
illustrates that place of Peter, 1 Epistle, c. 5. v. 1, 2, 3. The Elders that
are among you I exhort, who am also an Elder, and a witness of the sufferings
of Christ, and also a partaker of the glory that shall be revealed, feed the
^lock of God, which is among you, taking the oversight thereof not by
constraint, but willingly, not for fil^^y lucre, but of a ready mind, neither
as being Lords over Gods heritage, but being examples to the flock: But yet as
if the man were stark mad with worldly pride and pomp, he afterward in the
name of the holy Apostles of Jesus Christ, commands all the ^aity (forsooth) to
honor, love, and fear the Bishop, (...), lib 2. c. 20. And that you may see
whither the man drives, and what he aims at, after he has set out his Bishop
like an Emperor, or an Eastern King in all pomp and glory, he adds, (...).
The paying of Tribute to them as Kings, is the issue of these descriptions,
that they may have wherewithal to maintain their pomp and greatness*
according to the institution of our Lord Jesus Christ, and his blessed Apostles
But I shall not rake farther into this dunghill, nor shall I add any more
instances of this kind out of Ignatius, but close i^ to one insisted on by our
Doctor, for the proof of his Episcopacie, Di^r^. (...), (...). 25. 7. says he,
Qu^^^o, (...). Episcopo attendite ut and vobis Deus attendat, ego animam meam
libenter little loco substitui, cuper^^ (Quod Arglice optime decimus, my soul
for theirs) qui Episcopo, Presbyteris, and Diaconis obsequuntur. I hope I may
without great difficulty obtain the Doctors pardon, that I dare not be so bold
with my soul as to jeopard it in that manner, especially being not my own to
dispose of.

2. I shall not need to inquire who those sober and learned men are, with the
mention of whom the Prefacer here begins; I question not but that they are he,
and those of his persuasion, I only hope it is possible that they have not the
enclosure of that title, and then there may be others as sober, and as learned,
that consent with me in their opinion of this matter.

3. What is said here of those sober and learned men, that it is not a little
burthensom to their thoughts, that the Author of these Epistles so frequently,
causelessly, and absurdly breaks in upon the commendation of Church-Officers]
may be just matter of compassion in me; as far as I believe there is any truth
in it: For truly I should be sorry, that any sober, or learned man's thoughts
should be so causelessly, and yet so heavily burdened and disquieted: And yet
if that be the case, I may certainly be able to do more than compassionate, I
may administer comfort also: For if that Authors commendations of Bishops be
causeless and absurd, then their grief and pressure of thoughts must be as
causeless (that I add not, absurd) who are much disturbed with them: If the
supposititious Ignatius that has taken that person on him, act and personate
so very absurdly, any sober, or learned man will be glad, that he has so
luckily discovered his fraud, that the Visor is fallen off by this means, and
the cheat so speedily come to an end.

4. If therefore there be any thing serious in this expression (as [not a
little burdensome to the thought of sober and learned men] is a very solemn
and grave style, that admits no suspicion of Smile or Ironie) it must to my
understanding signify, that they that are not friends to Episcopacy, are not a
little burdened to think, that Ignatius, that Primitive glorious Saint and
Martyr, should so frequently (which they must be supposed to think causelessly
and absurdly) commend and exalt Bishops: And though in their doing this, I know
they do not expect I should commend them, yet ^t so falls out, that I am very
well able to excuse them, if the passages, which are here set down by the
Prefacer, be the only matter of burden to their thoughts.

5. For indeed it is a little strange, that he that has undertaken to write
Animadversions on my Dissertations, and knows what Copies they are of Ignatius,
which I defend, as the genuine Epistles, should produce testimonies out of
these Epistles to invalidate their authority, and yet never but once consult
these Copies to which I appeal, but gather up the offscourings of the corrupt
Editions, which even now he had called the very garbidge of the beast, when, if
he had pleased, he might have entertained himself and the Reader with much
whole^omer diet in the volumes set out by Vossius and the Lord Primate.

6. As it is, the task lies more truly burdensome on me, who must now be feign
to survey, very unnecessarily all the testimonies here set down, and
demonstrate that it is unjustly suggested by the Prefacer, that the Author of
these Epistles (he ought to mean those, which he, with whom he disputes, takes
for his) exal^s Bishops with titles of honor to the greatest Potentates on
earth.

7. For the first testimony then, taken from the Epistle to the Trallians, he
might only have corrected the reading out of the emendate Copies, and so have
read (...) for (...), and then, as the testimony had been more Grammatical
sense, not [whatsoever things you do, do nothing -- ] but [it is necessary, as
already you practice, to do nothing without the Bishop] so the
reasonableness, and moderation of that speech had been discernable enough,
being both the ordinary language of the ancient Canons (always thought
necessary to the unity of the Church) and peculiarly useful at that time to be
inculcated (to keep out the poison of the haeretical and schismatical
Gnostics) as has at large been formerly demonstrated, both in answer to
Dissert. 3. numb. 9.
Blendel, and again to the Cap. 3 sect. 3. numb. 54.
London Assemblers, and need not now be repeated here.

8. The second testimony, which concerns Deacons, and is not conceived to be
reconcilable with their institution, Act. 6. is in our Copies, both in words
and sense, different from that which is here cited out of the corrupt, and has
nothing of high or strange in it. It is thus, (...), The Deacons being
Ministers of the Mysteries of Jesus Christ, ought to please all men; for they
are not dispensers of meat and drink (i. e. not only, or especially such) but
officers of the Church of Christ, they ought therefore to keep themselves from
accusations as from fire. What is there in this above the proportion of
moderate and sound doctrine?

9. But the third testimony is an immoderate one indeed, and gives him, I
confess, a supereminent jurisdiction in the [(...), and the (...)] But by good
hap there is not a word of it in our Editions, and so we are not farther
concerned to vindicate or examine it.

10. So for the fourth, from the Epistle to the Magnesians, the immoderate
height whereof is argued from the (...) used of God, Heb (I suppose it should
be) 10. 31. I need say no more again, but that there is no part of it in our
Copies nor any thing instead of it above this moderate pitch, (...) (...) -- To
the honor of God, whose pleasure it is, it becomes us to obey the Bishop
without any hypocrisy.

11. Of the fifth there is only thus much in our Copies by way of caution
against Schisms, (...), Be united to your Bishop, and those that are set over
you, for a copy and doctrine of incorruption. Which, by the way, sets down the
plain reason of his so frequent inculcating obedience to, and union with their
Bishop (just as in our Vindication to the London Assemblers, and elsewhere, has
often been said) because the true doctrine being by the Apostles before their
decease deposited with these, as their successors in every Church, and because
having particular knowledge of the Orthodoxalness of Damas in this, and the
like of other Bishops and Presbyters under them in the other Churches, there
was no way so prudent, and so compendious to preserve them from the corruptions
of the haereticks (who were then creeping in clancularly) as their keeping
themselves exactly close to the Bishop, and their Superiors under him. And
accordingly it follows, As therefore the Lord being united to his Father did
nothing without him, either by himself, or by his Apostles, so neither do ye
any thing without the Bishop, and the Presbyters; nor endeavor to account any
thing reasonable which is private, or of your own devising: Which again differs
from the reading that is here offered, and tells us clearly what is meant by the
comparison betwixt God the Father and the Bishop, Christ and the rest of the
Church, even no more than Christ means when he said, Learn of me, for I am
meek: Christ did all by commission from, and nothing without his Father, and so
betwixt them unity was preserved: And in like manner the Members of the Church
must obey, and do nothing without their Governor, and so union may among them
be preserved also. But of this entire place we have formerly spoken in the
Vindication to the London Assemblers, c. 3. sect. 3. n. 42.

12. The sixth place is of some weight indeed, from the Epistle to the
Philadelphians, requiring all, of what sort soever, not only Presbyters,
Deacons, and the whole Clergy, but all the People, Soldiers, Princes, Caesar
himself to perform obedience to the Bishop. And here, I acknowledge, there is a
testimony and evidence of the charge of extolling Bishops above the greatest
Potentates; for sure Caesar was such, and if Ignatius had thought fit to use
such language, and done it at a time when Caesar was heathen, and he by Caesar's
sentence already condemned, and within a while to be brought forth to the
Amphitheatre, I might have justly deserved a severe Animadversion for moving
tongue or pen in defense of this rebellious, extravagant, senseless doctrine.
But I need not take pains to examine the place, my memory, as ill as it is,
assures me there is no such thing in the Epistles owned by us Prelatists; and
upon consulting the place, I find there are almost eight pages together
inserted by some Impostor, of all which there remains not above one page in our
Editions, which certainly is an evidence, that some Reformation was wrought,
some degree of purity restored to these Epistles, by this so fiery a purgation:
And it is very strange that this Prefacer could not take notice of it.

13. So again the seventh, in the Epistle to the Smyrnaeans, is advanced to the
same pitch of Insolence, placing the Bishop betwixt God and the King, and that
by way of correction of the words of Scripture [My son, fear God, and the
King] and all the several branches of that place here cited, are every word
vanished out of our volume of Epistles. And so the Prefacer has only had an
opportunity to betray his mistake, in affirming of Ignatius at the time of
writing that Epistle, that he was going upon an accusation to appear before the
Emperor, whereas it is certain he had before this, received his condemnation
from Trajan the Emperor at Antioch, and was now carrying to Rome for his
execution, and that is all he has gained by producing this testimony.

14. And so you see I have no reason to make any further answer to what the
Prefacer here justly adds concerning the unreasonablenesse, and
unchristiannesse of these expressions, whether in these insertions published
once under Ignatius his name, or the like in the Constitutions fathered also
upon Clemens, I am as perfectly of his opinion concerning the impiety of them,
as he could wish, and am thereby obliged to value our new Editions, the more
for freeing an innocent Martyr and his Reader from such Impostures.

15. Only I wonder that over and above all those that are by that Impostor
appointed to obey the Bishop, the Prefacer (as if the other had been too wary)
should think fit to make a further insertion, and to the Catalogue of the
Bishop's subjects, add [All Popes] when the Greek cited by him has only
(...), which he truly renders Priests in the words following. What is this but
to corrupt the sink, to help the Garbidge to get a stronger savor, to go
beyond the Artificer at his own weapon, to fancy a command to the Bishop to
obey himself, to Pope Clemens to be subject to Clemens the Pope? If the
supposititious Clemens had written at that rate, he had certainly never imposed
on any. But I must not advise my Monitor, else he should have rendered the Greek
in plain English, and spared that whether paraphrase, or insertion [All Popes.]

16. The last place produced out of the testimonies cited in the Dissertations
is indeed to be found in Vossius's edition, and the Medicean Copy of our
Epistles. And the producing of that from thence, and mentioning it as produced
by me, is an evidence that the Prefacer knew the way, if he had pleased to make
use of it, to have cited none but Genuine Testimonies: For all such, as far as
the uncorrupted Copies would afford, were by me set down to his hand: But that
method was not, it seems, for his turn, the Reader could not have been so
amuzed with a multitude of odious passages out of Ignatius, if this, as fairer,
so easier course had been taken.

17. For this one place then, where the genuine Ignatius bids them, or rather
exhorts Polycar^ the Bishop to advise them, to give heed to the Bishop that God
may attend to them, and adds, my soul for theirs who obey the Bishop,
Presbyters, and Deacons] though I cannot wonder that in these da^es there are
some, who are not well qualified to say Amen to it, yet being taken as it was
meant by that holy man, there is certainly nothing in it to be startled at, or
improbable to be written by the Saint Ignatius. It Is in the Epistle to
Polycarp, and it concerns the Church under him, And at that time it appears the
Gnostick haereticks were infusing their poison there, and their first artifice
of insinuation was, taking upon them to understand or know more than their
Bishop or Teacher did, though he the most famous Doctor of all Asia, (...), and
(...), an Apostolic, and Prophetike, and illustrious Doctor, says the Epistle
of the Church of Smyrna concerning him. This is set down in the words
precedent, (...), If a man assume and b^ast of his knowledge, take upon him to
know more than the Bishop, by this you may know that he has imbibed and sucked
in that Gnostick poison (that makes him so swell presently) And in opposition
to these it is, and upon perfect knowledge of their Bishop, that he thus
proceeds to exhort and conjure them to attend to their Bishop, and not to such
assuming Corehs, and to do it more effectually, offers to jeopard his soul for
theirs, that they shall suffer no damage for so doing. And supposing the Bishop
to be in the right* Orthodox and careful to build them up in the truth, and
that the haereticks which advanced themselves above the Bishop, designed that
which would be their ruin and perdition, if they succeed in their attempt (as
it is certain that this must, at this time, in this matter, be supposed) what
danger was Ignatius in by venturing his soul in this manner: This certainly he
might do, as far as (...) reaches (no more than this, that he durst or would
be content to venture it) though his soul (nay more than his life, which he now
more than ventured) was not his own to dispose of.

Sect. 4.
Of the three Orders in the Church. Of the Order of Presbyters when it came in.
No mention of it in Clemens Romanus, or Polycarpe, but in Ignatius. Lombard
words of the two Orders. The Popish Doctrine concerning Bishops.

Number. 1. FRom these premises thus laid, and, I suppose, by this time, removed
out of the way, from being occasion of stumbling to any, he now proceeds to
infer his conclusion, thus.

2. Upon these, and many more the like accounts do the Epistles seem to me to
be li^e the children that he Jews had by their strange wives, N^h. ^3. who
spoke part the language of Ashdod, and part the language of the Jews That there
are in them many footsteps of a gracious spirit, every way worthy of, and be
ming the great and holy personage whose they are esteemed, so there is
evidently a mixture of the working of that worldly and carnal s^^ it, which in
his days was not so let loose as in after times. For what is there in the
Scripture, what is in the genuine Epistle of Clemens, that gives countenance to
those descriptions of Episcopacy, Bishops, and the subjection to them, that are
in those Epistles (as now (...) have them) so insisted on? What Titles are
given to Bishops? What Sovereignty, Power, Rule, Dominion is ascribed to them?
I ^here any thing of the like nature in the Writings of the Apostles? In
Clemens, the Epistle of Po^ycarpus* and^? ^r any unquestionable legitimate
offspring of any of the first Worthies of Christianity? Whence have they their
^hree Orders of Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, upon the distinct observation
of which so much weight is laid? Is there any one word, iota, tittle, or
syllable in the whole B^o^ of God giving countenance to any such distinctions?
Ephesians 4. 11. We have Pastors and Teachers. Romans 12 7, 8. Him that teaches, him
that exhorts, him that rules, and him that shows m^^cy Phil. 1. 1. We have
Bishops and Deacons; and their Institutions with the order of it, we have at
large expressed 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2. Bishops and Deacons without the interposition
of any other Order whatsoever; Deacons we have appointed Act. 7. and Elders
Act. 14, 23. those who are Bishops we find called Presbyters Tit. 1. 5, 7. And
those who are Presbyters we find called Bishops Act. 20. 28. So that Deacons we
know, and Bishops who are Presbyters, or Presbyte^s who are Bishops we know,
but Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, as ^hree distincct Orders in the Church,
from the Scripture we know not. Neither did Clemen^ in his Epistle to the
Corimb^ans know any more than we do, which a few instances will manifest:
Says he, speaking of the Apostles, (...) -- Bishops and Deacons (as in the
Church at Philippi) this man knows, but the (...) Order he is utterly
unacquainted withal And that the difference of this man's expressions
concerning Church Rulers from those in the Epistle under consideration, may the
better appear; and his asserting of Bishops and Presbyters to be one and the
same, may the more clearly be evidenced, I shall transcribe one other passage
from him, whose length I hope will be ^xcused from the usefulness of it to the
purpose in hand, Page 57* 58. (...) (for so it seems was the manner of the
Church in his days, that their Officers were appointed by the consent of the
whole Church) (...) (or the Bishops of whom he was speaking) (...), etc. And
su^d^y other discoveries are there in that Epistle of the like nature: It is
not my design nor purpose to insist upon the parity of Bishops and Presbyters,
or rather the Identity of the Office denoted by sundry app^llations from these,
and the like places: This work is done to the full by Blondellus, that out
labor in this kind (were that the purpose in hand) is prevented. He that
thinks the arguments of that Learned man to this purpose are indeed answered
thoroughly, and removed by D. H. in his fourth Dissertation, where he proposes
them to consideration, may one day think it needful to be able to distinguish
between words and things. That Clemens owns in a Church but two sorts of
Officers, the first whereof he calls sometimes Bishops, sometimes Presbyters,
the other Deacons, the Doctor himself does not deny. That in the judgment of
Clemens no more were instituted in the Church is no less evident. And this
carries the conviction of its truth so clearly with it, that Lombard himself
confesses, Hos solos ministrorum duos ordines Ecclesiam primitivam habuisse,
and de ^is solis praeceptum Apostoli nos habere, lib. 4. sent. D. 24.

2. To supersede a conclusion not magisterially dictated (that were the
confidence quarreld at in me) but regularly inferred from premises, there can
be no more necessary than to discover the falsenesse of the premises, or their
weakness and incompetency to induce that conclusion. And this being already
done particularly and at large, it is impertinent to give any further answer to,
or account of this conclusion. I shall only lightly pass through the several
steps of it, and acknowledge of his conclusion, as much as either here, or from
the premises I find any reason to acknowledge, and briefly touch at the reasons
(before more largely rendered) why other parts of it may not be consented to.

3. And 1. what he says of these Epistles, that they seem like the children of
the strange wives. [speaking part the language of Ashdod, and part the language
of the Jews] has perfect truth in it, being applied to the former corrupt
Editions of Ignatius, but none at all, nor any appearance of any, as it is
applied to that volume, by which we desired to be judged, in the business of
Episcopacy.

4. Secondly, what is by these Epistles, as they are in our more emendate
Copies, affirmed of Bishops, is very agreeable to what is by the Scripture, by
Clemens, by Polycarpe, said of the same subject, all which under the name of
(...), and the like, describe their office, and require subjection and
obedience to be paid to them.

5. Thirdly; for the three orders, particularly for the second of those three,
which anciently, and still (but either rarely, or not at all in the Scripture)
are called Presbyters, but may most distinctly be styled Presbyteri secundarii,
or partiarii, Elders of a second rank, admitted to the exercise of some parts
of the Episcopal office, but not to all, and so distinguished from Bishops, or
Elders of the first rank. These the Prefacer cannot but know that I do not
undertake to find either in the Scripture, or in Clement's, or in Polycarp's
Epistle, and that though I have reasons to assure me, that when the namber of
believers increased so far, that there was both need of them, and competent
store of fit persons to undergo that office, then such Presbyters were
ordained to bear part of the burden with the Bishop, as the seventy Elders
with Moses (and I have compent reasons to persuade me, that this was done, in
some places, before the departure or decease of all the quire of Apostles,
particularly that St. John instituted such in Asia, when he Clem. (...). apud
Eusebius. l. 2. c. (...).
did (...)) yet this was not so universally done thus early, as that either the
Writers of the Scripture could, or after them Clement at Rome should be
required to make mention of it: And for Polycarpe, though I suppose, and doubt
not but he lived to see such in the Church, yet there was no necessity that in
that one Epistle of his, he should mention them, or use the word (...) Elders
of any others but Bishops, it being certain that after the secundarie
Presbyters were instituted, the name (...) still continued common to Bishops,
and was not presently appropriated to Presbyters, as is elsewhere made clear out
of Iraeneus, Clemens Alexandrinus and Tertullian, Dissert. 4. c. 22. and in the
vindication of them from the exceptions of the London Ministers.

6. It remains therefore that the Epistles of Ignatius are the best records of
Primitive Antiquity, on which to build this second Order of Secundarie, or
Partiarie Presbyters, which if they were instituted personally by St. John, or
if they were designed by the other Apostles, and not ordained in their times,
only because thus early ((...) and (...), in Epiphanius's style) there was no
need of them, their Institution will still be Apostolical, though not mentioned
in the Apostles writings, as in the Answer to the London Assemblers has been
shown also.

7. Fourthly, concerning the title of Pastors and Doctors, or Teachers, (...)
in Scripture, he cannot but know the account given by me, viz. that by all, and
each of those Bishops are to be understood, as has been showed Dissert. 4 c.
14, 15. and nothing being here said to disprove it, it is but petitio principii
to suppose the contrary: So also of (...) Rulers, I have spoken at large,
Dissert. 4. c. 13. The like of (...), when they have none but Deacons joined
with them, Phil. 1. 1. and 1 Timothy 3. All which are perfectly agreeable to my
hypothesis, that there are no single Presbyters, or middle order of Officers
betwixt Bishops and Deacons that I discern mentioned in Scripture. So the use
of (...), Elders for Bishops, Tit 1. 5, 7. is by me acknowledged (though not of
Bishops for Presbyters, which conceit is as largely Diss. 4. c. 8. vindic. of
Diss c. 3. sect 19. n. 27.
elsewhere confuted.)

8. And for the two large and express places here transcribed out of Clemens,
they had before been particularly produced by me, and found perfectly to
consent, and accord with the notions, which out of Scripture I had received,
and which by Epiphanius were vouched (...) out of the profoundest Records. And
for Blondel's collection to the contrary, I shall hope that to other men my
answers will appear more than verbal, and though I have here somewhat an unkind
character given me of them, viz. that they that approve them may one day think
it needful to distinguish between words and things, yet I am not quite
discouraged, being competently assured, that if he that said so, had had any
thing else to say, any more than words to object against them, he would not
have been so reserved, or sparing of his pains, as to have denied it place in
his Animadversions.

9. Lastly, It Is evident (what he says) that I do not deny Clement's owning
but two sorts of Officers in a Church, Bishops (sometimes called also (...),
Elders) and Deacons: But it is as evident by my words what I mean, and by
Clement's words, that I mean as he does, viz. that at the Apostles first
preaching, and planting the Faith in Cities and Regions before any multitude of
Believers came in, they constituted in each City no more but a Bishop, and one,
or more Deacons, after the exemplar in Jerusalem, where James the Lord's
Brother, soon after our Saviors ascension was constituted Bishop there, and
seven Deacons, Act 6. to attend him, but as yet no Presbyters of any middle
order between them and him.

10. This I have cleared concerning those first times out of Epiphanius, and
taken notice of the causes of it, intimated both by Clemens and him, 1. The
paucity of fit men for that office, (...), there were not found among them men
fit to be constituted Presbyters; and 2. The no need of any more at that time,
(...), a Bishop in each City or Region served the turn (only he could not be
without a Deacon) which is the more manifest, because the Bishops and Deacons,
which were then instituted, were (as in the former of these testimonies from
Clemens appears) the (...), the first fruits of their labors, their first
converts, and the flock assigned them, the (...), those that should afterward
believe.

11. To this if the words of Lombard would agree (as they will so far as here
cited, if only by Ecclesia Primitiva we understand the first age, or infancy
of the Church, at the time of the (...), the first preaching of the Apostles)
then that testimony would by me be fully subscribed also, meaning by the duos
ordines, the Bishops truly so called (and by him styled Episcopos and
Presbyteros) and Deacons, concerning whom, and whom only, it is true,
praeceptum Apostoli nos habere, that we have the precept of the Apostle, viz.
St. Paul in his Epistles to Timothy and Titus. But the truth is, Lombard's
words belong to another matter, a nicety that is gotten into their schools,
that Episcopacy and Presbytery are not diversi ordines, but diversi gradus,
not different orders, but only different degrees of the same one order of
Sacerdotium or Priesthood, upon a fancy that Sacerdo is so called from sacra
do, delivering, or imparting holy things, so faith he expressly, Ideo autem
etiam Presbyteri sacerdotes vocantur, quia sacrum dant, Presbyters are also
called Priests, because they give holy things. In which matter as it is of
little importance which way the question is decided, as long as the superiority
of Bishops over Presbyters is agreed on to be such, as has some Powers
reserved to the one which are not common to the other, so if Lombard's words
should by any be thought farther extensible, as founded in that opinion, that
first Presbyters ruled in common, and that beside them there were none then but
Deacons, I must then think it as reasonable for me to be permitted to forsake
Lombard in this, as the Prefacer will deem it for him to depart from him in
other matters.

12. For though it be here set down as an argument of the evidence and clear
conviction, and so of much more, than of the bare truth of the position, that
Lombard himself confesses it (which, I suppose, is not an acknowledgement
that all that Lombard says is true, but an insinuation that this of Bishops,
as maintained by me, is for the matter a Popish Doctrine, and yet is in this
particular rejected, and the contrary confessed by Lombard an eminent Popish
Doctor) yet I must crave leave to interpose my exceptions to this way of
arguing or concluding.

13. 1. That neither I, nor any true member of the Church of England, owe or
pay any observance to the bare dictates of Lombard, or indeed farther than he
has reasons or proofs of Scripture or Antiquity to confirm them.

14. 2. That in this point, which must be waged by Testimonies, there are none
produced, I shall add, producible by him out of Scripture, to prove that ever
there was a time, when there were in the Church none but those two orders of
Presbyters (in our modern notion) and Deacons, I may (without immoderate
confidence) assume, that all that can be offered to this purpose are
considered, and answered in the Dissertations.

15. 3. That the principal Testimonies of Antiquity, on which in this matter
some Papists build, being some obscure words of St. Hierome the Presbyter,
which yet must be so understood, as to be reconciled with his making the three
orders to be of Apostolical tradition, the result must be this, that though
they are mistaken in some circumstances, yet they maintain with us the more
substantial truth, that Bishops are instituted by the Apostles.

16. So it is elsewhere made made evident of Panormitan, who though he affirm,
that immediately after the death of Christ, all the Presbyters in common ruled
the Church, yet postm^dum, L. 1. Decret. de Con^uet c. 4.
says he, ordinaverunt Apostoli ut ^rearentur Episcopi and certa Sacramenta
eis reservarent, illa interdicend^ simplicibus Presbyteris, Within a while the
Apostles ordained that Bishops should be created, and reserved certain
Sacraments to them (Confirmation and Ordination) and forbade them to be meddled
with by simple Presbyters. And accordingly it is also in the forecited place of
Lombard, in the beginning of that 24 Did. Presbyteri, licet sint Sacerdotes,
tamen Pontificatus aepicem non habent, sicut Episcopi, quia ipsi nec chrismate
frontem signant, nec Paracletum dant, quod solis deberi Episcopis lectio
Actorum Apostolorum demonstr^t. Presbyters though they be Priests, yet have not
that superior part of the Pontificate, which the Bishops have, because they
neither Confirm nor Ordain, which, that it belongs to the Bishop only, the
reading of the acts of the Apostles demonstrates. Where whatever his opinion
was concerning that nicety, of distinction betwixt Degree and Order, it is
evident that he gives the superiority of degree to Bishops, and reserves to
them those two Powers, and foundeth this in the Apostles times and practice.

17. 4. That though this may seem at the first, but a slight difference in
these men from that which the Ancients have more generally taught, viz. that
the Apostles first instituted Bishops and Deacons, not simple Presbyters and
Deacons (as beside the plain words of Clemens and St. Paul, the sense whereof
may possibly be controverted, the testimony of Epiphanius, and of the
profoundest monuments of History irrefragably inforceth) yet their interests
for the magnifying of the Papacy, upon the score of succession to St. Peter,
do clearly discover themselves in this way of decision, and so make Papists
very incompetent witnesses in this matter.

18. For upon this conceit [that there was a time in the first plantation of
the Gospel, when the power of Bishops and Priests lay confused, though
afterward separated by the Apostles themselves] the conclusion aimed at, and,
when occasion requires, deduced by them, is evident, that this later, though
Apostolical institution, may be altered by the Po^e, out of the supereminence
of his power, as he is the Vicar of CHRIST, though they pretend not, that he
may lawfully attempt to overthrow the primarie and fundamental Sanction. And so
though Priesthood may not be taken out of the Church, yet the tenure, by which
Bishops hold, is not so firm; but must stand wholly at the pleasure of the Pope.

19. The defense of which conclusion, being none of the Interests of the Cause,
which I assert, I shall no farther be obliged to hearken to the premises, as
they are here but intimated by Lombard, and frequently repeated and built upon
by sundry of that party, than they shall be able regularly to prove them: Which
being not here attempted, but only the specious (but fallacious) argument
proposed from the confession of Lombard himself (whose confessions are no
obligations to all other men) I have no more occasion to enlarge on this
particular.

20. Which if it were seasonable, I might easily do, in observing other
particulars among the Popish Writers, wherein they show themselves far from
passionate espousers of Episcopacy. The Pope, forsooth, must be the fountain of
all Ecclesiastical authority, and all other Rivulets must run in a weak
stream, and then also derive all they have from him. And so much on occasion
of this testimony from Lombard, and much more than was necessary to have said,
if I had looked no farther than his Testimony.

CHAP. IIII.
Concerning the power of the People in appointing Bishops, and Deacons, and
other Ecclesiastical affairs.

Sect. 1.
Clement's words, (...), considered, and vindicated. (...). The first Bishops
designed particularly by God. When this way of designation ceased.

Number. 1. UPon occasion of the former citation of some words out of Clemens, the
displeasure is for a while removed from Ignatius, and another matter of
discourse is sprung, concerning the power of the people in appointing Bishops
and Deacons to their office in those days. To this we shall now attend, as it
follows, in these words.

2. It seems moreover that those Bishops and Deacons in those days (as was
observed) were appointed to the office by an^ with the consent of the people,
or whole body of the Church; no less do those words import, (...). Our Doctor
indeed ^enders those words, ap^l^uden^^ aut congratulen^e (...) and adds
(^atis pro imperio) ui^^l ^ic dea ceptation^* otius Ecclesiae, (...) q^^ ^p
s^os and Diaconos ab Apostolis and ^p^stoli^is vi^ hoc l^co concludit
B^ond^^lus, qu^si qui ex De^j^ssu and app^obatione const^n^ur, populi etiam
acceptatione indigere putandi essent, Dissent. 4. (...). 7, 8, (...) And who
dares take that confidence upon him, as to affirm any mo^e* wh^ ^^g (...) a
Doctor has denved? Though the scope of the place, the nature of the thing, and
first most common sense of the word here use^, being willingly to consent (as
it is also used in the Scripture for the most part, Acts (...). 1. 1 Cor. 7.
12.) to a thing to be done, or to the doing of it, yet here it must be taken
to applaud or congratulate, or what else our Doctor pleases, because he will
have it so. (...) also must be viri Apostolici m^n with Apostolical power, when
they are only the choice men of the Church where such a Constitution of
Office^s is had, that are intended, because it is ou^ Doctors purpose to have
the words so rendered: Ex jussu Dei and approbatione, is added, as though any
particular command or approbation of God were intimated, for the constitution
of the Bishops and Deacons mentioned, beyond the institution of the Lord Jesus
Christ, that Elders should be ordained in every Church, because this would seem
to be exclusive wholly of the consent of the people, as any way needful or
required to their Constitution, which yet, as it is practically false, no such
thing being mentioned by Clemens, who recounteth the way and means whereby
Officers were continued in the Church, even after the decease of the Apostles,
and those first ordained by them to that holy employment, so also it is
argumentatively weak and unconcluding. God appointed, designed Saul to be King,
approving of his so being, and yet he would have the people come together to
choose him. So also was it in the case of David. Though the Apostles in the
name and the authority of God, appointed the Deacons of the Church at
Jerusalem, yet they would have the whole Church look out among themselves the
men to be appointed. And that the ordaining of the Elders was with the peoples
Election, Acts 14. 23. It will ere long be manifested, that neither our Doctor,
nor any of his Associates have as yet disproved. This poor thing the people,
being the peculiar people of Christ, the heritage of God, and holy Temple unto
him, etc. will one day be found to be another manner of thing, than many of our
great Doctors have supposed. But he informs us, cap 4 sect. 3. from that
testimony which we cited before, that the Apostles in the appointment of
Bishops and Deacons (for so the words expressly are) are said (...), i. e. says
he, Revelationibus edo^to^ esse, quibus demum baec dignitas comm^^icanda esset,
that is, that they appointed those whom God revealed to them in an
extraordinary manner to be so ordained, and this is the meaning of (...). And
why ^o^^he holy Ghost orders concerning the appointment of Deacons (...), 1 Timothy 3. 10. That those, who are to be taken into office and power in the
Church, had need first to be tried and approved, is granted. And this work the
Apostles give to the multitude of the Church, Acts 6. Where yet after the
peoples Election, and the Apostles approbation, and the trial of both, one
that was chosen, is supposed to have proved none of the best. And yet of him,
and them, are the Apostles said by Clemens that they did (...). But how shall
it be made to appear, that spiritu proba^te^, trying of proving by the spirit,
or spiritually proving them, to try whether they were able Ministers of the New
Testament, not of the Letter but of the Spirit, proving them by that Spirit,
which was promised unto them to lead them into all truth, must needs signify,
they were taught whom they should appoint by immediate Revelation. To prove by
the Spirit, or spiritually the persons that are to be made Ministers or
Bishops, is to have their names revealed to us. Stephen is said to speak
(...), Acts 6. 10. And Paul purposed (...), Acts 19. 21. and we are said to
serve God (...) Gal. 5. 5. and to make supplication (...), Ephesians. 6. 18. with
many more expressions of the like nature. Does all this relate to immediate
Revelation, and are all things done thereby which we are said to do in the
spirit? Before we were inst ucted in this mystery, and were informed that
(...) did signify to be taught by Revelation, we had thought that the
expression of doing any thing (...) had manifested the assistance, guidance,
and direction, which for the doing of it we receive by the holy and blessed
Spirit of God promised unto us, and bestowed on, in, and through the Lord Jesus
Christ. Yea but he adde^ that it is also spoken of the Apostles, (...)
praecognitionem (i. e.) revelationem (...) they appointed them Bishops and
Deacons by the helps and presence of the Spirit with them, the Apostles
examined, tried those who were to be appointed Bishops, so obtaining and
receiving a perfect foreknowledge or knowledge of them before their admission
into office. This also expresses revelation ((...)) upon trial it was revealed
unto them, and so must any thing else be allowed to be, that our Doctor will
have to be so, now he is asserting to that purpose. But had the (...), who
appointing Bishops and Deacons after the Apostles time, had they also this
special Revelation? Or may they not be said (...)? If not, how will you look
upon them under the notion of (...), who neglected so great a duty: If they
did, let us know when this way of constituting Church Officers by immediate
revelation ceased, and what was afterward took up in the room thereof: and who
they were that first proceeded on another account, and on what Authority they
did it? There are a generation of men in the world, will thank the Doctor for
this insinuation, and will tie knots upon it, that will trouble him to loose.

3. I shall not here suffer my self to be detein'd by the scoffs and
accusations of affirming pro imperio, etc. with which I am very liberally
treated, but, withal, before this time. so familiarly acquainted, that I can
look on them as parts of his style, as idioms of his Dialect, and nothing else.
All that can pertain to me, by way of vindication, is, entirely to set down
what it is I have said, and then to remove whatsoever appearance of reply, or
objection I can here discern to be made to it.

4. Upon these words of Clement [(...)] delivered about the ordaining or
constituting of Bishops by the Apostles and other (...), D. Blondel had
inferred this conclusion [Episcopos and Diaconos Apostolis Apostolicisque
viris, nunquam nisi tota acceptante Ecclesia constitutos esse] that Bishops and
Deacons were never constituted by the Apostles or Apostolical persons, unless
the whole Church accepted them.] This conclusion he thus crudely inferred,
without any one syllable added to confirm it, leaving it to secure and sustein
it self by these few words of Clement's testimony.

5. The testimony, wherein those words were contained, being by me laid down at
length, and considered as far as was useful to the maine Question concerning
Episcopacie, I could not fitly take farther notice of those few words of it,
and his conclusion hastily collected from them, than to say that there was
nothing in it concerning the necessity of that acceptance of the Church, which
Blondel conc^uded thence; And this I chose to do (...), in passing, and in a
parenthesis, not willing to detain the Reader any longer so impertinently,
adding only a short reason, why I could not conceive that the Bishops by them
constituted could want the apprebation of the Church, because it had formerly
been said of them by Clement, that they were constituted by the appointment and
approbation of God, which I supposed must necessarily supersede all want of the
Churches approbation. And upon these grounds I rendered the phrase (...), not as
D. Blondel had done, acceptante simul universa Ecclesia, but applaudente aut
congratulante tota Ecclesia, the whole Church applauding or congratulating.

6. In this passage thus truly related, in every circumstance, I hope it is
already clear, that I was not guilty of any imperious or magisterial affirming
(which I dislike so much in others, that I would be very sorry to be found
guilty of it) when to a positive unconfirm'd conclusion, I made reply by giving
my reason, why I could not consent that it was duly inferred from those words
in Clement.

7. And for the thing it self, the matter of my affirming, being now excited
to it, I shall give a full account of it, though there it had been impertinent
to do so.

8. And that 1. by considering the force of the word (...), 2. the position of
it in that place, 3. the circumstances of the context, which preclude
Blondel's, and enforce my interpretation.

9. The word (...)] is known to signify [being well pleased] so (...) is
either simply the same, or with the connotation of a relation to some other,
whether persons or matter, formerly spoken of. So 1 Mac. 1. 57. (...), if any
were well pleased with the Law, i. e. resolved to live according to the
Mosaicall institution, such as are there joined with those with whom was found
the Book of the Testament, that they would not forsake the Jewish observances
upon Antiochus his prohibition of them. So again the same sort of men which
would not live according to the Kings heathenish commands, but kept close to
the Jewish laws, are said (...), not to be well pleased with the change, 1
Mac. 11. 24. we render it in both places consenting and not consenting, but
sure it signifies not any legal consent asked of them, at the constituting
either of the Law by God, or of the change by Antiochus, but an acquiessence,
or peaceable, willing, constant submission and obedience to it. Elsewhere we
render it being well pleased with, 2 Mac. 11. 35. where yet the matter spoken
of, makes it a more formal act of consent, than in either of the former it had
been. Whatsoever (say the Consuls) Lysias has granted, (...), therewith we
also are well pleased, which indeed is a confirmation of Lysias's act or grant.

10. These are all the places where the word in that double composition is
found in the Greek, whether Canonical or Apocryphal of the Old Testament. In
the New we have it, Luc. 11. 48. where of the Jews it is said, that they did
(...), allow, or approve their Fathers works, those which they had done long
since, and wherein their approbation was never asked, the killing of the
Prophets, ver. 47. So Act. 8. 1. of Saul's concurrence in Saint Stephens death,
so far as to keep the clothes of the executioners, which signified him to have
been an active person in that murder, to have had a special liking to it, not
again any act of legal consent; for all was there done without legal process,
judicio zelotarum, by the (judgment, or rather) popular fury of Zel^ts. So
again Romans 1. 32. (...), They take pleasure, say we, in them that do them.
There I think Theophylact's Scholion is very proper, (...), they not only do
unlawful things themselves, but plead for wickedness, are advocates for those
that commit any the foulest evil. So again 1 Cor. 7. 12. of the Christian man
or woman that has an unbeliever to wife or husband, (...), if the unbelieving
man be pleased, think good, be content to live with the Christian, or if we
render it again consent, yet sure we must not mean any legal consent, for that
had been formerly given in marriage, and no new act of it is now needful in
the unbeliever, but only a being content to continue to live with her, which
is there opposed to departing, v. 15.

11. By this view of the word in the Scripture, it already appears, how little
ground there is for D. Blondel's rendering of (...) by acceptante, and his
conclusion deduced from thence of the necessity of the wh^le Churches
acceptance. And against that only it was that my words were directed, nihil
hic de acceptatione -- there was no syllable in Clemens from whence to conclude
the necessity of such acceptance. And unless I have mistaken in this,
certainly there is neither confidence nor magisteriall affirming imputable to
me in this matter.

12. And it seems the Prefacer does as little adhere to Blondel's rendering, as
I, for he renders it [willing consent] And how knows he that I reject this
rendering of willing consent, or that if Blondel had so rendered it, I would then
have rejected it. Truly if that consent signify no more than a voluntary act
of acquiessence and good liking (as consent ordinarily signifies) I have no
dislike to that rendering, only I rather think the word here signifies a little
more not less) an outward expression of this good liking, which was the only
reason which moved me to use the phrase [applaudente aut congratulante] meaning
thereby that the Church had expressed that good liking and joy of theirs, which
is more than their bare consent to what was done in the constitution of their
Bishops.

13. So that the Praefacer needed not to have undertaken this verbal contention
with me, about the signification of an ordinary word. In that he really is at
more peace with me, than it seems he knew of, and so men are apt to be, which
begin and pursue ^uarrells, so hastily and so keenly.

14. The truth is, it is the matter of the conclusion which I then resisted in
Blondel, and so must still in the Praefacer; Blondel made the people's
acceptance, a sine qua non, a necessary condition, affirming that Bishops,
etc. were never constituted by the Apostles and Apostolical men, nisi, unless
they had this, which, I suppose, makes the peoples acceptance praevious to the
Apostles act, for if it followed after, it can be of no moment, the Act of the
Apostles was complete without it, and stood valid without it, and though it was
most happy when it followed, yet still this, as any other consequent, must be
accidental and intrinsecall to the Constitution of Bishops, as that which
advenit enti in actu existenti, comes to it when it is (which is the definition
of an accident) is no way required to, or constitutive of its being.

15. And so in like manner this Prefacer also, though he pretend only to the
consent of the people, yet by saying that the Bishops were appointed to their
office by the consent] and by his after mention of his notion of (...), for
consent to a thing to be done, or to the doing of it, and lastly by expressing
his sense of this consent of the people, as of a thing needful, or required to
the constitution of those Bishops, I am assured that he affirms this consent of
the people, to have been required and needful antecedently to the Apostles
instituting Bishops at that time.

16. And this is the thing that I still profess not to believe conclusible
from the words of Clement, and whether it be or no, let us now examine by
proceeding to the second, and third things, even now proposed by me, the
position of this phrase, and the circumstances of the context in this place of
Clemens.

17. The position of the phrase may first deserve to be taken notice of, (...)
Those that were constituted by the Apostles or after by other illustrious
persons, the whole Church expressing their good liking or consent, and that
have officiated without blame, and been well reported of by all for a long
time, etc. Here in setting down the unreasonablenesse of the sedition raised
against their Bishops, he aggravates it by these gradations, 1. that these
Bishops were constituted by the Apostles or other illustrious persons after
them, 2. that when they were so constituted, the whole Church liked it very
well, and expressed their liking it, I mean the constituting them by the
Apostles, 3. that being in office they had without blame discharged it, 4. that
for a long time they had every man's good word, though now they were ejected by
them.

18. By this distinct view of the words it is plain, that the whether consent
or good liking, which the people thus expressed, was after the Apostles
constituting them, as after that again their officiating, and after their
officiating their continued approbation. And indeed it were as reasonable to
affirm, the second testimony or approbation [(...), etc.] to be praevious to
their blameless officiating [(...)] as to say their consent was needful or
required to their constitution, as to the thing to be done, for that also
supposes it praevious to it.

19. This was a competent security to me, that my rejecting Blondel's
conclusion, was no Magisterial dictate of mine; But then the Circumstances of
the context through the whose Epistle make it most evident, that Blondel then
was, and this Praefacer now is mistaken.

20. For to repress the fury of the (...), seditions against their Bishops,
he had before immediately told them how these Bishops were placed among them,
viz. after this manner. The Apostles (...) knew or understood by Christ that
there would be contention for the name of dignity of Bishops. For which cause,
(...), having received perfect foreknowledge they constituted the foresaid
Bishops, and after left a list, or roll (of successors) that when any dyed,
(...), Other approved persons should take up, or succeed to their office.

21. Here the Question may be, What is meant by (...), approved persons, and
who had the approving them? For if the People had, then Blondel and the
Prefacer are in the right; but if not, then still here is nothing to be
pretended for them.

22. And indeed another (yet former) fundamental place of Clement in this
Epistle, takes away all place of doubting, and tells us punctually whose
approbation it was, The Apostles, says he, preaching through regions and
cities constituted their first converts, (...), examining or approving them by
the spirit to be Bishops and Deacons (...) of those which should come into the
Faith.

23. Here 1. it is not imaginable how the examination and approbation could
belong to the people, or the whole Church, when those, over whom they were
constituted, were not yet come in, they are made Bishops (...), of those which
should afterward come in to the Faith. And 2. if there had been a full Church
to choose, yet the matter in Clemens extending not only to the Bishops of the
present, but also to the successors for the future age, what right could the
then present people have to choose, not only for their own, but the future
age, and so deprive their successors of their Privilege?

24. But waving both these, the matter is otherwise clear, They are the same
persons which did preach and constitute, and examine or approve, i. e. the
Apostles did every of these, And doing it (...) by the Spirit, by Revelation or
direction of the Spirit (in the same manner as they are said to know by Christ,
that there would be contention about this matter, and that having received
perfect foreknowledge, they constituted those Bishops) it is evident they had
no need of any act of the People in doing it, and so that the examination and
approbation was that of the Apostles, and not of the People, of the Apostles
assisted and directed by the Spirit of God, and not so much as advised, that we
hear of, or instructed by the people.

25. This farther appears by another passage in that Epistle, where this act
of the Apostles approving by the Spirit, and receiving perfect foreknowledge
what would fall out, and what they should do, is by him illustrated by the
example of Moses, who (...) fore-knew, (i. e. certainly) had it revealed to him
by God, that Aaron should be the Priest.

26. Examples of such Revelations of God's in the first times, I have set down
in the Page 167.
Dissertations, As first of Matthias, when God being prayed to, that he would
demonstrate or declare ((...)) which of the two he had chosen, he did by lot
point him out to be the person, Act. 1. 24. Secondly of Paul and Barnabas, Act.
13. 2. Thirdly of Timothy, to whom the Episcopal dignity was given (...) by
Prophecy, 1 Timothy 4. 14. and (...), according to the prophesies which had
before been delivered of him, 1 Timothy 1. 18. Upon which Chrysostom and
Theophylact make their observation, (...), The dignity of Bishop (which they
there style of Doctorship and Priesthood) being great, wants God's direction
that a worthy person may receive it. And the same is affirmed by Clemens in
Eusebius l. 3. c. (...). of the Bishops whom Saint John ordained in Asia, that
they were (...) signified to him by the Spirit According to what Saint Paul had
formerly said of the Bishops of Asia, Act. 20. that the holy Ghost had set them
to preside over the flock peculiarly.

27. This, I must think, was, and still is sufficient to clear the difficulty,
and put it beyond question, who they were, by whom the Bishops in Clement are
said to be approved, certainly not the People, but the Apostles that
constituted them, or yet higher, the Spirit of God who signified or pointed
them out unto them, or by whose directions they approved them.

28. I shall not now need more largely to insist on all the severalls here
objected against me by the Prefacer; By this clear setting down of the whole
matter, it is certain, all his exceptions must speedily vanish. I shall but
touch on them that have not yet so fully been taken notice of and prevented in
passing.

29. And 1. that (...) were viri Apostolici, though it was truly supposed by
me, yet was it not my magisteriall dictate, but, to my hand, the plain
affirmation of D. Blondel; My words were regularly to be confronted to his
conclusion in the very form wherein he had produced it, and so I was to set it
by Apostolicis also.

30. The Reader may, if he will, see my rendering of (...), literally by
illustribus viris, and the putting of [i. e. p. 278.
Apostolicis, and Spiritu Dei probatis] into a Parenthesis, signified
[Apostolicis] to be no rendering of (...), but another character of the same
men, collected out of other parts of the Epistle.

31. And so indeed it is most evident by the whole place, [(...), The Bishops
constituted by the Apostles, and after them by other illustrious persons] that
those that are there called (...), illustrious men, were the successors of the
Apostles, such as, when they were gone, constituted Bishops in the Church.

32. And then what offense was there in my calling them Apostolical persons?
Or what pretense for the Prefacer to say they were only the choice men of the
Church, in opposition to my calling them Apestolicall? Choice men of the
Church, I know, they were, for so must they be deemed, who by the Apostles were
left Rulers of it. But such the Prefacer cannot mean, when he sets it in
opposition to me, who called them Apostolici; He must therefore questionless
mean the choice men of the People, and then those choice men must be concluded
to constitute Bishops, and not only to consent to their constituting, (as
before he had set it) And then I desire he will say positively, that this was
his meaning, and that from any place of Scripture or ancient Writer, he will
show me where any choice men of the people constituted Bishops after the
departure of the Apostles.

33. Secondly, when he says, that the words [ex iussu Dei and approbatione, by
the appointment and approbation of God] are added by me, it is not imaginable
what he should mean by it: Those words are evidently set by me as an argument
that they could not want the approbation of the people, because they were
sufficiently furnished by the appointment and approbation of God, as had
appeared by the testimony of Clement set down in the page immediately
precedent: And what is produced by me as an argument to convince the
unconcludeney of Blondel's collection, can it be blamed in me, as an insertion
or addition either to Clement's or Blondel's words?

34. And when he goes on reproaching this Edition with his [as though any
particular command or approbation of God were intimated for the constituting of
the Bishops and Deacons mentioned] I hope it has sufficiently appeared that
there was such command or appointment of God more than intimated by Clemens in
that Epistle, and the like expressed in Scripture in many parallel cases, and
this particularly a designation of the persons, which were to be ordained, and
so somewhat beyond the general institution of the Lord Jesus (which he speaks
of. I suppose he means the commission of the Apostle to Titus and the like)
that Elders should be ordained in every Church.

35. Thirdly: When he says it is argumentatively weak and unconcluding, he must
mean that this argument of mine is a weak, and unconcluding argument, I shall
therefore repeat it again, and put it formally into a syllogism; They who had
been constituted by the appointment and approbation of God, cannot then be
thought to want the acceptance of the people: But the Bishops, spoken of by
Clement, had been constituted by the appointment, and approbation of God:
Therefore, they cannot be thought to want the acceptance of the people. What
proposition can here be denied, I confess I see not.

36. The Major has it is evidence in its self; for certainly that which is
already done, and done by God's appointment, needs no other extrinsecal
addition or accomplishment, unless that also be ordained by God, which in this
case of the acceptance of the Bishop by the people, no way appears, and till
it does appear, cannot be supposed, or pretended by any to be thus needful.

37. And for the Minor, it is the express affirmation of Clement, that they
that instituted them, examined and approved them by the spirit, and knowing by
the Lord Christ, and having perfect foreknowledge of what should be, (...)
constituted these Bishops, and this is mentioned by Clement as an aggravation
of their crime, that rejected these that were thus constituted. And then I hope
the premises having strength, the conclusion from them regularly inferred, will
not be denied me.

38. For as to the examples of Saul and David, I am sure they prove nothing;
for if there were perfect truth in all which is here pretended, which is more
than from the circumstances of the stories I can affirm, viz. that God, who
designed them Kings, would have the People come together to choose them, then
from that act of God's will it was, and from God's expressing it, that the
convening and election of the People was necessary, and if God had not willed
it, or not appointed it, it had then as certainly not been necessary.

39. Now let any such declaration of Gods will be showed, that he would have
the People convene and choose their Bishop, and then I shall think my argument
weak, but otherwise I must not think it concluded so by these examples

40. So in the case of the Deacons Act. 6. the Apostles appointed the Disciples
to seek out seven men from among them, withal directing them how they should
be qualified, and reserving to themselves the entire power of constituting them
(...), to the office of Deacon. And so nothing from that third instance can be
inferred against us, it being no way parallel to the case in Clement, as
already is visible: For in the Acts, the Disciples look out, and choose v. 5.
the persons, and bring them to the Apostles, v. 6. and the Apostles lay their
hands on them in the remainder of that verse: But in Clemens, God designs the
persons (and so in the other Scripture instances, and in that of Clemens
Alexandrinus of the first Bishops of Asia ordained by St. John) and the
Apostles, and their successors ordain and lay hands on them.

41. As for that of Act. 14. ^3. that the ordaining of the Elders was with the
Peoples election (by the way, it was even now by, as well as with the consent
of the People) or indeed that any mention of the People is made there, or so
much as intimated by the word (...). All that I can say, is, that it has been
disproved, as far as any, that I know of, has yet endeavored to prove it, i.
e. all arguments, that I have seen for it, I have Resol. to the fifth Quest.
elsewhere answered: But what will ere long be manifested, I am not able to
forecast, and so am not now to provide answers by divination.

42. No more am I able to foresee what he says will one day be found, and yet
I think it is very possible: Neither he, nor I may live to see that day, when
any thing shall be farther manifested in this matter, than what the great
Doctors already suppose. The resolution of the question, what right every one
has in these affairs, being founded in plain matter of fact, viz. what Christ
or his Apostles instituted in the Church, and that being already as visible to
them, that are conversant in Scripture and ancient Records of the Church, as it
can well be imagined to be, till either a new mine of such Records is sprung,
or men receive knowledge of story by Revelation: Neither of which am I forward
to expect in this age.

43 In the next place for his objections against my interpreting of (...), of
Gods extraordinary revealing whom he would have ordained, they will soon vanish
also. For 1. the place of St. Paul concerning Timothies ordaining of Deacons,
and appointing (...), let them be first tried or examined, 1. Tim. 3. 10.
belongs nothing to this of the trying by the spirit: Timothy might have
ordinary means of trying (and the whole discourse of St. Paul, then setting
down the qualifications of those that were to be ordained, tends to that, and
then he had no need of extraordinary.

44. And so likewise the Apostles Act. 6. referred the matter of trial and
approbation to the Disciples, and without more ado, and without this (...),
trying by the spirit, ordained those that were thus presented to them. But
these two instances can no way praeclude divine revelations concerning
Matthias, and Paul, and Barnabas, and Timothy, and the Bishops of Asia, and the
Bishops of Achaia, of whom the express words of Scripture and Clemens, are,
that by God, and his Spirit, and Prophecy, these were assigned to their
Offices.

45. And accordingly though one of those Deacons in the Acts be supposed to
have proved none of the best, yet we see that Clement here uses it as an
argument to evidence the unreasonablenesse and impiety of ejecting their
Bishops, that they were thus constituted, which I suppose concludes, that this
was not to be suspected or feared of them, which was experimented to have
befallen Nicolas.

46. Secondly: for the notion of [(...), by the spirit] that it signifies, as I
affirm, and not, as he suggests [spiritually proving them, etc.] he knows (and
strait confesses) one way, by which I prove it, the mention of (...), that they
had perfect foreknowledge to this matter, and what is that receiving of perfect
foreknowledge, but the spirit of prophecy; and that, as was said, immediately
before, (...), they knew it by our Lord Jesus Christ, and by him were directed
perfectly to do what they did. And so this is one competent proof of it.

47. And by the way, how is the very first part of the phrase [(...), trying]
being applied to the Apostles and their Successors [if (...) had been left out]
reconcilable with the peoples trying, examining, or approving? Before 'twas
said that this work of trying ((...), 1 Timothy 3. 10.) was by the Apostles given
to the multitude, Acts 6. But how can it possibly be so here in Clement, where
it is said of the Apostles, that they did (...), try them by the spirit?

48. This I say, to show how far he would be from gaining his design, though it
should be granted which he desires, that (...) refers not at all to any*
extraordinary ways of revelation, which if it did not, yet neither refers it
to the peoples, but to the Apostles examining and approving.

49. But, I say, it is already evident, that I have given other reasons, why I
interpret Clemens thus of extraordinary revelations, which he ought to have
adverted before, and I have now mentioned them again, and must not repeat
eternally.

50. This again shows how little I am bound to assert, that every thing, which
is said to be done in the spirit, is done by immediate revelation, because if
some things be, this may be one of those some, and that it is, is sufficiently
proved by those other evidences.

51. Next to his question, whether the (...), who appointed (ordained) Bishops
and Deacons after the Apostles times had also this special revelation or no] I
answer, that Clement no where says that they had, only that they (...),
ordained (that is all one with laying hands on) them, whom the Apostles by
their Prophetic spirit had designed to that office.

52. To this the Context in Clement is clear, that the Apostles by that (...),
foreknowledge, ordained some, and (...), for the future, to be successors to
them, (...), they left a roll or list of names, who should succeed unto their
dead places, and these, as often as any Bishop (ordained by the Apostles) dyed,
were by the other Bishops, i. e. the (...) ordained in their places, according
to that rule left by the Apostles for their succession. So that in this matter
there could be no need of any further revelation, they were to ordain those
which were next upon the Apostles list, and that might be done without
multiplying of revelations.

53. And so his next question is at an end also; for I have no occasion or
ground to extend these revelations any farther than the persons of the Apostles
(though I know there were also Prophets in those times, beside Apostles) but
may safely and reasonably leave all others, where the Apostles had left no such
lists, or when they were at an end, to be concluded by Paul's directions to
Timothy, without depending farther on special revelations.

54. And now I think I have answered all his questions, or given him my Key to
do it himself, and so must be content to return weary home, without receiving
any of those thanks from that generation of men whom he pleases to mention,
but shall be content with my lot, being also competently secured from the
trouble of loosing knots, which those thanks were dedesigned to bring along
with them.

Sect. 2.
Another testimony in Clemens concerning the power of the People examined.
(...).

Numb. 1. BUt this business of the power of the People in the Church is not to
be dismissed so, but must more largely be resumed again, and my attendance shall
be answerable to my Leaders pleasure, who thus inlargeth his digression.

2. Before we return, let us look but a little further, and we shall have a
little more light given us, into what was the condition and power of the people
in the Church in the ^ayes of Clemens, speaking of them who occasioned the
division and schism in the Church of Corinth, or them about whose exaltation
into office, or dejection from it, that sad difference fell ou^, he giv^s them
this advice; (...). It seems the (...), the multitude, or the people, were not
such poor inconsiderable things as they are reported to be, when he advises
them to stop and stay the sedition by yielding obedience to the things by them
appointed and commanded. If it were in it self evil, disorderly, and not
according to the mind of Christ, that the people should order and appoint
things in the Church, it had been simply evil for Clemens to have advised any
to yield obedience to the things by them so appointed. Where is now Ignatius
his (...) and (...) -- Even those who are contending about rule and government
in the Church, are advised to stand to the determination of the people, and to
cry, (...). This is also insisted on by Blondellus, who thence argues,
Potestatem ple^is circasacra Dissert. 4. c. 8 ^ect 4. Ad verba hae^ (says our
Doctor) prod^gii i^star est quod notandum duxit D. Blondellus [potestatem
pl^bis circa sacra] (de qua tandem integra^ dissertationem elu^ub^avit)
artificiis quibus unque asserturus. Hic (inqu^t) nos monet Clemens fideles
etiam de Episcopatu aut Presbyterio contendentes non ab Epis^opi singulari
(...) nutu, sed a multitudinis p^aeceptis p^pendisse. But let not our Doctor
be angry, nor c^y out out so fast of Prodigies, a little time will manifest
that many things may not be prodigious, which yet are contrary to sundry of his
exceptions and apprehensions. I cannot but acknowledge him to be provoked, but
withal I must say, that I have found very commonly, that reasons ushered in by
such loud clamours, have in examination proved to have in examination proved to
have stood in need of some such noises, as might fright men from the
consideration of them. What is in the next Sections set up to shield the
children of Episcopacy from being affrighted with this prodigy, may perhaps be
of more efficacy thereunto* than the exclamations before mentioned: He
therefore proceeds, Sect. 5^ Certe (says he) si s^r^ore^ egerit D Blondellus,
de Presbyteris suis (non de Episcopis nostri^) actum pla^e and triumphatum
crit, nec enim ab universo aliqu^ Presbyterorum Colleg^o, quod ille tam
affl^ctim ardet, sed a multitudinis solius arbit^io tum contendentes de
Episcopo, tum siideles omne^ Corinthio* pepe^disse, aeque concludendum crit. If
any man in the world has manifested more desperate affection toward
Pre^bytery, than this Doctor has do^ toward Episcopacy, for my pa^^ solus
habeto. But though neither Clemens nor Blondellus speak any one word about the
ordering of things, multitudinis solius arbitrio, yet here is that said by them
both, as is sufficiently destructive, not only to the Episcopacie the Doctor
contends for, as a thing wholly inconsistent with the power and liberty ^ere
granted the people, but of any such Presbytery also, as shall undertake the
ordering and disposing of things in the Church of God* without the consent and
conc^ su^frage of the people. Such a Presbytery it seems Bl^ndellus does not
defend. But yet neither the Doctor's ou^ cry, as at a prodigy, nor this
retortion upon Presbytery, is any answer to the testimony of Clemens, nor
ind^ed is there the ^ast possible reflection upon an orderly Gospel Presbytery
in any Church, and over it, by what Clemens here professes to be the power of
the people, all appearance of any things is from the term solius, ^ysted into
the Discourse of Blondellus by the Doctor, in his ta^ing or it up to retort.
Clemens in the very next words secures us from any thought, that all things
depend a multitudinis solius arbitrio. His very next words are, (...). Our
Doctors and Masters having stu^t their imaginations with the shape and
lineaments of that hierarchical fab^ick, which the craft, policy, sub^^ty,
avarice, pride, ambition of many ages succes^ively had formed and ^^amed
according to the pattern they saw in the Mount of the World, and the
governments therein, upon the first hearing of a Church, a s^^ck of Christ,
walking in orderly subjection to their own Elders concu^^ing with them, and
consenting to them in their rule and government, instantly as m^n amazed, cry
out a prod^g^. It is not imaginable into what ridiculous, contemptible
miscarriages, pride, prejudice, and sel^ulnesse do oftentimes betray men,
otherwise of good abili^i^s in their ways, and commendable industry.

But Section the sixth, the Doctor comes closer and gives his reason why this
testimony of Clemens is not of any efficacy to the purpose in hand, says he,
At qu^^ (sod^s) a fidelibus de Episcopatu (ut a^s) ^^ntra ipsos ab Apostolis
const^^atos contend^bus, quis a populo contraprincip^^^ suum ^umultus tiente,
qu^s verbis ad retundendum seditionem ad plebe^ factis argumenta ad
Authoritatem populo adjud^^andum principi derogandum duci posse ^xistiSavit^
Though many words follow in the next Section, yet this is all of answer that is
given to this signal testimony of Clement's. I know the Doctor for the most
part mee^s, not only with favorable Readers, but also partial Admirers; or
else certainly his exclamation would scarce pass for an invincible argument,
nor such Rhetorical diversions as this be esteemed solid Answers. There is not
by Blondellus any argument taken from the faithfuls tumultuating against the
Bishops (that, of appointed by the Apostles which is th^ust in, taken for the
persons of those Bishops, is against the express restimony of Clemens in this
Epistle) nor from the peoples se^sly rebelling against their Prince, nor from
any word sopken to the people to repress their sedition; neither was any thing
of this nature urged in the least by Blondellus, nor is there any color given
to such a collection from any thing in the words cited from the Epistle, or the
Context of them. It is the advice of the Church of Rome to the persons (whether
already in office, or aspiring thereunto) about whom the contention and
division was in the Church of Corinth, that is insisted on. It is not the words
nor plea of them who were in disorder, there is no^ any reprehension given to
the body of the Church, the multitude or people who are supposed to tumultuate,
to quiet them, but a direction given (as was said) by the Church of Rome to the
persons that occasioned the difference, how to behave themselves so, that a
timely issue might be put to the division of the Church. To this end are they
advised to observe the (...), the Orders, Precepts, Decrees, or Appointments of
the multitude, as (from Act. 15.) the body of the Church is called. It is not
that they should yield to their tumultuating, but to yield obedience to their
orderly precepts, (...), are by him approved; and had it not been lawful for
them, with the Presbyters (...) in affairs of the Church, Clemens writing this
Epistle to the whole Church, could not possibly have led them into a greater
snare.

It is a sad thing to consider the pitiful entanglements and snares that some
men run into, who will undertake to make good, what they have once engaged for,
let what will come against them.

3. In this Section again the usage is, as formerly, very extraordinary: First,
I am put under Discipline to teach me (that which was anciently accounted a
very high pitch, prope res una, but these times may be able to advance one to,
which is but of ordinary parts) the Nil admirari, to see, and hear the most
portentous things, and to admire at nothing; I must not be permitted to say of
any, though never so strange, unreasonable a collection of Blondel's, that it
is instar prodigii, but I am censured as angry, and guilty of loud clamours,
outcries, exclamations, noises, and these designed to fright men from
consideration of my reasons, as after (on as little cause) of desperate
affection to Episcopacy, of forgerie, or foysting in the word solius into
Blondel' s discourse, and if this be not enough for my humiliation, there is a
reserve of [ridiculous, contemptible miscarriages, such as it is not imaginable
men should be betrayed to] and yet farther, as the causes of these, pride,
prejudice, and selfulness] and to conclude [pitifull intanglements and snares,
etc.]

4. This is truly somewhat above the proportion of the turgent style, or the
but four barbarous words in seven Epistles, and yet I verily believe the
Section is genuine, no part of it inserted by any (...), it bears so perfect
proportion with what I have hitherto had from the same hand. And the assuring
him, that all this might, if he had so pleased, have been very easily spared,
is all that I have to return to the more Rhetorical part of this Section.

5. Only when after all this severity, he thinks fit to give me some of his
benediction at parting, and to allow me a room among men of good abilities in
their ways, and very commendable industry, I cannot but remember the critical
note of Eumani^es the Atticist, that the ordinary form of (...) in Epistles was
first used by Cleon to the Athenians, after he had taken (...) from them,
whereupon a Comical person answered, (...), You, Sir, are the first that bid us
be well, and rejoice, having given us much cause of sadness. This our English
proverb expresses very significantly, and I that had as little right to his
plaster, as I had to the displeasure which made him think I wanted it, may
tell him, he has dispensed both without any merit of mine.

6. As for the argumentative part of his discourse I shall now come briefly to
that, and doubt not to show, 1. That D. Blondel's Collection was very strange,
and so merited the expression that was bestowed on it [instar prodigii] (I
meant not that it looked like a blazing star, or any other such prodigy) 2.
That solius was not foisted in by me. In a word, that all really was as I
pretended it to be. This must be cleared by a brief narration of the whole
passage, as it lies visible in the fifth Dissert. c. 8.

7. There was a sedition in the Church of Achaia, the Metropolis whereof was
Corinth, and that advancing so high, as to the ejecting their Bishops out of
their office ((...)) and these Bishops (...), those very persons which by the
Apostles had been either designed, and put upon the list, or actually ordained
and constituted among them.

8. This was done, says Clemens (...), for one or two only persons sakes,
whom the actors in the comm^ had a mind to advance to that office.

9. For the calming this tempest, Clemens makes use of many methods and
arguments of persuasion At length he betakes himself to the persons, for the
advancing of whom all this stir was made, this tempest was raised. To them he
thus makes his address; Tells them what M^ses had done when the people were in a
foul sin, being himself content to be blotted out of the book of the living,
rather than the wrath of God should light on the people, and then (in the words
which are set dow^ by the Prefacer) (...) -- Who then among you is a generous
person; who has bowels of kindness and compassion? who is replenished with
love or charity? Let him th^^ say (to this seditious multitude) If the
sedition, and contention, and schisms are for me, or my sake (viz. that I am
not in so great place or office as you contend, and desire to have me) I am
gone, I depart to what place soever you will, and do what the multitude
appoint me; only let the flock of Christ ^e at peace with the Elders that are
placed over them. Adding, (...), Thus godly men have done, and will do, and
(...), Many have removed out of their own Cities, that the Sedition might not
farther extend it self.

10. In these words nothing can be more manifest than 1. That this short
Oration to the tumult^ous people was only designed to still their commotion,
and to reduce them at once to peace and subjection to their superiors placed
over them in the Church. And so it can be no farther argumentative, than to
that, or the like case, or conjuncture, viz. that for the acquiring peace to
the public, and quiet subjection to Governors, any generous or charitable
person ought even to leave his Country, if need so require, and if that will
do it, to do, or suffer any thing for the regaining the public peace, not
that every Christian is in all cases bound to do this, or that; what is
charitable in these circumstances, is simply, and without them necessary: For
then the example there used of M^ses must be obligatory too, and every man
shall at all times be bound to wi^^ and pray what in that one case he did.

11. Secondly: That it is by Clement put into the mouth, not of the true
Bishops or Elders, duly constituted among them at that time; for should they
have offered to g^e ^ut and depart, 1. There is no ^s^ion but they had been
permitted to do so, by them who had already ejected them from their (...) or
Ministration: And 2. how could the (...), the flock be at peace together with
these ^tuted Elders (i. e. with these that were already constituted) in case
they should thus depart: And 3. how had lemens done the work to which his
who^e Epistle was designed, viz. re-establi^ht the true Governors in their
^h^irs again, if they had thus, by his advise, departed. But, I say, this
speech of (...), I am gone, I depart, is by Clement put into the mouth of the
one or two persons (...) f^r whose sakes this commotion was raised against
their Eccl^stic^l Governors ((...)) and this is so manifest, that it is to him
that shall but lightly view the place in the Epistle, impossible to make any
question of it.

12. Thirdly: ^t is here as manifest, that the recesse here s^o^en of, and
after exempli^ied in the (...), the many that had done so, and in like manner
by Kings and Princ^^ that in times of plagues had, in obedience to the Oracle^
delivered themselves up to death, (...), that by their own blood they ^t res^
and ^^liv^r their citizens, as before it had been by Moses (...) ^ver [blot me
out*] was an act of gene^ and charity in the^ that should do it, a mere
spontaneous, voluntary recesse, no act of ordinary duty or obligation. And
consequently, though it were very lawful for Clemens to advise this
generosity, yet it had been very ill in the seditious people to require them to
be gone, who so earnestly desired the restoring them to peace, and due
subjection, and so this can be no instance of the peoples power in this or any
thing else.

13. These things being granted, the strangeness of D. Blondel's conclusions
from the words will immediately appear: They are two; the one set down p. 12.
the other p. 13. of his Apology: In p 12. thus: Hic nos monet, fideles etiam de
Episcopatu sive Presbyterio contendentes, non ab Episcopi singulares, (...)
nutu, sed a multitudinis praeceptis pependisse. Here Clement minds us that
the faithful, even such as contend for the Bishopric, or office of Elder,
depend not on the pleasure of the Bishop, the singular Bishop, and who had the
supreme power, but on the precepts of the multitude. In p. 13. thus,
Presbyteros nihil (...) attentasse, sed propter Christum communemque piae
fraternitatis aedificationem, multitudinis dicto audientes fuisse: That the
Elders attempted not to do any thing by way of command or empire, but for
Christ's sake, and for the common edification of the brethren, they were
obedient to the command of the multitude.

14. In the first of these conclusions, that which is very strange, is, that
the believers should from Clement's words be concluded 1. not to have depended
on the pleasure of their Bishop. 2. to have depended on the precepts of the
multitude: Whereas 1. there is no one syllable of their not depending on the
pleasure of their Bishops, but special mention of the preserving their Bishops
quietly in their seats, as the end, which, with the peace of the Church, was
the only thing they had in their view: And 2. they no otherwise depended on
the precepts of the multitude, than as for the avoiding and quieting the
Sedition, they should voluntarily submit themselves, which is far from
concluding any due power in the multitude, as my bribing a Plunderer to save my
life, is from inferring that he has a lawful power over it; or my telling any
man in an extremity, I will do whatsoever you bid me, on condition you will be
quiet, and let my Master alone, will conclude that man to have had any power
over me, before I had said it, or that that power shall always continue to
have obligation on me afterward: Or, to go no farther than the Context in
Clemens, than the Kings being content to dye for the removing the Plague from
the People, can be a precedent and obligation to all Kings and Rulers, not
only to do the like in the like case, but to acknowledge themselves
universally to depend upon the commands of the people.

15. By this already appears, how free I am from being chargeable with those
things of which the Prefacer accuses me: As 1. that I foist in the [solius]
into Blondel's discourse. It is an ugly word, but sure I am not guilty of it:
For does not Blondel say, non ab Episcopi nutu, sed a multitudinis praeceptis?
that they depended not from the Bishops pleasure, but from the multitudes
precepts? Is not the [non, sed, not, but] here perfectly all one with [solius,
only?] Where there are but two parts, the Governor (or Governors, as Blondel
would have it) in every Church, and the People; what is done by the power of
the People, and not by the power of the Governors, must sure be done by the
power of the people alone. That which can be done but three ways, by the
Prefacer, or by me, or conjunctim by both of us together; if it be done by him,
and not done by me, is it not done by him only? What possibility is there that
I should deceive my self, or any man else by thus concluding?

16. This Prefacer, I acknowledge seems to set it otherwise than Blondel had
done, and so, I suppose, phansies it a joint power of the orderly Gospel
Presbytery and the People: But then 1. I that was speaking to Blondel, was not
to ^e supposed to speak to this Prefacer, who differs from Blondel. And 2. that
which is done by the Presbytery and People jointly, how can it be said to be
done not by the Presbytery, or to be done by, or depend from the peoples
command, not from the Presbytery? So that certainly I was capable of a more
benign censure, I might have been spared the accusation of s^isting or forgery
in this matter.

17. So likewise for his second charge, that I misreport Blondel's way of
arguing, making him take his argument from the faithful, tumultuating against
the Bishops, from the peoples seditiously rebelling against their Prince, from
words spoken to the people to repress their sedition; whereas, says he, there
is not any thing of this nature urged in the least by Blondel] this sure will
vanish presently also: For as to the first two branches, it is certain I no
where thus recite Blondel's arguing: My words he had just before set down
truly, if he would have c^nstrued them right, Quis, sodes, a fidelibus de
Episcopatu contra Episcopos centendentibus, quis a populo contrae Principem
suum tumultus ciente -- argumenta -- duci posse existimavit? Who, I pray, for
the asserting the authority of the people would think arguments might be
brought from the faithful, contending for authority against their Bishops,
from a people raising sedition against their Prince?] that is, from any thing
said or done by such men at such a time. This is not from the faithfuls
contending, or the peoples rebelling (as the Prefacer was pleased to
misconstrue me) but from the faithful contending, i. e who contended, or (as
the parallel to that) the people rebelling, or, who rebelled. And, I pray, does
not Blondel fetch his argument in this place of Clement from th^se, and none
but these? Are not his very words, fideles de Episcopatis contendentes -- a
multitudinis pr^^^ptis rependisse, that the faithful contending, or, who
contended for the Bishopric depended on the commands of the multitude] and
does he not draw his argument for the peoples power from them, and (which was
the third thing) from the words, that they are by Clement bid use to the people
to repress their sedition? From whence, I beseech him, is Blondel's argument
drawn, if not from hence, when from this one speech of theirs (made for them by
Clement) it is that this whole argument is drawn?

18. It Is true, indeed, Blondel should not have affirmed of those whom he calls
the Contenders, that they depended on the commands of the people, but that
Clemens bid them that they should make that offer to them, that in that
particular they would. But I, who was confuting Blondel's argument, was to take
it as he set it, not as it ought to have been set by him, and so have done
nothing criminous in so doing.

19. There is yet a third charge in a parenthesis, that the words [appointed by
the Apostles] taken for the persons of those Bishops is thrust in by me, and is
against the express testimony of Clemens in this Epistle.] But certainly this
is also a groundless accusation. For as to Blondel's words or arguing, they
are not by me thrust into them, but used as a circumstance of some force in my
arguing against him, to show that his argument taken from what was said or done
by those whom he acknowledges contenders, was sure to be no good argument, when
they, against whom they are by him supposed to contend, being the Bishops of
Corinth, those Bishops were, say I, constituted by the Apostles: This was but a
light circumstance, yet that which I thought would be some farther prejudice to
his argument, when the words, from whence he inferred his conclusion, were
supposed to be spoken by the contenders, those again contenders against
Bishops, and those Bishops constituted by the very Apostles.

20. And then for Clement, it is most certain (whatsoever the Prefacer is
pleased to affirm to the contrary) that he expressly says this of these
Bishops, whom they contended against, and ejected, that they were (...),
constituted by the Apostles, or after by other esteemed men, some immediately
both designed and ordained to the Office by the Apostles personally, others
designed and nominated, or put upon the (...), the list of succession by the
Apostles, and as places were vacant, actually ordai^'d by the imposition of the
hands of those esteemed or eminent men, the successors of the Apostles (such as
were also themselves called Apostolical men by Blondel, and by the ancients,
Apostoli secundarii, secundarie Apostles.)

21. This is most evident again by what was cleared in the last Section: And so
the Parenthesis had as little of Justice in it, as the main period, and might
have been spared also, if the Prefacer had so pleased.

22. What follows after in this place [It is the advice of the Church of Rome
-- ] is for the most part true, and I have suggested nothing against it, nor am
now a whit concerned in the contents of it, and therefore though there be some
infirm parts in it also, and many more in the former words, yet having
vindicated my self, I shall not trouble the Reader to pursue this matter any
farther; what he has mistaken, he may, if he please, rectify by what has
been said, and particularly inform himself of his doubts, that they to whom
the advice is given, and on occasion of whom the sedition was raised, are not
they that were in danger of being derected from their office (as at the
beginning of this Section he thought it possible) n^r consequently they (as
toward the end he says) which were already in office, but they (...), p. 69.
and (...), page 62.
for whom the people contended to have them advanced to the Bishops seats, they
that were the occasion and the subject matter of the contention, and as we may
conclude from some passages, Page 69.
(...) the ring-lead^r^ of the sedition, and Page 72.
(...), they that laid the foundation of it.

23. And that bring me to the second strange part of Blondels collection,
Communi Presbyteros consilio Ecclesiam rexisse, eosdem nihil (...) attentasse,
sed -- multitudinis dicto obedientes fuisse, that the Presbyters by Common
Council ruled the Church, and that the same Presbyters (in the text of Clemens)
were obedient to the command or saying of the multitude. But that certainly
could not be hence concluded, the persons into whose mouth Clemens put these
words being not Presbyters nor Bishops neither, but those whom the people would
have Bishops, and to that end raised this sedition, and cast the true Bishops
out of the Church, And so they of whom this sage observation is made, [that
they did nothing imperiously, but depended on the commands of the multitude]
are but these unruly fellow-believers, not really vested with any power in the
Church, only one part of a seditious multitude, exhorted by him to endeavor
to pacify another, and to endeavor to rescue the legal Bishops from
suffering in this tempest (yea, though the same popular tumult would have put
them into their places) others being resolved to shake the whole Church, rather
than they would miss of their design of raising those that they thought fit
to admire.

24. And for any such words used (or by Clemens advised to be used) betwixt one
part of this multitude and the other, I still desire it may be considered,
whether it be possible that an argument can be regularly drawn from them, on
which to found the right or power of the people, in ordering Ecclesiastical
affairs, when besides, all that has formerly been said, it is certain the
speech was made to that part of the people, which were in open rebellion
against their superiors, and was only a (...) or mollifying plaster applied to
the part which was at that present most inflamed, embrocation to allay the
paroxysme.

25. I might now join issue with the Prefacer, and examine the truth of his
positive affirmation, that in this saying of Clemens, there is that laid which
is sufficiently destructive to the Episcopacie that I contend for (and also of
any such Presbytery as shall undertake the disposing of things in the Church
of God, without the consent and concurrent suffrage of the people) or that the
Episcopacie I contend for, is wholly inconsistent with the power, and liberty
here granted to the people. But there is not one syllable here produced for the
defense of this affirmation. And I think it competently appears by this time,
how far that bare text of Clement is from founding it, and therefore I have
now nothing more to contend with, my contrary affirmation, that no such thing
is yet concluded, will certainly be true, and fit to be confronted to, and
balanced with it, and if I should farther improve it into this, that nothing is
conclusible, I think having already seen the utmost, that two such skillful
artificers, Blondel, and the Prefacer, have been able to produce toward it, it
would not be thought any grand insolence.

26. One thing only I cannot omit, that when he speaks of the power of the
people, he calls it [their concurrent suffrage] once, and after joins them
with the Presbyters in the (...) commanding or ordeining in the affairs of the
Church. But I shall demand, can any thing like that be drawn out of the place
in Clement? Is it not certain that the multitude, whose (...), Ordinances he
there speaks of, had cast out their Bishops or Elders out of the Church, and
those that are to speak to them, and join with them, are not Presbyters, but
those whom they would have exalted to that office, and raised their tumult
about it? And how then can the Presbyters in that place be supposed to join
with the people in this ordeining?

27. I shall not make my observations from hence, but leave the Prefacer to
examine himself, with what justice he has managed his replies to me, or
reproacht my answers to D. Blondel. And so indeed, as he says, It is a sad
thing to consider the pitiful intanglements and snares, etc. And so much for
this Section also. The employment is so dry to me, and the profit to the Reader
so thin from such kind of debates, that I should be glad it were the last of
them.

CHAP. V.
Of the plurality of Elders in Clements Epistle.

Sect. 1.
The difference betwixt Ignatius and Clement in the enumeration of Officers in
the Church. Clements Epistle to the Churches of Achaia. ((...).) Paul's Epistles
to those. Metropolitical Churches in the Apostles times. Answer to a charge
concerning Grotius.

Number. 1. IN the next place, this digression concerning the power of the people
being absolved, I am called back again to Ignatius, and in him to that of his
asserting the three Orders in the Church, which is thought fit to be considered
a while by comparing it with Clements doctrine in this matter; who is
acknowledged to name but two. And then his charge against Ignatius and against
me is thus managed.

2. To return then, it is evident that in the time of Clement there were but
two sorts of Officers in the Church, Bishops and Deacons, whereas the Epistles
of Ignatius do precisely in every place, where any mention is made of them, as
there is upon occasions, and upon none at all, insist on three orders distinct
in name and things. With Clement it is not so. Those whom he calls Bishops in
one place, the very same persons he immediately calls Presbyters, (after the
example of Paul, Act. 20, 28 and Tit. 1. 5. 7.) and plainly asserts,
Episcopacie to be the office of Presbyters, (...), says he, (...), viz.
Because they were in no danger to be cast from their Episcopacie. And whereasth
fault which he rep^oves in the Church of Corinth, is their division, and wan^
of due subjection to their spiritual Governors, according to the order which
Christ has appointed in all the Churches of the Saints, he affirms plainly,
that those Governors were the Presbyters of the Church, (...) (says he)
(...). And in all places throughout the whole Epistie, w^iting ((...)) to that
particular Church of Corinth, the Saints dwelling there, walking in the order
and fellowship of the Gospel, where he treats of these things, he still
intimates a plurality of Presbyters in the Church, (as the^e may, nay there
ought to be in every single Congregation, Act 20 28.) without the least
intimation of any singular person promoted upon any acc^unt whatever above his
follows. So in the advice given to the persons who occasioned the division
before mentioned; (...). Had there been a singular Bishop at Corinth, much more
a Met opolitan, such as our Doctor speaks him to have been, it had been
impossible that he should be thus passed by in silence.

But the Doctor gives you a double answer to this observation, with the
several parts, whe^eof I doubt not but that he makes himself me^^y, if he can
suppose that any men are so wedded to his dictates, as to give them
entertainment; for indeed they are plainly jocular But learned men must have
leave sometimes to exercise their ^ansies, and so sport themselves with their
own imaginations.

1. Then, For the mention that is made of the many Presbyters in the Church of
Corinth, to whom Clement in the name of the Church of Rome, exhorts to give all
due respect, honor, obedience. He tells you that by the Church of Corinth, all
the Churches of Achaia are meant and intended. The Epistle is directed only
(...), without the least intimation of any other Church o^ Churches. The
difference it is written about was occasioned by one or two persons in that
Church only; it is that Church alone that is exhorted to order, and due
subjection to their Elders, from the beginning to the end of the Epistle, there
is not one word, ap^ or ^ittle, to intima^e the designation of it to any Church
or Churches, beyond the single Church of Corinth, or that they had any
concernement in the difference spoken to. The Fabric of afterages lies so
close to the Doctors imagination, that there is no entrance for the true frame
of the Primitive Church of Christ, and therefore every thing must be wrested
and apportioned to the conceit of such an Episcopacie as he has entertained.
Whereas he ought to crop off both head and heels of his own imagination, and
the Episcopacy of the later days, which he too dearly affects, he chooses
rather to stretch and torture the ancient Government of the Church, that it may
seem to answer the frame presently contended for. But let us a little attend to
the Doctors learned arguments, whereby he endeavors to make good his assertion.

1. He tells you, that Corinth was the chief City of Achaia, the Metropolis (in
a political sense and acceptance of the word) of Greece, where the Proconsull
had his residence, Diss. 5. cap. 2. Sect. 3. Let us grant this to our Learned
Doctor, lest we find nothing to gratify him withal; and what then will
follow? Hence, says he, it will follow (Sect. 4.) that this Epistle which was
sent, Ecclesiae (...), non ad unius Civitatis Ecclesiam, sed ad omnes totius
Achatae: Christianos, per singulas civitates and regiones, sub Episcopis aut
Praefectis suis ubique collocatas missa existimetur: But pray Doctor, why so?
We poor creatures, who are not so sharp sighted, as to discern a
Metropolitan Archbishop at Corinth, of whom all the Bishops in Greece were
dependant, nor can find any instituted Church in the Scripture, or in Clement,
of one denomination, beyond a single Congregation, cannot but think, that all
the strength of this consecta^y, from the insinuation of such a state of things
in the Church of God, is nothing but a pure begging of the thing in question,
which will never be granted upon such c^mes.

Yea, but he adds, Sect. 5. that Paul wrote his Epistle not only to the
Church of Corinth, but also to all the Churches of Achaia, therefore Clement
did so also. At first view this argument seems not very conclusive, yea,
appears indeed very ridiculous; the inforcement of it, which insues, may
perhaps give new life and vigor to it: How then is it proved that Paul wrote
not only to the Church of Corinth, but to all them in Achaia also? why says
he in the 2 Ep. 1. Chap 1. ver. it is so expressed: he writes, (...). Very good!
It is indispurably evident, that Paul wrote his second Epistle to the Church of
Corinth, and all the rest of Achaia, for he expressly affirms himself so to
do, and for the first Epistle it is directed not only to the Church of
Corinth, 1. Chapter 2. v. but also, (...), that is, says our Doctor, in the whole
region of Achaia. So indeed says the Doctors great friend Grotius, to whom he
is beholding for more than one rare notion. I say it not in any way of any
reproach to the Doctor, only I cannot but think his careful warding of
himself against the thoughts of men, that he should be beholding to Grotius,
does exceedingly unbecome the Doctors gravity, and selfe-denyall. This is
complained of by some who have tried it in reference to his late Comment on the
Revelation. And in this Differtation he is put by his own thoughts (I will not
say guil^y) to an Apology, cap. 1. Sect. 24. Qua in re suffra* gium suum
tu^^sse H^gonem Grotium, (...) ^x Annotationibus, po^, nuper ^ditis, and
postquam haec omn a Typographo transcrip^a essent, cur^ perlectis edoctum
gratulor. Let not the Rea^er think that Doctor Ham: had transmitted his papers
full of ra^e conjectures to the Prin^e^, before G^us his Annotations on the
Revelation were published, but only before he had read them. The Doctor little
think^s what a fly this is in his pot of Ointment, nor how undecent with all
impartial men, such Apologies, subservient to a frame o^ spirit in bondag^ a
man's own esteem and reputation, appear to be: but let this pass: and let
the Saints that call upon the name of Jesus Christ in every place, be the
Saints in every part of A^a, though the Epistle it self (written indeed upon
occasion taken from the Church of Corinth, y^^) was given by inspiration from
God, for the use not only of all Saints in the whole world, at that time
wherein it was written, but of all those who were to believe in any part or
place of the world, to the end thereof: although the assertion of it be not
built on any tolerable conj^cture, but may be rejected with the same facility
wherewith it is tendered; what now will ^ence ensu^? why hence it follows, that
Clement also wrote his Epistle to all the Churches in A^haia. Very good, Paul
writing an Epistle entitled chiefly to the Corinthians, expressly and (...)
directs i^ to all the Saints or Churches of Achaia, yea, to all that call upon
the name of God in every place, so that his Epistle being of Catholic
concernment, is not to be con^ined to the Church of Corinth only, although
most of ^e particular things mentioned in that Epistle related only to that
particular Church; Therefore Clement directing his Epistle to the Church of
Corinth only, not on^^ mentioning nor insinua^ing an intention of extending it
to any other, handling in it only the peculiar concernment of that Church, and
a difference about one or two persons therein, m^st be supposed to have w^i^en
to all the Churches of Achaia. And if such arguments as these will not prove
Episcopacy to be of Apostolical constitution, what will prevail with men so
to esteem it? Si Pergama dextra defendi possent, etiam hac de^ensa faissent.
And this is the ^ause of naming many Elders or Presbyters in one Church: For my
part I suppose the Doctor might more probably have adhered to a former
conjecture of his Dissert. 4. cap. 10. Sect. 9. concerning two sundry different
Churches, where were distinct Office^s in the same City, Primo (says he)
respondeo* non usquequaque verum est, quod pro concesso fumitur, quamvis enim
in una Ecclesia aut (...), plures simul Episcopi nunquam fuerint (pray except
them mentioned, Act. 20. 28. and those Act. 14. 23.) nihil tamen ^are, quin in
eadem civitate duo aliquando ^us di^^erminati fuerint. He might (I say) with
more show of probability have abode by this observation, than to have rambled
over all Greece, to relieve himself against his adversaries. But yet neither
would this suffice. What use may or will be made of this concession shall
elsewhere be manifested.

3. That which is extended to this length in this part of the Prefacers
discourse, may briefly be summed up into these four heads; 1. a brief touch of
the difference betwixt Clemens and Ignatius, the one mentioning but two, the
other three Orders in the Church: 2. His asserting the Bishops mentioned in
Clemens to be bare Presbyters, concluding that from the number of them, many in
that (...) Church of Corinth; 3. a taking notice of a first answer of mine to
that argument, and endeavoring to invalidate it; 4. a reproach of my
vainglory in borrowing notions from Grotius, and being unwilling to be
thought to do so. Which last, though it hang loose from the matter in hand,
being perfectly extrinsecall to our Controversy, whether about Ignatius
Epistles or Episcopacie, (because it is certain that one that has received
help from Grotius, is not for that the more likely to be in the wrong, or to be
unable to maintain his assertions; and because he that has faults in his
manners, the vainglorious and ungrateful, may yet by so good a guide as
Grotius, fall upon some truth) yet I shall afterward punctually reply to, and
dispatch that also, and show how little happy the Prefacer is in all his acts
of severity. But as the order and the rule before me directs, I must begin with
the more material parts.

4. And first for the difference betwixt Clement and Ignatius, it was far
from being any observation of the Prefacers, or useful to him against us, It
is known to be a principal ingredient in the foundation, on which I build and
assert Episcopacie, viz. that in the times of the Scriptures and of Clemens,
there appear to have been two, and not above two Orders in the Church of
Christ, Bishops and Deacons, that these Bishops were promiscuously styled,
(...) and (...), Bishops and Elders, the nature of each word agreeing, to
denote a singular Governor, and the use of it both in Scripture and Clemens no
way inclining to determine it to a number or College of Presbyters in each
Church, ruling in Common Council. That Saint Paul, Phil. 1. 1. Tit. 1. 5. 7. 1 Timothy 3. expressly sets down this course, under the two plain heads of Bishops
and Deacons, that Clemens is as express, that the Apostles at their first
preaching constituted or ordained their first converts to be Bishops and
Deacons of those that should after believe, that Epiphanius voucheth it out of
the profoundest Histories, the antientest Records, that while the paucity of
Christians was such, as neither to need more than a Bishop, and his Deacons in
each Church, nor to afford much choice of persons for any more, (...) they were
contented every where with these two; Lastly, that when the number of believers
was greatly increased, and so permitted and required it, then a second order,
under Bishops, and above Deacons, was erected in each Church by Apostles and
Apostolical men, particularly, as may probably be collected by Saint John in
Asia, toward the end of his days, and accordingly that Ignatius's Epistles
written some years after John's death, are the first that mention that second
order.

5. All this in every branch has been distinctly cleared both in the
Dissertations, and since in the Vindication of them from the London Assemblers,
and not one word is here pretended to invalidate any one part of it, any
farther, than as it will fall under one of the two following heads of
discourse, and therefore I am now to hasten to them. Only to be s^re to have
neglected nothing, that can expect to be considered in the least, It is here
presently visible, 1. how causelessly Ignatius is quarreled with, for
mentioning the Orders of the Church upon no occasion, when the design of his
Epistles being to preserve truth and peace among the Churches, he had no better
and more compendious way to do it, than by requiring their subjection to their
Governors, and thereupon he so constantly inculcates it, and this is a very
important occasion, and that which always makes it very seasonable and
pertinent, whenever it is done by him.

6. Secondly, How fallaciously the discourse proceeds, which supposes Clemens
to call those Presbyters (which ought to signify as among us the word now
signifies, colleagues and fellow-rulers in the same Church) whom before he had
called Bishops, adding that he plainly asserts Episcopacy to be the office of
Presbyters, and that their Spiritual Governors were the Presbyters of the
Church, and a plurality of Presbyters in the same Church, whereas all this
while he knows that Clement says that the Apostles instituted Bishops and
Deacons in all Cities and Regions, and that these are by us cleared to be
singular Bishops, and that to prevent contentions, they left a list of
successors to that singular office in each Church, and that these singular
Bishops are often called (...) Elders, not only before, but after Clemens, even
by those that appear, and are acknowledged to assert the three Orders, and
consequently that Clement may well be allowed to style them so, in whose time,
for ought appears, there were none of that second order, now vulgarly called
Presbyters, yet erected, either at Rome, from whence or at Corinth, or in all
Achaia, to which he wrote this Epistle.

7. Thirdly, How infirm a way of arguing it is, to say that Clement does not
in the least intimate any singular person, promoted above his fellows, and that
had there been any such at Corinth, it had been impossible he should be thus
passed by in silence, when he knows that the Apostles constituting Bishops and
Deacons, and what follows on that account, is by us insisted on, and confirmed
to be more than an intimation of it, and when the whole purport of the Epistle
is to preserve the authority of the Governors of the several Churches under
that Metropolis, whom he knows we contend and prove to be the singular
Bishops, and must not forgo that pretension till it be confuted.

8. To proceed to the second head of discourse, his asserting the Bishops
mentioned in Clemens to be bare Presbyters.] For this it is certain, that he
makes no tender of any other argument, or appearance of proof, but only the
mention of (...) (which he renders Presbyters) in the plural, whom therefore he
concludes to be many Presbyters in the same Church: But 1. (...) Elder,
signifies Bishop in Scripture, in Clemens, in Polycarpe, in those of the
Ancients after them, that are known to assert the singular Bishop above
Presbyters in each Church. And this having been said and cleared in the
Dissert: is not, in the least, attempted to be disproved by him.

9. Secondly, These many Elders are not all (or more than one) said or
intimated by Clement to be in one City. For the Epistle, as was showed in the
Dissert: is, I suppose, most certainly, may have been addressed by Clement, not
to the single Church of that one City of Corinth but to the Churches of all
Achaia or Greece, of which Corinth was the chief, being the Metropolis.

10. That it was not so, is barely said, but largely proved in that place,
Dissert: 5. cap. 2. first from the title of the Epistle, (...), where it is on
each part the (...), or whole province, as of Rome, so of Corinth, the Region
and territory that belonged to either of those Metropoles, which in that age
was called (...), or the adjacent region, expressed by Ignatius, by (...), the
place of the region of the Romans, by Polycarpe in the same kind, speaking of
Phili^pi, (...), the Church adjoining or belonging to Philippi, and by Lib. 4.
(...).
Eusebius (...), the Province belonging to Corinth, of which Dionysius was
Bishop or Metropolitan.

11. Secondly, this was proved by the analogy held between this Epistle of
Clemens, and the Epistle of Saint Paul, inscribed to the Corinthians; For I
demand, was not this Epistle of Clement written to the same Church or Churches,
to whom Saint Paul's two Epistles had been addressed; That it was, is more than
probable by the Common title; and other Characters in the Epistle it self
incline to it. As that he refers them to the Epistles of Saint Paul written to
them, and that upon the like occasion of divisions and factions, so early crept
in among them. So page 61. (...) -- Take, says he, the Epistle of Saint Paul,
consider what he says to you in the beginning of his preaching to you,
certainly it was by inspiration from God, that he wrote to you concerning
himself and Cephas, and Apollos, because that then ye had partialities and
inclinations to one more than to another, but that partiality brought less
sin unto you -- Here still it is the same [(...), you] that before, and now
were guilty of this sin of carnality, admiration of person, faction, and now
at length sedition, and so the same Churches now and then, to whom these
Epistles on that occasion were addressed, and there is no circumstance
producible, that restrains one more than the other.

11. Now of the Epistles of Paul it is evident they were not confined to the
one City of Corinth, but to all the Churches of Achaia, so it is specified of
the second^ of them, 2 Cor. 1. 1. To the Church of God which is at Corinth,
with all the Saints which are in all Acha^a: And though this be not expressly
said of or in the first Epistle, or in this of Clement, yet the relation that
one has to the other, will conclude it of those also; and the phrase, which
there we find superadded to the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 1. 2. (...), to all
that are called by the name of Christ, all Christians, in every place] (and the
like form at the conclusion of this, The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you, (...), and with all every where that are called by God] has in all
probability the same importance) for that being universal, and extended beyond
Corinth, must not yet be interpreted of all Christians in the world, for that
would make each of these a Catholic Epistle, and would conclude the Apostle to
have received an Epistle from the Catholic Church, to which this return was
made: c. 7. 1. and so likewise the particular sins, and sinners both there and
here, to which they apply their exhortations, the in^est, the going to Law
before heathen judicatures, the seditions, etc. do evidently restrain it from
that latitude, which two circumstances being balanced on each side, will
certainly leave it in the middle, betwixt the one Church of Corinth on the one
side, and the universal Church of the whole world on the other, and so leave it
commensurate and applyable to the (...) all the coasts of Acha^a. Thus when 1.
Cor. 3. 5. it is said of Apollos, that he has watered them, as the Minister by
which they to whom he wrote believed and so in this of Clemens, that they had
been factiously inclined to Apollos) it is evident by the story in the Asts,
that this belonged not only to Corinth, but to Achaia indefinitely, Act. 18.
he resolved to go into Achaia, and coming thither he contributed much to those
that believed. v. 27.

12 To these are added these farther indications, that in the Epistle to the
Romans sent from Corinth, the salutations are sent from the Churches of Christ,
in the plural, Romans 16. 16. mention is made of the Church which is at ^enchrea
(which is one of these Churches) v. 1. so what the Apostle writes in these
Epistles concerning the collection for Judea, 1 Cor. 16. 1. and 2 Cor c. 8. and
9. evidently belongs to all Achaia. Romans 15. 26. Macedonia and Achaia have
pleased to make a certain contribution, and I know your forwardness, Achaia
has been ready or prepared, 2 Cor. 9. 2. and so when c. 1. 9. he had said,
when I was present among you and wanted, I burdened no man, it f^llowes, v.
10. this boasting shall not be shut up against me in all the regions of Achaia.
Where still [(...)] and [(...)] [you] and [Achaia] are all one, and if that
liberty be but allowed in this Epistle, the whole difficulty is at an end, for
then, as there were many cities and Episcop^l sees in Achaia, the chief of
which was Corinth, and what was sent to that Metropolis was from thence to be
communicated, as it belonged to all those others: so the Bishops of each of
these might very fitly be called by Clement (...) Elders, and not the Elders of
that one Church or City of Corinth, but all that related to that Metropolis.

13 This, I may have leave to hope, will be look^ on as a ^irmer foundation on
one side, to conclude that the (...) Elders, which is also the title of
Bishops, in this Epistle, being also called Bishops here (a title which, as is
Dissert. (...) c 8. etc (...). c. 2. sect. 2.
elsewhere showed at large, as far as the Scriptures never was applied to a
bare Presbyter) were the several Bishops or singular Governors of the many
cities of Achaia, than the bare number or multitude of them, without any other
circumstance to enforce it, will be sufficient to infer that they were the many
Presbyters in one city.

14. To come therefore to the third thing, the taking notice of this answer,
and his endeavoring to invalidate it, I shall briefly examine whatsoever is
said by him in pursuit of that attempt. And his first Method is that of the
Scoffer, to prepare his reader to look on this answer as ridiculous, he doubts
not but the Doctor makes himself merry, if he can suppose any so wedded to his
dictates, as to give it intertainment, for it is plainly jocular; and again, I
must in the same Scophick humor, be styled a learned man, so to be allowed to
exercise my fancy, to sport with my own imaginations.

15. But 1. truly, Sir, I was neither then nor am now at so much vacancy, which
might call for sport; If I were, I would find out more Christian-like
divertisements. 2. I could never think that what was thus confirmed by
Arguments (and this had bin done in the Dissert. on the same grounds of
probation, which have here been mentioned) could be liable to the censure
either of Dictates on one side, or of jocular, on the other; and 3. If he had
been as well able to confute my answer, or confirmations of it, as he was to
scoff and cry, ^cular, etc. he must needs have thought it more like a
Christian, and a Scholar, and a propugne of truth, to have insisted wholly on
the former, and omitted the latter. Lastly, I learn from hence, wherein my
crime consisted, when I said of one of Blondel's observations from Clement,
that it was instar prodigii; It seems I should have said that it was plainly
^ocular, have smiled instead of wondering, and all had been very well.

16. Having thus answered his proeme, I come to his narration: And there truly
I find no one argument of force to countenance or justify his mirth. A
cumulus there is, but that will signify nothing, unless some one of the
particulars, of which it consists, do so. And that they cannot do, being by him
known to be denied by me, before they are mentioned, and yet no proof added to
support them.

17. As 1. that the Epistle is directed to the Church (...), without the least
intimation of any other Church or Churches, and after in the like words, a
little varied, that there is not an apex or tittle to intimate the designation
of it to any but the Church of Corinth.] This is a negative unproved and
concluding nothing, whereas it is evident to him, that the very phrase [(...)]
is taken by me for more than an intimation that it was the whole (...) or
Province, which he wrote to, and that the consent betwixt this and S. Paul's
Epistles intimated them to be addressed to the same, and so to the Churches of
all Achaia.

18. So 2. when he says the difference it was written about, was occasioned by
one or two persons in that Church only, and that it was that Church only that
is exhorted to order and due subjection to Elders, that is petitio principii,
and that which no way appears in the Epistle, one or more of these might be in
other Churches of Achaia, and those other Churches might be all exhorted to
order and subjection to their several Bishops.

19. 3. When he falls back so soon into his first Topic again, that of
Contumely [the fabric of after-ages lies so close to the Doctor's
imagination, that there is no entrance for the true frame, and therefore every
thing must be wrested, etc.] and yet more, that whereas I ought to crop off
head and heels (a phrase that I have not met with, cropping off heels) I chose
to stretch and torture -- ] 1. It is evident how easily this might be retorted,
thus, that the fabric of this last part of this last age in this Island of
ours, lies so close on my Monitor's imagination, that the frame in Clement's
time, of a Church governed by Bishops, ordained by the Apostles and their
successors, not by the people or the whole congregation, cannot find entrance
with him. And secondly, from the recurring of such kind of Rhetoric as this,
so soon I might very probably conclude, that his whole confidence was placed in
this one Topic, which is ordered both to lead the van, and also to bring up
the reere, to be the reserve as well as the forlorn hope; And then upon this
view of his reply, I desire it may be indifferently considered, whether my
arguments were not as valid to confirm my answer as his mirth and repetitions
and bare negations without any attempt of proof, were of force to assert the
contrary.

20. Next he promises to attend to my arguments, but cannot hold his
countenance again, they must be styled [learned arguments] ^orsooth (to have
spoken as he thought, had been more like a serious person, that meant to attend
to arguments) And the first that he attends to is, that Corinth was the
Metropolis of Greece, in a political sense and acceptance of the word, where
the Proconsull had his residence, and this he grants, but for my consectary
from thence, that Epistle inscribed to the Church (...), should be conceived
sent to the Christians of all A^haia] all the strength thereof, says he, from
the insinuatian of such a state of things in the Church of God, is nothing, but
a pure begging of the thing in question.

21. But first, certainly this cannot be that fallacy called (...) the begging
of the question; It is the ^erring of that which is there proved both before
and after; before, both as that signifies long before, and immediately before;
long before, viz. Dissert. 4. c. 5. the erection of Metropoles and
Metropolitanes in the Church had been demonstrated; Immediately before, it had
been mentioned as a praecogn^scendum, that Corinth was such an one, which if
granted, it must follow, that there was a Metropolitan Archbishop at Corinth,
of whom all the Bishops in Greece were dependent. So again this was proved
after, by the consent betwixt this and Paul's E^istles; those were written to
all the Christians of all Achaia, and then why should not this be resolved to
be so written also? And how then can the question be here said to be begged by
me? If this of Corinth's being a Metropolis in the political sense, were not
sufficient to infer this conclusion, first that might then have been said, the
consequence denied, and traill made, what was, or what could be farther said to
prove it; but that method was not here thought safe, it was easier to say, the
strength of the consectary is nothing but a pure begging of the question,)
which yet I never heard said of a conclusion, inferred from praemisses, and
after farther undertaken to be proved; I desire to consult Aristotle in his
discourse of that fallacy, and he shall find it was not (...), on my side a
begging of the question, but (...), on his, a denying the conclusion.

22. This for the form of his reply; Secondly then, as to the matter of it, I
did, and still do think it a concluding argument, which I there used; and
being briefly set down, 'twill be more explicitly this: An Epistle addressed to
a Metropolitical see, under the title of the Church adjacent to such a chief
City or Metropolis, is addressed to all the Cities and Churches that relate to
that Metropolis. But Corinth was such a City, and this Epistle was so addressed
to it -- That Corinth was such a Metropolis was apparent, and is not denied, as
to the political acceptance of it; And if it were so also in the
Ecclesiastic, there is no farther difficulty; And if my supposing and not
farther proving of this in that place, were the infirm part of the discourse,
and begging of the question, I must answer, that I had no reason to expect it
should be esteemed so, having long before, on occasion of the Angels in the
Revelation, enter (...) into a discourse of Metropolitical Cities, and showed,
that not only in the political but Ecclesiastical acceptance, there were such
in the Apostles, and so in Clement's time.

23 This was there manifested in many instances, 1. in Antioch the Metropolis
of Syria and Cilicia, and all the Churches of those regions, the (...) of
Antioch and dependent on that; Secondly in Rome the Metropolis of the Roman
Province, or Vrbicarian region; Thirdly, in Alexandria the Metropolis of Egypt,
whereupon Mark is said by Lib. 2. c. (...)*
Eus^bius to have lonstituted Churches (in the plural) there, all which under
the title of Ibid. c. (...)*
(...), the province of, or belonging to Alexandria (as here (...)) were by
Saint Mark committed to Anianus or Ananias, and the Government administered by
him, all the rest of the Churches there planted by Mark, relating to this as to
the Metropolis. Fourthly, in Gortyna the prime Metropolis of Crete, the
Archbishop whereof in the Epistle of Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, Ann: Ch:
175. is styled Bishop (...), of the Church adjacent to (i. e. the province of)
Gortyna, and of all the rest in Crete. Fifthly, in Philippi, the Metropolis of
one Province of Macedonia, Act. 16. 12. to which purpose it is that in the
Epistle said to be written by Ignatius to them of Tarsus, we find, (...), the
Churches (in the plural) of the Philippians salute you. Sixthly, in the several
Churches of Asia, mentioned Rev. 1 each of them a Metropolis over some other
^ities, and Ephesus the prime of all the Proconsular Asia. And this form, or
this state of things in the Church of God, is there by three Canons of the
three great Councels, Nice, Antioch, Ephesus, testified to be the ancient
primitive, Apostolical state.

24. This being then done at large, and thereby the Primitive constitution of
Metropolitical Churches competently asserted, it seemed to me sufficient but to
re-mind the Reader, that Corinth was one such Metropolis of Achaia or Greece,
and accordingly, that upon that account (in the Ecclesiastical as well as
Political acceptance) the Epistles of Paul inscribed (...), to the
Corinthians, were meant to all the Churches of Achaia, and not only to that
one of Corinth. And what error I have committed herein, I confess I am not yet
able to discern or divine, or what there is behind that wants farther proof.

25. The only thing I can yet think of, is, that in this Praefacer's
judgment, I have not made it sufficiently appear by that one evidence of
Corinth's being a Metropolis, where the Proconsul of Achaia kept his residence,
Act. 18 12, 15. (i. e. a Metropolis in the Political acceptance) that it was
also a Metropolis in the Ecclesiastical notitiae, and then it may be fit
perhaps farther to add something to clear that, and put it out of question,
not only in thesi, that the Church generally thus corresponded with the state,
(according to that of Origin, (...), the Governor of the Church of every City
must keep conformity to the ruler of those that are in the City, Contr. Cells.
l. 3.) but also in hypothesi, that so it was particularly in this of Corinth.

26. To which purpose it were easy to multiply testimonies, which put it out
of question that Corinth was a Metropolitical Church, and so is recorded to be
in all the Notitiae, that are extant; But I shall content my self with one
testimony, that of Edit. Savi^. Tom. 3* p. 343.
Saint Chrysostom, who asks this question, (...) -- Why writing to the
Metropolis, he writes (i. e. expresses himself to write) to all by or through
that, whereas in other Epistles he does not do so? for writing to the
Thessalonians, he no where addresseth it to the Macedonians also, and writing
to the Ephesians in like manner, he comprehends not all Asia, and the Epistle
to the Romans was not addressed also to the inhabitants of Italy; but here this
he does, and in the Epistle to the Galatians, for there also he makes his
address, not to one, or two, or three Cities, but to all every where
dispersed, saying, Paul an Apostle -- to the churches of Galatia -- where, as
Corinth at the time when Saint Paul wrote that Epistle, is by him supposed to
be a Metropolis, and so Thessalonica, and Ephesus, and Rome, so both in the
Epistles to the Corinthians, and in that to the Galatians, there were more
Cities than one, to whom they were addressed. And then I suppose there is a full
testimony to all, and more than I undertook to prove from it. At the present it
suffices, Corinth, says he, was a Metropolis, and that in the Ecclesiastic
notion, when Saint Paul wrote to it.

27. What the Prefacer farther adds, is for the examining my next proof or
evidence, that Clement's Epistle belonged to the Churches of Achaia, and not to
Corinth only, because the Epistles of Saint Paul appear to have done so. And
besides the scoffs and the demurer accusation about Grotius (which shall anon
be considered) all that he replies is, 1. That though St. Paul's being expressly
and (...) directed to the Churches of A^haia, cannot be confined to the Church
of Corinth, yet Clement directing his Epistle to the Church of* orinth only,
without mention, or insinuation of any intention to extend it to any other,
handling in it the peculiar concernment of that Church, and a difference about
one or two persons therein, cannot be supposed to be written thus to the
Churches of all Achaia. Secondly: That in his opinion I might more probably
have adhered to a former conjecture of mine concerning two different Churches,
with distinct Officers* in the same City, though this would not suffice neither.

28. To these I reply. 1. That o^ St. Paul's only one (the second) is expressly
directed to all the Churches of Achaia, and yet the former is without that
express direction, already sufficiently cleared (and not here denied) to
belong to the same Churches, and the same reasons hold for this of Clemens,
which was written to them, to whom ^aul wrote, and not to the Church of
Corinth, but (...) to the Church ad acent, the (...) the territory, that
belonged to it. And therefore, secondly; That this is more than an insinuation
of an intention to extend ^t to those other Churches. Thir^ly: That the
concernments of the Epistle are no way restrained to the particular Church of
Corinth, but by common to the other Churches of Achaia. Fourthly: that the
difference, or rather sedition, does no way appear to be peculiar to the
Church of that one City: The one or two, if they signify strictly no greater a
number than two, might yet as probably be in any one or two other Cities of
Greece, as in that one of Corinth And there is no probability of reason to
conclude, that the Errors about the Resurrection, etc. had spread no farther
than that one City.

29. Lastly, for his opinion that I might more probably have adhered to my
former conjecture concerning the two different Assemblies of of Jewish and
Gentile Christians in one city; All that I need say, is, that though I still
adhere to that conjecture, as far as ever, and no way fear what he threatens,
that any use, which I shall repent of, will, or ever can be made of this
concession, yet I never thought fit to apply it to this matter, both because
here is no need of such aids, (and I may have leave to think the Prefacer would
not have suggested it to me, if there had, and that if he had had any way to
wrest the former hold from me, he would not thus have attempted it by
diversion) and because as I am not sure that there ever were two such distinct
Coetus at Corinth under distinct Bishops (only from the authority of Dionysius
Bishop of Corinth, that there were two parts of their first plantation, one
from Paul, another from ^eter) so if there ever were, yet they might before
this time of Clement's writing, be made up into one body, as I know the Jewish
and Gentile Church at Rome, that had been under different Governors, were now
united under Clement.

30. And therefore to conclude this matter. I desire every man may be allowed
liberty to use his own arguments and answers, and to take his own time to
produce and apply them, and that, till what has been said, be refuted, I may
be permitted to think that the whether (...) or (...), Bishops or Elders, in
this Epistle of ^lement are the singular Governors of the several cities of
Achaia

31. What he says by the by, of Act. 20. 8. and Act. 14. 23. that those two
places must be excepted from the universal negative. that there were never
more Bishops than one in a city, he cannot but know how little force it has
against me, who have manifest^d out of Irenaeus, that the (...) Elders or
Bishops ^ct. 20. were the Bishops of Asia, not of the one city of Ephes^^, and
that the Elders ordained in every Church Act. 14. were the Bishops ordained at
Lystra, Iconium and Antioch, and not any plurality of Presbyters in one city.

32. Having now done with all the three former particulars, wherein Ignatius
and Clement, Episcopacy and Presbytery were concerned, there remains only
that which is personal to me, in relation to Grotius, but that consisting of
several branches, of which it will presently appear how many, or rather how few
of them have any degree either of weight or of truth in them.

33. The first is very light, and unconsiderable, that in interpreting [all in
every place] 1 Cor 1. 2. Grotius says the same with me. And would not any man
believe this assertion of the Prefacer, take it on his word, and not think it
needful to examine it, but resolve it is so much the better, and that thereby
it seems, that I am not singular in my imagination: But to see the luck of it,
having no such idea in my memory, I turned to Grotius's Notes on the place, and
this is all that they say there: Ostendit vocationem omnibus esse communem, ac
proinde unum esse corpus debere, non tantum unius loci, sed and omnium locorum,
puta Achaiae and Macedoniae, in qua tum erat Paulus, Ecclesiam. The Apostle by
the phrase [all that in every place call on the name of the Lord Jesus, both
theirs and ours] shows that vocation is common to all, and consequently that
the Church, not only of one place, but of all places, to wit of Achaia, and
Macedonia, where Paul then was, ought to be one body] From hence truly I was
not so diligent a reader of that learned man's Annotations, as to make any
collection at all, or so much as to remember that he had said it, nor was I
ever so acute, or sagacious, as from those words to have been able to infer
this conclusion, that the Epistle was written to all the Churches of Achaia:
For as long as Corinth was in Achaia, there had been perfect truth in Grotius's
words, though the Epistle had been written only to Corinth, as there is on the
other side in his mention of Macedonia (where Paul then was) though Paul was
not conceived by Grotius to have been in above one City of Macedonia (viz.
Philippi) at this time when thus he wrote.

34. The second is, that H. Grotius is my great friend, to whom I am beholding
for more than one rare notion. To which I answer, that this is so far perfect
truth, that he is one whose memory I exceedingly reverence and value for what
he has written; one from whom I have from my first entrance on the
consideration of Divine and Moral learning, received more useful notions than
I have from any Writer of this last Age, and so may any man else that is not
very much above my pitch, if he read him with a sincere desire of knowing and
practicing the truth. As for any uncertain conjectures, which I suppose the
Prefacer means by rare notions, or for any expedients whereby to defend the
matter in hand, that of Episcopacy, I know not that I received any the least
hint or direction from him.

35. The third is, that I ward my self carefully that I may not be thought
beholding to Grotius. To which I reply, that I never was sparing on any
occasion, whether by words or writings to give my testimony of my valuing, and
my being beholding to him, but especially that I have done this very frequently
in my papers that have been published, as I shall not need make proof by
citations or references to them, and I pretend not either to more gravity or
self-denial, than is perfectly reconcilable with this, how far either of
these are discovered by the Prefacer, it is not my purpose to examine. And
whereas it is suggested as the complaint of some that have tried it in
reference to the Comment on the Revelations, this must needs be in those men,
whosoever they are, a most groundless complaint or quarrel, 1. Because it is
most certain that Grotius's Book of Notes upon the Revelation, came out after I
had penned the Annotations on the Revelation, and so all that I had to do, was
to survey them as soon as they came out, and comparing my Notes with his, to
reap what been t I could from him, but did not, could not receive from him my
scheme of that Prophecy, or series of my interpretations on the whole, or on
any part thereof, save only those two Chapters (1. 3. and 17.) whereon he had
formerly written.

36. Secondly: Because in the one place which my memory at present suggesteth
to me, that I borrowed the inter retation from him there I find upon
examination, that I have owned it from him, in that of the two Witnesses, p
962. (...) say, it is reasonable to forsake all other conjectures, and pitch
upon that which the learned H. Groti has resolved on.

37. Lastly, because I had made my particular and solemn acknowledgement to
this Learned man, by recommending, next after Chrysostom and the Greek
Scholiasts, his admirable Comments and posthumous Annotations, in which number
this on the Revelation was specially comprehended. This is once done in the
beginning of the Preface, and again toward the end of it. And that is the third
argument to supersede all force of this charge. And so I am still, I suppose,
free from all appearance of having merited any part of this character fastened
on me by him and his other complainers.

38. After I had written thus much, and just as this paragraph was transcribed,
it happens quite above my expectation, that a fourth evidence was offered to me
in a Letter from a Learned friend, an account whereof, by transcribing some few
passages in it, will a little longer divert the Reader: It is in these words.

Sir, I have seen a Preface of Mr. Owen' s before his Answer to Mr. John
Goodwin touching Perseverance, and I doubt not but you have seen it, or w^ll
see it before this Paper comes to you; so I will take no trouble to render to
you any thing more of that Digression, which he spends upon you, than to give
you notice that I observe amongst the many reproaches, wherewith he endeavors
to load you, in the 17. and 18. pages, he tells men, That there are many that
complain of your secret vain glory, in seeking to disclaim the direction from
H. Grot^ in reference to your Comment on the Revelation This charge, I suppose,
reflect; upon the very close of your Praemonition concerning the Interpretation
of the Apocalypse, viz. (Among which number I now also find the most learned
Hugo Grotius, in those posthumous Notes of his on the Apocalypse lately
published.] It seems those many complainers suspect, that (for the main
delineation of your work on that Prophecy) you took it from Grotius, though
you do pretend, that without any other light going before you, you derived it
from the light shining in the Prophecy it self. Unless you think it more fit
for you to contemn than to vindicate your self from that aspersion, sure you
want not sufficient evidence to reprove that surmise. I doubt not but you
communicated your thoughts concerning that Prophecy to several friends, whom
you judged proper to be consulted in such a matter: Amongst others, I am sure
you acquainted Mr. John D. with the first draught of your Interpretation, who
thereupon told you, That when he and I conversed together, which was in the
year 1645. I had in some discourses declared my opinion concerning that
Prophecy to what times it referred, and that he found a great concurrence in
your opinion and mine, which relation of his moved you to write to me, and
require of me to communicate my thoughts to you about the scope of that
Prophecy; and this your Letter was dated October. 9. 1648. To which desire I
forthwith paid a due respect, and in such manner, as I was able, gave you a
scheme of my thoughts on that Prophecy, and then soon after my answer sent to
you, I received a second Letter from you, in which you said [That which you
have now sent me is the laying down of all the very grounds, which I have laid
down for the interpreting the Apocalypse, and unless it be in one little
particular, the concurrence is exactly the same for the interpretation of the
several parts.] And then you proceeded in that Letter to give me the sum of
every part of the Prophecy, which is the exact sum of your interpretation
which is published: And this second Letter was dated December. 18. 1648. I have
thus punctually set down the times, because it is very likely that you cannot
with so much ease distinguish the times as may clear you perfectly from that
calumny, if you think fit to take any notice thereof at all.

All that I shall add to this seasonable assistance of my ill memory, is but
this, that Grotius's Notes were not published till the year 16^0. And so much
above what (...) intended in answer to that suggestion.

39. The fourth thing is, that which is concluded from mine own Apology, as he
is pleased to call it, Dissert. 5. c. 1. sect. 24. where I said, that I was
glad to find by Grotius' s Annotations on the Revelation (read hastily by me
after the Dissertations were finished and transcribed for the Printer) that he
was of my opinion concerning a Gentile and a Jewish congregation of Christians
in the same city. How I offended in this, or why this should be styled an
Apology, or what I should have said in any syllable otherwise than I did, I
confess I cannot imagine. This only I know, that it was perfect truth, what
there I said, that that whole discourse, about the two sorts of Assemblies and
Bishops, in every branch of it was made before his Annotations either were read
by me, or published, that if I had had his authority to have voucht for the
whole observation, I should most gladly have owned it, and counted it my
interest to do so, that I might not be blamed for the singularity of the
observation by those, who were otherwise minded: That as it was, I was glad I
had his suffrage, and accordingly expressed I was so.

40. And now truly I am very little concerned in the gloss, which, quite
contrary to my expectation, I find put upon it, were it not my duty to avert
the suspicion of a vice, and the ill example consequent to it, I should never
have disturbed the fly, which he tells me, this has let into my pot of
ointment. The Prefacer should have had my free leave to have said this, and
much more (so long as it was so far from truth) against me, without my making
any word of solemn reply to it. As it is, I am not ill pleased, that I am now
at an end of it.

Sect. 2.
A digression concerning some jealousies spread of Hugo Grotius.

1. YEt because I will be as little in the debt of that learned man Hugo
Grotius, as I may, and because I have the occasion offered, which suggests it
my duty to make some return of gratitude to so good a friend of mine, as I am
told he is, I shall do it in a way, which seems to me most proper at this time.

2. This very pious, learned, judicious man has of late among many fallen
under a very unhappy fate, being most unjustly calumniated, sometimes as a
Socinian, sometimes as a Papist, and as if he had learnt to reconcile
Contradictories, or the most distant extremes, sometimes as both of them
together.

3. For that of his being a Socinian, three things are vulgarly made use of, to
infuse that jealousy into men's minds: 1. Some parcels of a Letter of his to
Crellius. 2. Some relations of what past from him at his death. 3. Some
passages in his Annotations. Of these it may suffice to say briefly, that the
collection, which is made from the first, and the whole of the second, is
perfect calumny and forgery, the third an injustice in the publisher.

4. For the first of them, having seen above 20. years since, (...), fragments
or excerpta of a letter of his to Crellius (on occasion of that man's defense of
Socinus, against his excellent book De satisfactione Christi) wherein there
were many civilities and commendations of what was any way commendable in the
Socinian writings, and finding that this was looked on as an indication of his
judgment, very favorable to that sect, that instead of replying to his
confutation, he returned nothing but words of kindness and esteem to him and
his whole tribe, and having then commodity to make a more particular inquiry
into the truth of that whole matter, I accordingly made use of it, and had this
account from that l^arned man, which as well as my memory will afford, I will
set down entirely, 1. that upon the Survey of Crellius's book against him, he
found there was but one thing of any weight, which seemed to stand in force
against him, and to exact any reply from him, and that was about (...), vicaria
satisfactio, one man's laying down his life for another, the innocent to rescue
the nocent: Secondly, that after the publication of his Book, De Satisfactione,
but withal long before Crellius's reply, he had taken that one particular into
more serious consideration, and in his book, De Jure Belli ac Pacis, set down
his thoughts on that subject more exactly, I think it was l. 2. c. 21.
Thirdly, that to that discourse he remitted him, being of opinion, that he
needed not add any more in relation to that Controversy, as it lay betwixt
them, joining as appears by the Excerpta, many passages of civility and
commendations, which he thought du^ to them in one respect, their professed
desire to advance the practice of virtue and Christian life. And this account
of this letter gives it a quite different and distant appearance, from that
which the fragments, all of one sort, taken alone, out of this conjunction had
given it.

5. For the second, concerning some words which are reported (variously) to
have past from him at his death, they will be evidenced to be either totally
falsified, or foully mistaken and distorted from the true meaning of them, by
the account given of his sickness and last passages, by John Quistorpius,
Doctor of Divinity, and Pastor of the chief Church in Rost^ch, who assisted
him in his last trial. His Letter being already in Print, in Doctor
Causabone's little Book entitled (as I remember) De Vsu verborum, I must not
here set it down, but refer the Reader to that view of it, where he will
find no other words of his but these; when the Doctor wished he had been to
converse with him in health, his answer was, it a Deo visum est, thus God has
pleased to dispose of it; when he mentioned confession of sins, and the
example of the Publican, he interposed, Ego ille sum Publicanus, I am that
Publican; when he remitted him to Christ, without whom there is no Salvation,
he replied, In solo Christo omnis spes mea reposita est, In Christ only all my
hope is reposed. When he used the prayer beginning Herr Jesu wahrer Mensch und
Got, etc. he folded his hands and followed him in a low voice; when he asked
him at the end whether he understood, he answered, probe intellexi, I
understood it well; when upon reciting some seasonable texts of Scripture, he
askt-againe whether he understood him, his last words were, Vocem tua^ audio,
sed quae singula dicas difficulter intelligo, I hear your voice, but do not
easily understand every word you say. And having said so, he became
Speechless. This bare recital of his novissima, is a sufficient confutation
of all the uncharitable relations that are made of them.

6, Lastly, then for the passages in the Annotations, it may suffice to
remember that they are in his posthuma, those which have been published since
his death, those especially on the Epistles, of which it is evident, that they
had never been formed by him, or fitted for the public, but were put together
by some body else, after his death, who finding many things in his adversaria,
thrown into Paper books as he had at any time occasion, either from his
reading of Scripture or others writings (it being ordinary for every man to
note, not only what he approves, but what he dislikes, and what he thinks
matter of farther consideration) has, as he thought fit, made a body of
Annotations, and published them under his name. Many indications of the truth of
this I might produce, having elsewhere mentioned some. I shall only add one,
Col. 1. 16. where the Apostle says [by him all things were created that are in
Heaven -- ] the Annotation published under Grotius's name, has these words,
Rectius est; (...), hic interpretari, ordinata sunt, novum quendam statum sunt
consecuta, the righter interpreting of [were created] is, were ordered,
obtained a new kind of state, and so in the end, All things were created by
him] the Scholion is, Intellige omnia quae ad novam creationem pertinent,
Understand all things which belong to the New Creation.

7. Which explications as they more than savor of the Socinian leaven, not
willing to permit Christ there to be said the Creater of Angels, but referring
all to the New Creation (as the Socinians generally do, and accordingly
interpret. In principio, Joh. 1. 1. In principio Evangelii, In the beginning of
the Gospel) so they are expressly contrary to the words of Grotius, as we know
they were published by him on Jo^. 1. 3. where on those words [without him was
nothing made that was made] the nothing, says he, is put to take away all
exception, Id autem ideo factum, ut in iis, quae per verbum sunt condita,
intelligerentur etiam ea quae conspicua nobis nen sunt, Col. 1. 16. This was
done, that among these things that were created by the word, may be understood
also those things that are not seen, citing this very place to that sense, Col.
1. 16. which in the post humous Annotations, is interpreted in such a
contrariety both to this former note, and to the writings last published by him
before his death, that nothing can be more discernibly injurious to him.

8. By this the Reader may observe and judge of others, and consider how
unequal we are likely to be to dead men, if we judge of their opinions by all
that is after death published under their names. Witness also his Book, De
Potestate Regis ^irca sacra, which being written by him in his younger days,
but never approved by him to be published in his life, but purposely suppressed,
only some Copies stolen out in Manuscri^^ts from him in which form I read it
many years since) it is now against his consent (and in many things distant
from his sense expressed in later writings) published, as if it had been fully
allowed by him. But this by the way.

9. Next then for the charge of Popery that is fallen upon him, it is evident
from whence that flows, either from his professed opposition to many doctrines of
some Reformers, Zuinglius, and Calvin, etc. Or from his Annotations on
Cassander, and the Debates with Rivet, consequent thereto, the Votuns pro Pace
and Discussio.

10. For the former of these it is sufficiently known what contests there were,
and at length how professed the divisions betwixt the Remonstrant and
Contraremonstrant, and it is confessed that he maintained (all his time) the
Remonstrants party, Disq^is^an Pelagiana sint dogm. etc.
vindicating it from all charge, whether of Pelagianism, or Semipelagianism,
which was by the opposers objected to it, and pressing the favorers of the
Doctrine of Irrespective Decrees with the odious consequences of making
Appendix to de Antichristo.
God the author and favourer of sin, and frequently expressing his sense of the
evil influences that some of those Doctrines were experimented to have on men's
lives; and by these means it is not strange that he should fall under great
displeasure from those, who having espoused the opinion of irrespective
decrees, did not only publish it as the truth, and truth of God, but farther
asserted the questioning of it to be injurious to God's free Grace, and his
eternal Election, and consequently retained no ordinary patience for, or
charity to opposers.

11. But then still this is no medium to infer that charge. The Doctrines,
which he thus maintained, were neither branches nor characters of Popery, but
asserted by some of the first, and most learned and pious Reformers. Witness
the writings of Hemingius in his Opuscula (most of which are on these subjects)
whereas on the contrary side, Zuinglius and others, who maintained the rigid
way of irrespective decrees, and infused them into some of this Nation of ours,
are truly said by an D^ Jacksons Book 10. chapter 49
excellent Writer of ours to have had it first from some ancient Romish
Schoolmen, and so to have had as much (or more) of that guilt adherent to them,
as can be charged on their opposers.

12. The truth is, these (or the like to them) have been matters controverted
in all times, and in these latter days the controversies inflamed, and the
doctrines warmly maintained on both sides by the Lutherans against the
Calvinists, who are yet no more Papists than they, and by the Papists among
themselves, witness the continual disputes between the Jesuits and the
Dominicans, and at this time between the Molinists and Jansenians, the parties
for a long time so equally balanced, that the Popes have thought it prudent to
wave defining on either side, till this last year Innocentius X. upon the
instance of the French King has made a decision of them.

13. So that from hence to found the jealousy, to affirm him a Papist because
he was not a Contraremonstrant, is but the old method of speaking all that is
ill of those, who differ from our opinions in any thing, as the Dutch man in
his rage calls his horse an Arminian, because he does not go as he would have
him. And this is all that can soberly be concluded from such suggestions, that
they are displeased and passionate that thus speak.

14. As for the Annotations on Cassander, etc. and the consequent vindications
of himself against Rivet, those have with some color been deemed more
favorable toward Popery; but yet, I suppose will be capable of benign
interpretations, if they be read with these few cautions or remembrances.

15. 1. That they were designed to show a way to peace, whenever men's minds
on both sides should be piously affected to it. Secondly, that he did not hope
for this temper in this age, the humor on both sides being so turgent, and
extremely cont^ary to it, and the controversy debated on both sides by those,
qui aterna cupiunt esse dissidia, says he, who desire to eternize, and not
compose contentions, and therefore makes his appeal to posterity, when this
paroxisme shall be over, Judicet ^qua posteritas, ad quam maxim provoco.

16. Thirdly: That for the chief usurpations of the Pa^acie, he leaves it to
Christian Princes to join together to vindicate their own rights, and reduce
the Pope ad Canones, to that temper which the ancient Canons allow and require
of him, and if that will not be done, to reform every one within their own
dominions.

17. Fourthly: That what he says in favor of some Popish doctrines, above
what some other learned Protestants have said, is not so much by way of
assertion or justification of them, as to show what reasons they may justly be
thought to proceed upon, and so not to be so irrational or impious as they are
ordinarily accounted, and this only in order to the peace of the Christian
world, that we may have as much charity to others, and not as high
animosities, live with all men as sweetly, and amicably, and peaceably, and not
as bitterly as is possible, accounting the Wars, and Seditions, and Divisions,
and Rebellions, that are raised, and managed upon the account of Religion, far
greater and more scandalous unchristian evils, than are the errors of some
Romish doctrines, especially as they are maintained by the more sober and
moderate men among them, Cassander, Picherel, etc.

18. Fifthly: What he says in his Discussio of a conjunction of Protestants
with those that adhere to the Bishop of Rome, is Page 255.
no farther to be extended than his words extend it. 1. That there is not any
other visible way to the end there mentioned by him, of acquiring or preserving
universal unity. 2. That this is to be done not crudely, by returning to them
as they are, submitting our necks to our former y^ke, but by taking away at
once the division, and the causes of it, on which side soever; adding only in
the third place, that the bare Primacie of the Bishop of Rome secundum Canones,
such as the ancient Canons allow of (which has nothing of supreme universal
power or authority in it) is none of those causes, nor consequently necessary
to be excluded in the (...), citing that as the confession of that excellent
person Phil. Melancthon.

19. So that in effect that whole speech of his, which is so solemnly vouched
by Page 167.
Mr. Knot, and looked on so jealously by many of us, is no more than this, that
such a Primacie of the Bishop of Rome, as the ancient Canons allowed him, were,
for so glorious an end, as is the regaining the peace of Christendom, very
reasonably to be afforded him, nay absolutely necessary to be yielded him,
whenever any such Catholic union shall be attempted, which as it had been
the express opinion of Melancthon, one of the first and wisest Reformers, so
it is far from any design of establishing the usurpations of the Papacy, or
any of their false doctrines attending them, but only designed as an expedient
for the restoring the peace of the whole Christian world, which every disciple
of Christ is so passionately required to contend and pray for.

20. So that, in a word, setting aside the prudential consideration and
question, as whether it were not a hopeless design that Grotius engaged
himself in, expressing desires of an universal reconciliation, when there was
so little hope on either side, that the extreme parties would remit so much, as
to meet in the middle point (to which also the expressing of his no hopes of it
at this time, and the making his appeal to more impartial posterity, is a
satis^orie answer) all that this very learned man was guilty of in this matter,
was but this, his passionate desire of the unity of the Church in the bands of
peace and truth, and a full dislike of all uncharitable distempers, and impio^s
doctrines (whether those which he deemed destructive to the practice of all
Christian virtue, or which had a particularity of ill in^luence toward the
undermining of Government, and public peace) wheresoever he met with them.

21. All which notwithstanding, the temper of that learned man was known to be
such, as rendered him in a special manner a lover and admirer of the frame and
moderation observed in our Church of England, as it stood (shaken, but not cast
down) in his life time, desiring earnestly to live himself in the Communion of
it, and to see it copied out by the rest of the world.

22. And so much for this large digression, which if it be no necessary return
to the Prefacer, may yet tend to the satisfaction of some others, and to the
vindicating the memory of that Learned man.

Sect. 3.
Of (...) in Clemens. How many Orders there were in Corinth at the writing this
Epistle. (...). Metropolitical Churches at the first. Philippi a Metropolis at
the first, as Canterbury at Augustines first planting the Faith. The
Institution of Presbyters, when, by what authority. St. Jerome's opinion. The
use of the word Presbyters in Scripture. The Bishops task.

Number. 1. THE Prefacer now proceeds to take notice of a second answer of mine to
the objection from the plurality of the Elders in Clement, and this yields him
also matter for many questions, and great appearance of triumph. It is managed
in these words.

2. But the Doctor has yet another answer to this multiplication of Elders,
and he mention of them with Deacons with the eminent identity that is between
them and Bishops through the whole Epistle, the same persons being
unquestionably intended in respect of the same office, by both these
appelations. Now this second answer is founded up on the supposition of the
former (a goodly foundation!) namely, that the Epistle under consideration was
written and sent not to the Church of Corinth only, but to all the Churches of
Achaia, of which Corinth was the Metropolitan.

Now this second answer is, that the Elders or Presbyters here mentioned, were
properly those whom he calls Bishops, Diocesans, men of a third order and rank
above Dea^ons and Presbyters in the Church Administrations and Government: And
for those, who are properly called Presbyters, there were then none in the
Church. To give color to this misrable evasion, Diss. 4. c. 10, 11. He
discourses about the government and ordering of Church affairs by Bishops and
Deacons. In some Churches that were small, not yet formed or completed, nor
come to perfection at the first planting of them; how well this is accommodated
to the Church of Corinth, which Clement calls (...), and which himself would
have to be a Metropolitical Church, being confessedly great, numerous,
furnished with great and large gifts and abilities, is seen with half an eye.
How ill also this sh^ft is accommodated to help in the case, for whose service
it was first invented, is no less evident. It was to save the sword of Phil.
1. 1. from the throat of Episcopacie he contendeth for: That Epistle is
directed to the Saints or Church at Philippi with the Bishops and Deacons. Two
things do here trouble our Doctor: 1. The mention of more Bishops than one at
Philippi. 2. The knitting together of Bishops and Deacons, as the only two
orders in the Church, bringing down^ Episcopacie one degree at least from that
height, whereto he would exalt it. For the first of these he tells you, that
Philippi was the Metropolitan Church of the Province of Macedonia, that the
rest of the Churches, which had every one their several Bishops (Diocesan we
must suppose) were all comprised in the mentioning of Philippi: so that though
the Epistle be precisely^ directed (...), yet the Bishops that were with them,
must be supposed to be the Bishops of the whole Province of Macedonia, because
the Church of Philippi was the Metropolitan. The whole Country must have been
supposed to be converted (and who that knows any thing of Antiquity, will
dispute that) and so divided with Diocesans, as England of late was, the
Archbishops so being at Philippi: but how came it then to p^sse, that here is
mention made of Bishops and Deacons only, without any word of a third order or
rank of men* distinct from them called Presbyters or Elders? To this he
answers secondly, that when the Church was first planted, before any great
number were converted, or any sit to be made Presbyters, there was only those
two orders instituted, Bishops and Deacons, and so that this Church of Philippi
seems to have been a Metropoliticall Infant. The truth is, if ever the Doctor
be put upon reconciling the contradictions of his answers one to another, not
only in this, but almost in every particular he deals withal (an intanglemen;
which he is thrown into, by his bold and groundless conjectures) he will
find it to be as endless as fruitless: but it is not my present business to
interpose in his quarrels, either with himself, or Presbytery. As to the
matter under consideration, I desire only to be resolved in these few Queries.

1. If there were in the time of Clement no Presbyters in the Churches, not in
so great and fl^urishing a Church as that of Corinth; and if all the places in
Scripture, where there is mention of Elders, do precisely inten Bishops, in a
distinction from them who are Deacons, and not Bishops also, as he asserts;
when, by whom, by what Authority, were Elders, who are only so inferior to
Bishops, peculiarly so termed, instituted and appointed in the Churches? And
how comes it pass that there is such express mention made of the office of
Deacons, and the continuance of it, none at all of Elders, who are acknowledged
to be superior to them, and on whose shoulders in all their own Churches, lies
the great weight and burden of all Ecclesiastical administration? As we say
of their Bishops, so shall we of any Presbyter, not instituted and appointed by
the authority of Jesus Christ in the Church, let them go to the place from
whence they came

2. I desire the Doctor to inform me in what sense he would have me to
understand him, Diss. 2. cap. 20, 21, 22. Where he disputes that these words of
Hicrome, Antequam ^ludia in Religione fierent, and diceretur in populis, Ego
sum Pauli, ego Cepbae, communi Presbyterorum consensu Ecclesia (...) be
understood of the times of the Apostles, when (...) Church of Corinth, when it
seems that neither (...) such thing as Presbyters in the (...) we can (...) As
(...) Presbyters were Bishops properly so (...), who are they so, (...) of whom
(...) (...) to be a (...) so called. To (...) I (...).

(...). (...) in the Scripture, we (...) of Church (...). This ((...) Doct^) is
that of (...), give us (...) of Christ, give us in every Church, Bishops and
Deacons ((...) than we (...)) let those Bishops attend the (...), over which
they ^ching the (...), and administ^ O (...), in and to their (...); And I
(...) (...) all the Comenders for Presbytery in this N^^ion, and much (...) the
Independents, that there shall be a ^end of this quarrel: that they will (...)
with the Doctor, not any living, for the ^duction of any (...) so^t of persons
though they should be (...) Presbyters into Church office and Government. Only
this I must (...) this second sort of men (...) Presbyters, than it does
Bishops, and that word having been (...) third (...), we desire leave of the
D^ctor and his (...) if we also most frequently call them so, no ways
declining the other application of Bishops, so that it be applied to signify
the second* and not third (...) of men. But of this (...) business, with the
nature, con^ and frame of the first Churches; and the (...) m^st^k (...) men
have be their own prejudices been engaged into, in this d^ of them, a (...)
opportunity (if God will) may (...) long be a^ded.

3. Here first I shall demand, whence it appears, that I accommodated a double
answer to the multiplication of Elders in Clemens, etc. Truly I do not yet
know or remember that I did. This certainly was all (and this can amount (if to
any) but to one answer, that which we have vindicated already) that the Elders
in the Epistle of Clemens were all the Bishops of Achaia. This indeed when it
was proposed, was more distinctly set down by 4. steps or degrees, (but then
again those are no more two than four answers) 1. that the Epistle was addressed
to the Church, (...), i. e. to the whole Province; Secondly, that (to make it
capable of that title) Corinth was known to be the Metropolis of Achaia.
Thirdly, that Saint Paul's Epistles to the Corinthians belonged to all the
Churches of Achaia, not only to Corinth, and so in any probability Clements
was to do also, being written to the same, and inscribed (...), and therefore
Fourthly, that these many Elders were the singular Bishops in the several
Cities of Achaia, in each of which, the Apostles had instituted a Bishop. And
this is all that is there said in that second Chap. of Diss 5 And (yet farther)
no part of this adapted as an answer to that objection of the plurality of
Elders (or any other) but as things thought fit to be premised concerning that
Epistle of Cl^, before the taking into consideration any testimony produced out
of it.

4. This might spare me the pains of f^rther considering what is here replied
to this supposed second answer, But I have not hitherto been so thristy, as
might now justify any such hasty dismission of him, I shall therefore (...)
di^p^se the matter orderly before me, which is a l^ttle disordered and i^led by
the Prefacers hasty handling, and then give answer to every appearance of
scruple mentioned by him.

5. There are two things (to the business of (...)) ^ly observable in this
Epistle of (...), First, what he says of the Apostles constituti^^ of Bishops
and Deacons at their first preaching of the Gospel, and this ^lly considered,
through all Regions and C^s where they preached: without any restraining of
their speech to the whether Church of Corinth, or Churches of Achaia. This is
considered in Diss. 5. cap. 10. and reference made in the margent to a former
discourse, Diss. 4. cap. 10. where out of the most ancient Records it had been
cleared, that at the first the Apostles had constituted no more in every
Church, than here were mentioned, a Bishop and one or more Deacons. And so to
this (...) practice of the Apostles, it is that that referres, which is here by
the Prefacer ^iscalled the color of this second answer (which he farther
styles a miserable evasion) and so evidently it belongs not to the plurality of
Elders in Corinth, etc.

6. The second thing there discernible is, the plurality of Bishops (styled
also (...) Elders) among those to whom he there writes. And those, say I, are
the Bishops of all Achaia, as that is the (...) or Province perteining to that
Metropolis.

7. Now these things ought thus to have been severed, and then having
competently vindicated the former of these, Chap. 3. Sect. 4. (that there were
indeed at the first but two orders, showing when the middle order of Presbyters
came in, viz. most probably in Saint John's time in Asia) and so Cap. 5. Sect.
lately, as I was required, manifested the second, that of the Bishops of
Greece being meant by the (...), Elders, I might, as I said, have reasonably
been spared from being so speedily called out again to the same exercises.

8. But as it is, I shall now attend him, and first when he objects, that what
was discoursed of some Churches, small, and not yet formed or completed at the
first planting, cannot be accommodated to the Church of Corinth, which Clement
calls (...), most firm and ancient, and which I affirm to have then been a
Metropoliticall Church, being confestly great, numerous -- To this I answer, 1.
That I have no where affirmed this Church to be in Clements time small,
unformed, etc. nor had any occasion, or temptation to do so. 2. That I no
where accommodate to this Church at that time, what I had before observed of
the Church indefinitely at the first planting; These two are but effects of the
Prefacers have, without any foundation in any words of mine. 3. That if I am
now asked, whether at this time of Clement's writing there were any more than
two orders in Corinth, and the other Cities of Greece, I must say, as formerly,
that though it is probable there were none, yet I find no foundation in this
Epistle either for denying or affirming it.

9. The chief occasion of writing the Epistle was the sedition against the
Bishops, or Governors of the first order, on design (...), to cast out of
their Bishoprics some of those, whom the Apostles had placed over them, and
either for Prsbyters, the second, or Deacons, the third order, there was no
such contention, but only (as says he, the Apostles foresaw) (...), for the
name or dignity of Bishop, and so there is no occasion to mention any but their
Bishops, which yet is far from concluding that there were not any other, for
Deacons we are sure there then were, no Bishop being ever without such.

10. Again, that Bishops continued to retain the name of (...), Elders, even
after there was a second sort ordained, whom we now call Presbyters, has
elsewhere appeared from Polycarp, Papias, Irenaeus, and Tertullian, who
certainly lived to see them in the Church, and yet call Bishops (...) and
Seniores, and so the Bishops being called (...) in Clement, is no indication
that there were at that time no second order of Presbyters in that Church.

11. And yet on the other side, Clement's death falling not far from St.
John's, which was in the third of Trajan, it is as possible, and, I confess, to
me much more probable, that there might be yet no Presbyters ordained at
Corinth, or in the rest of Achaia, at the time of his writing this Epistle. And
so there lies no obligation on me, whose conjectures are wont to bring me so
little thanks from the Prefacer, to interpose them in this matter, where I have
so little light to see by. Only I am sure that the Prefacer's objection here
mentioned, would be of no force against me, in case I should deny that there
were then any Presbyters at Corinth, because, as the meaning of (...), which
Clemens affirms of it can be no more than this, that this Church was founded
and established by the Apostles themselves, and so was kept upright by them till
the time of this sedition, which Eusebius. l. 4. c. 22
Hegesippus tells us was (...), Primus being Bishop of Corinth, so that
concludes nothing for their having Presbyters ordained among them. And when I
said that at the first preaching of the Apostles, they instituted none but
Bishops and Deacons, I never granted, or employed, or believed, that as soon as
ever that was done, they instituted more, viz. Presbyters also.

12. And whereas he phansies my observation to be made of some Churches only,
that were small, and not yet formed* etc. this is another mistake; for I take
Clement's and Epiphanius's words universally of all Churches at their first
planting, the fuller, as well as the thinner plantations. As at Jerusalem,
where all the Ancients tell us there was a Bishop presently upon Christ's
Ascension, and the-number of Believers so great, that there were seven Deacons
instituted to attend him, yet neither in Scripture, nor in the Ancients find
we any footsteps of this middle order of Presbyters in that City, at that
time, or soon after. And the reason is clear, that though in some Cities there
were more, in some fewer converts, and so, comparatively to others, the Church
at Corinth, and through Achaia might be numerous, both Paul and Peter having
labored there succesfully, yet for some t^me there were not any where so many,
but that the Bishop, and his Deacon, or Deacons might be sufficient for them.

13. So likewise the being a Metropolis is no argument that there should be
Presbyters by this time constituted there; for supposing, as I do (and my
grounds have been largely set down) that the Apostles conformed their models to
the Governments and forms among the Nations where they came, at their first
planting the Faith in any region, it must follow, that the Church of Corinth,
as soon as it was formed into a Church, with a Bishop over it, was also a
Metropolitan Church, in relation to all other Cities of Greece, which either
then did, or should after believe, as Jerusalem was to all the Cities of Judea,
or as Philippi, being a prime City, or Metropolis of Macedonia, and the first
where Paul planted the Faith, was straightway a Metropolitical Church, how few,
or how many Christians there were in it, it matters not.

14. And therefore for his change of the scene from Corinth and Clement's to
Philippi and St. Paul's Epistle, it will bring him no advantage. The case
between them is exactly parallel. There was a (...), or Province of Macedonia,
says St. Luke, of which Philippi was (...), the Metropolis, just as Corinth
was of Achaia, and this City being the first in that region, wherein St. Paul
planted the Faith, it was certainly a Metropolitical Church, and Epaphroditus
was the Metropolitan of that Province, the first day he was Bishop of it. The
truth of which is so evident, that the jeere of the [Metropolitical Infant]
might seasonably have been controverted into a more serious, and decent
expression, there being no reason imaginable, why, if the Apostles did
institute Metropolitical Churches (as here is not one serious word of objection
against all that has been said to assert it) those Churches should not at
their first institution (call it their infancy if you will) be Metropolitical
Churches. For as to that of the whole countries being supposed to be converted,
and divided into Dioceses, that is not consequent or necessary to my assertion;
for as Clement says of the Bi^hop and Deacon in each City at the first
planting of the Faith, that they were constituted in relation to them (not
only which did, but expressly (...)) who should afterward believe, so the
Church and Bishop in the Metropolis, when that was first converted, might very
well be Metropolitical in respect of the other Cities of that Province, which
should afterward receive the Faith.

15. As we know when Augustine came first over into England, and preached the
Faith, and converted Christians first at Canterbury, Ethelbert's seat, and the
Metropolis of that Province, he was by being made Bishop there, made
Metropolitan also. That sure was Bede's meaning, when he says of it, lib. 1 c.
27. Venit Arelas and ab Archiepiscopo ejusdem civitatis Eth^rio Archiepiscopus
Gen^i Anglorum ordinatus est; He came to Arles in France, and by Etherius
Archbishop of that City was ordained Archbishop to the Nation of the English,
and if, as a learned Antiquarie thinks, Bid spoke after the use of his own
time, and that the word Archiepiscopus was not in use here then, at Augustine's
coming hither, yet for the substance of the thing, wherein I make the instance,
and all that I contend from thence, there can be no doubt, but that he being at
first made Bishop of the Metropolis, was thereby made also Metropolitan.

16. As for the divisions into Dioceses, how little force that has against all
that I have said, or thought in this business, whether of Bishops or
Metropolitans, I have spoken enough to that in the Vindication to the London
Ministers, c. 1. sect. 19. and to that I refer the Prefacer.

17. And so still I am free enough from quarrelling with my self in the least,
or from being engaged in any endless labor to reconcile the contradictions of
my answers, which as far as my weak understanding can reach, are perfectly at
agreement with one another. If the labor of showing they are so, prove
fruitless, I know to whom I am beholding for it, even the Task-master whom I
have undertaken to observe, and in that guise of obedience, shall now proceed
briefly to answer every of his questions, and I hope there cannot now need many
words to do it.

18. To the first, concerning the Institution of the second order, that of
Presbyters; for the [when] I answer, I know not the year, but evidently before
the writing of Ignatius's Epistles, in Trajan's time, and, in all probability,
after the writing all the Books of Scripture, and, for ought I can discern,
of Clement's Epistle, as far as concerns either Rome, or Corinth.

19. For the [by whom, and by what authority] I answer, I think they were first
instituted by St. John in Asia, before his death, and shall add to my reasons
elsewhere given for it, this farther consideration, that Ignatius in all his
Epistles to the Churches of Asia, Ephesus, Smyrna, Trallis, Magnesia,
Philadelphia, makes mention of them, within few years after St. John's death,
though in his Epistle to the Romans he does not. And if this be so, then also
it appears by what authority, viz. such as St. John's was, Apostolical. Or if
this should not be firmly grounded, as to the person of St. John, yet the
reason why they were not at first instituted, as well as Deacons, being but
this, because there was no need of them yet, and the power given by the
Apostles to the first Bishops, being a plenarie power, so far that they might
communicate to others, what was committed to them, either in whole or in part,
and those accordingly, in the force thereof, constituting Presbyters, in partem
officii, the authority still, by which they were instituted, will be
Apostolical, and so if (as this Prefacer gives order) they be let go to the
place from whence they came, they will not be much hurt, they are but remitted
to the society of the Apostles and Apostolical persons by this.

20. To the second, concerning the meaning of my words Diss. 2. c. 29, 21. when
I say that Hierom's words [of Churches being governed by common consent of
Presbyters] are to be understood of the times of the Apostles, and whether all
those Presbyters were Bishops properly so called] I answer, that my meaning
was, that if Hierome be reconcilable to himself, that must be his meaning,
that in the Apostles times the Churches were first governed by common consent
of Presbyters, and after, in the Apostles times too, upon the rising of
Schisms, a Bishop was every where set over them; that according in Hierome's
notion all those Presbyters were not Bishops, but such, as out of whom after,
one was chosen in every Church to be a Bishop.

21. That this was the truth of the fact, I no where expressed my self to think,
but that this was the most commodious meaning to be affixt to Hierom's words ad
Euagrium, so as they might be reconcilable with the many other testimonies
brought out of him, which concluded it his opinion also, that the three orders
were of Apostolical institution. But if I am now asked my sense expressly,
whether I think thus it was, as Hierome (I think) conceived it, I answer
positively, that I think Hierome was mistaken in that circumstance, and that
Clemens Romanus, and the Records that Epiphanius cites, are much a more
competent authority for the contrary, that Bishops were first instituted,
whenever any Apostle in his travail planted a Church in any City, and
retained not the Government in his own hands. Yet if by any Record it shall be
made to appear, that before any such City was left by the Apostle, and so
before any Bishop were instituted in it, the Elders, or, as those may signify,
the chief believers (a name of age, as well as of power) were trusted by them
for some short time of their absence (as I mentioned it there sect. 20. as a
possible thing) there will then be some ground of St Hierom's mistake in that
circumstance. But this, I confess, more than yet has any way appeared to me,
and therefore I am content to part with it as a fancy, or (...) to help St.
Hierome, and not so much as a conjecture. And so much for his Quaeries.

22. As for his addition by way of Corollarie to his questions, the answers to
the qu^stions have already perfectly supersede^ it: The three orders ^ignatius
have already appeared to be of Apostolical i^stitu^, and the very frame of the
first Churches, though there was no need of the second of them, (...), at the
first plantation in every City And it will not be easy for any man which has
looked into ancient writings to be persuaded the contrary, It being the
universal affirmation of all that speak of (...) Ignatius to St. Hierome, and
for many hundred years downward* though there be some difference in some few
circumstances, St. Hierome thinking that Presbyters first ruled in common,
before the singular Bishop was brought in over them, for the avoiding of
Schisms) that the three orders were all instituted in the Church by the
Apostles appointment. And if this be the sad mistake and prejudice, from which
he will shortly deliver us, I may have leave to advise him the one method of
attempting it, that cheaper of setting Antiquity aside in the delineation and
not the more costly of professing to make his appeal to it, as in this Preface
he has adventured to do.

23. One thing he here thinks farther necessary for him to add, that the
Scripture more frequently terms this second sort of men Elders and Presbyters,
than it does Bishops, wherein there be but these three misadventures; 1. That
this second sort of men are frequently mentioned in Scripture. 2. That this
second sort of men are sometimes called Bishops in Scripture. 3. That they are
frequently called Elders there: No one of which he will ever be able to
justify. Let him please to turn to the Vindication of the Dissert from the
Exceptions of the London Ministers, cap^. and if against what is there said, or
before in the Dissertations, he think himself able to evince any one of these
three propositions, I shall willingly acknowledge my self his Disciple, being
also sure, that unless both Bishops and Elders signify nothing but Piesbyters
in every place, their signifying most frequently so, is the giving the
question, the yielding the whole cause to the Prelatist.

24. As for the taskes of the Bishops office, and his performance of them, I
shall willingly grant him my suffrage, let them discharge them (and I besee^h
all who have any way hindered them, at length to let, and quietly permit them)
On condition he will do this as cheerfully as I, I shall never c^ntend with
him concerning the nature of the^^ task, ^e it, as he ^aith, their attending
their particular (...), (...) which they are appointed (the Bishop of Oxford
over that Fl^ck or portion, to which he was, and is a p^inted, and so all
others in like manner) be it their preaching and administering the holy
Ordinances of the Gospel, in, and to their own flock, and whatsoever else of
duty and r^ti^e officii belongs to a rightly ^onstituted Bishop. And let all
that have disturbed this course so duly settled in this Church, and in all the
Churches of Christ, since the Apostles planting them, discern their error, and
return to that peace and unity of the Church, from whence they have so
causelessly, and unexcusably departed, and let none be so uncharitable as to
surmise, that he which thus exhorts them, has any other design in doing it,
than that which alone he professes to have, their timely, and now, if ever
seasonable Reformation.

CHAP. VI.
Of Testimonies in Ignatius, deemed to favor the Congregational way.

Sect. 1.
The Prefacer's pretensions avoided. (...). His Hypothesis confutable from
Ignatius. The power of prejudice. Of Popish Churches. Chorepiscopi. Metropoles.
Conformity of Ecclesiastic with Civil distributions. The Ignatian Churches
phansied by the Prefacer. The Gnostick haeresie no deflowring of the purity of
the Church. The several branches of the phansied Model, how well grounded in
Ignatius. (...). A Catholic, a National, a Metropolitical, a Diocesan Church
in Ignatius.

Number. 1. BUT we are from Clemens once more brought down to Ignatius again, and
of the great prejudices and mistakes, and unjust apprehensions which we
Prelatists have had in reading, and bringing testimonies from him, we are now
to be admonished in these words, as follows.

2. To return then to our Ignatius, even upon this consideration of the
difference that is between the Epistles ascribed to him, and the writings of
one of the same time with him, or not long before him, as to their language and
expression about Church Order and Officers, it is evident that there has been
ill favored tampering with them, by them who thought to prevail themselves of
his authority, for the asserting of that which never came into his mind.

As I intimated before, I have not insisted on any of those things, nor do on
them altogether, with the like that may be added, as a sufficient foundation
for the total rejection of those Epistles which go under the name of Ignatius.
There is in some of them a sweet and gracious spirit of Faith, Love, Holiness,
Zeal for God, becoming so excellent and holy a witness of Christ as he was,
evidently breathing and working. Neither is there any need at all, that for the
defense of our Hypothesis concerning the non-institution of any Church Officer
whatsoever, relating to more Churches in his office, or any other Church, than
a single particular Congregation; that we should so reject them: For although
many passages, usually insisted on, and carefully collected by D. H. for the
proof of such an Episcopacy to have been received by them of old, as is now
contended for, are exceedingly remote from the way and manner of the
expressions of those things, used by the Divine Writers, with them also that
followed after, both before, as has been manifested, and some while after the
days of Ignatius, as might be farther clearly evidenced, and are thrust into
the series of the discourse with such an incoherent impertinency, as proclaims
an interpolation, being some of them also very ^idicul^us, and so foolishly
hyperbolical, that they fall very little short of Blasphemies, yet there are
expressions in all, or most of them, that will abundantly manifest, that he who
was their Author (whoever he was) never dreamt of any such fabric of
Church Order as in after Ages was insensibly received. Men who are fu^l of
their own apprehensions, begotten in them by such representations of things, as
either their desirable presence has exhibited to their mind, or any after
prejudicate presumption has poss^st them with, are apt upon the least
appearance of any likeness unto that Church, they fancy, to imagine that they
see the face and all the lineaments thereof, when upon due examination it will
easily be discovered, tha^ there is not indeed the least resemblance, between
what they find in, and what they bring to the Au^hors, in, and of whom they
make their inquiry. The Papists having hatched and owned by several degrees,
that monstrous figment of Transubstantiation (to instance among many in that
abomination) a folly, destructive to what ever is in us as being living
creatures, Men, or Christians, or whatever by sense, reason, or Religion, we
are furnished withal, offering violence to us in what we hear, what we see
with our eyes, and look upon, in what our hands do handle, and our pala^s
taste, breaking in upon our understandings with vag^an^ flying forms,
self-subsisting accidents, with as many express contradictions on sundry
accounts, as the nature of things is capable of relation unto, attended with
more gross Idolatry than that of the poor naked Indians, who fall down and
worship a piece of red cloth, or of those who first adore their Gods, and then
correct them; do yet upon the discovery of any expressions among the Ancients
seeming to favor them, which they now make use of, quite to another end and
purpos^, than they did, who first ventured upon them, having minds filled with
their own abominations, do presently cry out, and triumph, as if they had
found the whole fardel of the Mass in its perfect dress, and their breaden God
in the midst of it. It is no otherwise in the case of Episcopacie; men of these
later Generations, from what they saw in present being, and that usefulness of
it to all their desires and interests, having entertained though's of love to
it, and delight in it, searching Antiquity, not to instruct them in the truth,
but to establish their prejudicate opinion received by Tradition from their
Fathers, and to confute them with whom they have to do, whatever expressions
they find, or can hear of, that fall in, as to the sound of words, with what is
now insisted upon, instantly they c^y out vi^imus, Io-Pean^ what a simple
Generation of Presbyters and Independents have we, that are ignorant of all
Antiquity, or do not unders^ what they re^d and look upon Hence if we will not
believe that in Igna^tus's days there were many Parish Churches with their
single Pr^, (...) subordination to a Diocesan Bishop, either immediately, or by
the into posed power of a Chore-episcopus and the like, and those Dioc^^ans
ag^n in the preci^cts of Provinces, laid in a due subjection to their
Metrop^^itans, who took care of them, as they of their Parish Priests, every
Individual Church having no Officer but a Presbyter, every Diocesan Church
having no Presbyter but a Bishop, and every Metropolitan Church having ^her
Presbyter nor Bishop properly related unto it, as such, but an Archbishop, we
are worse than Infidels: Truly, I cannot but wonder, whether it does not
some^imes ^nter into these men's thoughts to apprehend now ^prible they are in
their proofs, for the fathering of such an Ecclesiastical distribution of
Governors and Government, as undeniably i^ qu^d, after the civil divisions and
constructions of the times and places, wherein it was introduced, upon th^se
holy persons, whose souls never o^ce entered into the secrets thereof.

Thus fares it with our Doctor and his Ignatius: (...), (it should be (...). I
shall o^el^ crave leave to sa^ to him a, Augustulus of Quintilius Varus, upon
the loss of the Legions in Germany under his command; Quintui Vare, read
^gi^res; Domine Doctor, read Ecclesias: Give us the Churches of Christ, such
as they were in the days of the Apostles, and down to Ignatius, though before
that time (if Hegisippus may be believed) somewhat d^ure^, and our contest
about Church Officers and Government will be never at an end, than p^^h ^^s you
will readily imagine. Give us a Church all whose membe^s are holy, called,
sanctified, just^fied, ^^ving stones Temples for the Holy Ghost, Saints,
Believers, united to Christ the (...) by the Spirit that is given to them, and
dwells in them, a Church whose (...), that does nothing by its membe^s ap^,
that appertains to Church ^^de, but when it is gathered (...), a Church that
being so gathered together in one place (...), acting in Church things, in i^s
whole body under the (...) and residence of its Officers* a Church walking in
o^^er, and not as some, who (...) (of whom says Ignatius, (...), such as
calling the Bishops to the Assemblies, yet do all things without him (the
manner of some in our ^ayes) (...) supposes not to ^eep the Assemblies
according to the command of Christ) give us, I ^^y ^uch a Church, and let us
come to them when they (...), such as the Churches in the days of Ignatius
appear to have been, and are so rendered in the Quotations taken from his
Epistles, by the learned Doctor for the confirmation of Episcopacie, and as I
said before, the contest of this present digression will quickly draw to an
issue.

3. The first thing here assumed, is the evidence of some ill favored
tampering with Ignaetius's Epistles, deduced from the difference between them
and Clement' s, in their expression about Church Order and Officers. But indeed
if there were any such thing, I hope it will not be imputed to me, who have
been as careful as is possible, to get an emendate copy of these Epistles,
and having first contented my self with that, which had past Vedelius's trial
at Geneva, which one might hope would burn up all the stubble, which could be
gotten in there, toward the founding of Episcopacie, I have since fallen upon
Copies much more purified than that, cleansed from almost all the dross. every
passage, which this Prefacer has thought fit to accuse or dislike in them: And
seeing he now professes against the total re^ecting of them, and gives them
many good words in testimony of a sweet and gracious spirit breathing in them,
if he shall now be pleased to direct me to any way of procuring a yet more
emendate Edition, and such as may perfectly accord his language with all others
of his time, or not long before him, particularly with Clemens, I shall
acknowledge it a great obligation, and a discovery worth his undertaking. But
as far as my eyes yet serve me, there is little hope of this, and therefore as
it is, I must be content to think, as the evidences before me exact from me,
that though Clemens says truly, that the Apostles at their first preaching
placed no more but a Bishop and Deacon in each City, yet before Ignatius's
time, there was a middle order constituted in the Churches of Asia, and that
also by the appointment of the Apostles, and that this is a very fair account
of all the difference of their language and expression about Church Order and
Officers.

4. In the next place he has very ingenuously discovered, upon what account it
is, that he has bestowed so many of his good words at last upon Ignatius,
because, forsooth, he has no need for the defense of his Hypothesis totally to
reject them, and because there are expressions in all, or most of them, that
will abundantly manifest, that he who was their Author, never dreamt of any
such fabric of Church Order as in after ages was insensibly received. But 1. I
think not this the right way of judging men's works, whether they be theirs or
no (the due motive of receiving or rejecting any ancient writing) by comparing
them with our own Hypotheses, and observing which way our necessities oblige
us. This we were wont to call (...), serving and requiring all others to serve
and minister to the wants of our Hypothesis.

5. Secondly: If it should really appear, what is here pretended, that there
should be expressions in these Epistles which would abundantly manifest that
their Author never dreamt of our modern Hierarchy, how easy would it be for
one that would transcribe copies from our Prefacer, to reply, that such and
such places were interpolated and inserted by some later hand, who meant
unkindly to Episcopacy, and then what security could be found to ascertain
those passages to be genuine, which would not as reasonably serve our turn, to
retain those which we think define for Episcopacie.

6. Thirdly: Whereas he adds, that the fabric we plead for, being not yet
dreamt of in Ignatius' s days, was in after ages insensibly received, why may
not that also minister to us an excuse, in case we should not have been able to
answer one of his former questions, to set down distinctly at what time
Presbyters (the second or middle order) came first into the Church, it being as
easy to imagine, and as credible to be affirmed, that after the writing
Clement's one, before the writing of Ignatius's many Epistles, this order was
brought in, but so as to us at this distance of so many Centuries, it is not
now senible or discernible.

7. All this may again be said (...), and to show that it is no hard matter to
write (...), Animadversions on the Author of the Animadversions. At the present
I am to take notice what the Prefacer's Hypothesis is, which he has undertaken
to defend, viz. That there never was any Church Officer instituted in those
first times, relating to more Churches in his Office, or to any other Church
than a single particular Congregation. The very same indeed that my memory
suggests to me out of the Saint's Belief, printed twelve or fourteen years
since, where instead of that Article of the Apostolic Symbol, the Holy
Catholic Church, this very Hypothesis was substituted. But then it must be
remembered, that the Dissertations being written in answer to Blondel, were not
obliged to be confronted to this Hypothesis, and that though Ignatius should be
found to say as little as I, against this, yet he might yield competent
testimonies against Blondel for the superiority of Bishops above Presbyters,
which was all that I there endeavored, because all that I was there required
to evince from them.

8. But then secondly; Ignatius is not perfectly silent in this matter neither;
for as in his Epistle to the Smyrnaeans, beside the (...), or multitude under a
particular Bishop, there is (...), the Catholic Church, which sure is more
than a single particular Congregation, so the National Church of Syria under
the Metropolis of Antioch, of which Ignatius himself is styled the Bishop and
Pastor, is frequently mentioned in those Epistles. In the Epistle to the
Ephesians, (...), pray for the Church which is in Syria, the Church of that
whole Nation put under that one denomination, of which yet certainly there were
^ivers assemblies, and so twice in the Epistle to the Magnesians, (...), and
(...), the Church in Syria; and in the Epistle to the Philadelphians, (...),
the Church of Syria which is at Antioch, joining them all under Antioch, the
Metropolitical Church. And let this serve for a taste of Ignatius's judgment
of our Prefacer's Hypothesis.

9. What again here follows of the hyperbolical, and little short of
blasphem^^s passages in these Epistles, of their impertinency, of their
remoteness from the way and manner of expression in the Divine Writings, and
those which followed after, I have formerly wearied my self, and the Reader
with the account of them severally, and, I think, given him reason to believe
with me, that they needed not here again have been heaped up so soon by way of
repetition.

10. The next larger portion of this Section endeavors to show what prejudice,
or the fullness of a man's own apprehension, is able to do in the reading and
citing Testimonies out of Authors, and this is by me so fully granted, and in
part experimented in this Prefacer, particularly, in his fetching the power of
the people in Ecclesiastical affairs, from Clement's bidding the generous
person ((...)) to sacrifice his own prosperity and possessions to the peace
of the People, as when a King ventures his life, or Moses says, Blot me out of
thy book, in order to the same end, that truly I needed not the instance of the
Papist fetching his doctrine of Transubstantiation out of the Ancients to
convince me of it. As it is, I have no exceptions to his evidence, nor to the
conclusion inferred by it, in general, of men full of their own apprehensions.
Only I crave leave to interpose, before it be thought applicable to me: For
unless he can prove that Ignatius's plain mentions (so often repeated, that it
is become a charge of impertinence against him) of the three Orders in the
Church, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, are as little able to infer (what I
alone undertook to deduce from them) that there were more than two Orders in
the Church in Ignatius's time (and so before Blondel's era of 140. years) as
the testimonies from whence the Papists conclude their Transubstantiation, and
their whole fardel of the Mass are unable to infer their desired conclusion,
I shall sit down in peace, wholly unconcerned in that large instance, and the
(...) of it, or application, to the men of these latter days in the matter of
Episcopacie.

11. Only let me assure him that these later days afford some men, which have
searched Antiquity to instruct them in the truth, taking the pains of that
travail on purpose for that one end, and after the Scripture, have expected to
fetch truth from that search, rather than any other; and have therefore begun
their study of Divinity in that order, and counted the ordinary course of
setting out from the modern systemes to be very preposterous, and if the
Prefacer's own conscience should chance to tell him that he has not exactly
observed this method, that he has first espoused opinion and frames of
Government, and then searched Antiquity to establish them, or if it should not,
yet because it is as credible, and easily suggested of him, as by him of
others, and others consciences may and do excuse them as perfectly, as his can
be pretended to excuse him, I hope this will be a competent reply to that part
of this Section also.

12. For as to that which follows in the pursuit hereof, of the Parish Churches
in Ignatius's days, of the Chorepiscopus, etc. of the Diocesan's subjection to
the Metropolitanes, etc. from whence his necessary wonder arises, whether it
does not enter into our hearts, how contemptible we are in our proofs, etc. It
may suffice to say, that the Prefacer has sure forgotten himself, when he
desired to persuade others, that all these are the conclusions which I have
made (or any other Prelatist) out of Ignatius's Epistles: Certainly the
asserting of the three orders, all of them as Apostolical, is the one thing
which we need deduce from thence, and if that be granted us from that
authority, there is an end of the Prelatist's contention with Blondel.

13. As for that of Parish Churches, sure I have as yet concluded nothing from
Ignatius concerning that subject, nor ever expressed my self to think him worse
than an Insidel, that discerned them not in these Epistles. The first time I
ever spoke of them was very lately in answer to the London Ministers, which the
Prefacer, having not yet seen, may turn to it, cap. 1. sect. 19. And I shall
now only add in relation to Ignatius, that the form of Government there
described being this, one Bishop with his Presbytery, i. e. College of
Presbyters under him, and one, or more Deacons of a third rank, ruling, and
administering in their several places and o^ the affairs of any one particular
Church, be it Trallis, Magn^sia, or the like (together with the whole
Territory belonging to that Church of such a Cit^; or if it be a M^polis, the
(...) adjoining) all this may very well be done, and very easily imagined
without any exact distribution into several congregations, such as we now call
Parishes, as long as the Orders of the Bishops, without whom, says he, nothing
was to be done, were by all inferiors regularly observed And if, as occasion
seemed to require, or expedience advise, the Bishop (either then or afterward)
made more punctual distributions of the believers committed to his charge, and
so appointing several assemblies in the same City, and in each village one,
placed also a Presbyter in every such assembly, this I hope, will not be styled
any working of the mystery of iniquity (which I see by and by mentioned) but
a regular acting of the Bishop according to that power, which from the Apostles
every such singularly instituted Governor was entrusted with in every Church.

14. Next for the Chorepiscopi, it is known how little I am concerned to
justify the deducing them from these Epistles. I profess to believe there is
not a word said of them there, nay when Blondel was willing to deduce them from
Clement's phrase, (...), and out of him the London-Ministers, I have Diss 3
cap. 8. Sect. 17. etc. V^^d. Land. Minist cap. 3. Sect. 1. n. 16.
refuted their deduction, and showed that they came not into the Church so
early, And so for that also he might have omitted his wonderment now, as
reasonably, as I was but lately rebuked for it.

15. As for that of Metropolitan Churches or Bishops, I do not again remember
that Ignatius first gave me the model for that frame; Certainly I have
produced other, I hope, competent evidences to conclude whatsoever I affirm of
it, and if some not obscure intimations out of Ignatius were observed to be
given that way, as when in the Epistle to the Romans he calls himself (...)
Bishop of Syria, and (...), the Pastor of the Church in Syria, being at that
time the known Bishop of Antioch, one single City; but that the Metropolis of
Syria, to which I may add, that in the Epistle to Polycarpe, speaking of his
successor, he does it in the like style, (...), he that should be thought
worthy of the dignity of going into Syria, yet have not I (...) those
Dissertations laid the weight on them, (much less counted them worse than
infidels, that are not convinced by them) though if I had, that would not have
rendered my proofs so admirably contemptible, as it is pretended.

16. Lastly, for the whole frame of Ecclesiastic Government, being, in his
phrase, la^quied after the civil divisions,] as I no where Father it on, or
deduce it from Ignatius, whom now we have to deal with, so if instead of his
darker phrase of contempt, the matter be set down in more significative
intelligible words, v^z. That the Apostles in each Nation, where they came to
plant the Faith, thought not fit to innovate (unnecessarily) in this matter of
distributions already made, whether in Judaea or the Gentile regions, but
planting a Church in a chief City, and extending the Faith to the Region about
it, and to other adjacent inferior Cities, annexed the Regional-Church to the
City-Church, and preserved the subordination of inferior Citie-Churches to the
chief Citie-Church, i. e. to the Metropolis, and this constantly when there was
no considerable reason to advise any change, if, I say, the matter be thus
intelligibly, and without the help of odious expressions, represented, I know
not what appearance of exception can lie against it: But of this also I have
formerly and Vindic. to ^^nd Minist. cap. 1. sect. 1^.
elsewhere spoken sufficiently, and here is nothing, I am sure, suggested, to
which any farther reply can be accommedated. And therefore as yet I need add
no more of it.

17. So that what follows of the red Legiones, and read Ecclesias, requiring
me to restore the Churches of Christ, as they were in the Apostles days, etc.
was sure very unnecessary. I have in no kind robbed him of the Churches, which
before my tampering with Ignatius he had found, and made himself owner of
there: If Quintilius Varus had been as guil^l^ss of the l^sse of the Legions in
Germany, as I have been of purlo^ning the frame of Independent Congregations
out of these Epistles, I believe Augustus would not have inflicted any severe
fine upon him for that mi^adventure I can truly assure him, that if I had found
any M^d^l formed according to his hypothesis in those Epistles, when I read
them, as diligently as I could, to discern what the Government was in his time,
I might, and should have answered Blondel another way than I did, and replied
first to his Preface, which is much of it written with some asperitie against
the Independents, and had that more compendious way of not being concernd in
the whole subsequent Apology, which is designed against Episcopacie: And I
shall not lie, if I now tell him that I have since my writing the last period,
once more read over all the seven Epistles, as they are in Vossius's Edition,
on purpose to observe whether there were any one word, formerly unobserved by
me, which might in the least favor his hypothesis, and I shall speak my sense
uprightly, that I might as succesfully have sought it in the first Chapter
either of Genesis, or St. Mathew's Gospel, whether the former interpolated
copies, or supposititious Epistles may af^ord him any aid, he will pardon me, I
hope, that I have not had the curiosity or leisure to examine.

18. This being thus true, it was but necessary for him to remember out of
Hegesippus, that the Churches before Ignatius's time were defloured: That place
of Hegesippus to which he referres, is sure the same which he had set down in
the entrance on the view of Antiquity, and which I took a view of cap. 1. Sect.
1. and showed how unjust his collection was from thence, as it was by him
applied to the Ancient writings: And I have now the like reason to complain
again, that what Hegesippus faith of those vile haeretical Apostates, the
Gnostics, that they opposed their false Doctrine, and preached it up against
the (...), preaching of the truth, should by him be applied to the prejudice of
the true Church, which carefully opposed all their insinuations, or to these
Epistles of Ignatius, which were purposely written, almost every one of them,
to keep that poison out of the Churches. It is most certain, that the first
method of these deceivers, was by despising and speaking eviil of the Governors
of the Church to insinuate their poison into the brethrens minds, and so that
they were the (...), the secret biters first, and then afterward the (...), the
raving dogs, as he calls them, which slew in the face of the Government, but
the Church held out constantly against their clancular, and open assaults, and
they never were able in the least to deflour it, the haereticks doctrines, and
their practices are continually branded by the Writings of those times, and
there is not the least appearance of their leaven, but all the direct contrary
in any Epistle of Ignatius, or other writings of those times.

19. It is time that I now come to the interpretation of his red Ecclesias,
the particulars of his demand, concerning the Churches, which he has found in
Ignatius, and I am accused for robbing him of. And though I have already said
enough of this in the gross, yet I shall spare no pains to give punctual
answer to every branch of it.

20. And 1, says he, Give us a Church, all whose members are holy, called,
sanctified, ^ustified, living stones, Temples for the Holy Ghost, Saints,
Believers, united to Christ the head by the Spirit that is given to them, and
dwells in them. To this I answer very briefly, that in all Ignatius's
Epistles, there is no title so much as of intimation that any Church, to which
he wrote, or which was under his Government, or which he had any occasion to
speak of, was thus qualified, particularly all whose members were holy or
sanctified. Secondly: I am not sure that if that were the Ignatian model of a
Church, this Prefacer would be able to parallel it in any congregation, which
these last, not best da^es, have brought out among us. Thirdly: That this might
as well be done, and as probably hoped under a subordination of Officers and
Governors, such as we Prelatists pretend to, as in any equal number of men, by
whatsoever other form compacted or knit together. This may suffice without
farther insisting, till some reason be urged to the contrary against any of
these three affirmations.

21. Secondly: He demand^ a Church whose (...) or multitude is where the Bishop
appears. This character of a Church, or rather exhortation how it ought to be,
is indeed set down by Voss Edit. p. 6.
Ignatius in his Epistle to the Church of Smyrna, where in purs^^t of the
advice, (...), Let all men follow the Bishop, and (...), Let no man do ought
of the things that belong to the Church without the Bishop, and that Eucharist
was to be accounted (...), firm, or valid, which was done by the Bishop, or by
some commissionated by him, he then a (...), Where the Bishop appears, there
let the multitude be, as where Christ Jesus is, there is the Catholic Church,
making in the latter part that difference between the Orthodox, and haeretical
Apostate Gnostics, that the former acknowledged and adhered to him, and the
later denied him, and proportionably in the former, making the same difference
betwixt the Eucharist duly, and unduly administered; that where it-was duly,
there the people received it in communion with their Bishop, either of him, or
of some body commissionated by him; which as it is competently distant from
their model, where neither Bishop, nor any from him commissionated is received,
so I am sure it is far enough from any contrariety to the Prelatists, or
favor to the Prefacers pretensions. What particle of it it is, which to his
fancy looks so agreeable, I cannot divine, and so have no more to reply to it.

22. Thirdly: He demands a Church that does nothing by its members apart, but
when it is gathered (...). This, I presume belongs to a place in the Epistle to
the Magnesians, which we shall meet again in his last demand, and there
consider it more fully. At the present, let it suffice, that it is no more than
this, that no man was to do any thing on his own head, or without the Bishop
and Presbyters, but when they met together they should join in one prayer, etc.
And this sure may be granted without any damage to the Prelatist, who desires
as much as any, that public Assemblies be frequented, which is the meaning of
being gathered (...), and that no inferior member of the Church do ought
(...) that belongs to the Church, without the Bishop. But if the meaning of the
demand be* either that the Bishop with his Presbyters, who are indeed members
of the Church, shall do nothing without the concurrent consent of the (...) or
people, which was the thing he contended for out of Clemens, this I am able to
assume, will never be inferred from that place, or out of these Epistles, and
for any other inference he will draw from hence, in order to the no other
Church, but a single particular Congregation, which we find in his hypothesis,
this I shall speak to in answer to his last demand, where he recurres to this
place again.

23. Fourthly he demands a Church that being so gathered together in one place
does (...), acting in Church things in its whole body, under the rule and
presidence of its officers.] Here if [acting in its whole body] denote any
power again of the (...) or whole body of the people, or any more than their
regular obedience to the lawful commands of the Bishop over them, I shall be
able to demonstrate that the words of Ignatius sound nothing toward it. They
are in the Epistle to the Voss. Edit. page 33.
Magnesians, and are a plain exhortation to unity and concord, and that to be
evidenced in their actions, and the rule of that obedience to their Bishop,
presiding, says he, (...), in the place of God, as the Presbyters in the place
of the College of Apostles, and the Deacons entrusted with the Ministry of
Jesus Christ, from whence he concludes with the (...) paying reverence to one
another, i. e. (according to the meaning of that phrase in S. Peter, (...), 1
Pet. 5. 5.) to the Bishop, etc. their superiors, and, besides mutual love, and
care of avoiding divisions, to the (...), etc. being united to the Bishop, and
th^se that are set over them, for a pattern and doctrine of incorruption or
Ortho^oxe Religion, in opposition to the infections and corruptions of the
Gnostick Heresies. And then what analogy bears this with the hypothesis of
the Prefacer, what unkind aspect has it on the Prelatist's pretensions?

24. Fifthly, he demands a Church walking in order, and not as some, who,
(...), which he renders, such as calling the Bishop to the Assemblies, yet do
all things without him -- Here it was a little news to me to see a piece of
Greek Englished (This being, I think, the first time that the Prefacer has
done so, I shall not attempt to guess at the reason of it) But indeed it was
much more so, to find [(...)] rendered [calling the Bishop to the Assemblies]
Does he mean that the people had the ^ower of calling Assemblies, or calling
the Bishop to them? I shall not again detain the Reader with my conjectures
of his sense, This I am sure of, 1. that there is no mention of Assemblies, but
that those words, [to the Assemblies] are perfectly interpolated by the
Prefacer: 2. that (...)] is no more than they call him Bishop, allow him the
name or title, but, as he adds, do all without him, subject not their actions
to his directions or command (as in the words immediately precedent, (...),
being only called Christians, and being truly such, are set as extremely
contrary, or as in the same V^ss. Edit. page 36.
Ep. ad Magnes: (...), calling Jesus Christ is opposed to true Christ^^ity, and
sure does not signify calling Jesus Christ to their assemblies) and then of
them that do thus, Ignatius may be allowed to add, (...), that they d^e not
assemble validity according to the command (all actionr of such, (...), having
no kind of validity in them) and by so adding he passes no sentence upon the
Prelatist, unless he be only nominally such, plead for Bishops and disobey
them.

25. Lastly, says he, give us such a Church, and let us come to them when they
are (...), (i. e. all in the same place assembled together in prayer) such as
^he Churches in the days of Ignatius appear to have been, and are so rendered
in the quotations taken from his Epistles by the Doctor for the confirmation of
Episcopacie.] To this I answer, 1. that if the Church he would have, be set
down by me as he desires, in the quotations from Ignatius, then I needed not
have been called to for the giving him his Churches back again, I had, it
seems, either never detained them, or else rendered them already. Secondly, for
this last passage, the most that I have quoted toward it, is from the Epistle
to the Magnesians, And the whole passage lies thus, (...) Be ye united to the
Bishop -- and strait, Page 33.
(...). As the Lord therefore being in union with, did nothing without his
Father, neither by himself, nor by his Apostles, so neither do ye any thing
without the Bishop and his Pre^byters, nor attempt to account any thing
reasonable, which appears so to you privately, but in the same place let there
be one prayer, one supplication, one mind, one hope, in love, and joy
unblameable.

26. This whole plaee, I did not conceive what it imported, save only perfect
agreement and submission to the judgment of their superiors, in opposition to
the (...), those that entertained private doctrins, which were not left in the
Church by the Apostles, together with all mutual unity, charity, conjunction in
prayer of all sorts, for supply of wants, pardon of sins, in the same h^pe and
joy -- But I now suppose that the thing here designed to be inferred from this
in the close (as from the (...) toward the beginning) of his demands, is the
establishment of his grand hypothesis forementioned, the n^institution of any
Church Officer whatever, relating to more Churches in his Office, or any other
Church than a single particular congregation. And this, it seems, he was so
willing to have competently testified here, that one and the same testimony, a
little dis^uised, is (...) to appear twice to the same purpose, and so becomes
a double witness (a military trick, which officers sometimes use, when their
companies are not fu^, to muster the same soldier twice under several names)
And so we see that which truly I have attended for all this while (and could
not really think it designed by him, til this repetition of the testimony
shew^d me, that special weight was laid on it.) that this one place of (...)
and (...) (for (...) is again inserted to help the inference) must conclude the
^institution of any Church Officer relating to any but a single particular
congregation. The reasonableness of which will be judged by any man, if he
shall but put the premises and conclusion together thus; It was Ignatius's
command to the Mag^^si^ns, that no man must do any thing ^n his own head
without the Bishop and Presbyters, but when they assemble together, they must
have one prayer, one supplication (adding, one mind, one hope in charity, in
joy unblameable) therefore in Ignatius's time there was no other Officer
instituted in the Church, which related to more Churches in his office, or to
any other Church than a single particular congregation.

27. If this be the manner of concluding Church-models from ancient Writers, I
shall not wonder that the Pr^latists ways of inference have been disliked, for
I acknowledge they bear no proportion with this. For certainly 1. if he had
spoken of some single congregation, which constantly met in the same place,
within the same walls, and bid them when they thus met, they should have one
prayer, one supplication, as one mind, one hope, this would only conclude that
there were such particular congregations, and so we know among us every Parish
Church is, where none but the public Liturgy is used; but this would no way
conclude, as the hypothesis does, that there is no other but such. A particular
affirmative has no power of excluding all but it is self. Ignatius's speaking
of a single house, cannot conclude it his opinion, that there is no Town, no
City, no Province, no World made up of all these, nor consequently that he
which is Ruler of that house, may not also be placed in office in the City, in
the Nation, etc.

28. But then secondly; it is manifest that in this place, where he talks of
[(...)] he talks also of the Bishop and Presbyters, and the Prefacer has not
yet told me, that his particular congregation will bear all those, a Bishop and
Deacon, or Deacons, he said he could allow, but then that Bishop was to be but
a Presbyter, whatsoever he was called: And therefore I may suppose that a
Bishop and Presbyters in Ignatius's sense, such as he makes two orders,
superior to Deacons, and all three in that Church of the Magnesians, to which
he speaks, will not be born by his particular Congregation, and therefore even
that, which Ignatius here speaks of, was not such.

29. Thirdly: They that live under a Bishop and Presbyters, and do every one
of them, somewhere or other, assemble with other Christians in some one place
(as whosoever assemble in any place, must assemble in one) may yet all of them
make up above one single congregation, the several Christians of the City of
Oxford, may live obediently under the Bishop of Oxford, and uuder the
Presbyters of that City, and every one assemble (...), partake constantly of
the Church-meetings, some at St. Peter's, others at Allhallows, and every one at
some or other, and yet all those make up many particular Congregations, and the
Bishop govern them all, and so relate in his office to them all, and by the
several Presbyters, ordained and instituted to the several charges, administer
and order all.

30. Nay fourthly: the (...) -- might fitly be rendered no more but unanimous
^rayer, all one with (...), continue in concord, and in prayer one with another
in the Epistle to the Trallians, and that may equally be done, whether they
meet all in one, or in many places. And so still he has not gained so much as
his particular affirmative from hence, that the [(...)] here spoken of by
Ignatius, referred to a single congregation, which yet if it did, were far
enough from concluding the [none but such.]

31. Lastly, It is farther evident from Ignatius, 1. that there is (...) a
Catholic Church. 2. (...), the Church in Syria, joined under himself as their
one Pastor, i. e. a National Church; and thirdly, (...), the Church of Syria at
Antioch, a Metropolitical Church, and so (...), the Church which presided in
the place of the Region, or Province of the Romans, a Metropolitical and
Provincial Church again: And fourthly, in every Epistle, a Church under a
Bishop, Presbyters, and Deacons, which the world has hitherto called a
Diocesan Church, consisting of many single congregations.

32. It is not easy to reckon up all the inconsequences of this inference,
whereby the Prefacers hypothesis is concluded from this Testimony of Ignatius
These may at the present suffice, till farther discovery be made by him, what
medium will be chosen to draw this conclusion out of these premises, which seem
not at all inclined to it. And so though we are not come much nearer to a
conclusion of this controversy, there is yet no season of adding more to the
debating of it, and therefore so much for this Section also.

Sect. 2.
The mystery of iniquity. Clement's argument for the allaying the sedition.
Proofs of the Congregational way invalid. The contrary more than intimated by
Ignatius. The Ecclesiastic distributions contemper'd by the Apostles to the
Civil. (...) in Ignatius.

Number. 1. THat which next follows, is the telling us three things that he will
not insist on, and only one fourth that he will, and methinks that should not
detain us long. He thus begins.

2. Being unwilling to go too far ou^ of my way, I shall no^

1. Consider the severals instanced in, f^r the proof of Episcopacy by the
Doctor, seeing inde^i^bl^ the interp^etation must follow, and be pr^po^tio^ed
by the general issue or that state of the Church, in the da^es wherein those
Epistles we^e w^, or are pretended so to be, if that appear to be such as I
have mentioned, I p^^sume the Doctor himself will confess, tha^ his witnesses
(...) wor^ to his business, for who^e confirmation he does produce them Nor

2. Shall I insist upon the degene^ation of the institutions and appointments
of Jesus Christ, concerning Church-Administrations in the mannagement of the
succeeding Churches, as principled, and ^pir^ted by the operative and efficaci^
us mystery of iniquity, occasion'^ and advantaged by the accommodation of
Ecclesiastical affairs to the civil ^ist^ibu^ions, and alo^ments of the
po^^tical state of things in those days; nor

3. Insist much farther on the exceeding dissimili^ude and inconf^^mity that is
between the expressions concerning Church Officers, and (...) these Epistles
(whence ever they come) and those in the w^^tings of unquestionable credit,
immediately before, and after them, as also the u^ter silence of the Scripture
in those things, wherewith they so abound. The Epistle of Clemens, of which
mention was made before, was wri^ten for the composing and quieting of a
division and distemper that was fallen out in the Church of Cor^n^h. Of the
cause of that dissension that then miserably rent that congregation, he
informs us in that complaint, that some ((...)) were wrongfully cast from the
Ministry by the mult^^u^e, and he tells you, that these were good honest men,
and faithful in the discharge of their du^y; for says he (...), though they
were unblameable both in their conversation and Ministry, yet they removed them
from their office: To reprove this evil, to convince them of the sinfulness of
it, to reduce them to (...) right understanding of their duty, and order,
wal^ing in the fe^low^hip of the Gospel, what course does he proceed in? what
arguments does he use? He min^s them of one God, one Ch^^st, one B^d^, one
Faith; tells them that wicked men alone use such ways and practices, bids them
read the Epistle of Paul formerly written to them upon ^cc^sion of another
division, and to be subject to their own Elde^s; and all of them leave off
contending, quietly doing the things which the people, o^ the body of the
Church commanded Now had this person w^i^ing on this occasion, using all so^ts
of arguments, artificial, o^ in^r^^ficial (...) his purpose, been baptized into
the opinion and esteem of a single Episcopal ^uperintendent, whose exultation
seems to be the design of much which is said in the Epistles of Ignatius, in
the sense wherein his words are usually taken, would yet never once so much as
bid them be subject to the Bishop, that resemblance o^ God the Father supplying
the place of Chrrst, nor o^ them h^w^er^ib^e a thing it was to disobey him, nor
paw^d his soul ^or theirs, that should submit to him, that all th^^ obeyed him
w^r safe, all that disobeyed him were rebellious, cu^sed, and separated ^m G^d.
What Apology (...) be made for the weakness and ignorance of that Holy M^yr,
if we shall suppos^ him to have had apprehensions like those in there Epistles
of ^h^^ sacred order, for omitting those all-conq^e^ing ^e^sons, which they
would have supplied him with^ll, to his purpose in han^, and p^^ching on
arguments every w^y less useful and c^gent. But I say I shall not insist on
any such things as these, but onel^

4. I say there is not in any of the Doctor's Ex e^p^a from those Epistles, not
in any passage in (...), any mention, or the least intimation of any Church
whereunto a^y Bishop was related, but such an one, as whose members met
altoge^her in one place, and with th^i^ Bishop disp^sed and ordered the (...)
of the Church. Such was that whereunto the h^l^ Martyr was rela^ed; such were
those neighbou^ing Churches that sent Bishops and E^s to that Church: And when
the Doctor proves the contrary, ^rit m^h^magn^^ Apollo: From the Churches and
their stat^ and constitution, is the state and condition of their Officers, and
their ^^lation to them ^en Let that be manifested to be such from the
appointment of Jesus Christ to his Apostles, or de facto in the d^yes ^f
Ignatius, o^ before the contempe^a^ion o^ Ecclesiastical ^ff^i^es occasiona^^y,
or by ch^ce, to the civil constitution of Cities and Provinces in these days,
as would, (...) possibly c^uld bear a (...) Diocesan, Metropolitica^
Hierarchi^, and this controversy will be at an end: When this is by any
attempted to be demonstrated* I desire i^ may not be wi^h suc^ ^^ntences as
that u^ged by our Doctor from Epist. ad Ephesians. (...). The expression in it
concerning Christ being unsound, unscriptural, concerning Bishops,
unintelligible, or ridiculous.

3. How unwilling the writer of this Preface (therein to show the judgment of
Antiquity concerning Perseverance) has been to go out of that his way, the
large Animadversions, which he has afforded Episcopacie, Ignatius, and me,
will sufficiently demonstrate: As it is, the sooner he shall now return to his
rode again, the more tolerably easy it will be for the Reader, and me, and
therefore I shall endeavor to make as much haste as he, and neither take any
notice of what has been said in the Dissertations for proof of Episcopacie,
but yield, that if it appear, that there were none but particular Independent
Congregations in Ignatius's time, I have then produced no testimony from him by
which the Prefacer may be concluded, though as far as concerns Blondel, who
went upon distant hypotheses, all that I said may have been in full force
against them.

4. His second consideration concerning the degenerating of Christ's
institutions concerning Church Administrations in the management of succeeding
Churches, and the principle of that degeneration the working of the mystery of
iniquity, and the occasion of that again, the accommodation of Ecclesiastical
affairs to the civil distributions (which is in effect that the Apostles
erecting Mother-Churches in chief Cities, where they first preached, as at
Jerusalem to all Judaea, Antioch to all Syria, etc. was a special occasion of,
and advantage to the working of the mystery of iniquity) is that which in the
several degrees of it might yield large discourse, the mystery of iniquity, in
St. Paul, being remote enough from this; and distributions of Churches, such as
were most commodious, far enough from having either iniquity or mystery in
them. But I shall readily transcribe his pattern, and as he has not, neither
shall I infist on it.

5. The third, on which he will not insist much farther, was competently
insisted on before, in comparing Clement's two orders in the Church (and the
like in St. Paul) with Ignatius's three. But the design of returning to it
again, was to offer one argument more, which had not formerly been made use of,
and I must not let that fall to the ground: It is this, that if the Bishop had
been in that esteem in Clement' s time, in which these Epistles set him out, as
the resemblance of God the Father, he would certainly have bid them be subject
to him, and used that as an argument to compose the sedition, of which he wrote
unto them.

6. But 1. it is certain that negative arguments prove nothing, there might be
Bishops in Clement's days, and the power due to them as great, as that which
would entitle them to the image of God the Father, and yet the sedition being
raised against the Bishops themselves, and the question being not concerning
the Order, but the Persons, who should be advanced to it, the mention of the
dignity of the Order, or of the due subjection to it, might be no proper way
of appeasing that sedition, nor, as such, chosen to be made use of by Clement.

7. Secondly: We know that next the obligations to peace, etc. the first and
principal argument used by Clemens, was the institution of these their Bishops
by the Apostles, and the dignity of that Order being such, that the Apostles
foresaw the contentions that would be (...) for the dignity or name of it, he
tells them that the Apostles had made a list of successors in each Church,
presuming, and not needing more particularly to tell them, that this was an
high aggravation of their crime, in throwing those out, whom God had thus
particularly set over them And I know not that Ignatius would or could upon his
hypotheses, have argued stronger to his purpose.

8. What the Prefacer adds by way of flourish, I shall not need to attend to:
By this brief account it is clear, though Clemens mentions but two Orders, and
Ignatius three, yet Bishops may have been in equal esteem with both of them.
And that is all that I need reply, to that which, he says, is one of the such
things which he will not insist on.

9. The fourth thing, on which he is resolved to insist, and enlarge his
digression, is, that which I had thought had been already newly insisted on
(and, I hope, compently answer^d) that in all the Epistles there is no
intimation of any Church whereunto any Bishop related, but such an one as whose
members met altogether in one, and with their Bishop disposed and ordered the
affairs of the Church. And so on to the same purpose, and I shall be Magnus
Apollo, if I show him any.

8. Now I am persuaded, 1. that it already appears sufficiently, that the
[(...)] the members of each Church meeting together in prayer, is no proof,
that to them bell ^ged in the least, to dispose and order the affairs of the
Church, and yet besides, that nothing has yet been pretended for it out of
Ignatius, unless it be the (...), nothing on their own heads, in the same
place, which is much remoter from that purpose.

9. Beyond this it has appeared farther, that the office of all members under
the Bishop was by Ignatius's doctrine to obey their superiors, to live under
subjection, and that is not to dispose, or order. And the places so long
insisted on out of Clemens also, have, I hope, appeared to infer nothing to
that purpose.

10. Secondly: It Is as certain that I have See sect. 1. n. 8. and 14.
already performed this task laid on me by him, and showed him that Ignatius,
as Bishop of Antioch, the Metropolis, is called Bishop and Pastor of the Church
of Syria, and some other the like passages, which directly infer what he
requires me to infer, and so that I have thus much title to his favor, and
should not be put off to a Poetical expression for my reward.

11. As for the condition he interposeth, that I must show this before the
contemperation of affairs to the civil constitutions of Cities and Provinces,
I confess that to be a rigorous condition, and such as unless I be released
from that restraint, I shall be utterly disabled to perform my task: For he
cannot but know, that it is my affirmation that, at the first planting of the
Churches, the Apostles thus contemper'd the Ecclesiastic to the Civil
distributions of Citie^ and Provinces, having no power of making new Cities or
Provinces, any more than of constituting new Nations, and yet planting their
Churches, and constituting Bishops in ^ities (and thence (...), in every City,
and (...), in every Church, is all one in the sacrea style) which must
necessarily infer that the Ecclesiastical agreed with the civil distributions
And truly how the Church was ordered before the Apostles planted it, I have not
the curiosity to inquire.

12. A second condition he is also pleased to lay on me by way of farther
restraint, to make my obedience yet more difficult. That my proofs must not be
such as is that Testimony urged by me from the Epistle to the Ephesians,
(...).] This passage it seems has not found favor with him, the first part of
it is, says he, un^ound and unscripturall, the second unintelligible or
ridiculous.

13. But I cannot yield to his censure in either part. For the first, Let it
but be considered that Christ came to reveal the will of his Father that
whatsoever he taught, he taught from his Father, and there can be no
unsoundness in the expression, to say, that Christ is the sentence of his
Father (any more than that he is the word, or the wisdom of his Father)
meaning thereby that what he delivered* was his Fathers sentence or good
pleasure, for so in the title of the Epistle to the Philad: (...) by Christ's
s^e is explained immediately by (...), according to his own will.

14. And for the second, let him but read it as he may find Vossius and the
Archbishop of Arm^gh read it, (...) by the appointment or sentence, or (...),
own will of Christ, and sure it is very intelligible and far from ridiculous,
even no more than this, that the Bishops ordained in all regions by the
Apostles, were appointed by, or by appointment of Christ, as the same matter is
in the Epistle to the Philadelphians set down in a parallel phrase, where the
Bishop, Presbyters and Deacons are said to be (...), designed by the
appointment of Jesus Christ. Or if the (...) be le^t out, then, reading (...)
with (...) subscri^tum, as the old Latin Sententia will bear, it is directly
all one with the former. Or if in the third place, it be read in the nominative
case, (...), then the figure is very intelligible, that these Bishops are
Christ's ^p^intment, Christ's sentence, Christ's will, i. e. are appointed or
determined or willed by him. And so I hope there is yet nothing so very
unintelligible, or at all ridicul^ in Ignatius, or my testimonies from him,
that I should need this c^^tion to be interposed against I produce more.

CHAP. VII.
Of Metropoles and Metropolitans.

Sect. 1.
Some account of the probations produced for Episcopacie, (...). The power of
Metropolitans. Their relations to more Churches than one. An enumeration of
Prymates, and Metropolitans.

Number. 1. HAving made this solemn promise, that I should be so highly rewarded
in case I produced any intimation to prove, that there was any other but single
particular Congregations, It was now timely remembered that I had done somewhat
like this already, in proving the seven Angels of the seven Churches in the
Revelation to be Metropolitans, and to the consideration of that he now next
proceeds, and that brings in an examination of what I have said of Metropoles
and Metropolitans: And it begins thus,

2. But it may be said, what need we any more writing, what need we any truer
proof, or testimony? The learned Doctor in his Dissertations, Dissert. 4. cap.
5. has abundantly discharged this work, and proved ^he seven Bishops of the
seven Churches mentioned, Rev^l. 2. 3. to have been Metropolitans or
Archbishops; so that no just cause remains, why we should farther contend.

Let then the Reader pardon this my utmost excursion, in this digression, to
whose compass I had not the least thoughts of going forth at the entrance
thereof, and I shall return thither whence I have turned aside.

Dissert. 4. cap. 5. The Doctor tells us, that Septem Ecclesiarum Angeli non
ta^tum Episcopi, sed and Metropolitae, i e. Archi-Episcopi statuendi sunt, i. e
principelium urbium, (...), ad quos provinciae integrae, and in i^ multarum
inferiorum ^bium Ecclesiae, earumque Ep^scopi tanquam ad Archi^p^scopum aut
Metropolitanum pertinebant.

The Doctor in this Chapter commences per saltum, and taking it for granted,
that he has proved Di^cesan Bishops sufficiently before, though he has scarce
spoken any one word to that purpose in his whole book (for to prove one
superintending in a Church, by the name of a Bishop, others acting in some
kind of subordination to him, by the name of Elders, and Presbyters, upon the
account of what has been offered concerning the state of the Churches in those
days, will no way reach to the maintenance of this presumption) he sacrifices
his pains to the Metropoliticall Archi^piscopall dignity, which as we must
suppose is so clearly founded in Scripture and Antiquity, that they are as
blind as Bars and Moles, who cannot see the ground and foundation of it.

But first, be it taken for granted, that the Angels of the seven Churches are
taken for the Governors of those Churches, then that each Angel be an
Individual Bishop of the Church to which he did belong: 2 be it also g^anted,
that they were Bishops of the most eminent Church or Churches, in that
province, or Roman political distribution of those Countries, in the
management of the government of them, I say, Bishops of such Churches, not
u^bium (...) (as the Doctor terms them) what a^ce is ma^e by all this to the
Assertation of a Metropoliticall Archiep^pacy, I cannot as yet ^is^v^r. That
they were ordinary officers of Christ's institution, rel^ing in their office and
ordinary discharge of it, not one^y to the particular Churches wherein they
were placed, but to many Churches also no less committed to their charge, than
these wherein they did reside, the Officers, Rulers, Go ^ors, of which Churches
depended on them, not only as to their advice and counsel; but as to their
power and jurisdiction* holding their place and employment from them, is some
part of that, which in this undertaking is incumbent on our Doctor to make
good, if he will not be supposed to prevaricate in the cause in hand.

3. Being here called out anew to the maintaining of what I had said in the
Dissert: concerning Metropoliticall Churches, and Bishops, and having so lately
been engaged in the same task by the exceptions of the London-Ministers, and
many objections, which here in the process of this discourse are lightly
proposed, being by them formerly made, and accordingly answer accommodated to
them, and yet farther, the maine thing which is here done, being to set down
many Latin passages, out of the Dissert: and to deem them confuted by the bare
recital of them, upon these grounds I do not foresee that there will be any
necessit^ of making any large returns to this last, but not concisest part of
his digress^on. What had been returned to the London-Ministers, the Reader will
find in that Vindication, Cap. 1. Sect. 16 (of which number, by the fault of
the ^rinter, ^e will meet with two Section) and so on for the three subsequent
Sections, and to the Dissertation^ themselves, and that vi^ication of them, I
shall willingly refer this matter* Yet shall I not o^t to gather up
whatsoever I shall here find ^ggested, which was not there punctually spoken
to, and of that nature here are four things in this Paragraph.

4. First that in the 5. Chapter of Diss: 4. I commence per saltum, taking it for
granted, that I had proved Diocesan Bishops before, though says he, I had
scarce spoken one word to that purpose in my whole Book. To this I answer,
that as in the first Dissertation* had answered one sort of objections against
Episcopacy, and in the whole second Diss. asserted it out of Ignatius and Saint
Hierome himself, so in the third, I had deduced it from Christ and the
Apostles, and I suppose laid those grounds, and by all antiquity confirmed, and
by answer of Blondel's objections vindicated them, so that they were
competently fitted to bear that structure of Episcopacie, which I had laid
upon them; and then having in the fourth Diss: added to this the visible
practice of this in the hands of single Governors, whether the Apostles in
their severa^l (...), or their successors the first Bishops, called secundarie
Apostles, mentioned in the Scripture, and yet more particularly in the Angels
of the seven Churches, (which being acknowledged to be the Governors of those
Churches, were proved to be single Governors of them, which was the only thing
in question betwixt Blondel and me) I had some reason to hope that I might be
allowed to have spoken some one word to that purpose in that Book, before I
came to prove those Angels to have been Metropolitans, which he knows was not
attempted, t^ll all this of Episcopacie had been premised by me.

5. The reason, which he add^s in a parenthesis, why he affirms thus expressly,
that I had scarce spoken one word to prove a Diocesan Bishop in that Book, is
the second thing I am to reply to; For, says he, to prove one superintending
in a Church by the name of Bishop, others acting in some kind of subordination
to him under the name of Elders and Presbyters, will no way reach to the
maintenance of this presum^tion.

6. To which I answer, that the question lying, as there it did betwixt Blondel
and me, there can be no doubt, but, if I have evinced the power in every
Church, to have been in the hands of a single Bishop, and either no college of
Presbyters in that Church, or else those Presbyters subordinate to the Bishop
(meaning by subordinate, subject to his power and authority over them) I have
also evinced the cause against Blondel; And this I may have leave to hope is
there done, till the contrary be made appear, and here being no offer of that,
but only a mention of the account of what has been offered by the Prefacer,
concerning the state of the Churches in those days, 1. that account has
already been shown to have no force in it, 2. if it had, it belongs not to the
controversy, as it lay betwixt me and Blondel, but is as contrary to Blondel^
pretensions as to mine, and so still I cannot see how I fell under his
Animadversion in this matter, or how I commenced per saltum, in doing what
there I did as regularly as I could imagine.

7. The third thing is, that I call the Bishops of the most eminent Churches,
urbium (...), whom he will have called Bishops only. But of this there can be
no Controversy, the fitness and propriety of words being to be judged from
the use of them, and the case being clear, that a Metropolitan, especially a
Primate, was called (...) in the ancient Councels and (...) Cod^.
Church-writings, and from them, and not from Scripture, which uses no higher
style for them, than of Bishops and Angels, it is, that I borrowed that
appellation.

8. The last thing, that I must, if I will not be supposed to prevaricate, make
good, is, that the Angels of the Churches related in their office not only to
the particular Churches wherein they were placed, but to many Churches also, no
less committed to their charge, than these wherein they did reside, and that
to power and jurisdiction, etc.

9. That they related to other Churches besides their own, even to all that
belonged to their Province, I suppose my self obliged to make good, and the
34. Apostolic Canon is alone able to do it in general, as shall anon
appear. Then more particularly, that they had power of ordeining Bishops, and
of judging them also, is Saint Chrysostom's affirmation of Titus, whom I
suppose to be such a Metropolitan in Crete, That if any were made Bishop (...),
without the judgment and liking of the Metropolitan, (...) (...), He ought not
to be a Bishop, is the sixth Canon of the first Council of Nice; And what is
there defined of the Metropolitan's rights, besides that it is done by 318.
Bishops, the most select of the whole Christian world, and in an age very
competent to pass a judgment of an Apostolical custom, it is also vouched by
them expressly as one of the (...) the ancient immemorial: customs of the
Church. And much more to the same purpose is evident by the ancient Canons of
the uni^ersall Church, as has in some measure been set down (and as far as
I can be concerned to make good, either against the Presbyterian, or
Congregational, or P^pist way) in a tract of Schism, Chap. 3. Sect. 11 etc.

10. To this the story of those first tunes exactly accords, telling us that
Irenaeus by being Metropolitan of Lions, (...) Eusebius* Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c.
(...).
(...), was Bishop (that sure must be interpreted Metropolitan or Primate) of
the Diocese sand so Bishops) that pertain to France, and Ibid, c. (...).
again (...) he had the Government of the Brethren* i. e. the Christians that
belong to France. And this (...) the Scholar of Polycarpe, auditor of the
Apostles, the^, Demetrius (...) undertook the administration of the Dioceses
belonging to Alexandria, Ibid, c. (...).
and both these at the same time in Commod^'s reign. And that whole Chapur in
Eusebius is but the enumeration of several such Metropolitans by name, who
were all at the same time, of the Church of the Antiochians, S^rap^^n, the
eighth from the Apostles, of the Church of Rome, El^us's successor, Victor; of
(...) (...), or as he phraseth it in the next Chapter, (...), Theophilus; of
the Church in Jerusalem, Nar^^ssas; of the Church of Corinth; (...),
Banchyllus; and of Ephesus, or, as he phraseth it, (...), Polycrates, (...).
(...).
of whom he after says that (...), he was chief as Prime or Ruler of the
Bishops of Asia. In the same manner as afterward, Saint Cyprian Bishop of
Carthage in the Council of Constantinople in Tru^ styled (...) Ca^. 2.
Archbishop of the Region, or Province of Africa, which is, as to the matter of
it, owned by himself, Epist. 40. and 45. where he mentions his Province, and
the extent of it.

Sect. 2.
Of Churches in the p^^ral, and a Church in the singular in the Scripture.

(...). 1. IN pursuit of this matter of Metropolitanes, he proceeds next to
take notice of one observation of mine in these words.

2. To this end he inform^ sect. 2. that in the New Testament there is in
s^ndry places mention ma^e of Church (...) ^umber, a^ Gal. 1. 21. 1 These. 2.
14. Acts 9 35 Act (...) Gal. (...). Rev. 1. 11. sometimes of Church only
(...), as Acts 8. 1, 15. 4. 22. Acts 1. (...). Heb. 16. 1. 1 ^or (...). 2 ^or.
^1. 1. These. 1. 1. Rev. (...). (...), 8, 1^, 18 Now this is (...) beholding to
the Doctor for i^, no mo^e I supp^^ (...) ^^und to be to it, when the reason of
it shall be a li^e w^d ^ed. The sum is, that the name Church, in the sing^r
(...), but where i^ relates to the single congregation, in, or o^ ^e C^^y or
Town: Th^^ of Churches respecting ^he several Church^ Congregations that were
gathered in any Country or Province: Manifest then it is from hence, that there
is in the New Testament, no Church of one denomination beyond (...) single
Congregation: And where there are more, they are alway^s called Churches: How
evidently this is destructive to any Dioce^ Metropolitical Officer, who has no
Church left him thereby of Christ's institution to be related to, another
opportunity will manifest.

3. Here is but one thing done by the Prefacer, a recital of my observation in
the words, just as I set it, that there is in the New Testament mention
sometimes of Churches in the plural, sometimes of a Church in the singular.

4. For this observation he says, he is not beholding to me, and I shall
imitate him thus far in replying, that neither is he the first that has
mistaken it, the London Ministers had done before him just what now he thinks
fit to do. For having duly recited the observation, when he comes to give the
sum of it, that sum is very different from the particulars (just as by the
Page 85.
London. Ministers it had been before) viz. that my observation is, that the
word Church is never used in the singular, but when it relates to a single
congregation.

5. Here I must interpose (as to the London-Ministers I did, and to the Page
86, 87, 88.
Vindication there I refer the Reader for it, and shall here recite it no
farther than only thus) that I only say the word Church was so used in the
singular for the Church of one City, meaning still (as I there express, and I
always do, when I speak of a Citie-Church) with the territory adjoining,
whether again that be a territory of more Cities, when that which is spoken of
is a Metropolis, as many of those which I there mention, were, Corinth, Ephesus
(and all certainly, except Cenchrea, being near unto, and an Haven-City of
Corinth, (...), says Stephanus Byzantinus, (...).) or whether the villages
adjacent, when it is not a Metropolis. But that the word Church in the
singular, is never used but when it thus relates to the single congregation in,
or of one City, Metropolis, or not Metropolis, that I never said, nor thought,
nor was it useful to me to observe o^ suggest any such thing.

6. And so being mistaken in his ground, his inference must also suddenly
vanish, which he affirmed to be so manifest, and so likewise all the advantage,
which when opportunity should serve, he meant to have made of it.

Sect. 3.
The meaning of Provinces. Philippi a Metropolis. Dionysius's Epistle to
Gortyna. Philip Bishop of all the Churches in Creet. (...).

Nu^. 1. FRom the mention of my observation, he goes on to examine the use
which I made of it.

2. For the present (says he) let us see what use our Doctor makes of this
observation

Sect. 3: says he, Ju^ae^, and the rest of the places where Churches are
mentioned, are the names of Provinces, (...), quatenuus ^ae (...)
contradistinguuntur: But if the Doctor takes these words in an Ecclesiastical
sense, he begs that which will upon such unworthy terms never be granted him:
If no more be intended but that Jud^^. Gala^^a, and he like names of Coun^s
were Provinces wherein were many Churches; Smyrna. Ephesus, of Towns and Cities
wherein there was but owe, w^ g^^nt him*

And how much that (...) is to his advantage has been intimated: And this
seems to be his (...) by his following words, Pro^rum inquam, in quibus ^mae
civ^tate^ singu^ singularum Ecclesiarum sede^, (...), ^que Ecclesiae in plurali
istius sive istius Provinci^; well, what then? ^um tamen unaquaeque civitas,
cum territori^ sibi a ju^ct^ ((...)!) ab Episcopo suo administrata, singularis
Ecclesia dicenda sit: Id^^que quod (...) factum dicitur, Acts 14, 15. (...)
(...) jubetur, Tit. 1. 5. tha^ in every City there was a singular Church in
those Provinces, (I speak of those where any number were converted to the
Faith) I g^^n^, for the annexed terri^es le^ the Doctor take care: The^^ bring
one Church at Cor^^h, and another at Cenchrea, So that ev^ry single city had
its own single Church with its Bishop in it, as at ^ppi. The passage mentioned
by the Doctor, conc^rning the Epistle of Dionysius to the Church of Go^^yna in
Crete, is very little to his purpose: Neither does he call Ph^l^p the Bishop of
that Church, the Bishop of all the other Churches in Crete, as the Doctor
intimates; but the Bishop of them to whom especially and eminently he wrote.

3. It being here, as he says, uncertain to him, what I mean, when I say
Judaea, Syria, and the like are Provinces, as they are contra-distinguished
from those which were no more than Dioceses in our mo^erne use of the word,
though I thought I had spoken intelligibly enough before, yet I am most ready
farther to explain my self, That I mean Province in an Ecclesiastic sense,
the several Churches of several Cities (with their territories adjoining to
them) altogether making up one Provincial Church, so styled, as meeting
occasionally, or at set times at the Metropolis in an Assembly ordinarily
called Provincial, in which the Bishop of the Metropolis praesideth, as James
at Jerusalem with the Bishops of all Jud^a joining with him, as I conceive the
model set down both Acts 15. and Rev. 4. 4. by way of visional representation.

4. These several Churches considered by themselves, are each the Church in, or
of such a City, and so each mentioned in the singular number, but being
considered all together, though the d^, wherein they all agree, be in the
singular also. Ju^, Syria, etc. (and accordingly we have in Ignatius the Church
of Syria, both Church and Syria in the singular number) which, as comprehensive
of all the severals in it, I call a Province (as men have generally done before
me) yet the severals so comprehended, are often mentioned in the plural, the
Churches of Judaea, etc. This is the observation, and being, as (...) thought,
evidenced by the instances there made, I did not think it could want farther
proof, or be liable to be censured as that fallacy of begging the question on
such terms, as ^e is pleased to think unworthy.

5. At the present, all that I had there to say in the * Dissertations being
only this, the rendering some reason of that differe^ (...) Dissert. (...).
(...).
of style in Scripture, sometimes the Churches in the plur^ sometimes in the
singular, and that reason being visible, because Judea had many Churches in it,
as many Cities, and C^rea, etc. was but one Church of one City, and the
territory (though perhaps many places of Ecclesiastic assemblies in that ^uit)
this cannot be a begging of more than is made evident. All that I am by him
warned t^ take farther care of, is, the territory, (what cause he had to cry
(...)! at the mention of it, I shall not enquire) which I shall be mindful to
do, when it is in any danger, or need of my care, which as yet it is not,
being no way assaulted by him, and therefore ^ere is at present no place of my
farther solicitude.

6. What he is pleased to interpose of Philippi, its being a single City with
its Bishop in it, he cannot but know, is, as to me, a mere begging of the
question, which just then he had accused in me, some pains being taken in that
Dissertation, cap. 10. to show that those plural Bishops, were not the Bishops
of that one City of Philippi; To which having never offered the least word of
answer, the contrary should not thus have been taken for granted by him.

7. One thing he adds in the close, which was a little unexpected, that the
passage, concerning the Epistle of Dionysi^s to the Church at Gortyna in Crete,
is very little to my purpose, and that neither does he call the Bishop of that
Church, the Bishop of all the other Churches in Cr^. What truth there is in
this suggestion will soon be d^d.

8. And first, these are the words o^ that E^, o^ the (...) of it, in E^ l. 4.
c. (...). Di^us Bishop of Corinth, (...) (this he should not have rendered, to
the Church of Gortyna, but) to the Church adjacent or lying about Gorty^^,
(...), together with the rest of the (...) (the word common to Dioceses and
Provinces) in Crete. The controversy, I perceive, here, is not concerning
(...), what that signifi^^ (but the (...) the rest, how ^arre that extends,
whether to all, or to some to whom he especially and eminently wrote) and so I
shall not need insist on it, else it were easy to show, that signifying
originally, ad^acence of habitation, it belongs indifferently, whether to a
greater or less circuit, a Parish (which word comes from thence) or adjacence
of houses; a Diocese, or adjacence of Parishes to a City; a Province, or
adjacence of Cities (with their territories) to a Metropolis or chief City. And
which of these it signifies at any time, the Context must define.

9. So the Church (...), must here be the whole Province, relating to Go^tyna
the Metropolis of ^rete, and then the (...), can be no other but the rest of
the (Provinces if there were more than one, or else the) Dioceses (as we now
style them) which were in r^te* And then certainly the adding of (...) the
rest, to the mention of that which Gortyna was the Metropolis, must conclude
him to comprehend all the other, beside that, which were in Crete, and Philip,
which is there said to be Bishop (...) of them, in the plural, not only (...)
of that about Gortyna, must needs be concluded Bishop of them all, which he
could not be any other way, then as he was Bishop of the Metropolis, to which
those other related. And then what could be more to my purpose than this, I
confess I know not. Against this there is no word of reason offered, only
it is said that it is not to my purpose -- and so I have nothing to which I can
make reply in this matter.

Sect. 4.
The Original of Metropolitical Churches. Accommodation of the Ecclesiastic to
the Civil distributions. The Bishop of Romes greatness.

Number. 1. THe next thing he is pleased to examine, he calls (I shall not debate
how fitly) my application of the forementioned observation, and from thence he
expects some great advantage.

2. Sect. 4. says he, Application is made of the forementioned observation:
Sect. 2. and the Interpretation given of it, Sect. 3. in these words, His sic
positis, illud statim seq^^tur ut (in Imperii cognitione) in provinci^ qual
b^^, cum plure, Urbes ^int, una tamen primaria and principalis c^nsenda ^rat,
(...) ideo dicta, cui itidem inferiores reliquae civitates subjiciebantur, ^t
^^vitat bus regiones, fic and inter Ecclesias, and Cathedras Episcopales unam
semper primariam and Metropoliticam fuisse.

In this Section the Doctor has most ingenuously and truly given us the ^ise
and occasion of his Diocesan and Metropolitical Praelates, from the aims of
men, to accommodate Ecclesiastical or Church-affaires, to the state and
condition of the civil government, and distributions of Provinces,
Metropolitan Cities, and chief Towns within the several dependencies (the
neighboring villages being cast in as things of no great esteem, to the lot of
the next considerable Town and seat of Judicature) did the Hierarchy, which he
so sedulously contendeth for, arise; what advantage were aff^rded to the work,
by the paucity of believers in the Villages and less Towns (from which at
length the whole body of Hea^henish Idolaters were denominated Pagans) the
first planting of Churches in the greater Cities, the eminence of the Officers
of the first Churches in those Cities, the weakness of many rural Bishops,
the multiplying and growing in numbers and persons, of gifts, abilities, and
considerable fortunes and employments in this world, in the Metropolitan
Cities, with their fame thereby, the tradition of the abode of some one or
other of the Apostles in such Cities and Churches, with the eminent
Accommodation at the administration of civil Jurisdiction and other affairs,
which appeared in that subordination and dependency, whereunto the Provinces,
chief Cities, and territories in the Roman Empire were cast, with which
opportunities Satan got by these means, to introduce their ways, state,
pomp, words, phrases, terms of honor of the world into the Churches;
insensibly getting ground upon them, and prevailing to their dec^ension from
the naked simplicity and purity wherein they were first planted, some other
occasion may give advantage for us to manifest; for the present it may suffice
that it is granted, that the Magnifick Hierarchy of the Church arose from the
accommodation of its state and condition of the Roman Empire and Provinces. And
this in the instances of alter^ages that might be p^oduced, will easily be made
yet fa^ther evident; in those shameful, or indeed rather shameless cont^s,
which fell out among the Bishops of the third Centu^ie, and downward, about
precedence, titles of Honor, ex^^nt of Jurisdiction, Ecclesiastical subjection
to, or exemption from one another, the considerablenesse of their Cities in the
civil state of the Roman Empire where they did reside, was still the m^st
prevalent and cogent argument in their brawles: the most notable brush, that in
all Antiquity we find given to the great Leviathan of Rome, who sported
himself in those gatherings together of the w^ters of people, and multitudes,
and Nations, and Tongues, or the general Councels (as they are called) was
from an a gument taken from theseat of the Empire, being ^ixt at
Con^lantinople, making it become new Rome, so that the Bishop of the Church
there, was to enjoy equal privilege with him, whose lot was ^allen in the old
imperial City.

3. The brief sum of what he there quotes in Latin, is this, that as in the
civil account, the chief City where there are many in a Province, is the
Metro^olis, to which the inferior Cities are subjected (and relate to it, as
the adjacent region to the City) so the chief Church in a Province was by the
Apostles designed (which I hope is far enough from Satan's introducing it) to
be a Metropolitical Church, on which the inferior Churches and their Bishops
depended, and observed concord and unity with it. This the Prefacer looks on,
as a special discovery, and having threatened what some other occasion may give
advantage to manifest, he is not pleased to make any the least objection
against it at this time, or to endeavor to prove that it was not thus, but is
very well satisfied that it is granted, that the Magnifick (as he will style
it) Hierarchy of the Church arose from this accommodation of the Ecclesiastic
to the civil forms of distributions.

4. This indeed, as far as concerns every national Church, which by this
means is best disposed for order and unity within it self, is by me willingly
and profestly granted, and if the reasonableness, that it should do so, do
not competently vindicate it, yet supposing (as the discourse there does) that
the Apostles themselves did generally so design it in every region, I hope
there will lie no charge against it; And if farther then so, the observing of
it proved useful, as he says it did, to the reducing the Bishop of Rome to
some moderate terms, equalling another Bishop to him, when the Empire was
removed to another seat, I know not still, why this should be such a
disobligation to the Prefacer, who will hardly be able to give any more
moderate or less Popish account of the immense greatness which that Bishop by
prescription of some number of years did challenge, than this of the Imperial
seat having been fixed at Rome, and these privileges accruing to him by that
means, and not by any investiture from Christ, by succession to Saint Peter,
as they plead, nor by appointment of the Apostles in their first plantations,
which now we speak of.

5. I have elsewhere spoken on this subject in the tract of Schism, in the
latter part of Chap. 3. and to the London Ministers, cap. 1. sect. 16. and
there briefly showed the reasonableness of it. And here being yet nothing but
promises of objections against it, it may suffice that I defer the answering
them, till they be produced.

Sect. 5.
The Grounds of the Apostles instituting Metropoles. The frame of Heathen
Governments, and the patterns among the Jews, civil, and sacred.

N^. 1. NExt he proceeds to that which I add, as an image of this model in the
Church, taken from Gods direction to Moses for the government of the Jews,
thus,

2. B^u Doctor adds, Sect* 5. Illud ^x Jud^^rum exemplari transcripsisse
Apostol^ vid^mur, cum Mo a^ a id lege caut^m ess^t, ut Judi^es and ministri^
qual^b^t civ^ta^e ordina^ur, Deuteronomy. 16. 18. ill^ v^ebus dabi^s ad Ju^ ^cem
(M^fis su^ss^m) ^^nedrio Hi^rosolym tano cinctum recurre^e ^ntur, Cap. 17. 9
an^ in S^ct. 6. ^e p^ov^s Jerusalem to have been the M^s of the N^ion, Eg ^gia^
v^o laudem! But

1. The D^ presume knows bef^e this* that those with whom he has to (...)
give him he thing in question upon his begging, or request (...) consideration
and inquiry is, whether the Ap^ any such model of Church order and
Government* as is by the Doctor contended for; to this he tells you, that the
Apostles seem to have done it, from the pattern of Mosaical institutions in
the Church of the Jews; But, Doctor, the question is not, with what respect
they did it, but whether they did it at all or no? This the Doctor thought good
to let alone till another time, if we would not grant him upon his petition,
that so they did.

2. This then is the Doctors second argument for his Diocesan and Metropolitan
Prelates. His first was, from the example of the Heathers, in their civil
administrations and rule, this second from the example of the Jews Not to
divert into the handling of the Church and Political state of the Jews, as
appointed by God, no^ that dissonancie that is between the institution of civil
Magistrates, and Evangelicall administrations, this is the sum of the Doctors
reasoning, in his 5, 6, 7, and 8. Sections God in the Church and among the
people of the Jews, chose out one City to place his name there, making it the
place where all the types and ceremonies which he had appointed for the
discovery and shadowing forth of the Lord Jesus Christ, were visibly and
gloriously to be managed, acted, and (...) forth (^undry of them being such, as
whose Typicalnesse would have been destroyed by their muliplication) and
principally on this accoun^ing that place or City (which was first S^) the seat
of the Kingdom, or habitation of the chief ruler, for the administration of
Justice, who appointed Judges in all the Land, for the good and peace of the
people, therefore the Churches of Jesus Christ, disposed over the face of the
whole world, freed from obligations to Cities of Mountains, walling before
God, in, and with a pure and spiritual worship, having no one reason of that
former institution, in common with the Church of the Jews, must be cast into
the same mould and figure; I hope without offense I may take leave to deny the
consequence, and what more I have to say to this argument I shall yet defer*

3. One great fallacy I am here charged to be guilty of, (but having been often
accused of this very crime, I yet never had the ill luck to be convict by him)
that I beg the question again, which, says he, is only this, Whether the
Apostles institutea any such order, or no?

4. But can this be a begging the question, when Sect. 9. of that Chapter, I
expressly undertake to prove that the Apostles did institute such model, and
when he himself in the very next paragraph, expressly confesses that I proceed
to prove it.

5. Can that be said to be begged, which is undertaken to be proved, and the
proofs as yet not so much as considered by him, and so certainly not
invalidated? Or can a man be bound to prove his assertion, before he has
explained what he means by it, or upon what grounds of credibility he affirms
it?

6. That which I do in that Chapter may analytically be divided into two
parts, 1. the grounds upon which (...) conceive the Apostles thus modeled the
Church, and secondly; the proofs or testimonies by which I manifest that they
did so. The question in hand being a matter of fact, whether or no the Apostles
instituted Metropolitical Churches, etc. that was to be proved or disproved
only by testimonies, and if that be not attempted to be done, but taken for
granted, that were indeed a begging of the question, but a due place being
reserved for that in the latter part of the Chapter, I conceive it no breach of
the Laws of discourse, owned and exemplified by artists, first to render the
assertion credible, by proposing the grounds upon which I conceive they did it.

7. And those grounds were of two sorts, 1 The known frame of the Heathen
Governments, where they came to plant the Gospel, and by attending to which
they should plant it more advantagiously, and then what Nazianzen says of
Julian, that it was in him a wise but a wicked policy, for the reducing
Heathenisme among Christians to appoint the heathen Priests to make use of the
Christian observances, may be very credible, as an act of Divine policy in the
Apostles, to make their advantage for the propagating and preserving the Faith,
by observing and not going contrary to the civil distributions, which they
should meet with among the Heathens.

8. Secondly, The patterns of this among the Jews, and those we know, the
more considerable in this, because they were there instituted by God himself,
and because many other observances in Christianity are by Christ and the
Apostles visibly accommodated from the Jews. And again there are two of those
patterns, one in their civil managerie, Judges and Officers in every City,
Deuteronomy. 16. 18. and Moses in matters of higher concernment and difficulty with
(...) San^^d^im at Jerusalem; and the other in their Ecelesiastical, the three
families of the Levites, separated for the sacred offices, a (...) or chief
over them, Number. 3. 24. and over them Eleazer the Son of Aaron the (...), the
chief of the chiefes of the Levites. And the advantages of order, and unity,
and due administration of Justice, which recommended those forms among the
Jews, were all fit to be taken care of, and consequently were so many motives
to induce the Apostles to copy them out under the New Testament, and to observe
the like uniformity in all their Plantations.

9. And these grounds being thus laid as a foundation, to support and fit the
building, which in the remainder of the Chapter was regularly, i. e. by
testimony of the Scripture and the Ancient Church, superstructed on it, I
cannot guess, what I could otherwise have done in respect of the Method, than
what was there designed by me And truly if I did, let the proof of the fact
alone, as he says, till another time, as long as that other time was so near
at hand, in the same Chapter, in the very next Section after the setting down
(...) exemplar^ among the Jews, I cannot yet discern how I have ^nd^ in it.
No man can do two things at once, and I was free to choose my own Method, as
long as (...) neither omitted nor put off (as the Prefacer has often done, and
so now again in the last words of this Paragraph he does) to some other
occasion, that which was so necessary to be proved there.

10. As for his summarie account of my discourse again, it is very much varied
from that, which those four Sections yield, which is no more than this, that
as by Gods appointment to Moses, there were many inferior and one superior
^ourt; many in the several Cities of Judea, and one at Jerusalem, to which the
inferior related, as the Mother and prime; and as in the Temple about the
Levites there were heads of the Levites, and heads of those heads, so it would
be ^ctly parallel in the Apostles to institute Bishops in every City Church,
and Metropolitanes in the chief Cities, which as it is no argument at all to
prove the matter of tact, that indeed it was so, nor by me designed for such,
proposed only as an exemplar or parallel, not as a proof, and accordingly
induced with [ad hanc imaginem, after this image] Sect. 9. an [as] and [so] not
a [therefore] (and so there was no consequence in it capable of being denied so
again such as it was it very much differed from that which is here set down
in Italick letters, as if it were the English of my Sections (which, again,
were never set down in English, till now that this advantage might be gained
by it.)

11. This manner of dealing, what it imports I shall not judge, but leave the
Prefacer to pass his own animadversions on it.

Sect. 6.
Of Antioch the Metropolis of Syria, Acts 15. What the dependence of Inferior
Churches to their Metropolis. The reference to Jerusalem made by the Church of
Antioch. The decrees delivered to other Churches. Jerusalem the grand
Metropolis. Philos Testimony. Ignatius Pastor, Bishop of Syria. The Epistle to
the Antiochians. A Testimony thence.

Nu^. 1. NOw then he proceeds to the examination of my proofs, (If it might
have been foreseen that there were any such, the last Paragraph might certainly
have been spared.)

2. But, says he, the Doctor proceeds to prove, that indeed the Apostles did
dispose of the Churches in this frame and o^de, according to the pattern of
the civil government of the Roman Empire, and that instituted of God among the
Jews. The ninth section, wherein he attempts the proof of this assertion, is
as follows.

Ad hanc imaginem, Apostolo^ Ecclesias ubique disponendas curasse, and in
omnbus plantationibus su^, minorum ab ^m^ioribus civitatibus dependentiam and
subordinationem constituisse exemplis quidem plurimi^ monstrari possit, illud
in Syria and Cilicia patet Act. 6. 4 cu^ ^nim (...) illud c. 15. 2.
Hierosolymas referr^tur ab Ecclesia (...) Antiochi^, Cap. 14 26 and 15. 3. and
de^ etum ab Apostolis d^o ad eos mitteretur v. 22. in Epistola qua decretum
illud co^tin^batu^, ^imul cum Antiochensibus, (...) comprehensos videmus v. 23.
De^ Epistola (...) Antioch^ Eccle^i^ reddita v. 30. Paul^s tandem and Sylas
Syriam and Cili^iam peragr^tes v. 41. c. 16. 4. (...) singulis civitatibus
observanda tradiderunt, ut quae ad hanc Antiochiae Metropolin, ut ^^tidem
subordina^^ Ecclesiae pertinerent, ut and ipsa Antiochia ad Hieros^ly^as,
primariam tam latae (ut ex Ph^lone p aediximus) Provinciae Metropolin
pertinebat, and ad ^am, ad ^imen^am litem istam, se conferebat.

This being all that the Doctor has to produce from the Scripture to his
purpose in hand, I have transcribed it at large; for this being removed, all
that follows, will fall of its own accord

1. Then, the dependence on, and subordination of lesser cities to the greater,
is asserted ^s an Apostolical institution; Now because I suppose the Doctor
will not assert, nor does intend a civil dependence, and subordination of
Cities, as such, among themselves, nor will a dependence as to counsel,
advice, assistance, and the like supplies, which in their mutual communion, the
lesser Churches might receive from the greater and more eminent, serve his
turn: but an Ecclesiastical dependence and subordination, such as whereby many
particular Churches, with Inferior Officers residing in them, and with them,
depended on, and were in subj^ction to some one person of a superior order,
commonly residing in some eminent City, and many of these Governors of a
superior order in the greater Cities were in subordination unto some one of
high degree, termed a Metropoli^a^. and all this by Apostolical institution is
that which he aymeth a^, which being a most gallant adventu (...), (...) a
waking generation, we shall doubtless find him quitting himself ^^ke a man in
his undertaking.

2. Then he tells you that the question ab^ut Mosaicall Rites, and necessity of
their observation, was reffered to Jerusalem by the single Church of Antioch.
But how does the Doctor make good this first step, which y^ if he could, would
do him no good a^all? It is true, that Paul was now come to Antioch, Chapter 14.
26. and a^ that he was brought on his way by the Church Chap. 15. 3. Bu^ ye^
that he breath (...) who were t^ug^t the Doctrine contested about, v. (...).
were only of the Church of Antioch (when it is most certain from the Ep^s of
Paul to the Galatians, Colo^^ians, Romans, and others, that great disturbance
was raised fa^ and wide, in all the Churches of the Gentiles about this
con^ve^sy) no ^ing is offered. It seems indeed that their disputes grew to the
greatest heights at Antioch, whither brethren from other parts and Churches did
also come, whilst Barnabas and Paul abode the^e, but that tha^ single Church
^e^erred the determining of that controversy, to them at Jerusalem,
exclusively to others, the Doctor proves not. And it is most evident, from the
return of the answers sent by the Apostles from Jerusalem, ver. 23. that the
reference was from all the Churches of the Gentiles, yea and all the scattered
brethren, perhaps as yet not brought into the Church order not only at
Antioch, but also throughout Sy^a and Cilicia. It is then granted what he next
observes, viz. that in the answer returned from Jerusalem, with them at
Antioch, those in Syria and Cilicia are joined, the reason of it being
manifest, namely their trouble about the same controversy, being no less than
theirs at Antioch. It is also granted, that as Paul passed through the Cities,
that he delivered them the decrees to keep, that were ordained by the Apostles
and Elders, cap. 16. 4. and that not only to the Churches of Syria, and
Cilicia, which he left cap. 15. 41. but also to those throughout Phrygia, and
the regio^s of Gal^tia, ver 6. What now follows out of all this? What? but that
Antioch by Apostolical institution was the Metropolitan See of all the Churches
of Syria and Cilicia. Good Doctor do not be angry* but tell us how this may be
proved. Why doubtless it was so; as Antioch belonged to the Metropolitan
Church at Jerusalem, as he ^old us out of Philo (who was excellently acquainted
with Apostolical institutions) what Jerusalem was to the whole Church and
Nation of the Jews, while the name of God was fixed there, we know* But what
was the primitive estate of the Churches of Jesus Christ, made of Jews and
Gentiles, tied neither to City, or Mountain, I must be pardoned if I cannot
find the Doctor making any tender of manifesting or declaring. The reasons of
referring this controversy unto a determination at Jerusalem, the Holy Ghost
acquaints us with Act. 15. 2. That we have no need of this Metropolitical
^igment, to inform us in it. And now if we will not, not only submit to
Diocesan Bishops, but also reverence the grave Metropolitans, standing upon
such clear Apostolical institution, It is fit that all the world should count
us the arrantest Schismatics that ever lived since Pope Boniface his time. The
sum then of this doubty argument for the Apostolical institution of
Metropolitans (that none might ever more dare to call Diocesans into question
hereafter) is this; Paul who was converted about the third or fourth year of
Caligula, five or six years after the ascension of Christ, having with great
success for three years preached the Gospel, went up to Jerusalem with
Barnabas, upon the persecution raised against him at Dam^scus, Act. 9. 22.
whence returning to the work, he went first to Tarsus, Act. 9. 30. thence to
Antioch, where he abode one whole year, Act. 11. 25. 26. and was then sent to
Jerusalem with the collections for the Saints, about the fourth year of
Claudius, ver. 30. thence returning again to Antioch, he was sent out by the
command of the Holy Ghost more eminently, and peculiarly than formerly for the
conversion of the G^^tile^, Act. 13. 1, 2, 3* in this undertaking in the space
of a year or two, he preached and gathered Churches (whereof express mention
is made) at Salamis, Act. 13. 5. in the Isle of Paphos, ver. 6. at Perga in
Pamphylia ver. 13. at Antioch in Pisidia, ver. 14. a^ Ico^ium, cap. 14. 1. at
Ly^tra and Derbe, ver. 6. and at Perga 26. in all these places gathering some
believers to Christ, whom before they returned to Antioch, he visited all over
the second time, and settled Elders in the several congregations, Chap. 14 21,
22, 23. in this journey and travel for the propagation of the Gospel, he seems
in all places to have been followed almost at the heels, by the prosessing
Pharisees, who imposed the necessity of the observation of Mosaical Ceremonies
upon his new Converts; for instantly upon his return to Antioch, where during
his absence, probably they had much prevailed, he falls into dispute with them,
Chap. 15. 1. and that he was not concer'd in this controversy, only upon the
account of the Church of Antioch, himself informs us, Gal. 2. 4. affirming
that the false brethren, which caused those disputes and dissensions, crept in
to spy out his liberty, in his preaching the Gospel among the Gentiles, ver.
2. that is in the places before mentioned, throughout a great part of Asia. For
the appeasing of this difference, and the establishing of the Souls of the
Disciples, which were grievously perplexed with the imposition of the Mosaical
yoke, It is determined that the case should be resolved by the Apostles, Act.
15. 2. partly because of their authority in all the Churches, wherein those,
who contended with Paul, would be compelled to acquiesce, and partly because
those Judai^ing teachers pretended the commission of the Apostles for the
Doctrine they preached, as is evident from the disclaimu^e made by them, of any
such commission or command, ver. 24. Upon Paul's return from the assembly at
Jerusalem, wherein the great controversy about Jewish Ceremonies was stated
and determined, after he had in the first place delivered the decree and
Apostolical salutation by Epistle to the Church at Antioch, he goes with them
also to the Churches in Syria and Cilicia, ^xpressed in the letter by name, as
also to those in Pamphilia, Pisi^ia, Derb^; Lystra, Iconium, etc. Ch^p. 16. 1,
2, 3, 4. and all the Churches which he had gathered and planted in his ^ravels
through Asia, whereunto he was commanded by the Holy Ghost, Act. 13. 1, 2.
Things being thus stated, it necessarily follows, that the Apostles had
instituted Diocesan and Metropolitan Bishops. For though the Churches were so
small, and thin, and few in number, that seven years after this, may we
believe our Doctor, the Apostles had not instituted or appointed any Elders or
Presbyters in them, viz. When Paul wrote his Epistle to the Philippians, which
was when he was Prisoner at Rome, as appears, cap. 1. 7, 13, 14. cap. 4. 22.
about the third year of N^ro, yet that he had fully built and settled the
Hierarchicall fabric contended for, who once dares question? Audacia --
Creditur a multis ^iducia.


But if this will not do, yet Ignatius hits the nail on the head, and is
ready at hand to make good whatsoever the Doctor will have him say, and his
testimony takes up the sense of the two n^xt following Sections, whereof the
first is as follows.

Hinc dicti Ig^atiani ratio constat in Epistola ad Romanos, ubi ille Antiochia
Ep^scopus se (...), past^^em Eccl^siae quae ^st in Syria app^lle^ ^um ad
Antiochiam, s^il. ut ad Me^opolin su^m tota Syria pertineret. Sic and Author
Epistolae ad Antio^he^os (...) came i^scrib^^s, totam ^yriam ^jus (...) esse
conclud^t.

But yet I fear the Doctor will find he has need of other weapons, and other
manner of Assistance to make good the cause he has undertaken. The words of
Ignatius in that Epi^^^e to the R^mans (...) (...): Because he recommen^s to
them that particular Church in Syria, which by his imprisonment was deprived of
its Pastor therefore without doubt he was a Metropolitical Archbishop. Tity^e
tu p^ etc.

But the Doctor is resolved to car^y his caus^, and therefore being forsaken of
all fair and honest means, from whence he might hope for assistance or
success^, he tryes (as Saul the wi^ch at En^^^) the counterfeit, s^ious title,
of a counterfeit Epistle to the Antiochians, to see if tha^ will speak any
comfor^able words, for his relief or no. And to make sure work, he causes this
Gentleman so to speak, as if he intended to make us believe that Syria was in
Antioch, not Anti^ch in Syria, as in some remote p^rts of ^he world, they say
they inquire whether London be in England, or England in London, What other
sense can be made of the words as by the Doctor transcribed? (...), To the
Church of God dwelling in Syria which is in A^tioch: now if thi^ be so, I shall
confess it is possible we may b^ in more errors than one, and that we much
w^nt the learned Doctors assistance for o^r information; the words themselves,
as they are used by the worship^ull writer of that Epistle, will sca^ce furnish
us with this learned and ra^e notion, they are at length, (...) (for so he
^i^st opens his mouth with a lie) (...), What is here more expressed, than that
the l^tter passage is ^est^^ct^ve of what went before, was spoken of its
^esidence i^ Sy^i^, wi^^ reference to the name of Christian, first given to the
D^sciples in the place, I know not; and therefore it is most certain that the
Apostles in st^uted Metr^politan Archbishops, (...).

3. The large transcripts of the Latin sections being the foundation of his
whole ensuing discourses, it is a little necessary they should be made
intelligible to all, to whom the confutation of them is addressed: This I shall
be content to do for him; and the plain English is this.

4. According to the image of the civil government among the Jews, and the
like again in their Temple (forementioned) the Apostles appear to have
disposed of Churches every where, and in all their plantations to have
constituted a subordination and dependence of the Churches in the infer^r
Cities, to those in the Chief or Metropoles. An example of th^^ we have in the
story of the Acts, concerning Syria and Ci^^cia, and the several Cities
thereof, in relation to A^tioch t^^ Metropolis, For when the question Act. 15.
2. was referred and brought to Jerusalem from the Church (peculiarly) of
Antioch. ^ap. 14. 26. and 15 3. and the decree of the Council returned to them
by whom the question was proposed, i. e. to the Church of Antioch, ver. 22. yet
in the Epistle in which that decree was contained, we find the brethren
through Syria and Cil^cia, i. e. all the Christians of that Province, to be
express^d and joined with those of Antioch, ver. 23. And after, when that
Decretal Epistle was delivered to the Church of Anti^ch, ver. 30. Paul and
Sylas went over Syria and Cilicia, ver. 41, 42. and as they went, they
delivered to every City the Decrees of the Council, c. 16. 4. which is an
evidence, that the Churches of those Cities, related either immediately to
Antioch, or, as Antioch it self did to Jerusalem, and were in subordination to
it, as to the principal Metropolis, of so wide a Provinc^, according to that of
Philo, that Jerusalem was in his time the Metropolis not of Judea alone, but of
many other regions, in respect of the Colonies, which is sent out of the Jews
that dwelt in the^, naming Syria and Cilicia and diverse others.

5. What is here said, may be divided into two branches, one concerning the
Cities of Syria as relating to Antioch, the other concerning Antioch it self
and other Cities, relating to Jerusalem: The latter is mentioned incidentally;
the former is it, which was proposed for the example to testify the Apostles
distributions, and the plain story of the Acts seemed to me to manifest it
fully, that the Churches of the inferior Cities of Syria etc. related to
Antioch as to the Metropolis; And the matter also being farther clear by all
Ecclesiastic writers, which make Antioch the Metropolis of Syria, I gave a
taste thereof out of Ignatius's Epistle to the Romans, who being the known
Bishop of Antioch, settled there by the Apostles, calls himself Pastor (as
elsewhere Bishop of the Church in Syria. And so the Ancient writer of the
Epistle to the Antiochians under Ignatius's name, (but none of those which we
receive from Polycarps collection) has these words in his inscription. (...)*
to the Church of God which is at Antioch, lying together in Syria, making Syria
to be the (...) or Province, of which Antioch was the Metropolis.

6. The same is after manifested of other chief Cit^es, Rome, Alexandria,
Gortyna in Crete, and the seven Churches of Asia, and the plain words of the
three Councels forementioned, which devolve the whole business o^ the rights
of Metropoles to their first plantations. And of all these there is not one
word replied, save only what concerns Rome and Alexandria. To those two, we
shall come in the next Section, But in this I am to consider what he has to
object to the severa^ proofs concerning the Church of Antioch, being as I
conceive it manifest, a Metropoliticall Church in the Apostles times.

7. And first it seems I must define, what I mean by this dependence and
subordination of inferior Churches to their Metropolis. And I shall do it, in
my own words, not in his, for they are very obscure, 1. I mean by inferior
Churches, the several Churches in the several lesser Cities with the region
adjoining, administered and governed each of them by the Bishop of each such
lesser City-Church, and his officers under him. 2. By the Metropolis, I mean
the Church of the chief City of that Region or Province, and such, say I, was
the Church of Antioch in respect of Syria. 3. By the subordination and
dependence of the inferior to the Metropolis, I mean not any inferiority of
order and dignity, nor a dependence only as to counsel and advice and mutual
Communion, but an inferiority of power in many things, which the Apostles left
not to the Bishops of the inferior Cities, but reserved to the Metropolitanes.
To this purpose the 34th. Apostolic Canon is clear, (...), the Bishops of
every Nation must know their Primate, ((...), says Zonaras) and account him as
the head of them, and the powers that thus belong to him, are known in the
ancient Councels by the title of (...) privileges and praeeminencie^, which are
proper to such, and for which even immemorial and Apostolical tradition and
custom is vouched by them. Such as receiving accusations against, and appeals
from inferior Bishops, ordeining of them, as Titu^ is appointed to do through
Crete, and as the sixth Canon of Nice says, that he that is made Bishop
without the Metropolitan, shall not be deemed a Bishop; For this I again
refer the Reader to the Discourse of Schism^, page 60. etc. and there to that
ninth Canon of the Council of An^ioch, the same in effect with the 34th.
Apostolical ^anon forementioned, where the Bishops of inferior Cities are
interdicted doing, without the Metropolitan, any thing which is there styled
(...), i. e. (as is there explained) where in more Churches than one are
concerned equally; The Bishops power extending to the administration of
affairs in his own Diocese, (...), whatsoever belongs to his Diocese, say
both those Canons, but things of a more foreign nature, which belong not to
the particular Bishop, ratione officii, (...), which respect the common state
of the Church (as Zonoras interprets (...)) being reserved and perteining to
the care of the Metropolitan.

8. This, I suppose, sufficiently expresses, what subordination I mean, the
very same which the most Ancient Canons of the Universal Church express to be
due from the Bishop to the Metropolitan, and then I shall not trouble my self
to inquire what he means by [some eminent Cities, and, Governors of a superior
order in greater Cities] which I should have thought had been Metropoles and
Metropolitans, had I not found them all placed by him in subordination to some
one of high degree termed a Metropolitan.] And by that Character being assured,
that by the former he must mean no more but Bishops of inferior Cities, I must
be content not to understand the mystery, why they should yet be styled
eminent and greater Cities, and so briefly pass to the next thing.

9. Secondly then, he will examine my plea from that passage in the Acts, cap.
15. and the thing he dislikes is my mak^ng the question sent for resolution to
Jerusalem, to be referred to them by the single Church of Antioch. This, ^aith
he, (...) do not prove, though if I could prove it, it would do me no good at
all. And yet, to see, in the process of the discourse, he severally grants all
the rest, And only desires me not to be angry, but to prove that Antioch by
Apostolical institution was the Metropolitan See of all the Churches of Syria
and Cilicia, which is in effect to deny, or bid me prove the conclusion,
without offering to deny above one proposition, which therefore, I must assume,
will, if it be proved, infer the conclusion, and so do me all the good,
which I pretend to expect from it.

10. Now truly, that this question thus referred to Jerusalem, was at this
time, Act. 15. 1. referred to it, by the single Church of Antioch (but that as
Metropolis of all Syria) I thought sufficiently proved by the text it self
first cited, cap. 14. 26. and 15. 3. In the former of these places, the
Apostles were come to Antioch, as that signifies Antioch the great (to
difference it from another City of that name, v. 21. the same which is by
Pliny placed in Pisidia, as here also it is, ver. 24.) that City peculiatly
where the Scripture says they were first called Christians, and whereof
Euodius and Ignatius were constituted Bishops by Peter and Paul, one of the
Jewish, the other of the Gentile Christians. And being there they gathered the
Church together, ver. 17. that I suppose to be the Church of the City of
Antioch, (or if any more, those certainly as some way relating and subordinate
to Antioch, which again inferres Antioch to be their Metropolis) Then of
Antioch it follows that there they abod^, v. 28. And then cap 15. (...).
certain men, which came down from Judea, infused the Iudaical ritual doctrine
into the brethren, who are those but the Christians of Antioch, where then they
were? And upon the dispute had with those Iudai^^rs, v. 2. they determined,
that sure must still be the Church of Antioch peculiarly, that Paul and
Barnabas should go to Jerusalem about this question, and then ver. (...). they
are brought on their way by the Church, What Church is this still, but the
Church cap. 14. 27. i. e. the Church of Antioch?

11. This was my way of proof (designed to lay the foundation of that argument
of Antioch's being the Metropolitical See) that this question was referred to
Jerusalem from the Church peculiarly of Antioch. And I must hereby think it
competently proved, unless some weak part be discovered in it, or some
absurdity or repugnancy be objected to it; None of which, I see, is here done.

12. For 1. as to that which is offered at, by his saying that I have not
proved that the brethren that taught the doctrine contested about, ver. 1. were
only of the Church of Antioch, sure that is of no force. For as I doubt not
but the same doctrine might be, and was infused into many others in Galatia,
Colosse, yea, and Rome it self, as he truly ^aith, and never conceived that
the poison was confined to, or enclosed within Antioch, so all that is needful
to my ^ur^e, is this, that at this point of time noted Acts 15. 1. the
Iudaizers pretensions were solicited at Antioth, and that on that particular
occasion of the dispute between Paul and them, the question was by them
peculiarly referred to Jerusalem. And that sure might be done by them alone,
though others far distant as well as they, either at that or some other time
were disturbed with the like scruples.

13. That which the Prefacer here confesses, that the disputes grew to the
greatest height in Antioch, is a very sufficient account in this matter, why
Antioch peculiarly should send up to Jerusalem about this question, when
others, who were not so much concerned in it, did not do so; And moreover the
convenience of such Messengers, Paul and Barnabas, who could say so much, from
the success they had had among the Gentiles toward the deciding of the
question, might both qualify and incite them to do it, rather than any others
at this time; And so still there is more reason why I should conceive the
question referred to Jerusalem, peculiarly or alone by Antioch (and not so by
Colosse, or Rome, or Galatia) and no appearance of any thing yet produced to
the contrary.

14. Secondly, He adds, then to Antioch brethren from other parts and Churches
also came, whilst Paul and Barnabas abode g^ere. To what purpose this is urged
by him I know not, but this I know, that there is no mention in that story of
any such, but only of those which ver. 1. came from Judea, and taught the
necessity of Iudaizing. And of them it is not probable that they joined with the
Antiochians to refer the question to Jerusalem, or if they did, I am sure the
Decretal Epistle from the Council was not addressed to them, but to the Gentile
Christians ver. 19. 23. and takes no other notice of them, than as of seducers
ver. 24. And so still it appears not of any, that they thus referred the
question, but only of the Antiochians.

15. Thirdly, Whereas he concludes it most evident from the Councel's answer,
ver. 23. that the reference is made from all the Churches of the Gentiles, if
he mean it of all other Gentile Churches, beside Syria, and Cilicia, as
Phrygia, Galatia etc. Which he after mentions, and Rome, and Colosse, which
before he had mentioned, there is no appearance of truth in it, the text saying
expressly, that it was sent to the brethren of the Gentiles in Antioch, and
Syria, and Cilicia; But if he means it of all not absolutely, but all of Syria
and Cilicia, and not only of Antioch, then as that is the very thing observed
by me, to prove that Antioch was the Metropolis of Syria and Cilicia, so
certainly it is far from evidencing the contrary. I grant, nay, I make it
matter of observation, that when the Question was sent to Jerusalem by Antioch
peculiarly, the Decretal Answer of the Council is addressed, not only to
Antioch, but also to all the Christains of Syria and Cilicia, and what reason
can there be for that, when the Question was not, as far as appears,
proposed by them, but only this, that those Regions depended on, and related
to that Church, from which the Question was sent, i. e. to Antioch; which if it
be but possible (much more, if by other evidence, that out of Ignatius, it be
proved to be more than possible, even perfectly true) it must thence follow,
that the argument drawn from the Council's answer being addressed to Syria and
Cilicia, as well as to Antioch, will no way conclude that the Question was
referred by all those, when the Text, which is the only ground of affirming
ought in this matter, mentions none but the Church of Antioch in the referring
of the question, and this other reason is so ready at hand, for the mention of
more, in their giving answer to it.

16. Fourthly: Whereas he adds, that the Apostles delivered these Decrees, not
only to the Churches of Syria and Cilicia, which Paul left, c. 15. 41. but
also to those throughout Phrygia, and the Regions of Galatia, ver. 6. 1. it is
no where said, that they did so in Phrygia, and the regions of Galatia; for the
mention of the delivering the Decrees being ver. 4. no way belongs to Phrygia
and Galatia, which are not mentioned till ver. 6. nor can be farther extended
than to D^rle and Lystra forementioned ver. 1. which we know were Cities of
Lycaonia, Act. 14 6. and neither of Phrygia nor Galatia. Nay, 2. it is not
necessary, that the delivering of the Decrees mentioned chap. 16. 4. should
belong to all the Cities which had by that time been mentioned: S^. Lak^'s
words will be true, that as they went through the Cities they delivered them
the Decrees to keep] though it should be affirmed, that they delivered them
only to the Churches of Syria and Cilicia, which they are said to confirm
cap. 15. 41. as here to establish in the Faith, cap. 16. 5. But these two
things having been said only (...), to show how far the Prefacer is from
speaking demonstratively, when he is censuring others for want of that. In the
third place, I shall acknowledge it very possible, and most probable, that St.
Paul did deliver these Decrees of Jerusalem to other Churches beyond Syria and
Cilicia, where he came, particularly to the Churches of Lycaonia, Derbe and
Lystra, yea, and to the Churches of Phrygia and Galatia, which no way disturbs
my pretensions, because as Paul that planted those Churches might reasonably
have care to uphold them in the truth, so in the latitude of Philo's speech,
all these, even Phrygia and Galatia also, in respect of the Jewish inhabitants
dispersed among them, might in the secular account refer to Jerusalem as their
grand Metropolis.

17. For so says Philo, it was the Metropolis of most, whither it had sent
Colonies, naming Egypt, Phoenice, Syria, and Coelosyria, and (...) others
far distant, Pamphylia, Cilicia, and a great deal of Asia as far as Bithynia
and Pontus (and Lycaonia, etc. are sure within this distance, nearer to
Jerusalem than some here named) and then by the contemperation we speak of, of
the Ecclesiastic to the Civil distributions, why should not they all relate to
the Metropolitical Church at Jerusalem also?

18. And St. Paul's delivering them these (...), decrees to keep, and doing it
not upon his own authority, as his (...), his private Apostolical judgment,
but as (...), judged, and conciliarly determined by the Council at Jerusalem,
this sure is an evidence that St. Paul, that planted these Churches, set them
in subordination to, and dependence on the grand Metropolis of those parts,
that at Jerusalem: Which is the thing I was to prove, that these distributions
were made by the Apostles, that planted Christianity.

19. But then it must still be remembered, that the Cities of Lycaonia and
Phrygia, and Galatia were not named in the Councils Epistle, but only Syria
and Cilicia, and accordingly this of c. 16. 4. is no proof, I acknowledge, that
these Churches did belong, and were subordinate to Antioch: That was to be
proved not by this passage c. 16. 4. (thus understood) but from the inscription
of the response of the Council to the brethren of Antioch, and Syria, and
Cilicia, as it was before explained and cleared, and farther from Ignatius his
styling himself Pastor of Syria, who, we know, was no otherwise so, than as he
was Bishop of Antioch, the Metropolis of Syria. And so still I hope the
conclusion now regularly follows out of these premises, there shortly set
down, but here more largely evidenced to infer, that Antioch was by
Apostolical institution the Metropolitan See of all the Churches of Syria, and
Cilicia. And so sure I have no temptation to be angry, nor ever discovered any
part of that passion to the Prefacer, and so needed not have been besought, so
affectionately, not to fall into it at this time, when there is no rub in my
way, no difficulty to oppose, or provoke the least degree of it, in the most
ragefull.

20. What follows by way of scoff at the citation from Philo, as if I took him
for a person well acquainted with Apostolical Institutions, might also, as now
appears, very well have been spared. I had brought in that Testimony
seasonably enough sect. 6. when I was speaking of the exemplar among the Jews,
and by it showed that Jerusalem was the Metropolis to all those regions in the
Jewish account, and now all that I concluded in reference to that citation,
was, that Antioch was in the number, and then the appeal which Antioch made to
the Council at Jerusalem (and not the Testimony of Philo) was the argument on
which I inferred the Conclusion, that the Church of Antioch was now subordinate
to the Church or Council at Jerusalem (which if it were, must be by the
Apostles institution) as all Syria in Philo was to the S^nhedrim at Jerusalem.

21. To which I shall now farther add: If it were not so, why did the Church
send up Paul and Barnabas thither? Why did not Paul, who planted Christianity
there, finally determine the controversy? Why did the (...) or Elder^,
whosoever they were (the Bishops of Iudaea, I suppose, but it will be much more
strange, if they were but the Presbyters of Jerusalem) join with the Apostles
in making Decrees, whereby those of Antioch, and all through Syria should be
bound, if all this while the Church of Jerusalem were not their Metropolis, and
so had no manner of power over them?

22. As to that which he says, that the Holy Ghost, Acts 15. 2. acquaints us
with the reasons of referring this controversy to a determination at
Jerusalem, so that he has no need of this (as he will style it) Metropolitical
figment, to inform him in it. I confess I cannot reach him in it, for all
that that verse informs us, is, that upon occasion of that dispute between
Paul and Barnabas on the one side, and the Iudaizers that came from Iudaea, on
the other side, the Church determined to send up to Jerusalem about this
Question. This only informs us of the occasion of referring the question,
whereon there was (...), no small dispute, such, as it seems, they could not so
convincingly decide within themselves, but this renders no account, why they
sent and referred it to Jerusalem peculiarly, and not to any other Church,
unless we here suppose, as I do, that Jerusalem was looked upon as their Mother
Church.

23. What reason it is which the Prefacer finds in that second verse, or by
what medium it comes to have the force of a reason, he is not here pleased to
communicate, but only says, the Holy Ghost has there acquainted us with the
reason. But in the next page he is more liberal, gives us the reasons of their
sending to Jerusalem, partly because of the authority of the Apostles (which
were there) in all the Churches, wherein those, who contended with Paul, would
be compell^d to acquiesce; partly because those Iudaizing Teachers pretended
the commission of the Apostles for their doctrine.

24. As for the first of these, I suppose that, taken alone, cannot be the
reason, because there being but two Apostles there at that time, Peter and
John, 1. there might be so many in some other City. 2. Paul and Barnabas being
before this separated by Gods command to the Apostolic Office, were in this
respect of equal authority with them, and so in this sense the words of St.
Paul have truth, in relation to them, Gal. 2. 6. (...), they added nothing to
me. 3. The reference is made Act. 15. 2. not to the Apostles alone, but to the
Apostles and Elders, i. e. the whole Council at Jerusalem at this time. 4. The
cause of the reference was not only the contention of those who came out of
Iudaea, but the Antiochian Christians being taught, i. e. seduced by them, c.
15. 1. and accordingly the Decree respected them peculiarly. And so this first
reason is of no force.

25. For the second; it is true indeed, and it is affirmed ver. 1. that certain
men, which came down from Jerusalem, taught the brethren, and said, except ye
be circumcised, ye cannot be saved, and that may seem to be set down as the
reason of their making this reference to Jerusalem, because the men came from
Iudaea, which made it fit to inquire whether the Apostles and Council there
were of these men's opinions: But then even this will very little advance his,
or prejudice our pretensions: For this goes upon a ground which will be
useful, not disadvantageous to me, viz. that if these certain men, which came
from Iudaea, had been truly sent, or commissionated by the Church of Jerusalem,
then this would have been of some force at Antioch (which it could not be, if
Antioch were perfectly Independent from Jerusalem) and accordingly in the
Epistle from the Council, ver. 24. we have these words; For as much as we have
heard, that certain, which went out from us, have troubled you, etc. to whom we
gave no such commandment or commission (so (...) literally signifies) It seemed
good unto us, etc.

26. Where it is apparent that any such former commission being disclaimed, now
they send their express decree, not their bare counsel, or advice, or
assistance, which the Prefacer would allow, but, I say, a (...), a conciliarie,
dogmatical definition, by which, as it appears by the consequents, all were
deemed to be obliged, which were within the circuit, of which Jerusalem in the
Jewish account was the Metropolis. And so still, this reason, if any such be
discernable, Act. 15. 2. confirms my assertion instead of invalidating it.

27. That which next follows in the Prefacer, as the sum of my argument, is
very far from being what he says it is, either my argument, or the sum of
it: My argument it is not, being quite a distant thing, a recapitulation of the
whole story of St. Paul from his conversion to his coming this time to
Jerusalem from Antioch, whereas I collected nothing from any part of the whole
story, but only from this particular, the reference from Antioch to Jerusalem.
And then what is so much larger than the particulars diffusively taken, is sure
very unlikely to be the sum of them. And yet it is a little strange, that that
which is so over large a recitation, should choose to omit the one thing,
whereon the whole force of my argument lies, i. e either the reference made to
Jerusalem from Antioch, to infer the dependence and subordination of Antioch
to Jerusalem, or the style of the Epistle from the Council, taking in Syria and
Cilicia, as well as Antioch, when the reference had been made, and the
Messengers ^ent from Antioch peculiarly.

28. And when he says, that for the appeasing of the difference it was
determined, that the case should be resolved by the Apostles, that sure is
unduly suggested; for c. 15. 2. the reference is not made either to the
Apostles indefinitely, wheresoever they were, or to the Apostles that were at
Jerusalem at that time, and to none but such, but in express words, to
Jerusalem to the Apostles and Elders, comprehending under the word Apostles,
James the Bishop of Jerusalem, which was none of the twelve, and yet
pronounces the decree, (...), I judge, or, my sentence is, v. 19. and by the
word Elders, as I suppose, all the Bishops of Iudaea, sitting in Council with
him: And so still this is to the Church of Jerusalem, as the Metropolis of
Iudaea, and in an eminent manner, of Syria also, and not only to the Apostles
alone, or peculiarly to be resolved by them.

29. The Prefacer here in his haste says, that Paul goes with the decrees to
the Churches in Pamphylia, Pisidia, and by name Iconium, citing c. 16. 1, 2, 3,
4. and all the Churches which he had gathered through Asia. Whereas 1. there is
no mention of Pisidia, or Pamphylia in those verses (nor since, c. 14. 24. for
what is said of Mark's departing from them from Pamphylia, c. 15. 38. belongs
to the former story) nor of any City but of Derbe and Lystra, which are known
to be in Lycaonia. Secondly; That there is no mention of their passing through
Iconium, nor of the very name of the City, but once incidentally, that Timothy
was well reported of by the brethren that were at Iconium, ver. 2. Thirdly;
That for Asia, the Text says expressly, ver. 6. that they were forbidden of the
Holy Ghost to preach the word in Asia, and that therefore when they had gone
through Phrygia and Galatia, they came to Mysia, etc. So that he could not well
have multiplied more mistakes in so few words, and all to make up his
hypothesis, that the Decree of Jerusalem had no more reference to Antioch, and
the regions, whereof that was the Metropolis, than to all those other Churches,
which yet if it be extended no farther than to Asia it self, will by Philo's
words be interpretable of the Province subordinate to Jerusalem.

30. What remains to this head, is made up of contumely and reproach of my
audaciousnesse, with reflection only upon a supposition of mine, that after
this time the Churches were small, and thin, and few in number, and so that
of Philippi was seven years after this, which is designed as a prejudice to my
hypothesis concerning Metropolitan Churches so early. But to the former of
these, the reproaches, I have nothing to return but my thanks; to the latter I
have answered formerly, that the smallness of the number of Christians nothing
hinders the dependence of one Church upon another. See Vindic. to Land. Minist.
chap. 1. sect. 16. numb. 14. And so much for the evidence out of the Acts.

31. Next he comes to my proof out of Ignatius, who, say I, being Bishop of
Antioch does yet in the Epistle to the Romans call himself Pastor of the Church
of Syria. The words wherein he so styles himself, he sets down in the Greek,
and instead of translating them (as they should be translated) Remember in your
prayers the Church of Syria, which in stead of me has Christ for their Pastor
(viz. now that he was carried from them to his Martyrdom) he takes advantage
of the Readers unskilfulnesse in that language, and forms my proof into a
ridiculous argument, Because he recommends to them that particular Church in
Syria, which by his imprisonment was deprived of its Pastor, therefore without
doubt he was a Metropolitical Bishop; and then is very pleasant with his Tityre
t^ pat^ -- --.


32. But would not a little sadness and justice have done better, and then it
had been most clear that Ignatius his saying, that Christ was now their Pastor
instead of him, must necessarily imply that he was formerly their Pastor, and
whose Pastor was he? expressly (...), the Pastor of the Church in Syria; where
it is evident, that the whole Church in Syria, not that particular Church only
of Antioch, is by him supposed to be under his Pastoral care, the same thing
being before in the same Epistle expressed in words no way liable to
misunderstanding, (...), God has vouchsafed or dignified the Bishop of Syria,
calling himself Bishop of Syria, and so not of Antioch only. This has been
formerly cleared against all Chap. 6. sect. 1. (...). 15.
exception, and need not be here farther repeated.

33. There remains the testimony of the Author of the Epistle to the
Antiochians, which I vouched not as the genuine writing of Ignatius, but only
as an ancient Writer according to the genuine in this matter. Hence I am cried
out on as forsaken of all fair and honest means, and like Saul trying the
Witch of Endor, etc. But this is but ordinary style, a flourish of his
Rhetoric, and need not stay us to consider it; that which follows is more to
the purpose, that I make this counterfeit speak as if Syria were in Antioch,
not Antioch in Syria, and here asks, What other sense can be made of the words
as by me transcribed, (...), to the Church of God dwelling in Syria, which is
in Antioch, and then triumphs in this discovery.

34. But certainly the Witch was not so contrary to a wise woman, the
counterfeit author so perfect a changeling, as here he is set out to be.
Certainly the Greek, as transcribed by me, lies thus in the construction,
(...), to the Church of God which is at Antioch, with this farther denomination
added to it, (...), adjacent, or lying together in Syria, or allowing them the
same position in English, which they have in Greek, To the Church of God lying
together in Syria, the Church, or, that which is at Antioch; but taking all the
words together (of which I there only gave the abstract) to the Church pitied
by God, chosen by Christ, lying together in Syria, which first received the
surname of Christian, the Church which is at Antioch -- And so he may discern
it possible to make sense of these words, a very little skill in that language
being sufficient to enable one to join (...) with (...), the not very remote,
as well as with (...), the immediate Antecedent. And so this leaves it clear as
the day, 1. That Antioch was believed by that Author to be in Syria (not Syria
in Antioch) and 2. That Syria was the (...), or Province belonging to Antioch
the Metropolis, and that is a proof, as far as his authority will bear, that
the Apostles instituted Metropolitans, and so of the very thing in earnest,
(...) which was to be demonstrated.

35. And if this authority were not so great as the former of the true Ignatius
had been, yet, first, he was an ancient Writer, and so acknowledged; and,
secondly, one that imitated ancient style, and calls himself Ignatius, (...),
the known title of Ignatius, by which he was condemned by Trajane, and so,
though he feigned a person, yet did it decently, and so testifies his opinion
that this was the style of Ignatius's days, or else would not have discovered
himself by using it. Thirdly, his testimony added to Ignatius's, and in concord
with it, will not (certainly) take off the for^e from Ignatius's. And fourthly,
if this be finally reprobated, there be several more behind of Scripture and
the Ancients concerning Gortyna in Crete, and seven Metropolitical Churches in
Asia, and a reference to the Archbishop of Armagh's discourse on that subject,
and passages collected out of the Canons of the Ancient Universal Church, and
no one word offered to be replied to all this, which makes it very impertinent
to go about farther to confirm this assertion, which else I might do, and
for brevities sake refer the Reader to Frigevillaeus Gautius, Par. 1. c. 4.
the subject of which Chapter is, Primates esse jure Divino, That Primates are
by Divine right.

Sect. 7.
(...). Casaubon's Censure of that phrase.

Numb. 1. NExt he comes to examine Sect. 11. and that one small testimony from
the inscription of Ignatius's Epistle to the Romans. Before I proceed to which,
I shall confess to the Prefacer, that he has m^st an opportunity of great
rejoicing: For the truth is, in the end of sect. 10. there lay a passage,
wherein though I affirmed not, but only past my conjecture (crediderim, etc.)
yet I now, by a last reading over of Ignatius's Epistles, discern my self to
have mistaken^ For in the Epistle to the Magnesians, (...) the Ephesians from
Smyrna, are not, as I conceived it possible, the Smyrnaeans called Ephesians,
because Ephesus was the prime Metropolis, but the Ephesians, which together
with some of the Church of Smyrna, were sent with him from Smyrna, such as
Burrhus mentioned in the Epistle to Page 9.
the Smyrnaeans, who appears to be a Deacon of the Church of Ephesus in the
Epistle to them, and yet is said to be Page 1^.
sent with him by the Smyrnaeans, (...), with other of the Ephesians also. This
I desire Page 9.
the Reader now to correct in the Dissertations, by blotting out that last part
of Diss. 4. (...). 5.
Sect. 10. which concerns that matter.

2. I come now to his view of the Testimony from the Epistle to the Romans,
and it is set down in these words.

3. But to make all su^e, the l^ctor will no^ so give ^ver, but Sect. 11. he
adds, that ^he Epigraph of the Epistle to the Romans g^ants him the whole
case, that is, (...), ex qua (says he) E^^lisiae Romanae ejusque Episcopo suo^
E^iis omnibu^ in ur^ri^ regione, aut p^ovi^c^a Roman a cont^nti^, p^aefe^
comp^e vide ^u^.

Although I have spent some time in the consideration of men's conjectures o^
those sub^ bicarian Churches, that (as is p^nded) (...) here pointed to, and
the rise of the Bishop of Romes ju^^sdiction ^ver those Churches, in a
correspondencie to the civil Government of the Prefect o^ the City, yet s^
great a C^itick in the Greek ^ongue as Casa^^o^ Ex^c ^6. ad Ann. 150. having
professed that expression, (...), to ^e barbarous, and u^inte^g^, I shall not
co^ about it. For the presidency me ^ioned of the Church i^, or at Rome, that
it was a presidency of ju^isdiction, and not only in eminence of F^h and
Holiness that is in ended, ^he Doctor thinks it not incumbent on him to prove:
Those with whom he has to ^o are of another mind; alt^ough by this time some a
tera^ mign: be attempted; yea, ^here was as el^where shall be showed: And so
much for Ignatius ^is Archie^e.

4. This Testimony it seems must be thrown off upon the one score of Isaac
Casaubon's Censure, that the expression was barb^rous and unintelligible: I
must therefore examine his words, which I find Exerc. 16. sect. 150. though not
ad Ann. 150. that whole book of Exercitations against Baronius extending no
farther than the Life of Christ.

5. Casa^bon's words are these (speaking of Bellarmine's collection of the
Roman domination from thence) Rogandi sunt ut barbaram locutionem prius nobis
explicent, quam ullum ex iis verbis argumentum ducant, quae ne ipsi quidem
intelligant. They that endeavor to draw these words to this purpose, are to be
entreated first to explain to u a barbarous expression, before they draw any
argument from those words, which they themselves d^e not indeed understand.
Here it (...) true that Casaub^n says of (...), that it is barbara locutio,
but for the un^, which the Prefacer adds, and which seems to be expr^n these
words also, it is possible it may be a mistak^. Isa^c Casaubone conceived
himself to have observed by many indications, that Cardinal Bellarmine
understood no Greek, he calls him a little before, hominem Graecarum literarum
prorsus (...), a man utterly unskilled in the Greek learning; adding, that all
his works, especially that which he last wrote, demonstrate it. And why may
not the [ne ipsi quidem intelligunt] be thus meant by him, that Bellarmine was
very unsit to make collections out of a Gre^, which 'twas certain he did not
understand. (...) I am sure he had before said of him expressly, concerning the
writings of Dionysius Areopagita, Est quidem ridicula plane res -- It is a very
Page 542.
ridiculous thing for one that has n^ Greek to ^ffer to jud^e of a Greek
Author. Which being granted of that Cardinal, I should yet well have hoped,
that the Prefacer, who has so much Greek in this Preface, and very little of
it translated, might himself have been able to understand such plain words
(for, of the words it is that Casaubone speaks, not of the full importance of
them) (...), which presides in the place of the Region of the Romans.

6. But then, secondly, there will be little reason to doubt what the full
sense also of these words is: For without disputing what Casaubone says, that
the word (...) is not proper o^ vulgar style, but in some respect barbarous, I
shall yet suppose it put by Ignatius (being joined with (...), presidence) for
the Latin seeds, seat, or see, which [(...), place] will, without any forcing,
signify, as when the Gallican Church in their Epistle to Eleutherius, says of
Iraeneus Archbishop of Lions, (...), If we Eusebius. lib. 5. c. 4.
knew that place would purchase righteousness to any, the meaning is, if his
being Bishop of so eminent a City and Province would commend him -- (and
accordingly Peter Halleix would here have it read (...), throne, or seat, but
has no Manuscript ^o favor his conjecture) Nay, if we shall observe the
ancient Latin forms, we shall have no reason farther to deem (...) barbarous,
than as it directly answers to the Latin usage of locus, place, and that sure
may be allowed Ignatius in an Epistle to the Romans: For in the second Epistle
of Anacletus to the Bishops of Italy, we have these words, In capite
Provinciarum, ipsis quoque in civitatibus vel locis nostris Patriarchias vel
Primates, etc. In the head of Provinces, and in our Cities or places,
Patriarchs, or Primates were constituted. The authority of that Epistle may
sure be sufficient to manifest the use of a word, and then our City, and our
place is all one, and that properly of a chief City or Metropolis, such as here
Rome is contested to be. And then the sense will be as plain as the words
intelligible, that the Church, to which that Epistle was addressed, was the
presiding Church in the place, or seat of the region of the Romans, i. e in the
chief place, or seat, or City of that Region, commonly called the suburbicarian
Region. And thus has Jacobu^ G^tt^fred^, a learned Lawyer, and Critic expressed
himself to understand it, meaning by the suburbicarian region, all that in the
civil not^tiae was under the administration of the Prefect of the City of
Rome, answerable to which circuit was the Primitive Province of the Roman
Bishop. And here being nothing offered against it, I have no occasion to give
farther answer: For as to that of Jurisdiction, what degree of that belonged to
the Primate in every Province, over and above that which belonged to a Bishop
of an ordinary City and territory, that has often been spoken to already, and
need not be again repeated or enlarged on.

7. In the close he is pleased to add, that by this time (i. e. in Ignatius's
time, who suffered in Trajan's time, and survived St. John very little) some
alteration was attempted, and if that were so meant by him, as to belong to the
jurisdiction of the Church of Rome over other Churches, which the discourse is
upon, this truly might pass for pr^ttie ancient, being scarce distinguishable
from Apostolical, and so if what was attempted, were attained also, 'twill be
very like the yielding that, which I contended from that testimony*

Sect. 8.
Alexandria a Patriarchate instituted by St. Mark. This proved and vindicated.
The Essens in Alexandria, Christians, Bishops among them.

Number. 1. IN the next, and last place, he will pass his judgment on the
evidence drawn from the story of the Church of Alexandria, thus.

2. The ex^mp^e of Alexandria is urged in the next place in these words, id^^
de (...), de qua Eusebius, Mar^um (...), Ecclesias (in plurali) primum in
Alexandria instituisse. Ha^ omnes ab eo sub nomine (...) administrandas
sus^episse Anianum, Neronis anno octavo idem Eusebius affi^t, quibus pat^t
primariam Alexandriae and Patriarchalem Cathed^^m fi^sse, ad quam reliquae
Provinciae ill^us Ecclesiae a Marco plantatae, ut (...) Met op^tica^, suam
pertinebant; doubtless; for 1. There is no^ any passage i^ any a^ent Author
more clearly discovering the uncertainty of many things in Antiquity than this
pointed to by the D^cto^ in Eusebius: F^ (...), the sending of Mark the
Evangelist into Egypt, and his pretching the^e at Alexandria, what he had
written in ^h^ Gospel, is but a Rep^^^: Men said so, but what ground they had
for their saying so, h^elat^s no^. And yet we know what a foundation of many
a^^e^tions, by following Was, his u^^or o^ report is made to be. 2. In the very
next wo^^^, the Author affi^mes, and insists l^ng upon it in the next Chap^er,
that Ph^lo's b^ok (...), was written concerning the C^ conv^r^ed by Mark's
preaching at Alexandria, when it is notoriously known, that it treats of the
Essens, a Sect among the Jew, amongst whose observances many things were vain,
superstirious, and foolish; u^worthy to be o^ce app^^uded as the practice of
any Christian in those day s; that (...) Ph^lo, ^s far as can be g^thered,
living, and dying in the Jewish Religion, having been employed by them with an
Apology to Rome in the days of Calig^l^. But 3. sup^^se that Mark were at
Alexandria, and preached the Gospel there, which is not improbable, and ^ed
many Chu^ches in ^^at great and populous City of Jews and Gentiles, and that
as an Evangelist the care of those Churches was upon him in a ^eculiar manner;
^ay, and add farther, th^^ after his death, as Hierome ^ssu^^s us, the Elders
and Presbyters of those Churches c^o^^e ou^ne among themselves to preside in
their Convocations and meetings. I, I say ^l ^his be supposed, what will ensue?
w^y then it is manifest tha^ the^ was fixed at Alexandria a Pa^cha^ Chai^, and
a Metropolitical Church, according to the appointment of Jesus Christ by his
Apostles, Si ho^ non sit probationum satis, nescio quid sit satis. If some few
Congregations live together in love and communion, and the fellowship of the
Gospel in a City, he is stark blind that se^s not that to be an Archbishops
See. The reason is as clear as his in the Com^, for the freedom of his Wife; Sy
Utinam Phrygiam ^x^r^m m^am ^^a mecum videam l^beran. Them. Opti^a^ muliere^ qui
lem. ^y. Et quidem nepoti tuo, hujus fili^, hodi^ primam mammam ded. haec. Them.
Hercle, vero, s^o, siquidem prio^am dedit, ba d^dubium qu^^ em^^i Aequum s^^t.
M^^ Ob ea^^ rem? Them. Ob ^am. And there is amend of the contest. The Doctor
indeed has sund^y other Sections added to ^h^se foregoing, wh^ as they concern
times more remote from those who first received the Apostolica^ Institutions,
so I must ingeniously profess that I cannot see any thing whereon to fast^n a
su^pi^ion of a proof, so ^a re as to call it into examination, and therefore I
shall absolve the Reader from the pena^ty of this D^gression.

3. It is most true that I have deduced the Original of Metropolitans from the
first plantation of the Faith in Alexandria, the prime City of Egypt, and
having Disser. 3 c. 10
before spoken many things of it, I begin here with a reference to what had
there been said. And for the clearing of it, it is not a^^sse that I give the
Reader a brief view of all.

4. They that write the History of that Church, and are thought to write it
least favorably to Bishops, do yet a^ of the Records of that Church, that St.
Mark ^ound^^ (...), and left Ananias, or Anianus Patriarch there: Of this Eus^b
us thus speaks, (...), L^^. 2. c (...).
that Mark first erected ^hurches in Alexandri^, (...) Anianus received and
ruled, under th^^ t^^o (...) Cap. (...).
(...) the Province of Alexandria adding that (...) was such a multitude of
them, which upon St. Mark's (...) first onset* received the Christian Faith,
(...) to it (...), by (...) most Philosophical, or pious excellent m^^ner (...)
living that Philo Jud^us, who lived at that time, (...) ^it to write a Book to
describe their whole manner of (...).

5. That the same St. Mark constituted (...) so in Pentapolis, is affirmed by
the Author of his (...) (...) (...) accordingly the sixth Canon of the first
(...) N^ appoints those Churches, as also all (...) Lybia, to be subject to the
Patriarch o^ Alexand^^ (...)firming that so it was to be by the ancient and
primitive custom.

6. Here it is evident, that by Mark himself Alexandria was constituted a
Metropolitical Patriarchal See, in the hands and government of a Patriarch, who
by being Bishop of that, had the care of the whole Province, and many
particular Churches in it, and accordingly superintended in all of them. And
this the second Canon of the Council of Constantinople refers to, when it
decrees (...), that the Bishop of Alexandria shall administer only the affairs
of Egypt, and this in their care (...), not to confound the Churches, disturb
the order anciently observed among them.

7. The only thing that I could foresee possible to be objected to this was
the authority of Eutychius the Annalist, affirming that till the time of
Demetrius's Patriarchate, there was no other Bishop in Egypt but only at
Alexandria. But to this authority it was sufficient to oppose the far greater
of Eusebius, who speaking of that Demetrius, says, that after Julian he
undertook, (...), the government of the Dioceses there, in the plural, which
cannot be imagined to be without Bishops over them. And the same is in a manner
confessed by Eutychius himself, who says Ananias was made Patriarch by Mark,
which he could not be, if he had no Bishops under him.

8. And indeed Philo describing the manner of these Holy men i^ Egypt, the
Christians of Mark's planting, sets down (...), the manner of presidencie, or
rule of them who performed the Ecclesiastic Ministeries, and says it was made
up of (...).
Deacons and Bishops, who were in the uppermost rank placed over all.

9. And so when Cou^r. (...) i^ iuit.
Tertullian tells us of Valentinus the heretic, that he had an ambition to be
Bishop, it is evident enough that this was in Egypt, for he was of that
Country; and it is no way probable that it was the Patriarchate of Alexandria,
that he sued for, being, as Epiphanius says, (...), Hae^. Valent. in in^^.
of the Athribitick division, which was far distant from Alexandria. To which
again belongs what was premised of Mark's planting Churches in Pentapolis, and
the Nicen^ Council giving that Patriarch jurisdiction over them by the (...),
the ancient, or original customs, which suppose^ still that there were such
Churches and Bishops originally from St. Mark.

10. The matter lying thus, and being indeed in every branch thus laid in the
Dissertations (if the Prefacer had been at leisure to attend it) I supposed the
way clear to my conclusion. But he is pleased to make his Exceptions. Those he
seems to promise shall be more than one, for he begins with [For 1.] but then
having branched that again into three parts, and so again beginning [For first]
by that time he has gotten through those branches, he has forgotten what was
promised to succeed his first gener^l in the division.

11. As it is, we have enough remaining: For his general exception being the
uncertainty of things in this story (from whence by the way, he makes haste to
conclude the clear discovery of the uncertainty of many things in Antiquity, so
ready he is upon all occasions to express his affections that way, that his
conclusion is far wider than his promises) the first that he mentions is, the
sending Mark the Evangelist into Egypt, and his preaching at Alexandria what
he had written in the Gospel: This, says he, is but a report, Men said so; but
what ground they had for saying so, Eusebius relates not.

12. But 1. is there any thing more acknowledged, and uniformly attested in
story, than this of Mark's preaching the Faith (that sure is what he had
written in the Gospel) in Egypt, and particularly at Alexandria? Is it doubted
of by any Writer? or is there the least ground of doubting?

13. Secondly: Eusebius being to set down a fact of former times, which he
received by tradition, either from man to man, or in writing, what could he say
more, than [Men said so?] And who ever required other ground^ of narrations of
notorious facts, than the common unquestioned affirmations of men? and so, it
seems, it was here: And certainly there is no cause imaginable, why any man
should question this, or believe the contrary, and why following Writers should
not found assertions on such matters of fact, with so uncontrolled a consent of
all Historians (that speak of that Churches plantation) brought down to us, or
why we Prelatists should not conclude from thence, what even St. Hierome
himself, and Eutychius, the prime favored Authors of the Presbyterians have
yielded us premises to conclude.

14. His next branch of Exceptions is against Eusebius's affirming Philo's book
(...) to have been written concerning the Christians converted by Mark' s
preaching, when, says he, it is notoriously known, that that book treats of
the Essens, and Philo lived and dyed a Jew. But certainly this no way
prejudiceth Eusebius's affirmation, Essens we know signify holy pious men, and
Christians converted to the Faith by St. Mark, may doubtless be such, and
being Jews by parentage, and by the example and doctrine of St. Mark brought to
a strict ascetick life, why might not Philo describe and commend them as such,
being, though a Jew, yet, that we can any way discern, not any professed enemy of
Christianity, which also was but Judaisme reformed and hightened.

15. And for any vanities or follies taken notice of in that Sect of the Jews,
ordinarily called the Essens, there is no necessity that those should be found
among the holy men in Egypt, described by Philo, or if any relics of them
should be discerned among them, 'twould be no stranger, than that there should
be some of the Pharisaical leaven among other Primitive Christians, as it is
evident by Scripture that there was.

16. It will be very much more difficult for the Prefacer to avoid the force of
many passages in that book of Philo, which inclined Eusebius that way, and have
had the same force on many others, I shall mention but one, which is already
touched on, and belongs to our business in hand, their (...), and the Bishops
and Deacons among them, which will not be found in any sect of Jews that were
not Christian.

17. His third branch is made up of Concessions and liberalities (one more than
is useful or necessary for me to have granted) and then as if he had repeated
the full force of my argument, he laughs at it, and falls into a Scene of the
Comoedian, and so concludes in great cheerfulness: And truly I am very glad to
find him in so good humor, and although my argument might with ease have been
truly and fully repeated [viz. that St. Mark planting many Churches in Egypt,
subjected them all to the Patriarch of Alexandria, therefore here is an example
in the Apostles times of a Metropolitical Church constituted] and although the
argument lying thus, it be far from ridiculous, and if it were not conclusive
enough, there are many more evidences of the same matter in that Section of the
Dissertations, and as there is no word offered to them, so what is objected
against this, has appeard to have no force, yet I shall most willingly have
the Prefacer excused for all this, and give my plaudit to his exit, upon that
one score of the obligation laid upon me, much more than upon the Reader in
absolving me from the penalty of this digression.

Errata:
PAge 1. l. 4. r. Dissertations. p. 3 l. 34. r. confirmation. l. 35. r (...).
p. 4. l. 9. r. into their Codex. l. 10. r. (...) l. (...). r. (...). l. 28. r.
(...). marg. l. 7. r. (...). p. 5. l. 20. for to be r. so. p. 6. l. 4. r.
Eadem. l. 5. r. pr^buerunt. l. 19. r. where. l. 24. r (...). p. 8. l. 14. r.
Holoander. p. 11. l. 5. r. Da. Blondel. p. 12. l. 23. r. (...). p. 18. l. 16.
r. (...). l. 35. r. (...). p. 19. l. 1. r. (...). l. 10. r. (...). p. 25. l. 1.
r. fell. p. 28. l ult. r. (...). p. 29. l. 3. r, ^mitate. l. 10. r. (...). p.
30. l. 36. r. (...). p. 31. l. 3. r. (...) p. 32. l. 30. r. couti. l. 32 r. is
his. p. 34. l. 31. r. Thoms. p. 35. l. 16. r. controv. p. 36. l. 14. r. him in.
p. 38. l. 16. r. (...). r. (...). p. 40. l. 14. r. (...). l. 19. r. (...). l.
20. r. Tiberianus's. l. 28. r. (...). l. 31. r. (...). p. 41 l. 4. r. (...). p.
42. l. 33. r. (and by. p. 43. l. 6. r. (...). l. 33. r. (...). p. 44. l. 20. r.
long as. p. 46. l. 11. r. fictitious. l. 2^. r. (...). l. 27. r. him, Ignatius
vir. p. 47. l. 19. r. lie just. l. 26. dele it. p. 49. l. ^7. r. not. p. 50. l.
4. r. (...). p. 51. l. (...). r. by Ignat. p. 52. l. 3^. r. sensuu^. l. 36. r.
(...). p. 56. l. 9. r. either. l. 20. r. (...). l. 26. r. (...). p. 58. l.
(...). r. is. l. 13. r. (...). p. 61. l. 25. r. pretensions. p. 6 (...). 19. r.
(...). p. 63. l. 3. r. (...). l. 5 r. (...). l. 8. r. (...), r. (...), r.
(...). l. 15. r. (...). l. 18. r. (...). l. 19. r. (...). p. 72. l. 18 r.
(...). l. 21. r. (...). (...). 22. r. (...). p. 74. l. 5. r. competent. l. 27.
r. (...). marg. l. 2. r. (...). p. 76. l. 15. r. (...). p. 77. l. 36. r.
reservarunt. p. 81. l. 22. r. communicanda p. 82. l. 8. r. (...). p. 84. l. 7.
r. they that. p. 87. l. 25. r. seditious. l: 29. r. or dignity. l. 31. r.
(...). p. 91. l. 4. r. addition p. 93. l. 2. r. possible neither. p. 94. l. 10.
phecy? p. 95. l. 7. r. (...). p. 96. l. 14. r. (...). l. 33. r. singularis. p.
97. l. 8. r. effictim. p. 100 l 29. r. (...). p. 101. l. 6 r. or that what. p.
102. l. 12. r. singularis. l. 35 r is as far. p. 109. l. 16. r. (...). p. 111.
l. 7. r. edoctus. p 120. l. ^8. for) r.] p. 121. l. 2. r. desire him. p. 123 l.
9. r. (...). l. 10. r. (...). l. 14. r. (...). p. 124. l. 24. r. but lie. p
138. l. 30. r. Deacons, in. p. 145. l. 13 r. (...). p. 147. l. 11. r.
accordingly. p. 152. l. 20. r. Augustus. l. 33. r. (...). p. 154. l 30. r.
sensible. l. 31. r (...). p. 156. l. 1. r. apprehensions. l 25. r. (...). p.
158. l. 25. r. (...) l. 28. r. City page 163. i. 26. r. (...). p. 164. l. 12. r.
validly: l 13. r. actions. l 35. r. (...). p. 168. l. 35. (...). p. 172. ^6.
(...). p. 174. l. 6. r. Primates. ^28. r. urbium. p. 177. l. 15. r. (...). p.
178. l. 14. r. (...). l. 21. r. Apostles; That. l. 36. 1. (...). l. 39. r. is
styled. p. 180 l. 11. r. (...) p. 18^. l. 11. r. (...). l. 16. r. but one. p.
184. l. 1. r. of, which. p. 180. l. 18. r. (...). p. 190. l. 10. r. above. p.
195. l. 11. after passage r in Antioch. p. 197. l. 19. r. (...). p. 205. l. 29.
r. (...). p. 208. l. 28. r. with the. l. 34. r. and he. p. 213. l. 2. r.
Patriarchas. p. 216. l. 12. r. (...).

FINIS.

