Colonel Hammond's LETTER SENT To William Lenthal Esquire Speaker of the Honorable
House of Commons, CONCERNING Mr. Osborns late scandalizing the said Colonel,
and the rest of the Gentlemen now attending the KING: Which Letter was read in
the House of Commons. Together with An ORDER of the Commons for the said Osborn
to appear within Forty days to make good his Allegation.

Published by Authority

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
June 26. 1648.

To the Honorable, William Lenthal Esquire Speaker of the Honorable House of
COMMONS.
Mr. Speaker,
HAving lately received knowledge of the unparaleld wicked practices of Mr
Osborn, from the Right Honorable the Lord Wharton, by a Letter which his
Lordship sent me, directed to him from the said Osborn, who has bin the chief
instrument, in contriving and acting, as far as in him lay, the late Design of
the Kings intended escape; wherein it appears, that failing in that his
Treacherous purpose, and meeting now with new Counselors, he proceeds, though
in a more abominable way, by shameful and unheard of Lies, as much as in him
lies, to abuse and inflame the disturbed minds of the people in these
distracted times, and most unworthily to scandalize me, and the rest of the
Gentlemen, now attending the King; and in those things wherein his own heart is
a witness, that they are (of all other) most contrary to truth. And being since
further confirmed, That in prosecution of this his audacious villainy, he has
written public Letters to both Houses of Parliament, asserting such horrid
falsities, that are hardly fit to be named, but by such a wretch, whose
principle being falseness and treachery, knows no limits in wickedness. Sir, My
sense of the ill that in such times as these may accrue to the Kingdom by such
Abuses, causes me to send up this bearer Major Rolph (though through weakness
he be very unapt for Travel) whom he avouches for his Author, that if you
please may be examined, who will sufficiently inform you of the great untruths
raised by that unworthy person; whom I should let pass as not worthy the taking
notice of, to Time, to Shame, as it has those other unworthy Reporters, who
have spread abroad the late false Report of my Inhumane abusing the Person of
the King, were not the Public more then my self concerned in it; but the
wisdom of your Honorable House, does, and I doubt not will more clearly
discern, the Design driven at in such Reports, and will take care for a right
understanding of those who have been, or may yet be deceived by such abuses.
For my own particular, had I not been thus occasioned by my duty to you and the
Kingdom, I should have left the clearing of my integrity (as formerly so still)
to the righteous God, who if with patience men can wait upon, and trust in him,
will certainly confound and destroy that structure, whose foundation is laid in
lies, with shame and sorrow to it is wicked builders: Sir, I have not only to
support and bear me up against these calumnies, the testimony of a good
conscience; but to clear me amongst men, it pleases God so to order it, that
upon all occasions given, and that before many witnesses, the King is so just,
as to vindicate me from all those Aspersions, and so I doubt not will all
others that have any sense of honor or truth, who have been witnesses to my
actions and deportment, since His Majesty's unexpected coming to this place.
Sir, I conclude with this profession to you, as in the presence of God the
Searcher of hearts, That as all the good of this world could not have hired me
to this Employment, could I have avoided it, or would you have seen it fit
otherwise better to have provided for it; so, seeing Providence has cast me
upon it, or rather it upon me, I have (and by the assistance of God shall so
continue) to the utmost of my power and knowledge, demeaned my self with all
dutiful respect to His Majesty's Person, with an equal eye to the duty I owe
you and the Kingdom, in the great trust you have been pleased to place upon me:
And this with that integrity and evenness, that I stand ready to give an
account to God and all men of my actions herein. This satisfaction to you I
find upon all occasions, by constant testimony of your favor to me, I need
not now give you; yet being sensible a little at the wickedness of this most
ungrateful unworthy person, makes me thus trouble you, though I need not,
Reason it self will plead sufficiently against him, that having attempted and
failed in such a Design, being so principled as such a man must be, that for
his own interest he should proceed thus to color his villainy, as by his late
Addresses to both Houses. Sir, I shall not further trouble you, but in most
earnest expectation looking for a deliverance from my intolerable burden
(which God and a good conscience only supports a poor weak man to undergo)
either by a removal of His Majesty's Person from hence, when to your wisdoms it
shall seem safe and fit; or by better providing for it, by a person or persons
more able to undergo it, either of which, that which may best suit with your
affairs, is most heartily desired, and that with speed, if God see it good:
Till when, in the strength of that God who has carried me on hitherto, and as
he shall enable me (being sufficiently guarded against the worst that Malice
can throw upon me) in all constant integrity, I shall endeavor to express my
self, Sir,

Your most faithful and humble Servant, TO: HAMMOND.
Carisbrook-Castle, June 21. 1648. POSTSCRIPT.
Mr. Osborns Letter to my Lord Wharton, which his Lordship sent me, I have
enclosed in a Letter to the Committee of Derby-house.

Since I ended this Letter, I have examined the three Soldiers, who were dealt
with to have been assisting in the Kings escape; but they all affirm, and are
ready to make good upon Oath, That neither Osborn, Dowcet, nor any other, told
them that the Kings life was in danger: So that it seems clear a Device of his
own to inflame the people.



Die Martis, 20 Iunii, 1648.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the Letter of Richard
Osborn of 10th Junii, 1648. directed to the Speaker of the House of Commons;
and the Letter enclosed from the said Richard Osborn of 1o Junii, directed to
the Lord Wharton, be communicated to the Lords: And it is Ordered, That the
said Richard Osborn may have Forty days after the date hereof, to come with
safety to his person, to make good the Allegations mentioned in the said
Letters, so long as he shall stay here, for the Examination and proof of the
business; And likewise shall have free Liberty to depart without molestation,
let or hinderance.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

