Hampton Court CONSPIRACY, WITH The Dovvnfall of the Agitators and Levellers,
who would admit no distinction of Birth or Tittle, and out of the Lands of the
whole Kingdom in General would proportion an equal Estate to every man in
particular.

TOGETHER With the horrid resolution of one George Greenland Corporal, who in
the space of three days did undertake to murder his Majesty at Hampton Court.

More then King-catching herein you may spy,
King-killing Hampton-Courts Conspiracy.
Printed in the Year 1647:

Hampton Court CONSPYRACY.
A. B. WHat are now become of our Mountebank Horse-Doctors the Agitators, who
have so long made both Houses house of Offices for evacuations and purges; the
only Wise men to state the case of the kingdom, or to uncase it into states;
Whose Dictates were more then Documents, and Proposalls Imposals, bespeaking
both Speakers silent, making a younger brother of our Parliament, in
bequeathing unto it one of their party-colored Coats, not so much for a badge
of division, as that each spot of knavery might have its splendour, and so
become the less blemish, but because of its long dreaming have left in the pit
of despair?


T. S. Sir these Agitating Anthonyes of our time I believe have made so many
interrogatives of the Prerogative, that it is a hard question to resolve
whither the devil has carried them by the spirit of a Proposal: Report
bespeaks them voted back to their several charges, that is devoted or
consecrated to the charge of the kingdom; perhaps the devil has carried them
to the Spittle pinnacle, for not long ago some of them with their animal
agents were seen there to over-looke the kingdoms of the world, and the glory
of them, which appeared (for one instance) in a Comfit-maker (who stood upon a
bench dressing Sweet-meates for them like mad, and indeed the Sisters gapt upon
him as if they wanted sugar plumbs) but to the point, this fellow told them
that it was revealed unto him out of the Revelations, that twenty years hence
at farthest, the Saints shall begin their reign of a thousand years; and that
text that the meek shall inherit the earth; did wrap him up in such a high
sphere of spiritual solace and jocanty, that he despise all worldly comfort
making; but observe whether amongst these Levellers, there was not the very
form and matter of a conventice Conspiracy against Hampton Court, or the King
of it; for they gathered hands to begin to make plain the highway of our Lord
King Charles; their argument was, that the Creator is no respecter of persons;
Ergo, why should the creature, wherefore we will leave Hampton Court with my
Sister Hannas Kitchen, the people chose the King, Ergo, why should we not choose
whether we will have a King or not. These plots of high concernment were
agitated below stairs, in allusion to the powder plot, above stairs they
whimperd out freewill, which intimated their inherent ability to act these good
works, and sweet roguries. From all which I infer that the Scribes, Pharisees,
Hypocrites, instead of paying Tribute to Caesar, would have him pay Tribute to
their Tub tribunals, to bequeath his head to the wise Agitators, his body to
the liberty of the subject, and so he may become, if not a Saint a Separatist;
which if they can accomplish it will probably prognostic that these Saints
shall be sovereigns.


A. B. But what is it that terminates their design?


T. S. First a confusion of King and Court. Secondly a concussion or knocking
together the simple noddels of the vulgar into a community until they run all
horn mad. For the first they have the Popes Bull, to wit Mr. Peter's, who must
roar the Catholic Commonality out of Allegiance, into the coxcomb community
of sublunary creatures; who of late has converted his Apostolical keys into
putry padlocks, persuading his Majesty it is the narrow way to heaven to be
shut up close, whiles himself holds riding about like an Itinerary Minister,
as the just right of liberty of Conscience, prohibiting some purblind
Presbiters into divine Post boys. The divine Dell, and Peter's the other day
opened their mouth, and the devil spit in them, and they spoke saying, the
King was but as a dead dog; which interpreted, is he shall live no longer as a
man; Rabshekah was a royalist to these rogues, was ever such pulpit puppies
seen or heard of in this universe, that snarled at his sovereign as a Dog. I
know not whether it be the common prayers to punish such prodigious Prophets,
but I am sure it is divine service to hang them.

2. For the second they plead the old custom in the nonage of times, and as
King Pinus was said when the first that constituted confines and ordained
bounds, so these Pinnies will begin anew (because al things but of that are
become new) to be boundless all things are to be common to the outward and
inward man, and nothing proper unless it be to propagate a posterity out of
their neighbors wifes propristy; now I must want a share in a sisters dowry,
whether it be copy hold Land, or to be tenant intale, each Citizen must
proclaim himself a Coukcold and his wife a Concubine, and farewell all
private devotin in mine Uncles counting house thirty pounds a year shall he
distributive justice to those that had just nothing before, toward the
execution of which at large, they shut up my Lord Mayor and his brethren,
converting their gold chains into silver mint.

And these Agitators the no more ring leaders to this Conspiracy?


T. S. For some of Putney prerogative would willingly change the year of King
Charles his reign into the year of his ruin.

Making head quarters for to be more high
Then the crown of it regal Monarchy.
Amongst whom, if he be not converted, I may reckon one almost omnipotent, a
Oliver who has cut more cross capers then them all, whose private spirit
breaths negatives and affirmatives instanti, in an instant. First he affirm
that the religious Army will prostrate their Arms at the Parliaments feet, at
the least beck of intimation; then spurrecuts to the Army, and gives them a
negative Nod to forbear disbanding on pain of persecution. Another time
persuades the House to commit Sir Thomas his Commission, because he thought
King was a little above Charles Steuart, and therefore not liable to the
lamentable result of a petty paper plodding Committee, but timely intelligence
very excellently forewarning his Excellence, he made a halt at the House
door, and sent his Commission to a Court of guard to be tied neck and heels
from their clutches, wherefore Oliver crossed a caper, and bid his Excellence to
conceal it, to maintain his march, for the house lay in Ambuscado.


A. B. Yet he does not run parallel with an Agitator.


T. S. For then he should be a Leveller, I suppose he is rather a Reveller, for
Crumwell has so well picked up his crumbs from under the late well spread table
of the Commonwealth, that now he would sit at the upper end of the board, the
Sir Anthonyes being but the dogs of his flock (as Peter's his puppy dog only
for his bravado barking) who gain a few fragments by the way of snapping. Had
it not been for his Iron-sides the other day, his ribs had paid Tribute to
Caesar, for being ruled by Endimion Ireton in the behalf of a little piece of
his Majesty's Prerogative.


A. B. Neither is Crumwell such an al crusty conditioned fellow as I took him
for.


T. S. For I conjecture that he would willingly preserve the Prerogative so it
were in the salt pichle of Independency. The other day he made a very
canonical condemnatory speech, to stop the careere of the Hobby-horsmen of
Israel; biding of them show their faith by their works, or sound a retreat to
their several Regiments, and do nothing at all, for they ought to be under
Government and not over it. Concerning which (to err a little with the
brethren) I heard a dispute at the spiritual Spittle, one propounded his
argument thus, if the honorable and freeborn people of England, be the
Foundation and groundwork of Government, it is requisite they should Govern:
but they are, Ergo, what are Kings, Princes, and Potentates? only the specious
superstructure which we support, Ergo, we are the principle, which duly
considered is a very fundamental point; the Fabric ought to be inferior to
the fundament or foundation, by which local rule of contraryes, the talle
shall dictate to the head, the breeches to the brainepan: and so be right sir
Animal Agitators.


A. B. Then Sisters shall succeed Senators, and ride to Westminster.


T. S. What a pretty condition should we be in, if this Spittle should be
super-steeple predominant over all our Synagogues.


A. B. Surely chimney-Churches would smoke us out of the Temple, but
themselves in that thick spirit would mount to the spirits that rule in the
air, for they are devilish children of disobedience. What is all this but a
mere Jesuitical juggling against the poor King of Hampton Court, and Kirk.


T. S. It is so. Did not the Agitators come to push of pike with him in his
forced retreat? very probably they showed him the point of death, and would
have forced it upon him as a main point of their Doctrine, though the devils
Use. O brave St. Authonies fire of zeal, must the King not only be confined,
but confounded, is it all one to carry him to his throne, and to go about to
cut his throat? O high and mighty Proposals to the now, if you please freely
begot people of England (for cummune being bonum, it is fitting all things
should be common) wherein every lamentable letter speaks a praemunire to the
Prerogative, and seems to crush the Crowne-beneath the footstool of a Cobbler,
translating his person by underlaying into the similitude of a Saint.


T. S. These Traitors of our age, or Agitators in their last fire-work to the
Army, let off a Cracker with noise that they with their fellow soldiers did
and should do the Parliament as much service by disobedience as obedience.


T. S. That is as well by not disbanding when they commanded, as by banding
together against the Lord and his Anointed when they desired, (which may be an
Oracle, though not of Apollo, yet of a pox of them, the shakers whose spirits
are familiar with the devil) portending those that raised this Parliament
shall ruin it, or shake it into shivers, or shite it away by fanatic fluxing.


A. B. It is a great question what an Agitator means; therefore tell me.


T. S. I will nominate some several significations that the the word carries,
which much relates their antic or rather Antinomian actions. First it
signifies a tossen; and what is the kingdom now but a Tenniscourt, and his
Majesty the ball banded about with the roguish rackt of roundheadisme, and
often hazarded to destruction; look from Dan to Bersheba, and you shall see
such tossing the Independent petticoats for free quarter, and such toss
potting to credit the Public Faith; that doubtless shortly all things must be
common, and then this last age shall be exalted above the first because of
horns, and Couckolds will be a custom if not canonical.

Secondld, Sir Anthony Agitator signifies a driver of a cart or beast; and now
are not Carremen, nay the very carriage of men become Kings, who drive the Cart
of the Commonwealth into the deep ditch of desolation, crying high gee ho,
both to God and the Gospel, lashing the poor commonalty with twisted cords of
conspiracy.

Thirdly to agitate signifies to prick or compel; do not they prick forward
Community for all commodities, pull up the hedge of honesty from their
Neighbors piece of ground; thinking it too much modesty for a Saint to cover a
sin.

Fourthly, suriae sagitant improbas, it signifies to torment; and did not these
Tinkerly Traitors terrify the people with the sound of their kettledrums: nay
they have now made the addle headed multitude incapable of their Amsterdam, and
animal alarums: from whence in fine, I define an Agitator to be an arch Tub
Traitor of this age whom the Devil lately tossed out of the bottomless pit to
drive on his desinges, prick Principalities, and torment the times.


FINIS.

