A HAPPY DISCOVERY Of the strange and fearful PLOTS Laid by our Cavaleirs
for invading of HVL, and surprising Sr. John Hotham.

AND How by night they intended utterly to destroy both, but were suddenly
taken.

LIKEWISE, The victorious exploit and conquest of certain corragious Prentises
traviling to York to Learn Proceedings, had over the malignant party.

John, Brow. Cler. Parl.

August. 6. Printed for Io Hundgate. 1642.

SVDDEN NEWS FROM HVLL.
DIving into the center of these plots which have threatened the downfall of our
depressed Commonwealth, I addressed my self as well to impeach the clouded
enemy, as infuse comfortt to our sinking spirits, to point out the unwilling
truth with straggling penmanship.

We are daily eyewitnesses of seditious Pamphlets, which (as false alarms)
either terrisie us at first view, with conceited flashes, or else house us in
dangerous security by their silver speeches, so that muffled with such penny
stuff, we cannot judge of affairs without truths enemy, Partiality.

Always ate we stifled with the unsavory sent of unfortunate progresses,
which drives us into a medley, as whose reeling faith knows not which way to
incline, whether to King or Parliament.

Tha honorable Assembly in Parliament is envied against by some, as if those
Pillars had or do stoop under their distracted burden: Soveraignity others
trample upon, who as those lisping children to David, cry, Come and help us,
our conceits sit in counsel, and give verdict pro and con ad pl^citum; thus
are our fears augme^ted or p pressed, as apprehension serves.

Our Kingdom now is cut in twain, two party more indeed then enough, dwell
among us: the one volunteers stand to, the other Cavaliers, on whose forces
depends the safety of our Commonwealth, which I pray God may not turn to
ruin, as they are thwarted, we may justly fear the worst, for still ere they
flurt each upon other, not only to the spoil of their persons, but the
unresolved Realm. Some of their counter buffs we are struck with, which begin
to totter with their steadfast fury. Many and sundry rimes have the Kings
Cavaliers cast about for the subversion of Hull, whose persisting exploits are
in-interpreted in the language of Rebellion, however they, by the benignity of
Fortune, have behave behaved thrmselves, or through cruelty of Fate, or
knowledge is trusted with. Diverse times have they in he eyes of the world,
attempted Hull, but since they have not pro^cded Masters of their Art, they
have canopied their plots with dark secrecy. It was agitated amongst them that
the only way to crown their actions was privately to creep into the heart of
the town for the full possession whereof they with a mutual consent intended
intrinsically to mask them^ves with the vizards of the Parliaments adiuvants,
and to enter under color of well-willng subjects, usurping feigned authority
with the stolen name of a general; which intent they put in execution, and
marching undhr veil of twilight, in small parcells, that suspicion might not
stand their overthrowing judge, they by peacemeale were buttoned in the town,
though not without preceding examination.

Who, when they had intownd themselves, set their thoughts at liberty, and
crumbling together, chewd the cud, how they might by begirting Sir John Hothams
dwelling, become Master of his person: their opinions circled: and with the
world went round. One Captain Thach beholding to nature for a pregnant wit,
whispered to them the time and places, when, and where every one should stand
in posture of War; determining first to Captiuate the good Knight, and then to
stop the current of those floods which often at will use to incro^ch on and
baptize the Land. But it fortuned that through the distemperature of some who
had passed through the discipline of a Tavern and were slaved to ebriety, the
distemperature of that strong magazine which might have insued, became
abortive. For eruptions of words broke from them, which drew out their designs
with a shameful blush, some were taken, others suspected, most fled.

Thus their deliverance was wrought, else might they have sucked the poison of
their inveterate ma^^ce; That worthy Knight had found a prison of his own
house, or have perished without a combat, the Watch and Guard da^gerously
ma^cht, not only in the bowels of of that town were those menacing
promiscuous excrements, but upon a watchword externate troops waiting as
^o^di^^ors without, were ready to force it to a gashly fright or a fearful
flight. But the snare was as broken as their cause and safety annexed to trusty
subjection, walks up and down the streets. This adventure did not cashiere
them of their spirits, but bountifully fed their watchfulness with the Aqua
vitae of careful audacity. Experience lent them eyes, which glancing
intellectually on unacted devices, invited unusual care not guilty of
repentance: Now have they learnt to sally out, and to look to their tenants
within, to spue out such venomous serpents: yea revenge sat in their wrinkled
brows, which marshalled their forces against the out ragious onsets of their
insinuating adversaries: for directing their steps out of the gates, they
scoured up and down to investigate the blood thirsty Dor-Mice that lay in
ambush, whom they espied basking under the hedges in confused heaps: and after
the sword had sometime discarged its office: many, on whose leaden breast
doting sleep was exceeding fond, slept their last. Others let words creep up
their throats, with a come help: by which means their companions suspecting
nothing loss, but the town had been their own, joyfully to their sorrow,
some raced it, accusing Nature, that they were not aided with wings. All were
separated, and so escapt Cavellier-free. Thus were they trownsed for their
tomerous adventures, and not long after were served the same sauce: for it
fortuned that some well minded Souldier-prentises, who voluntarily, and
valiently were resolved, traversing the Northern parts, met with a rout of
mounted Field Gamsters: who upon demand of what side they were, and thereupon
some viniger language fiercely flew on them: the skirmish was sharp as were
their weapons, with which they brought many a horseman to a foot-race: who
escaped, may thank their beasts, those that were scarrified, may thank
themselves. Such have been the issues of their embraced services. Thus while
they take heart, not of grace, to fabricate abhord exploits their machanations
end with lives, at least misfortune.

FINIS.

