LACRYMAE ECCLESIAE; OR The mourning OF HADADRIMMON For Englands JOSIAH.
Delivered in two Sermons, Janu. 30. 1660. at the solemn Fasting and
Humiliation, for the Martyrdom and horrid Murder of our late gracious King
Charles the First, of ever blessed Memory, In the Church of the Borough of
Blechingley in the County of Sury.

By Will. Hampton Rector of the said Church.

In that day shall there be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the Mourning of
Hadadrimmon, in the Valley of Megiddon, Zach. 12.11. Nunc requiescit in sinu
Abrahae dulcis amicus noster nam quis alius tali animae locus? Aug. de
Nebridio. LONDON, Printed for VVil. Hope, at the sign of the blew Anchor on the
North side of the Royal Exchange, 1661.

To the Right Honorable Charles Lord Cokaine, Viscount Cullen; Grace, Mercy,
and Peace be multiplied.
Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
As you have been a great sufferer in your Person and Estate, to the loss of
more then thirty thousand pounds for your fidelity and loyalty to his late
Majesty of blissed memory, and yet were cheared more with the continual feast
of a good and a quiet Conscience (as I have heard you confess) then you could
have been, had you saved your estate and gained ten times that sum by engaging
on the other side: for who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords
anointed, and be guildesse? 1 Samuel 26.9. So no less sorrow for his sad
sufferings, and chiefly that last fatal blow brought upon his sacred Person by
the furious rage of merciless, and bloody men, when a sword did even pierce
through your heart as your Lordship has often expressed in my hearing, and in
my house, whither you were pleased to retire your self aster your releasment
from Oxford, and at other times; and to honor me with your presence, when we
did in private pour forth our souls together in utter detestation of that
horrid Fact, and in bitter lamentation for it: Therefore upon this account, I
think not these Sermons more due to any one then your self; as also for the
many obligations that lie upon me for your manifold favors and respects to me,
even from your youth up till now.

It is framed in a low and plain style, sitted for a Country Auditory, and it
has always been my desire and endeavor to condescend to the meanest
capacity. My warning was very short for such a work, having scarce two days to
prepare, by notice given me by a worshipful Neighbor, one of our late
Burgesses in the late healing Parliament, of such a day to be kept, of which I
knew nothing before.

And although the short warning, the exhaustion of my Spirits, in Preaching
twice the Lords day preceding, together with my age might have pleaded my
excuse for such a task, and confind me to praying and weeping: Yet (as nothing
seems hard to a willing mind) my cordial affection to the duty (for I have in
my secret prayers long wished I might live to see such a day as this, wherein
we might in public as well express our detestation of, as lamentation for that
monstrous and bloody Act) put me on with the assistance of the Divine Spirit,
to a performance beyond my strength and expectation.

The dead Letter cannot be answerable to the lively Delivery; which was to the
content of my Auditory, which that day was great, many of the adjoining
Parishes, where no notice was given of the day, repairing to my Church: And
which was to my content, as it drew tears from mine, so from the eyes of a
great part of my hearers; which is the best commendation of a Preacher.

The Lord grant it may work upon their Souls, to whose sight it shall come,
whose hearts or hands, or fingers were defiled with that innocent blood; that
they may be deeply humbled, and moved to repentance for such a crimson scarlet
sin; and find Mercy, and obtain Pardon from Heaven, by having their hearts
sprinkled with that blood, which speaks better things then the blood of Abel.
And that it may blunt and alleviate the asperity of their Spirits, who have
great thoughts of heart, and those evil too, against this blessed Change, a
work even of Omnipotency: And against our dear and gracious Sovereign (whom God
long preserve) a King of such asweet Christian temper, for Wisdom, Discretion,
Meekness, Gentleness, Pity, Piety, Mercy, as is too good for such a churlish
and unthankful People. Thus commending this poor labor to the blessing of God;
and your Lordship, and family to his grace, and safe protection, I humbly take
my leave, and remain

Your Honors humble Servant in the work of Christ W. Hampton.
From my Study in Blechingley, February 12, 1660.
The mourning of Hadadrimmon for Englands Josiah.
The Text. And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah; And Jeremiah
lamented for Josiah; and all the singing men, and the singing women spoke of
Josiah in their Lamentations to this day; and made them an Ordinance in Israel;
and behold they are written in the Lamentations, 2 Cron. 35.4, 25.
THis day is a day of blackness, and gloominess, a day of clouds, and thick
darkness, a day of mourning for a good and a religious King cut off by
untimely, violent death, to the unexpressible grief of all good Christians, by
the traiterous heads, treacherous hearts, and bloody hands of wicked, and
ungodly men; yet great pretenders to holiness above all other. Now (I say) this
being a black day, a day of mourning, I have chosen a Text of mourning, of
mourning for a godly and a religious King Josiah, the fittest parallel I can
find in the whole sacred book, for our Martyred Sovereign.

Josiah was one of the best of all the Kings of Judah; whose History you may
read at large in the foregoing Chapter: and in the former part of this Chapter,
and also in the 22, and 23. book of the Kings.

He came to the Crown young, at eight years old; and sought the Lord while he
was yet young in the eight year of his reign: and the twelfth year began the
great work for advancing Religion and Piety. He purged Jerusalem of Idolatry,
reformed abuses, repaired Gods House, restored his worship, regarded his
Ministers, kept such a Passover, as had not been kept before since the days
of Samuel the Prophet; neither did all the Kings of Israel keep such a
Passover, as Josiah kept, Verse. 18. Like unto him there was no King before
him, that turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his soul, and
with all his might, according to all the Law of Moses, neither after arose
there any like him, 2 King. 23.25.

And though he was thus good and zealous, yet for the peoples sin was he taken
away by a violent death; as it follows; Notwithstanding the Lord turned not
from the fierceness of his great wrath, where with his anger was kindled
against Judah, because of all the provocations that Manasseh had provoked him
withal. And the Lord said, I will remove Jerusalem out of my sight, as I have
removed Israel, and will cast off this City Jerusalem, which I have chosen, and
the house of which I have said, my name shall be there 2 King. 23.26.27.

So that for the great sin of the Land was this blessed King snatched from his
People by untimely death, as a punishment (not of his but) of their iniquity.
According as Huldah the Prophetess had informed the Messenger sent to her by
him, 2 King. 22. from ver. 15. to 20. Thus says the Lord, Tell the man that
sent you to me: Thus says the Lord, Behold I will bring evil upon this place,
and upon the Inhabitants thereof, even all the words of the book, which the
King of Judah has read; because they have forsaken me, and have burnt Incense
to other gods to provoke me to anger; Therefore my wrath shall be kindled
against this place, and shall not be quenched. But to the King of Judah that
sent you; Thus shall you say to him: Thus says the Lord God of Israel, as
touching the word which thou have heard; because thine heart was tender, and
thou have humbled thy self before me, when thou heardest what I said against
this place, and against the Inhabitants thereof, to make it a desolation, and a
curse, and have rent thy clothes, and has wept before me, I have also heard
thee, says the Lord, Behold therefore I will gather thee unto thy Fathers, and
thou shall be gathered unto thy Grave in peace, and thy eyes shall not see all
the evil that I will bring upon this Land.

Now that this judgment pronounced might be accomplished upon the Nation: This
godly and religious King was unhappily drawn into a destructive War. Pharaoh
Necho King of Egypt going to War against Carchemish King of Assyria, to the
river Euphrates, Josiah is drawn in to aid the Assyrians: Necho sends
Ambassadors to dissuade him from it; what have I to do with thee thou King of
Judah? I come not against thee this day, but against the House wherewith I have
war; for God commanded me to make have; for bear thee from meddling with God,
who is with me, that he destroy thee not. Nevertheless Josiah would not turn
his face from him, but disguised himself that he might fight with him, and
hearkened not unto the words of Necho from the mouth of God, and came to fight
with him in the valley of Megidd^. And in this battle he lost his life, Verse.
23. And the Archers shot at King Josiah; and the King said to his Servants,
have me away, for I am sore wounded. His Servants therefore took him out of
that Chariot, and put him into the second Chariot that he had; and they brought
him to Jerusalem, and he dyed, and was buried in one of the Sepulchers of his
Futhers: And then follows my mournful Text; And all Judah and Jerusalem
mourned for Josiah; and Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, etc. Jusiah dyed by a
fatal arrow, (as our Josiah by a dismal blow) to the unexpressible grief of
his People, the Church of God, decay of Religion, and damage of the State;
which the Nation being sensible of, betake themselves (as our Nation now does)
to a general lamentation, and a bitter mourning: And all Judah and Jerusalem
mourned, etc. and Jeremiah etc. Wherein we have, 1. The Person lamented, and
mourned for; and that was Josiah a godly and religious King, yet slain by
cruel hand; The Archers shot him, wounded him sore, and he dyed. 2. The sad
lamentations made for him: where we have, 1. The generality of the mourners;
The whole Land mourned, the whole Church and Nation of the Jews. All Judah and
Jerusalem; Jeremiah the Prophet, all the singing men, and singing women; all
the People, both City and Country, Prophets and others. This was the greatest
mourning that we read of; Therefore the very quintessence of mourning is set
forth by this, Zach. 12.11. In that day there shall be a great mourning in
Jerusalem, like the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Magiddon. And that
not without cause, whether the worth of the man, the good that he did, or the
evil that followed upon his death be considered. 2. The continuation of this
mourning; It was not only for a time, for a day or two, or a week or two, a
month or two, and no more; but it was continued from time to time, from year to
year, by an Ordinance made for it in Israel.
It was a custom amonst the Jews to have public mourners at their Funerals,
both men and women, who used to make lamentations in doleful Tunes, at the
death of Persons of worth; as appears, Eccl. 12.5. Man goes to his long home,
and the Mourners go about the streets. In these lamentations they used to make
mention of the parties deceased, and to mourn for them. Thus they did for
Josiah in their solemn mournings for others, making mention of the great loss
of him: Insomuch that it became a constant custom, and as it were a settled Law
or Ordinance, to make mention of the sad loss of Josiah, in their doleful
Elegies: Or it may be, that by reason of the loss of so worthy a King, a
special Law was enacted for it (as our Nation and State has now piously, and
prudently done) that at all other solemn mournings, there should be mourning
for Josiah; and that public Mourners observed the same. This is meant when
it is said, And made them an Ordinance in Israel.

3. The Record for the commemoration of this holy man in the continued mourning
for him; And behold they are written in the Lamentations. Some conceive the
Lamentations of Jeremiah, registered in sacred Scripture to be here meant; which
seems to them to be hinted, Lam. 4.20. The breath of our nostrils, the
anointed of the Lord is taken in their Pits, etc. But the most reject this, and
think there might be some other Lamentations remaining then upon record, and
wherein the loss of Josiah was set down. And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned
for Josiah, and Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, etc.


I shall not now by reason of my very short warning exactly handle every branch
of the text, but only gather for you from hence three general observations,
wherein I shall comprise and bind up together, as with a threefold cord, the
whole sum and substance of the Text.

1. That the child, the dearest child of God may undergo a violent death; and
this I gather from the Person lamented; Josiah a good and godly King, a blessed
Saint, yet slain by cruel hands. The Archers shot him. 2. That it has been an
ancient custom among the people of God to mourn for the dead: And this I gather
from the mourners in the Text, The Church of God, Judah and Jerusalem; Jeremiah
the prophet; All betaking themselves to sad and solemn mourning for Josiahs
death. 3. That the death, especially the violent death of a good King, is a
ground of a great mourning to all good people. Good Josiah being so unhappily
slain; Judah and Jerusalem, all the good people in that Church and Nation,
betake themselves to doleful lamentations: And all Judah and Jerusalem, etc.
1. Of the first of these; That the child, the dearest child of God may undergo
a violent death. As a child of God may be exposed in this world to any
tempration that is common to the Nature of man, to the sorest and sharpest
affliction so to the sharpest kind of death. The reason is, because death by
the decree of God and by the desert of man, is the inseparable sequel of sin to
all the sons of Adam, as well to the godly, as to the wicked; forasmuch as all
have sinned all must dye, and whatsoever may conduce to, or bring on death,
whether it be corruption from within, in these our earthly Tabernacles, our
bodies breeding some noisome or grivous disease: or force and violence from
without by wounds, hurts, and bruises, may befall the the one (God permitting)
as well as the other. As death is common to all, so the same causes procurers and
producers of death are incident, and alike common to all.

As the the undergoing any sore affliction, or a violent death, is no sure
argument, that a man is the child of God, so the undergoing the like is no
certain evidence that he is not the child of God; we cannot conclude any one to
be a reprobate, simply from any kind of suffering, or from any kind of death;
because Gods dear child may be exposed to the one or the other.

The Donatists of old (who were the forefathers of our Anabaptisticall
fanatique Section, separating brood) vainly supposed, that the undergoing of
sore afflictions and violent death was the most ready way to bring them to
heaven, and a sure character of eminent Saints; and therefore would wilfully,
and needlessly expose themselves to grievous sufferings, and sometimes to cruel
death. As Venner the Sectarian Preacher, or rather prater, the Wine-cooper, and
his cursed crew, lately gloried to shed their blood in fighting for King Jesus
(Thus do they blasphemously abuse that good, sweet and precious name) though in
open and horrid Treason and Rebellion against the lawful powers ordained by
God, and in plain opposition to the laws of God, and of the Land, as if Christ
who foretold by his Prophets, as a great blessing to his Church and People
under the Gospel, That Kings should be their nursing Fathers, and Queens their
nursing Mothers, would have these nurses all killed, and murdered by their own
children: And not remember what he has said; They that take the sword (upon
such false grounds) shall perish by the sword.

St. Austin Epist. 50. ad Bonifacium, speaks of three kinds of death,
wherewith the said Donatists desired to be killed, or rather indeed killed
themselves: Some of them would make request unto the worshippers and keepers of
Idols to destroy them; others would offer themselves to armed men, robbers and
spoylers, lying by the highway side to be slain of them: and there wanted not
such among them, as delighted to cast themselves headlong from high places,
into the water, and into the fire. In this last age some Fanatic people have
traced their steps. Gualterus that famous Preacher of Zurich, who lived about
an hundred years since, Hom. 209. in Mat. cap. 16. Relates that he himself saw
a woman (after she had lived many years honestly with her husband and among her
neighbors) being instructed, or rather seducted by the Anabaptists, ran away
from her husband, and forsook her seven little children nothing pitying the
youngest, though a sucking babe, and being asked why so unnatural, and unlike
Mother she forsook her children; she had that pretense which the rest of the
Anabaptists have; Christ exhorts us to bear the Cross.

But though he exhort to bear the Cross, yet he requires not, that we should
put needless crosses upon our selves; but only to bear them patiently, when he
is pleased to send them, and when he calls to suffer: As for those who rashly
expose themselves to troubles, and cast themselves into wilful dangers, or
death it self, without warrant of Gods word: their actions are so far from
pleasing, that they are very displeasing to him: As Saint Austin very well
affirms, Tract. 11. in 3. John. Let Marculus (says he) fling himself down
headlong from a rock: and let Donatus in like sort, cast himself into a pit,
both with intent to end their lives, yet shall they not be called Martyrs: or
at most (as he speaks in another place) they are but Martyrs of a foolish
Philosophy, mad Fanatic Martyrs.

Now as these or like sufferings, were no evidence to them of their salvation;
because it is not the meet suffering, or the kind of death, but the cause that
makes a Martyr: So the like being undergone, are no argument that a man is not
in Gods favor. The dearest child of God may undergo a violent death. The
Prophet, the man of God that came from Judah to cry out against Iereboams
Idolatrous Altar at Bethel, in his return homeward was slain by a Lion, yet all
agree, though his body suffered yet his soul was saved; he was the dear child
of God; so esteemed by the old Prophet, who took care for his decent burial,
and laid him in his own Sepulcher; and they mourned over him, saying, alas my
brother: and laid a charge upon his sons to lay him in the same Sepuchre, lay
my bones besides his bones, 1 Kin. 13.31. So this good King Josiah esteemed
him; for when in accomplishment of that Prophecy, he brake down the Altar of
Bethel, and burnt many bones upon it, digging up the bones of the Idolatrous
Priests, and burned them; when he came to the Sepulcher of this man of God, and
undertood by the title whose it was, he gave charge to let him alone, Let no
man move his bones, deeming him the servant of God, 2 Kin. 23.18. And all those
Worthies of the Old Testament, spoken of, Heb. 11.36, 37, 48. Being too good to
live in this world, received hard measure from the world; And had trial of
cruel hands and scourgings: yea moreover of bonds, and imprisonment, they were
stoned, they were sawen asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword.
Blessed Steven the Proto-martyr of the New Testament, was pelted and knocked to
death with stones, and many of the best of Gods Saints and Servants pledged him
in the cup of Martyrdom which was very bitter and bloody. The holy Baptists
head was chopped off to satisfy the appetite of a lustful and luxurious woman,
and served up to her in a Charger. And Gods holy child Jesus, that just and
religious one, taking our sins upon him, and standing in that place, underwent
a violent death, the painful, shameful, and accursed death of Cross, yet still
most dear in his Fathers favor. Josiah here, a good and a religious King; yet
slain by cruel hands, The Archers shot him and he dyed: now briefly for
Application.

Use. 1. Learn here first, That neither goodness nor greatness can exempt man
from the saddest sufferings Josiah a King as good as great, yet slain in
battle. The Lord sees good sometimes to have it so, to humble the best and
greatest; that none may presume or trust to any worldly privilege or dignity:
and to prepare his servants for a suffering condition.

2. Let us be instructed to beware of rash Iudgmen, not to be censorious of all
that suffer either sharp affliction, or some bitter death: if they die
penitently, etc in true faith of Christ, or in a good cause, it does not
diminish ought from their future happiness, but rather promote them in the way
to glory. But let none of you suffer as a murderer, (says St Peter) or as a
thief, or as an evil doer, or as a busy body in other man's matters; yet if
any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God
on this behalf, 1 Pet. 4.15, 16. Christ has taught us not to deem them the
greatest sinners who are the greatest sufferers, Eo nomine, for that very
reason, because sufferers by the example of those Galilaans, who sacrificing
were sacrificed. Pilate mingling their own blood with the blood of the beasts
which they offered: and of the other who were mangled, and quashed to death by
the sudden fall of a Tower. Suppose ye that these Galilaeans were sinners above
all the Galilaeans, because they suffered such things? I tell you nay, but
except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Or those eighteen upon whom the
Tower in Siloe fell and flew them, think ye that they were sinners above all
men that dwell at Jerusalem? I tell you nay, But except you repent you shall
likewise perish, Lu. 13.2, 3, 4.

And though our late dear Josiah, underwent a bloody death (made as it were a
sacrifice for the Church, and his people) by the rage, malice, and immane
cruelty of merciless, and perfidious men, or rather monsters: (Horrendum
factum, dictu Horrendum.) Yet God forbid any of us should have the least doubt
of his souls felicity: Although his hard hearted, and implacable enemies denied
him (that which is freely granted to the vilest and most notorious condemned
malefactors) the help and comforts of his Chaplains, for his souls
refreshment, in the time of his hard imprisonment, and therein (as he
complains in his Soliloquies) might seem as they sought to deprive him of all
things else, so to be afraid he should save his soul, other sense, charity it
self can hardly pick out of these repulses, I received, says he; Yet we have
good ground to conclude and full assurance to persuade us, that the better part
of him is safe, they which killed the body had no power to hurt the soul. That
bitter cup conduced much to his souls happiness: calix mortis, calix salutis,
the cup of death, and Martyrdom was to him a cup of Salvation. His meek
submitting to the will of God; his patient bearing taunts, reproaches, and
injuries, evento shameful spitting on his meek yielding to an unjust and bloody
stroke, his hearty praying for his enemies, and murderers, according to that
glorious pattern of his blessed Master, his commending his soul to God trusting
to his mercies in Jesus Christ our only Savior for an eternal crown; all being
fruits of a sanctified soul, are comfortable evidences of a saved soul.
Though his death was bloody and violent, yet being sweetened with Christ's death,
and his being washed and bathed in the blood of the Lamb, we have
firmperswasion and good assurance, that he lived and dyed the dear child of
God, and is now a Saint in Heaven, praising God among the noble army of
Martyrs: an heir of salvation, and of that immarcescible Crown of glory, which
the Lord has promised to them that love him.

Use 3. Let it prepare and arm us against the fear and terror of violent
death, if such should befall any of us, we know not but it may; it is sometimes
the lot of Gods dearest children. Let us not then overmuch disquiet our selves
with the fear of violent death, by thieves, robbers, murderers, or by the
rebellious rout of Fanatics. The Sectaries talk high, and hope yet to have a
day; their hearts are bloody, and their hands would be at work; these times,
they say, will not hold; we shall have a change, though we have now a time of
rejoicing, yet we shall ere long have a time of howling and crying; our harp
shall be turned into mourning, and our mirth into the voice of them that weep:
but we hope their horns will be clipped, and their nails pared, a book be put
into their nostrils, and a bridle in their lips, to hold them back from
rebellion and mischief. If they should break out in murder as they did begin;
and if any of us should fall by their knives, swords, or guns, let not the
fear, or thought of this too much affright us. Let us arm and prepare our
selves with the shield of Faith, and be always ready: and if we die in the
Faith, and favor of our God in Christ, it shall not hinder us at all to our
way to heaven, but bring us the sooner to our Fathers House, the place of true
rest, and happiness.

I proceed to the second Observation; That it has been an ancient custom among
the people of God to mourn for the dead; and in a moderate manner to mourn for
our departed friends, is not unlawful, but rather Christian and commendable.
The custom has been very ancient: Solomon speaks of it, as a thing commonly
used in his time, Eccl. 12.5. And we find it more ancient, Abraham the Father
of the faithful, bewailed his dead wife Sarah, Genesis 23.2. Sarah dyed in
Kirjath-arba, the same is Hebron, in the Land of Canaan, and Abraham came to
mourn for Sarah, and to weep for her. Joseph mourned many days for his Father
Jacob. They mourned with a very great and sore lamentation, and with grievous
mourning, Genesis 50.10.11. All the people mourned thirty days for Moses, Deuteronomy.
34. David mourned for Ammon, and for Absalom, and for Abner; yea, he was the
chief mourner there: King David himself followed the biere, and the King lift
up his voice and wept at the grave of Abner; and all the people wept; yea, all
the people wept again for Abner, 2 Samuel 3.31, 32. And as in the Old Testament
so we find it used in the New. The devout widows wept for the death of Tabitha,
Act. 6.39. Christ wept at the grave of Lazarus, Joh. 12. And the good woman
mourned, and wept when he dyed. And devout men carried Steven to his burial,
and made great lamentation over him, Act. 8.2. And here all Judah and Jerusalem
mourned for Josiah; and Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, etc. From all which
examples we see the the antiquity of this custom, and hence,

Use. May learn, That moderate mourning for the dead is not unlawful, but
rather commendable. Christians are not to be like Stoics, or rather Stocks
void of all natural affection.

But to this I shall not need to exhort, nature it self is apt enough to show
it self upon all occasions of this nature. In mourning for our near relations,
we are more apt to err in the excess, then in the defect, to mourn
immoderately, then to fail in mourning for our friends deceased. Therefore let
us take heed that we do not exceed, nor give too much way to our passion. The
Apostle does not forbid all sorrow for the dead, but immoderate sorrow; That we
should not grieve, and take on like the Gentiles, who were ignorant of the
blessed state of the dead that die in the Lord; and had no hope of ever seeing
them again, because they were not persuaded of the Resurrection, and so mourned
out of measure, 1 These. 4.13. I would not have you ignorant brethren of them
that are asleep; as ye sorrow not even as others that have no hope: for if we
believe that Jesus dyed and arose again, even them also which sleep in Jesus
will God bring with him.

There are four cordials let me give you to moderate, and mitigate this sorrow;
regulate this passion.

1. Because it is our common condition; death is no new or strange thing; but
the lot and portion of every child of Adam. As by one man sin entered into the
world, and death by sin, so death passed upon all men for that all men have
sinned, Romans 5.12. Do we see some friend go before us? let us not be too much
troubled: nothing has happened to them, but what must happen to us, yea to all;
it is the case of all to die. Our Fathers are gone before us, and we must
follow after them, and our children after us; one generation passes, and
another succeeds: all things are here in a mutable condition, and so are we.
Omnia peribunt, sic ibimus, ibitis ibunt. Demonax the Philosopher, seeing one
make great lamentation for a friend departed, wished him to make enquiry among
all that company, being very numerous, and see if he could find any one, who by
death had not been deprived of some friend or other: which when he did, and
could find none; with the community of the case, he comforted himself, and
bridled his sorrow. So if by death we have been deprived of Parents or
Brethren, Husbands or Wives, children and Friends; let us remember nothing
comes to us, but that which is common to all, and let this restrain us from
moderate mourning. With this thought David put an end to that sorrow for his
child which he so dearly loved, But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast,
can I bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me, 2 Samuel 12.23. As if he had said, death is common to all, I shall die as well as
he; I must follow him in the way of death, the way of all the earth, from which
there is no returning hither: Therefore why should I afflict my self any more?

2. Because death comes by Gods appointment and determination; with him are the
issues of death, he has fixed and appointed our time here. All the days of my
appointed time, will I wait till my change come, says Job. So that God has
set down how long every ones time shall be. The number of our months, years,
and days is with him; he has set us our bounds which we cannot pass. Job. 14.
Indeed to our apprehension many times, some are taken away untimely,
unseasonably, suddenly, husbands from the wives, and wives from their husbands,
children from their parents, and parents from their children, some in their
youth and sull strength, when their breasts are full of milk, and their bones
full of marrow: but let it not seem strange to us; Their appointed times were
come; the will of God is done and we must be content, and with patience submit
to it.

3. Because by death the faithful go to a better mansion, and mend their
condition: they make a happy change; they change their mortal for immortality;
this corruption, this earthly house for an heavenly house. They are freed from
their labors, sorrows, troubles, miseries, afflictions, molestations of this
present evill-world, and brought to the desired home of true aest, of bliss
rnd perfect happiness; ut non tam plangendus sit, qui hac luce caruerit, quam
gratisicandum ei quod de tantis malis eraserit, says the Father; That he which
departed hence in the Lord, is not so much to be lamented for, because he is
deprived of this light, as to be rejoiced for, in that he is escaped out of
such a Sea of misery, and landed safely in the sure harbor of endless
felicity; taken up to the true light.

4. Because we have assurance of a joyful Resurrection, they that dye in the
Lord, are not lost, or gone from us for ever; but only gone before us: they are
fallen into a sweet sleep, and shall for certain awake again, rise again at
that great day when the Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven, and change
our vile body, and make it like unto his own glorious body, when we shall enjoy
the company and society of our Christian friends in body and soul for ever;
therefore (as the Apostle exhorts) comfort your selves, and one another, with
these words.

The second Sermon.
And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah.
And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah; etc.
2 Chronicles. 35.24, 25.
THe third observation which I gave you from this Text, which I chiefly
intended and aimed at for this day, as being most suitable to our present
occasion and meeting, and which follows now to be spoken of, was this:

That the death, especially the violent death of a good King, is a ground of
great mourning to all good people. Josiah a good, religious, zealous King,
being slain in battle, the Church and good people among the Jews, yea the whole
Nation, City and Country, Prophets and others, all the Inhabitants of the Land,
fall to sad mourning and doleful lamentation.

This truth is so apparent, that it needs not much proof, yet it may be further
made out upon these accounts.

1. The death of any friend does occasion sorrow and mourning, much more the
death of a choice friend, of a chief friend, of a common friend, especially if
he fall into the hands of merciless thieves and murderers, and come to a
barbarous and bloody end; this must needs be a cause of great mourning to all
that did bear any loving respect to him.

And is not a King, a good King a friend, a chief and choice friend, a common
friend to all his good people, being the Minister and Vicegerent of God, for
the punishmen: of evil doers, but for the praise of them that do well? 1 Pet.
2.14. Must not then his death, a violent and bloody death, unmercifully and
unjustly brought upon him, occasion sad hearts and great mourning among those
who had any spark of goodness and affection toward him?

2. A good King is not only a friend, but a Father, Pater Patriae, the Father
of his Country, and of the Commonwealth; and surely he is no good and dutiful
child that will not mourn for his fathers death; especially if he see him
slain and murdered by bloody hands, in such a case not to shed tears, were a
sign of a graceless and godless son: and certainly they are no good children,
no loyal or dutiful subjects, that mourn not for the horrid slaughter, and
barbarous assassination of their civil father.

3. A good King is the light of our eyes, and breath of our nostrils, yea the
very life of our lives, a principal means under God of our temporal weal and
being, under whose shadow and protection we enjoy our selves and all in safety,
life, goods, and estate: He is the Minister of God to thee for good, Romans 13.4.
And is it not a sad thing to have such a pillar broken down, such a one taken
away by cruel hands? What can be expected to follow but ruin, rapine,
confusion and misery, oppression and calamity, as we have felt by woeful
experience? and will not all that have any goodness, that delight not to live
by devouring others, lament for the loss of such a one?

4. A good King is under God a principal cause of our well-being, in relation
to spiritual things for our souls benefit, it is under him, and by his power
and Law, that we are preserved to live a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2. therefore the loss of him must needs be
deplorable, as opening a wide gap to all profaneness, and dissolute living. It
was a sad time with Israel when there was no King in Israel, every man did what
was good in his own eyes, Judge. 17.6. and to what exorbitances and villainies
will not the corrupt nature of man left to its own liberty, and actuated by
satanical fury, break out in such an Anarchy? will not this make a good heart
mourn?

5. A good King is a nursing Father of the Church, so called in Scripture
phrase; it is by his care and providence, by his good example and diligence in
the service of God, and in the holy duties of his worship, that Religion is
upheld, and the practice of it furthered, and the Church maintained in a
flourishing condition.

Regis ad exemplum to tus componitur orbis, people are much inclined to follow
the example of the Prince: And can good people that wish well to Sion, and are
well affected to Religion, to the service and worship of God, see such a one
snatched from them by violent death, to the great decay of Religion, abolishing
of the solemn worship of God, and the bringing in a Babel-like confusion of
hearts and Tongues (as we have seen to our reproach, to the breaking of our
hearts, to the joy and derision of our enemies) and not be filled with extreme
grief, and betake themselves to great and bitter mourning.

6. A good King is the Bridegroom of the Commonwealth, the Husband of his
people: and hence it has been an ancient custom, at the Inauguration or
Coronation of Kings to deliver them a Ring, as a pledge or token of wedding
them to their people, and will not the children of the Bride-chamber mourn,
when the Bridgeroom is taken away from them? Christ himself in the Gospel
assures us, that they will and shall mourn in that day. And here I pray take
notice, that they are no children of the Bridechamber that mourn not for such a
loss: what then are they that rejoice? Can the Bride, a loving Spouse, endure
to see her dear Husband assassinated, murdered by cruel Butchers, and that in
the Bridechamber; in his own house, or at his own gates? Can she endure for
ever to have him separated from her, or to have his head separated from his
body before her eyes, without shrieking out, and wringing hands, without bitter
tears and doleful lamentations? surely no: And how then can good people, good
Christians, good Subjects, call to mind the murdering of a good King at the
door of his own Royal Palace, by some of his own people, of his own subjects
and servants, without bleeding hearts, weeping eyes, and mournful spirits?

These may stand as so many grounds or arguments to confirm the point in hand,
that the death, especially the violent death of a good King, is a ground of
great mourning to all good people.

To all these, I might add the confusion that follows such a black deed. The
barbarous murder of a good King is commonly attended with a deplorable Chaos of
confusion, both in Church and State: The plotters and actors in such a foul
work are none of the best, yea they are the very worst and vilest of men, men
of hard hearts, and seared consciences, of wild, large and loose principles,
who having swallowed Royal blood, do easily glut themselves with the blood of
Nobles, and other of their fellow subjects, and like ravening Wolves having
slain the Shepherd, sport themselves in tearing and worrying the sheep; and to
conclude, make no bones of the greatest evil, so it may promote their wicked
designs: And must not this needs bring on a rueful confusion?

1. There follows a Chaos of confusion in the Church when a good King is
murdered, if the murderers escape, they new-model Religion, and fit it to their
own Standard, and make it a mere Machiavillian, politic Engine to prop and
boulster up their usurped power.

When Jeroboam wrested the ten Tribes from the house of David, with his new
Kingdom, he set up a new Religion, for fear least if the people kept to their
old Religion, they would return to their old King, 1 King. 12.26, 27, 28.
Jeroboam said in his heart, Now shall the Kingdom return to the house of
David, if this people go up to do sacrifice in the House of the Lord at
Jerusalem, then shall the heart of this people burn again unto their Lord, even
to Rehoboam King of Judah, and they shall kill me: Whereupon he took counsel,
and made two calves, and set the one in Bethel, and the other in Dan, and
pretended all to be done for the good and ease of the people; it is too much
for you to go up to Jerusalem: whereas it was for his own base ends, and
according to his new Religion, he made a new sort of Priests, not of the sons
of Aaron, according to Gods Ordination, but whosoever would, might be a Priest
for that State-Religion, and served well enough to serve calves. He made of the
lowest and meanest of the people Priests of the high places, whosoever would he
consecrated him, and he became one of the Priests of the high places; and this
thing became a sin unto the house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off, and to
destroy it from off the face of the earth, 1 King. 13.33, 34. I need not tell
you, how exactly the late Tyrants our Masters followed his steps, the sad
thought of it is too fresh in our memories. Our old true and established
Religion must be thrown down, and turned out, both for government, discipline,
doctrine, manner of worship, and Divine Ordination, as if all had been naught,
and a boundless toleration given for a monstrous many headed new Religion, and
Priests start up of the meanest and lowest of the people; many boldly intruded
upon that holy work to administer the Word and Sacraments, without a lawful
call and separation to it; they climbed up, and crept in the wrong way, like
thieves and robbers, John 10. they consecrated themselves with audacious and
sacrilegious presumption, rushing upon that sacred Function, and came not in by
the door of Divine Ordination, which none ever durst presume to do since the
Apostles time, till these days of confusion; and these were the Priests of the
high places, these, these, the only men in those disorderly times, who having
never taken holy Orders, were thought most worthy to be mounted to the high
places of preferment.

2. A Chaos of confusion follows also in the state: They which kill the Heir to
gain the inheritance, and stone Naboth to seize his Vineyard, must maintain
with a vast expense of blood and treasure what they have unjustly gotten, by
which means the poor people are oppressed and squeezed, harrowed and peeled to
the very bones: We have found and felt this true, what sore oppressions,
unsupportable taxes, and overheavy burdens, besides devouring free quarter
(when our Lord-Danes boasted that all was theirs, and that they had more to do
in our houses, and with our goods (expertus loquor) then we our selves) have we
undergone since the oppression and murder of our good King.

Besides, there is a vast confusion after such a fact, by reason of
contestations between Competitors, as was in the Roman Empire upon Caesar's
death, between Octavius, Lepidus, Marcus Antonius, and others; there is a
furious busling and struggling, who shall be Master and Supreme; now one strives
for it, and now another; now one has it, and then another; now one Government
is up, and then another, and so the oppressed people in this time of confusion
are the greatest sufferers, pelted and buffeted between both, tumbled and
tossed, and emptied from one vessel to another, till their purses are as empty
of money, as their hearts of content, or their lives of comfort.

Now then seeing such a Chaos of confusion both in Church and State follows
upon the murder or violent death of a good King, as we all alas can too
feelingly and knowingly speak, is not the point clear, that the death,
especially the violent death of a good King, is a ground of great mourning to
all good people; for I am sure none will grant them to be good people (unless
themselves may be Judges, and their own mouths praise them) who applaud a Chaos
of confusion in Church and State, and delight, like Sharks, Harpies and
Cormorants, to fish in troubled waters; or like Tories to live upon spoil and
rapine, because there out, they have formerly sucked no small advantage.

I hasten on to the application of this truth to all our souls.

Use 1. First then see here what great cause we have of sad mourning, and of
great lamentation, who have seen a Josiah, a good and religious King, our
great, our chief friend, our common Father, our Bridegroom, our dear Husband
snatched from us by bloody hands, and by a violent death, well may this day be
called a bitter day, as the mourning for one only son, or the mourning of
Hadadrimmon for Englands Josiah.

Let us a little parallel Josiah in my Text with our Josiah, that so seeing his
excellent worth, we may be the more sensible of this exceeding loss, and find
what cause we have for great mourning.

1. Josiah was a very pious and religious Prince, well affected to Religion, to
the true Religion, the reformed Religion, as it was by his care reformed and
restored according to the Law of God, found in the Temple by Hilkiah the
High Priest: to this he adhered, cleaving to the Lord with all his heart, and
walking in all the ways of David his father, and turned not aside to the right
hand, or to the lest, 2 King. 22.2.

So our Josiah was very pious, and zealously affected to Religion, to the true
reformed Protestant Religion, which he firmly professed and cleaved to: And
though his adversaries in the beginning of our troubles blasted him with
Popery, as if he had been a Papist, (a slander as false as the Father of Lies
could invent, and one of their most cunning Engines, whereby ( Absalem-like)
they stole away the hearts of his people, and brought him so low) yet he
continued constant in it to his last breath, and sealed it with his blood; and
that unparalleled book which he wrote and left behind, (...), wherein he
commends that Religion to his son, our now gracious Sovereign, to be constantly
embraced and professed by him, which he found by proof to be the best of all
Religions, and nearest to the Apostolical primity and purity. I say, this shall
stand as a lasting monument to all posterity, to the perpetual shame of those
malicious Traducers. Out of that divine book (so I may call it, for much of a
divinely inspired spirit appears in it) give me leave to add some of his own
sweet words to the Prince of Wales: If you never see my face again, I do
require and entreat you, as your Father and your King, that you never suffer
your heart to receive the least check against, or disaffection from the true
Religion established in the Church of England; I tell you I have tried it, and
after much search, and many disputes, have concluded it to be the best in the
world, not only in the community as Christian, but also in the special notion
as reformed, keeping the middle way between the pomp of superstitious tyranny,
and the meanness of fantastic Anarchy: And a little after, The scandal of the
late troubles, which some may object, and urge to you against the Protestant
Religion established in England, is easily answered to them, or your own
thoughts in this, that scarce any one who has been a beginner, or an active
prosecutor of this late War against the Church, the Law and me, either was, or
is a true lover, imbracer, or practiser of the Protestant Religion established
in England, which neither gives such rule, nor ever before set such examples.

2. Josiah was very zealous for Gods house, he took great care for the
repairing of the Temple, and the beautifying of it, 2 King. 22.3.1 Chron.
35.20. So our Josiah was zealous for the houses of God; in the year of his
reign he took order that the Temples and Churches through the Kingdom should
be repaired and beautified: and attempted, and to a good degree brought on the
reparation of that great Mother Church, (the old Ornament of our Metropolis, or
great City,) famous for the antiquity of it, and for its great bulk: being
reputed for its building the greatest pile in the Christian world: great part
of which charge he took upon himself: which with his fall, is falling down
apace; as also are many other Churches within the Land. That (O shame to
Christianity) by our great reformers for many years, made not only a den of
thieves, but a stable for horses: As the barbarous Turks dealt with that
renouned Temple of St. Sophia in Constantinople, when they had conquered that
imperial City.

3. Josiah was a great friend to the Clergy, to the Prophets and Ministers of
God, the Priests, the Levites, and gave them encouragement in their Service, 2
Cron. 35.2. So was our Josiah, a great lover and respecter of Godly and learned
men, of able, and Orthodox Divines; a great benefactor to the Universities and
Schools of learning; the greatest countenancer, cherisher, and encourager of
the Clergy, and Ministers of England of any King before him. A tender nurse, a
most propitious Father of the Church. Hear his own words in the foresaid
heavenly book; Page 208. I am so much a friend to all Churchmen that have any
thing in them beseeming that sacred function, that I have hazarded mine own
interest, chiefly upon conscience, and constancy to maintain their rights; whom
the more I looked upon as Orphans, and under the sacrilegious eyes of many
cruel and rapacious reformers: So I thought it my duty, the more to appear as
a Father, and Patron of them and the Church. And again speaking of the harsh
denial of his Chaplains attendance, during his imprisoment, But my Agony must
not be relieved with the presence of one good Angel, for such I account a
learned, godly and discreet Divine: and such I would have all mine to be: And
again, As I owe to the Clergy the protection of a Christian King, I desire from
them the benefit of their gifts and prayers; which I look upon as more
prevalent then my own, or other men's; by how much they flow from minds more
enlightened, and affections less distracted, then those which are encumbred
with secular affairs: besides, I think a greater blessing and acceptableness
attends these duties, which are performed as proper to, and within the limits
of the calling, to which God and the Church have specially designed and
consecrated some men. And lastly, Page.214. I must confess I bear with more
grief and impatience, the want of my Chaplains, then of any other my
Servants, and next (if not beyond in somethings) to the being sequestered from
my wife and children; since from these indeed more of earthly and temporary
affections, but from those more of heavenly and eternal improvements may be
expected. What more cordial expressions could come from a pious soul, of love
and affection to that calling?

4. Josiah was a great promoter, and furtherer of Gods public and solemn
worship, that it might be decently, and reverently performed; as appears by
that most famous, and solemn Passover which he kept in this Chapter; which was
done by his command, and to which he contributed upon his own charge super
abundantly thirty thousand Lambs and Kids, and three thousand great cattle, 2 Chronicles. 35.7.

So our Josiah was a zealous furtherer of the public and solemn worship of
God, that it might be performed with all holy devotion, decency and reverence;
not negligently, irreverently, rudly, and slovenly. And which is to be pitied,
and with a fountain of tears to be lamented, this his pious zeal for Gods
house, and worship, and Ministers, for the true Protestant Religion, for the
Church, and its Patrimony, and for the ancient and orderly Government, and
Discipline thereof, was the great crime that provoked the Sectaries to hasten
his destruction.

5. Josiah was a King unblameable in regard of any notorious personal crime; we
find him not noted for any remarkable personal evil, as most of the former
Kings had been: foam are said to be good, and some bad; but the best of them
had their naevus, their spots and blemishes; we read of David's Adultery, and of
Solomon's Idolatry: but none was stamped upon Josiah. The greatest blemish I can
possible discover in him, was a little too much wilfulness, his rash, and
unadvised rushing into that fattall battle at Megiddon; for which the good man
paid dear.

So our Josiah was of unblameable life, more entire and free from any notorious
personal crime, as searing, drunkenness, whoredom, or the like, then most of
the Kings before him, no such like as these could be charged upon him: even his
most bitterest enemies could not tax him: had they espied any blemish, no
doubt we should have heard it again and again.

6. Josiah was a Prince of a soft heart, and a tender conscience: Thine heart
was tender, and thou have humbled thy self before me, says the Lord, 2 King.
22.19. So our Josiah was of a soft heart and very tender conscience: how did
his conscience check and trouble him when by restless importunity he had
yielded compliance (for plenary consent it was not, as he said) to the Act for
the Earl of Straffords death, which in his Judgment and conscience he could
not be satisfied, was just by any clear Law? he confesses he did never bear
any touch of conscience with greater regret. How did he mourn like a Dove, and
complain of itin the bitterness of his soul? How meekly did he mention it with
grief, as the main thing troubling him at the time of his Martyrdom,
acknowledging that the giving way to an unjust sentence, might besome cause
that the Lord permitted such an unjust sentence to be executed upon him? What
is it that made him so firm and constant to uphold the Church in her just and
ancient Rights, Government, and Patrimony, but his tender Conscience? which as
also his Oath persuaded him that Epistcopacy (with some small regulations) was
most Ancient, Universal, Divine, and Apostolical; and therefore could not
yield to the extirpation of that Government, and to the alienation of the
Church-revenues, without wounding his conscience, with some stain of perjury,
sacraledge and impiety. This tenderness of conscience, and the immeasurable,
and unmercifull pressing him against it, struck him to the heart, and stuck
nearer to him then any thing else, as we find it at large in his woeful
complaints uttered between God and his own soul in his Soliloquies.

This his tenderness of conscience was a clear evidence of a godly, gracious,
and sanctified soul, wicked and ungenerate men feel no such cheeks of
conscience at sin: Though sin be an unspeakable burden, like a talent of lead,
yet the weight of it does not trouble them, so as to seek ease from the Lord.
They complain not with David, My sin is ever before me: and mine iniquities are
gone over my head, and are like asore burden too heavy for me to bear.

The Philosophers observe that no Element is heavy in its own place; in the
Sea, let a man be in the bottom of it, although he has the whole Sea on his
back, yet he feels not the weight of it; but let him take but a bucket full
out of the Sea, out of its place, and then he shall feel how heavy it is; So
unregenerate, and graceless persons, though they have a huge weight of sin
upon them, yet they feel it not; their consciences are not pressed nor troubled
with it, because it is in its proper place. But the child of God is sensible of
the least sin, even the appearance of evil: and trembles under the weight of
it, because there it is out of his own place and proper Element. A soft heart,
a tender conscience checking of sin, argues a divine impression upon it, if the
true fear of God, and of his dreadful Majesty.

7. Josiah was a King as devout to God, so devoted to his peoples good; good to
his people, full of goodness to his people. In the verse following my text,
there is mention of the acts of Josiah and his goodness; Now the rest of the
Acts of Josiah, and his goodness or kindness, ver. 26. His Acts and his
goodness or kindness are joined together, because he did many Acts of goodness
and kindness to his people; what an Act of bounty and kindness to his people
was it, to be at that vast charge in the Pass over feast for their ease and
benefit, before mentioned?

So our Josiah did many good Acts in relation to his people. In the beginning
of the long Parliament, he passed sundry Acts of grace and goodness, for the
ease and comfort of his people; as for taking away ship money, for taking away
all illegal taxes; for the taking down the Star Chamber Court, and the high
Commission Court, which were found to be oppressive to his people: for a
trienniall Parliament, and other; enough to have made abundant and ample
reparations for any former miscarriages of his Officers, and Ministers, had he
been to deal with reasonable and moderate men: and more he would have done, and
more he intended to do, yea more then could in reason be required, had his
precious life been spared. But the greedy appetite of some could not be
satisfied without innocent blood, royal blood, as the Jews would rest in
nothing but our Saviors crucifige, crucifige, crucify him, crucify him,
though they pulled the horrid guilt of it upon themselves, and upon their
children.

Thus you have heard what a King, what a good King we had, and what a blessing
in him. Now to have such a Josiah taken from us, is it not a sad loss? and by
a violent and bloody death, is it not a sad case? He was slain, not as Josiah
in my text by strangers of another Nation, and in the hear of battle; but
murdered in cold blood, and that by some of his own Subjects, and Servants, who
had sworn allegiance and fidelity to him, who had declared, promised,
professed, protested, vowed, covenanted to protect, preserve, and defend him,
and to make him a glorious King: (O damnable Hypocrisy!) for these to murder
him, and that not in private, as other Traitors have dealt with their Princes,
but to do it openly with great pomp and artifice (as men solemnly wicked) and
under pretense and show of Justice (Oh hellish mockery of justice, added to
cruelty and malice?) as it were in defiance of Heaven, in the sight of all
Israel, and in the sight of the Sun; in opposition to all Laws, both of God and
man; against the light of their own consciences. This was a sad, and a black
fact. The Powder-plotters were a great deal more modest, they did their work
under ground, and in darkness, as being ashamed of it. But these played a game
above board, in the open light, with an harlots face, without shame or
blushing; so that all circumstances and aggravations considered that might be
named, it was the most daring and horrid act of immanity and iniquity, that was
ever perpetrated under the Sun, next to the crucifying of the Lord of Life; an
act not to be equalized in any history, not only of Holy Writ, but also of
profane and heathen Authors.

For such a King to be thus murdered, is the faddest ground of mourning that
ever the good people of this Nation had; therefore for this, O England, gird
thee with sackcloth, lament and howl, Ier. 4.8. yea, wallow and roll thy self
in ashes, make thee mourning as for an only son, yea bitter lamentation, Ier.
6.26. and as it is Zach. 11.2. howl fur tree, for the Cedar is fallen: And
let us everyone wish with the Prophet, O that mine head were full of water, and
mine eyes a fountain of tears, to weep day and night for the slain, the Ruler
of the people, Ier. 9.1. or as it is, Ier. 14.17. Let mine eyes run down night
and day, and let them not cease, for the Virgin daughter of my people is broken
with a great breach, and with a very grievous blow. O that blow, that very
grievous blow, made the greatest breach upon the sons and daughters of Sion,
upon all true children of this Church, that ever was made, to the piercing of
their hearts, and wounding of their spirits, and bleeding of their very souls;
therefore weep and mourn for this, let our hearts be filled with bitter grief,
and our eyes with brinish tears.

And as for the loss of such a King, so much more let us mourn for that
wonderful and horrid sin which was this day committed in the Land, the shedding
of his innocent blood, a sin over passing the deeds of the wicked, a sin that
no Nation, no people ever committed. Let us beseech the Lord to pardon it, to
acquit the Land of it, that it may no longer cry for vengeance, and call for
judgments to be continued upon us, and cause him to pour out his fury upon us
in blood. Let the blood of sprinkling, the blood of Christ speak better things
then the blood of Abel. Abel's blood cried for vengeance, and so may the blood
of this righteous one, but the blood of Christ cries for mercy. Holy Father,
let that blood of thy dear Son outcry the other, and bring down mercy upon the
Land. O deliver us, and be merciful to us, in regard of that crying sin, for it
was great; Lord lay not the guilt of that blood this day shed: upon the whole
Nation, for thou have many among us, who having neither hands not hearts
defiled in it, did with abhorrency of soul detest and loath, and in much
bitterness of spirit mourn for that odious fact. Thou who art the searcher of
hearts, and know our thoughts, know this to be true.

Lay it home to their consciences who had a hand in it, and are yet living,
that they may see the greatness of their sin, and be moved to great sorrow, and
bitter repentance, and obtain pardon out of thy great and abundant mercies in
Christ, that the innocence of thy blessed Martyr may be cleared, our Religion
vindicated from the scandal, and out Nation cleared from the vengeance of that
blood, and thy mercy glorified in the conversion of so great sinners.

And as for this horrid fact, so for all our other sins and provocations let us
mourn, which helped forward this judgment, for our personal sins, and for our
National sins, we have all contributed to that stock of sin which brought that
stroke of divine vengeance upon the Land. Let us weep in the bitterness of out
souls for the great and crying sins of the Land, our mourning, repining
unthankfulness for former mercies, our barrenness and unfruitfulness under the
means of grace, our swearing and blasphemy, our excess and drunkenness, our
hatred and uncharitableness, our irreligiousness and profaneness, and all
other our heinous sins which so highly provoked the Lords anger, to deliver up
both us and our King into the hands of such merciless and blood-thirsty men:
let us (I say) mourn for them in the bitterness our souls, and beseech the
Father of heaven to pardon them all for the merits sake of his dear Son.

And as we mourn for our provoking sins, so let us turn from them, subdue and
mortify them, that so we turning from our evil ways, and ceasing from
sinning, the Lord may cease from punishing, and turn from his wrathful
indignation, and restore to us his wonted blessings and favors, as (praised be
his name) he has in great mercy begun.

Our sins, our sins have been the cause of this judgment, and of all the
judgments following it. O let us stir up our hearts with indignation against
our sins; as the Jews took hold of Paul, crying men of Israel help, this is the
man that teaches every where against the people; so should we lay hold on our
sins, which are the greatest disturbers, and cry to the Lord for help against
them: as we read of Marcus Antonius, when Julius Caesar was murdered in the
Senate house, and some sought to pacify the business, he brought forth Caesar's
coat all bloody, rent and cut, and spread it before the people: Look here
(says he) you have your Emperors coat thus bloody and torn; whereupon the
people were presently in an uproar, and cried out to slay the murderers. Thus
looking upon this horrid bloody fact, and the other judgments crowding in upon
us of late years, and considering that our sins have been the murderers, and
authors of all these mischiefs, our hearts should be raised to fly upon our
sins with indignation, and not be satisfied without the destruction of them
which have wrought so much distraction among us.

Use 2. If the violent death of a good King be a ground of great mourning to
all good people, see here what good people they are who mourn not, nor ever did
mourn upon this account; what good people they are who plotted, contrived,
abetted, assisted, and acted in that black and bloody work, the horrid murder
of our dear Sovereign; what good people they were, who gloried in it, rejoiced
in it, and justified it being done, as I my self heard one say, that the taking
off of the head of that blessed King, was the greatest and worthiest piece of
Justice that ever was. We know who they were, and of what principles they were,
whose hands were dipped in that blood, and whose fingers were defiled with the
iniquity. The Sectarian party, Anabaptists, Quakers, Independents, fifth
Monarchists of a new stamp, were the sticklers in that detestable, black
business, and the approvers, applauders of it* Judge wha they are. They have
indeed of late usurped to themselves the name of Saints, good people, the well
affected of the Nation, pious, precious men, the holy, the godly men, the holy,
the godly party, as if all other were reprobates to them, Whether they be such
or no, let their works speak and let the world judge, and the Lord himself
shall judge. If murder, aeason, homicide, parricide, regicide, hypocrisy,
perjury, immrnity, cruelty be piety, then let them be Saints, Solomon says;
That the mercies (not of the Saints, but) of the wicked are cruel, from such
Saints, and from their mercies, good Lord deliver us.

Use 3. See what cause we have to bless God for the late blessed and healing
Parliament, which has endeavored to avert Gods wrath, and to acquit the Land
of that innocent blood, by disavowing the deed, and by Justice upon the
Traitors and murderers, and to vindicate our Nation and Religion from that
shame and reproach which the adversaries cast upon both (though unjustly) for
that horrid fact; whereas neither our Nation nor Religion liked or allowed it,
but loathed abhorred and detested it, it was devised, hatched and perpetrated,
by a Sectarian Anabaptistical fanatic party, who (as the Act says) were as
far from being true Protestants, as from being true subjects: all true
Protestants did abominate it, and in bitterness of soul mourned in secret for
it. And blessed also may they be for enacting this Law and Ordinance in our
Israel, for an anniversary fasting and humiliation in relation to it (a thing
my soul desired) that so we may have liberty and opportunity to express our
detestation of it, and lamentation for it in public.

Use 4. See what cause we have to pour forth our humble prayers, and most
hearty supplications to the most high, for his merciful and powerful
protection and preservation of our most gracious Sovereign that now is, (such a
son of such a father) that this land may never have the like cause of mourning,
that he may be a second Josiah (only any such tragic act or end excepted,
which the good Lord avert) for the glory of God, and for the joy and comfort of
this Church and Nation.

That as he has even miraculously kept him from the peril of the sword, and
rescued him from the midst of his furious enemies, brought him back to his
people, and restored him (with little less then a miracle) to his just rights,
and placed him on his Fathers Throne; so he will vouchsafe to be his defense
and strong Tower, to hide him under the shadow of his wings, until uniquity be
overpast. That his sacred person may never come under the power, or be at the
mercy of such Saints, or rather Satanists, whom nothing could suffice but the
blood of a righteous King, the Lords anointed; and (as we have just cause to
fear) who being levened with such sour principles, thirst no less after his.

Lord therefore disappoint their plots, and confound them in their wicked
devices. Let all that rise up against him be like Sisera and Iabin, who
perished at Endor, and became as the dung of the earth: make them and their
Princes like Oreb and Zeb, yea, make all their leaders like as Zeba and
Salmunah: O our God, make them like a wheel, and as the stubble before the
wind, persecute them even so with thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy
storms, make their faces ashamed, let them cover themselves with their own
confusion, as with a cloak: let their mischief come upon their own heads, and
their cruelty fall on their own pates, so shall the King rejoice in thy
strength, exceeding glad shall he be of thy salvation, for why the King puts
his trust in the Lord, and in thy mercy. O thou most high let him not miscarry,
so we thy people, and sheep of thy pasture, shall give thee thanks for ever,
and will be showing forth thy praise from one generation to another: so shall
thy name be glorified, thy son magnified, thy truth defended, thy Gospel
propagated, our breaches repaired, thy poor Church comforted, which we humbly
beseech thee to grant, O Father of mercies, for his sake who is the Son of thy
love, and our only Savior, Jesus Christ the righteous, to whom with thee and
the blessed Spirit of Grace and Truth, one Almighty and ever-living God, be all
honor, praise, and glory, adoration and obedience, now and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

