A BRIEF VINDICATION OF THREE PASSAGES IN THE PRACTICAL CATECHISM, FROM The
Censures affixt on them by the Ministers of London, in a Book ENTITLED, A
Testimony to the truth of Jesus Christ, etc. By H. Hammond D. D.

LONDON. Printed for RICHARD ROYSTON in Ivy-lane, 1648.

A VINDICATION OF THE PRACTICAL CATECHISM.
SEeing it again appears to me by a book, that came to this town on Saturday
last, (entitled, A Testimony to the truth of Jesus Christ, etc. pretending to
be subscribed by 52 Ministers of Christ within the Province of London) that it
is Gods good pleasure to deliver me up to be evil spoken of, and accused, and
to bear a yet deeper part of his bitter cup, then many others of my Brethren
have done, I desire to bless and praise his name for this his goodness and mercy
to me, and to embrace all those, who have joined their hands to be instruments
in this, as those whom by Christ's command (particularly belonging to me on this
occasion) I am bound to love, to bless, to pray for, and not to think of any
other way of return toward them. This, I thank God, I can most cheerfully do,
and would satisfy my self to have done it in private, between God and my own
soul, were there not another occasion, which makes it a little necessary for me
to say somewhat publicly; and that is the vindication of the truth of Christ
Jesus, which they, who are willing to give testimony to it, will, I hope, take
from me in good part.

These men p. 4. in the beginning of the second branch of their testimony,
(which it seems by p. 37. the whole number of the 52 Ministers have subscribed)
make mention of unsound opinions, especially abominable errors, damnable
heresies, and horrid blasphemies, which are broached and maintained here in
England among us, under the notion of New lights, and new truths; many of which
they have reason to judge destructive to the very fundamental truths of
Christianity, etc. All of them utterly repugnant to the sacred Scriptures, the
occasion of much grief of heart to all the friends of truth and piety at home,
the scandal and offense of all the Reformed Churches abroad, the unparalleld
reproach of this Church and Nation, totally inconsistent with the Covenant, and
the covenanted Reformation, and in a word, the very dregs and spawn of those
old accursed heresies which have been already condemned, etc.

After this preface and expression of their zeal to Gods truth, they conclude
the period with a profession, that they more particularly abominate these
infamous and pernicious errors of late published among us, and hereafter
recited in this ensuing Catalogue, viz. Errors, etc.

In this Catalogue, three particulars there are recited from the Practical
Catechism of H. Hammond, 2. Edit. London, 1646.

From which premises, I suppose, any Reader will conclude, that those three
particulars are by these Ministers thought guilty of all those Charges which
they had affixt to All the unsound opinions, etc. noted by them, viz. that they
are utterly repugnant to the sacred Scriptures, etc. and in the modestest of
their expressions, that they are infamous and pernicious errors.

Upon this supposition, I hold it my duty by setting down these three
particulars punctually, to refer it to all impartial Christians to judge
whether it be a Testimony to the truth of Jesus Christ to pass such censures
on them.

The first is recited by them, p. 9. and it is this, That Christ was given to
undergo a shameful death voluntarily upon the Cross, to satisfy for the sin
of Adam, and for all the sins of all mankind.

This is thus plainly set down in their catalogue of infamous and pernicious
errors, but without the least note to direct what part of this proposition is
liable to that charge, any farther then may be collected from the title of the
Errors under which it is placed, viz: Errors touching universal or general
redemption. From whence I presume to discern their meaning to be, that to
affirm Christ to have satisfied for, or redeemed all mankind, is this
pernicious error by them abominated. And such I confess I should acknowledge
it to be, if it had any right to be joined with that other by these men set
under the same head [that the damned shall be saved] but I hope that error has
received no patronage from that Catechism, nor sure from that assertion of
Christ's redeeming all mankind. These two propositions being very reconcilable,
that Christ redeemed all men, and yet that the whole number of the impenitent,
unbelieving, reprobate world shall never be saved by him. If there were any
need of it, I should easily show the way of reconciling these two, by adding
that the great Benefits of Christ's Death, which I affirm to be general, are
given upon condition, not absolutely (as Gods love to the world, and, the
effect of it, giving his Son, is not designed, that all absolutely, but that
all conditionally, i. e. whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but
have everlasting life) and that they which do not perform that condition (as
God knows a great multitude do not) shall never be saved by his death: To
which purpose is that of Prosper, one far enough from all kindness to the
Pelagians, Redemptor mundi dedit pro mundo sanguinem suum, and mundus redimi
noluit, etc. the Redeemer of the world gave his blood for the world, and the
world would not be redeemed. ad Gall: cap. 9. But, to confine my discourse
(without consideration of the consequences) to the assertion it self; I desire
it may be observed, that this was not crudely set down in that Catechism, but
with this immediate addition [ to taste death for every man, Heb. 2.9.] by that
plain testimony of Scripture confirming the truth of what was asserted, as
punctually as could be imagined. For sure [every man] signifies all mankind, as
that notes singulos generis humani, in the largest notion of the word, and
tasting death for them is satisfying for their sins. If this testimony (so
clear, that it alone has, to my knowledge, convinced one as learned a man as
does in this Church of ours maintain the doctrines contrary to the
Remonstrants) be not thought sufficient to support this assertion, I shall then
ex abundanti add these other plain testimonies; Not only that of Gods giving
his only Son, mentioned by Christ, as an effect or expression of his love to
the world, (which it would not be, if he did not give him for the world, whom
he is said to love) but (to prevent all distinctions concerning the notion of
the world, as if it signified, only the Elect) more particularly these two;
First that of 2 Pet. 2.1. where the Lord, i. e. Christ is plainly said to have
bought (i.e. paid the price, satisfied for) them, who deny him, and bring upon
themselves swift destruction: to which agrees that of 1 Cor. 8.11. where the
weak brother, of whom it is said, that by another man's scandal he shall perish,
is described to be one for whom Christ died. The other testimony which I shall
add, is that of S. Paul, 2 Cor. 5.14. which I desire the intelligent Reader to
observe: Where speaking of the constreining obliging love of Christ, he says,
we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead, that is, surely,
All in the full latitude, not only the elect but All others; and this
conclusion the Apostle inferrs by this medium, because one, i.e. Christ died
for all, which being a proof of the other, must certainly be as true, and as
acknowledged (if not more) as that which it is brought to prove; and
particularly the [all] for whom he died, be as unlimited as the [all] that were
proved from thence to be dead, or else the Apostle could not judge (as he says
he does) or conclude the death of all in Adam by that medium. From this arguing
of the Apostle I shall make no question to infer, that in S. Paul's divinity,
Christ died for all who are dead in Adam; and on that occasion I shall add, by
the way, that the contrary doctrine [of Christ's not dying for all] was by the
Ancients affixt on Pelagius upon that ground, of his affirming that all (i. e.
that Infants) were not fallen in Adam, and so needed not to be redeemed by
Christ. Thus it appears by S. August: cont. 2. Epist. Pelag: l. 2. c. 2.
Pelagiani dicunt Deum non esse omnium aetatum in hominibus mundatorem,
salvatorem, liberatorem, etc. and when the Massilians, to vindicate themselves
from that charge of S. Augustines, confess that Christ died for all mankind,
(as it appears by Prospers Epistle) Prosper expresses no manner of dislike of
that confession, but forms other charges against them. And the truth is, there
is scarce any ancient writer before Pelagius, but has directly asserted
Christ's dying for all, The testimonies of Irenaeus, Clemens, Origin, Macarius,
Cyril of Jerusalem, Eusebius, Athanasius, and many others might readily be
produced, if that were needful. And then let it be guest also, which of the two
positions, the affirmative or the negative, best deserves the charge of being
the spawn of those old accursed heresies, which have been already condemned,
etc. The same I could add from many the learned Protestants, which never
were thought to be tainted with any ancient or modern heresy (though others I
know have expressed themselves otherwise) but I need not such auxiliaries. To
conclude this point, I suppose in affirming or vindicating this position, I
have born testimony to the truth of Christ, from whom, and whose Apostles I
profess to have learned this truth, and to conceive it (for the sense of it)
as fully testified by plain Scriptures, as many Articles of the Creed; and for
the expression used in the Pract: Catechism of [all mankind] I must
acknowledge to have learned it from the Church of England (of which I do yet
with joy profess my self an obedient son and member) in those words of her
Catechism, established by Act of Parliament, and inserted in the Book of
Liturgy, where I was taught, [ to believe in God the Father, who created me and
all the world, In God the Son, who redeemed me and all mankind, and in God the
Holy Ghost, who sanctified me and all the elect people of God; where mankind as
it is of a narrower extent on one side then all the world of creatures, so is
it to be understood of a larger, then all the elect people of God; and so much
for the first charge.

The second is set down p. 15. and it is this, That neither Paul nor James
exclude or separate faithful actions or acts of faith from faith, or the
condition of justification, but absolutely require them, as the only things by
which the man is justified. What is thus set down I acknowledge to be in
terminis in the practical Catechism, but cannot easily guess wherein the
error or perniciousnesse is conceived to lie, unless it should possibly be
through a mistake of the phrase [the only things by which the man is justified]
as if by that speech should be understood, either that the faithful actions or
acts of faith without faith it self, were the only things by which we are
justified, or else that all the things there spoken of, Faith, and faithful
actions, or acts of faith are the only CAUSE, and so some CAUSE of our
justification, or by which, as by a CAUSE, we are justified; either of these I
confess might pass for an error, but both these doctrines I have sufficiently
disclaimed; and indeed in this very proposition it is affirmed that the faithful
actions or acts of Faith are not excluded or separated from Faith (which they
must be if they justify without Faith) or the condition of justification ( i.
e. from that faith which is considered as, and affirmed to be the condition of
our justification) but by those two Apostles absolutely required, to what? why
to faith, or the condition of our justication, as the only things together with
it by which as by a condition, and only so (as it is clearly set down all over
that part of the Catechism, which handles faith or justification) the man is
justified. This I suppose may give these men some light of their mistake, if it
were such: but if they understand the speech as then and now I do, and yet
think it error, and pernicious, I must then only prove that what was said from
S. James and S. Paul, was not by me falsely imposed upon them, and then they
must either maintain my speech, or fall with me in the same condemnation. That
S. James does not exclude or separate faithful actions, or acts of Faith, from
Faith, or the condition of justification, but require them, ( i.e. Faith, and
faithful actions, or acts of faith) as the only things by which, as by a
condition, the man is justified, will be clear by the definition of a condition
in Logic, and the plain words of S. James; A Condition is a qualification of
the s^bject required to make him capable, or a causa sine qua non; and so a
condition of justification is no more, then that without which a man cannot be
justified; and that as the direct affirmation of S. James, c. 2.24. Ye see that
by works ( i. e. faithful actions, or acts of faith) a man is just^fied, and
not by faith only: and again, Faith if it have not works, v. 17. and Faith
without works, v. 20. is dead, and so, sure, not such as by which we are
justified. From whence I form this syllogism, That, without which, in S.
James's opinion, we are not justified, and by which joined with faith we are
justified, not by faith only, is not by S. James excluded or separated from
Faith or the condition of our justification, but required together with Faith,
as the only things by which (as by a condition the man is justified; But
without acts of faith or faithful actions, in S. James's ^^^mon, we are not
justified, and by them we are justified, and (...) by faith only, Therefore
faithful actions, or acts of ^^^th are not by St. James excluded or separated
from Faith, or the condition of our justification, but required together with
faith, as the only things by which (as by a condition) the man is justified.

The first proposition is clear from the nature of a condition; the second from
the words cited out of S. James, and then I hope the conclusion will neither be
error nor pernicious.

Then for S. Paul it is made evident in the Pract: Catech^sme that the faith by
which according to his doctrine Abraham was justified (and not by works) Romans
4. was not only a depending on God for the performance of his promise (which
yet was a faithful action, or act of Faith) but also a resigning himself up
wholly to him to obey his precepts; or more clearly, was a Faith, which,
howsoever it was tried by promises or commands, did answer God in Acts of
faith, or faithful actions; and so was accepted by God (without absolute
unsinning obedience, much more without obedience to the Mosaical law, i. e.
without works) all which is clear in the story of Abraham, and I suppose need
not farther be evidenced. And then concerning S. Paul's part in the business,
my syllogism shall be this, He that affirms Abraham to be justified by that
Faith, which, howsoever 'twas tried, did answer God in acts of faith or
faithful actions, does not exclude or separate Faithful actions or acts of
faith from faith, or the condition of our justification, but absolutely
requires them, etc. But S. Paul affirms Abraham to be justified by that Faith,
which howsoever 'twas tried, did answer God in faithful actions, or acts of
faith, Therefore S. Paul does not exclude or separate faithful actions, etc.
The first proposition I conceive wants little proving, after that which has
been already premised in this matter. And for the second I shall desire that
Abraham's faith, as it has justification attributed to it by Saint Paul, may be
viewed both in the 4 to the Romans and the 11 to the Heb. In the former his faith
was tried by the promise of a numerous seed, etc. and he answered that with one
act of faith, or faithful action, believed in hope, beyond hope, v. 18. was
strong in Faith, and gave glory to God, v. 20. was fully persuaded, that what
God had promised, he was able to perform, v. 21. all which what are they but
acts of faith, or faithful actions; all, which (when the object of the faith is
Gods absolute promise) the matter is capable of, and for this it was counted to
him for righteousness, or he was justified, ver. 22. and thence sure I may
conclude, that these were so required, as the condition by which he was, and
without which he should not be justified. In the 11 to the Heb. many other acts
of his faith, or faithful actions are mentioned; v. 8. by faith he obeyed to go
out of his own Country, not knowing whither he went, and v. 9. by faith he
sojourned in a strange land, v. 10. by faith he expected a city, that has
foundations, v. 17. by faith he offered his Son, and v. 19. counted that God
was able to raise him up from the dead, v. 20. by faith he blessed Isaac
concerning things to come. What are all these but acts of faith, or faithful
actions in all kinds of trials? And therefore I suppose all this being out of
Saint Paul, as the former out of Saint James, 'twill be no error or pernicious
from their very words to have affirmed this doctrine, and affixt it on them. I
suppose also this may serve for the second proposition.

The third is set down p. 18. from Pract. Catech. p. 120. and it is this, That
[thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain] is undoubtedly no
more then [thou shall not forswear thy self.] To this Charge I answer first,
that it is a little strange, that a bare explication of a phrase of Scripture,
a part of the third Commandment in Exodus though it were acknowledged false, or
forced, should yet be so far improvable by any, as to come under the title of
an infamous pernicious error, a spawn of the old accursed heresies, etc. and be
capable of all those other aggravations at first mentioned, which being affixt
to all the errors in the Catalogue, must also be affixt to this which is set
down for one of them.

But then secondly, for the truth, (most undoubted certain truth) of this
explication, or interpretation thus censured, I have formerly at large made it
appear, that the words [to take the name of God] signify to swear, and no
more, and the Hebrew which we render in vain, signifies [falsly] and is so
rendered in the ninth Commandment, and agreeable to that, Psalm. 15. to lift up
the soul to vanity, is to swear by the soul or life falsely, as it there
follows, nor sworn to deceive his neighbor, and beside my own judgment in
this matter, backed with the consent of as learned as this age has, or the
Ancient Church had any, I conceived that I had a most authentic warrant from
Christ himself, who renders it (...), thou shall not forswear thy self: For so
we read Mat. 5. ye have heard that it was said to them of old, thou shall not
kill, and again in the same manner, thou shall not commit adultery, that is,
That of the 10 Commandments delivered in Sinai, and brought down by Scripture,
to them his present auditors, one Commandment was, thou shall not kill,
another, thou shall not commit adultery, and so again in the very same form of
words, another, Thou shall not forswear thy self, From which I did assure my
self (and so still do) that (...), is as directly the interpretation (in Christ's
judgment) of the first part of the third Commandment, as (...), or (...) of
the seventh and sixth, and so that it is undoubtedly no more the one then the
other. And indeed this was the only occasion of delivering those words in the
Pract: Catech. to show that Christ did not misreport the words of the
Commandments, nor yet refer to any other place, but that Commandment in those
words of his. And though I have many other things, that I could say to that
matter, able to free that speech from all imaginable inconveniences (especially
when in that place Christ's prohibition is explained to be against all kind of
swearing (by any other as well as by God) in ordinary conversation, or in any
case but wherein it is necessary to confirm by oath) yet I am very willing to
leave the matter here, upon this account at this time given of it, i. e. in my
opinion on Christ's score, and not fear what any ingenuous Reader will charge on
me for this interpretation.

I beseech God to forgive them which have brought this unnecessary trouble upon
the Reader: and for my self I have to them these two only requests, 1. That
they will examine themselves sincerely, and as in Gods sight, what the motive or
design was, which persuaded them to single out me alone (who profess my self,
and am by all that know me, acknowledged to hold nothing contrary to the Church
of England, and will justify it to any man that knows what the Church of
England is) and join me with the broachers of all the blasphemies and heresies
of this age: And 2ly, that they will lay to heart the consequences which may
naturally flow from hence, if God do not uphold weak Christians, who seeing so
many doctrines of very distant natures blended together, with the same brand of
[heresie and blasphemy, infamous and pernicious] fastened on them, and no kind
of proofs annexed, that any are such (beside the judgment of the Censors) may
possibly find some of them to be the infallible truths of God, and be tempted
(if they have not stronger antidotes then this bare Testimony will afford them)
to have the same thoughts of the other also; Or if not, whether they will not be
inclined to have the same severity and condemnation for me, or any other
asserter of such propositions as these, as they are taught to have for the
authors of those other blasphemous propositions, and so be tempted to
uncharitableness.

Having said thus much, I shall hope it may find some good success among some
who have subscribed that Testimony: But if I am mistaken in all of them, I
shall then desire that this improsperous Paper may gain me but thus much, that
either the first subscriber Mr John Downam (who did License the Printing of
this very Book, from whence all these pretended Errors are cited) or else Dr
Gouge, or Mr Gataker, who are foremost of the second rank, or some other person
of learning and Christian temper will afford me their patience personally, and
by fair Discourse, or any other Christian way, to debate the truth of our
pretensions; and for this I shall wait their leisure.

H. HAMMOND.
From my Study, Christ-Ch: in Oxon. Jan. 24. Monday.
The End.

