THE SPEECH OF Major John Harris AT The place of Execution, near St. Mary Axe,
on Monday the Third of September, 1660.

With his Prayer immediately before his Death; And his Confession touching his
appearing on the Scaffold before White Hall, at the most horrid Murder of our
late Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles.

London, Printed for Nathaniel Bryan, 1660.

THE SPEECH OF Maj. John Harris, AT The place of Execution, on Monday the Third
of September, near St Mary Axe: With his Confession, touching his appearing on
the Scaffold at the horrid and most detestable Murder of our late Gracious
Sovereign, etc.
SInce the Exploit put upon the Ginny Mer-chant by Major John Harris; who
counterfeiting the Hand and Seal of Cromwell the Tyrant, presumed to demand some
hundreds of pounds from them, ^y a spec^ous pre^ence of Authority and
Commission from the said Tyrant, which he obtained; And having something in
Arrear, as he said, and falling into Poverty, Necessity invited him to use his
Wits once more, (which proved his last;) For, upon his going to one Mr. De Noy
a Merchant, with a Guard of Soldiers, pretending the Lord Chancellors Warrant,
he caused the doors to be broke open, entered the house, and carried away about
12. pounds in money. From thence he went to Capt. Halls at Redriff, about 2 or
3 of the clock in the morning and in like manner entered his house, carrying
away a very considerable sum: Which being done, he gave the soldiers 30
shillings to drink, and dismissed them, immediately betaking himself to his
house at Lambeth Marsh: But he was in few hours pursued, and by a Warrant
apprehended, and committed to Newgate, where he remained till the last
Sessions: At which being tried, he was found guilty of Burglary, and received
Sentence of Death to be executed near St. Mary Ax, not far from the place where
the Merchant lived: Which accordingly on Monday the 3d instant, was put in
execution, being carried from Newgate, with his Coffin, in a Cart; But before
we proceed to his Speech, we shall only give a touch of his Confession; Which
was, That he protested against the having any hand in the late Kings Death, and
that he was only upon the Scasfold with a half pike, being commanded thither
by some Commission-Officers, etc. But the time of execution drawing nigh, he
was required to hasten; and being come to the place where he was to breath his
last he addressed himself to the People (wringing his hands) as follows:

CHristian Friends, As my time in this world is very short, so is the breath of
my Nostrils ready to depart; I am exceeding faint and weak the Lord (in mercy)
enable me to undergo this bitter Cup; the Dregs, I confess, I deserve; but I
hope God will forgive me my sins, since I conceive it is very much his pleasure
to bring me to this place for the sins that I have committed. It is the Lords
affliction, blessed be his Name. And though I desire, as I am carnal, that this
Cup may depart from me, yet not my will, but the Lords be done. Death brings
unto the Godly an end of sinning, and of all miseries due unto sin, so that
after death there shall be no more sorrow, nor cry, or pain, for God shall wipe
away all tears from our eyes; by death our souls shall be delivered from
thraldom, and this corruptible body shall put on incorruption, and this mortal
immortality. I beseech you pray for me, and join with me in this my last prayer.

His Prayer a little before his Death.
WElcome blessed hour, welcome Death, the period of my Pilgrim^ge, the term of
my Bondage, the end of my Cares, the close of my sins, the bound of my Travels,
the Gaol of my Race, and the Haven of my hopes; I have fought a long fight in
much weakness, I have finished my course though in great faintness, and the
Crown of my joy is, through the strength of Divine Grace, I have kept the true
Faith: And now what is my hope? my hope Lord Jesus is even in thee, for I know
that thou my Redeemer live, and that thou will immediately receive my Soul,
and raise up my body also at the last Day. And now, O Lord, let thy Spirit of
Comfort help mine infirmities, and make supplication for me with sighs and
groans that cannot be expressed; I submit my self wholly to thy Will, I commit
my Soul to thee as my faithful Redeemer, who have bought it with thy most
precious blood. I confess, I know no name under heaven by which I may be saved*
but thine my Jesu, my Savior; I re^ounce all confidence in any merits save
thine. I thankfully acknowledge all thy blessings I unfainedly bewail all my
sins, I stodfastly believe all thy promises, I heartily forgive all my
Enemies, I willingly leave all my Friends, and I entirely long for thy coming.
Come Lord Jesus come quickly; Lord Jesus receive my Spirit.

Then pulling his Cap over his Eyes, he prayed again very fervently, putting up
diverse short E^aculations; As, Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit, for
thou have redeemed it; O God, thou God of Truth; Lord Jesus, receive my Soul;
Sweet Savior into thy hands I commit my Spirit; and so he yielded to Death.

FINIS

