A LETTER FROM THE Archbishop of PARIS, TO THE Late King JAMES.
Great SIR,
AS the King is truly sensible of Your Majesty's firm adherence to his
Interest, even with the loss of your Three Kingdoms, so he has redoubled his
Care, and has left no stone unturned to restore Your Majesty to the said
Kingdoms again; not only by endeavoering to reduce them, but by making War also
against all the Consederates who opposed him in this his Undertaking. And
although the King beyond hopes has not been successful in the first, though
there was a very good prospect of it, yet he succeeded in the other, in having
enlarged his Dominions very much, and by increasing the same still by the Great
Conquests he makes every Year, by the great and continual Victories he obtains
over his Enemies from time to time; but all this is not such a satisfaction to
his Generous Mind, as that would be, if he could restore Your Majesty to Your
Throne again. This grieves the King, and sticks so much to his heart, that he
does not value the smiles of Fortune, so long as it frowns upon Your Majesty.
And as good Offices claim Gratitude, so the King not only Royally received Your
Majesty into his Kingdom, but maintained and Cherished you too in that Grandeur
to this very hour, besides his Kindness he showed to that great number of your
Subjects which he Maintained, and Employed. No less was expected from the Holy
See, whom Your Majesty so highly Obliged when Reigning, who instead of
out-doing the King's Kindness toward Your Majesty, stands now marked with
Ingratitude. But now the King seeing his Kingdom Exhausted of Money, by the
immense Charges he has been at, and his own Subjects Croaning under the
Miseries that attend a War, and then considering the Effusion of Blood of so
many Thousands of Christians, and that a Prince who will reap the Benefit of
his Arms, must make Peace when he is the most Victorious. Therefore the King
amidst his great Victories stretches out the Scepter of Peace, to all his
Enemies; which as he has done at first, in particular to the Duke of Savoy, out
of Compassion to withdraw him from his Ruin: So he does now in General to all
the Confederate Princes. But These, as well as He, being pufft up with great
Hopes, and expecting the turn of Fortune, refuse the King's fair Offers, and
stand upon so high Terms, which amount even to the Pyrenean Treaty! A thing not
to be expected from so Victorious a Prince, as our King is. Yet, the King being
desirous to see the Peace of Europe Established, for the Reasons above
mentioned, is willing to grant them more ample Proposals; such as he does not
doubt but would he accepted of by the Confederates; and he meets with no other
Difficulty, than the Re-inthroning of Your Majesty. Which as it is the Thing
the King takes the most to Heart, so he has labored for it, more than for any
other thing: But it seems Heaven is against it, and will have it otherwise. It
lies therefore in your Majesty's Power to remove that Obstacle and to further
that so much wished-for Peace; by following the Laudable Examples of that great
Emperor Charles the Fifth, and Casimire King of Poland; who quitting their
Empire and Kingdoms, chose rather to live a Religious, and Retired Life, a Life
which the King was a commending much the other day: A Life, I presume to tell
Your Majesty the advantages of, by mentioning the dangers of the other. Your
Majesty was seated upon a Precipice, and the more you are Elevated, the more
dangerous will prove the Fall. In that Retirement you will be safe as it were
upon a Plain, from whence you may look back upon the dangerous Rocks behind
you. Descending from the Throne, you mount to the repose of a private life. And
as there is nothing to be esteemed a pleasure, or a happy state without a
perfect safety; so your Your Majesty will find, that you will then be more
contented, more happy, and consequently more high than you was before. There
you may secure your self from the dangers of a troublesome Kingdom, and bewail
the perilous condition of Worldlings, and purchase an Eternity of Joys. No
other Earthly condition can equal that: It Is a Heaven upon Earth, separating us
from the rest of the World, and contented with its own Tranquillity, and
Delights. Such a one it will be to Your Majesty, if you embrace it voluntarily,
and withdraw your heart from all worldly Cares and Creatures, and contemn a
Worldly Diadem. Which that you may do, the Author of all good grant that Your
Majesty's Affections, Actious, Thoughts and Desires may be ordered by him to
that end, that they may begin and end in him, who is the Abyss of Happiness.

Paris the 22d. of June 1694. Great SIR, Your Majesty's Most Humble, and Most
Obedient Servant, FRANCIS, Archbishop of Paris.

Superscribed thus, To His Most Excellent Majesty James the Second, K. of Great
Britain, etc.

LICENSED, July 12. 1694.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Rich, Baldwin in Warwick Lane, 1694.


