A DISCOURSE UPON This Saying: The Spirit of the Nation is not yet to be
trusted with Liberty; lest it introduce Monarchy, or invade the Liberty of
Conscience.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Henry Fletcher, at the three Gilt Cups in Paul's
Churchyard.

A DISCOURSE, etc.
DAVID was a man after Gods own heart, yet made the people Judges of what was
of God, and that even in matters of Religion; as where he proposes unto the
Representative, consisting of twenty four thousand, in this manner: If it seem
good unto you, and that it be of the Lord our God, let us -- bring again the
Ark of our God to us: for we enquired not at it in the days of Saul, 1 Chro.
13. But men in this Nation blow hot and cold: one main exception which the
Prelatical and Presbyterian Sects have against Popular Government, is, that as
to Religion it will trust every man unto his own Liberty; and that only for
which the rest of the Religious Sects apprehend popular Government, is, that
the Spirit of the Nation (as they say) is not to be trusted with the Liberty of
Conscience, in that it is inclining to persecute for Religion. What Remedy? Ask
the former Sects, or parties different in judgment as to matter of Religion,
(for the word signifies no more) they tell you a King; ask the latter, they
tell you some certain or convenient number of Princes, or an Oligarchy: But
says the Scripture, Put not your trust in Princes. It does not any where say
the like of the Congregation of the Lord, or of the people; but rather the
contrary, as is employed in the example already alleged of David's Proposition
unto the Representative of Israel, and is yet plainer in the Proposition of
Moses unto the whole people, even before they were under orders of popular
Government; and when they were to introduce such orders, as where he says,
Take unto you wise men, and known among your Tribes, and I will make them
Rulers over you. Now these Rulers thus elected by the people, were Supreme,
both in matter of Religion and Government: in which words therefore, both by
the Command of God, and the example of Moses, you have the spirit of the people
trusted with all matters either Civil or Religious. Throughout the Testaments,
Old and New, (as I have over and over demonstrated unto you) the proceedings of
God, as to the matter of Government, go not beside the Principles of humane
Prudence the breadth of one hair. Let Saints therefore, or others, be they who
or what they will, work otherwise in like cases, or (to speak more particularly
unto the present state of things) obtrude upon us Oligarchy when they can or
dare, they shall be, and soon confess themselves to be below men, even of
natural parts. In the mean while, having thus the free leave and encouragement
both of Scripture and Religion, I come unto a farther disquisition of this
point by the card of Reason, and the course of Prudence.

In all the Circle of Government, there are but three spirits; the spirit of a
Prince, the spirit of the Oligarchy, and the spirit of a Free People: wherefore
if the spirit of a free people be not to be trusted with their Liberty, or,
which is all one, with the Government, then must it follow of necessity; that
either the spirit of a Prince, or of the Oligarchy, is to be trusted with the
Liberty of the people, or with their Government.

What the spirit of a Prince entrusted with the Government or Liberty of the
people has been, we have had large experience; and full enough of the spirit
of the Oligarchy: for a single Council having both the right of Debate and
Result, never was nor can be esteemed a Commonwealth, but ever was and will be
known for mere Oligarchy. It is true, that the spirit of the people, in
different cases, is as different as that of a man. A man is not of that spirit
when he is sick, as when he is well: if you touch a sick man, you hurt him; if
you speak to him, he is froward; he despairs of his health; he throws down his
medicines: but give him ease, he is debonaire and thankful; give him a cure,
and he blesses you. It is no otherwise with the people. A people under a yoke
which they have lost all hopes of breaking, are of a broken, a slavish, a
pusillanimous spirit, as the Paisant in France. A people under a yoke which
they are not out of hopes to break, are of an impatient, of an active, and of a
turbulent spirit, as the Romans under their Senate for Life, the Hollanders
under the King of Spain, and the English (after the ruin of the Nobility)
under the late Monarchy. A people broken loose from their ancient and
accustomed form, and yet unreduced unto any other, is of a wild, a giddy
spirit; and (as the Politician says) like some bird or beast, which having
been bred in a lease or chain, and gotten loose, can neither prey for it self,
nor has any body to feed it, till (as commonly comes to pass) it be taken up
by the remainder of the broken chain or lease, and tied so much the shorter; as
befell those in Spain after the War of the Commonalties, and the Neapolitans
after that of Mazinello. But a people under orders of popular Government, are
of the most prudent and serene spirit, and the voydest of intestine discord or
sedition; as the Venetians, the Switz, and the Hollanders.

Wherefore thus we may in no wise argue: A Ship without Tackling and Steerage
is not to be trusted with any freight, nor can make any Voyage: therefore a
ship with Tackling and Steerage is not to be trusted with any freight, nor can
make any Voyage. But to say that the people not under fit Orders of popular
Government, are not capable of Liberty; therefore the people under fit Orders
of popular Government, are not capable of Liberty, is no better: as the former
Argument breaks up all hope of Trade, so the latter breaks up all hopes of
popular Government.

Here lies the point. The Mariner trusts not unto the Sea, but to his Ship.
The spirit of the people is no wise to be trusted with their Liberty, but by
stated Laws or Orders: so the trust is not in the spirit of the people, but in
the frame of those Orders, which as they are tite or leaky, are the Ship out of
which the people being once imbarqued, cannot stir, and without which they can
have no motion.

If the Trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself unto the
Battle? It is not a multitude that makes an Army, but their Discipline, their
Arms, the Distribution of them into Troops, Companies, Regiments, and Brigades:
this for the Van, that for the Rear-ward; and these bodies must either rout
themselves, which is not their interest, or have no motion at all, but such
only as is according unto Orders: If they march, if they alt, if they lodge,
if they charge, all is according unto Orders. Wherefore he that gives the
Orders, trusts not to the Army, but the Army trusts him. It is no otherwise
in the ordering of a Commonwealth. Why say we then, that the people are not to
be trusted, while certain it is, that in a Commonwealth rightly ordered, they
can have no other motion then according unto the Orders of their Commonwealth?
Have we not seen what difference there may be in an House elected by the
Counties only, and an House elected both by the Boroughs and the Counties? Is
this so much from the people, as from their Orders? The Lacedemonian Senate for
Life, before the institution of the Ephori, was dangerous; after the
institution of the Ephori, was not dangerous. The Venetians, before the
introduction of their present policy, were very tumultuous; since the
introduction of the same, are the most serene Commonwealth. Was this from the
people who are the same, or from the difference of their Orders? If you will
trust Orders, and not men, you trust not unto the people, but unto your Orders:
see then that your Orders be secure, and the people fall not.

You the present Rulers of England, now the object of Angels and Men, in the
fear of God look to it. I dare boldly say, and the world will say to all
posterity, If England through the want of Orders be ruined, it was not that you
needed to trust the people, but that the people trusted you.

And of what Orders have some of you that lay the people so low, and think your
selves only to be trusted, made offer? Do you not propose,

That they who are or shall be entrusted, (with Power or Authority) be such as
shall be found to be most eminent for Godliness, Faithfulness, and Constancy to
the Good Old Cause and Interest of these Nations?

Now I beseech you consider, if you mean to make your selves Judges, without
the People or Parliament (in such manner as you have owned your Commander in
Chief) who are Godly, and what the Interest of the Nation is, what kind of
Commonwealth this must make: Or if you mean to make the People Judges, without
which it is impossible there should be any well-ordered Commonwealth, whether
you can give them any other Rule then according unto Moses, Take ye wise men,
and understanding, and known among your Tribes.

Consider whether those you would indemnifie for strengthening the late
unnatural and dishonorable Yoke, be eminent for Godliness, Faithfulness to the
Good Old Cause, or for asserting the Interest of these Nations; and whether to
impose such Qualifications as may bring these or the like again into power, be
the more probable way unto a Free State, or to leave the People acording unto
the Rule of Moses, unto their Judgment in these Cases.

You propose, That to the end the Legislative Authority of this Commonwealth
may not by their long sitting, become burdensome or inconvenient, there may be
effectual provision made for a due succession thereof.

I beseech you to consider what Example can be produced of any one Commonwealth
wherein the Legislative Authority was not continually extant or sitting; and
what reason there can be that it should possibly be otherwise, the Government
remaining a Commonwealth. Consider whether in case the two Houses of Parliament
had been heretofore perpetually sitting, the Government had not been a
Commonwealth; Whether the intervals of the same, were not that in a good part,
which caused it to be Monarchical? and so, whether the Legislative Authority in
a Commonwealth being intermitted, must not convert the Commonwealth into
Monarchy, in case the intervals be guided by a Single Person; or into
Oligarchy, in case they be guided by a Council. Lastly, Consider whether such a
Council in the intervals of Parliaments, be not, of all others, that Molehil by
which a Tyrant can be most conveniently raised, for a jump into a Throne, or
what there is in this case to withstand him, though White Hall should be sold
or pulled down.

Again, you propose, That the Legislative Power be in a Representative
consisting of an House successively chosen by the People, and of a select
Senate, coordinate in Power.

Upon which I beseech you to consider, Whether there can be any safe
Representative of the People, not constituted of such a number, and by such
Rules as must take in the Interest of the whole People: whether there be not
difference between the interest which a People can have under Monarchy, and the
Interest which a People ought to have under a Commonwealth: and whether it be a
good Argument, that an Assembly of four hundred upon intervals, was a
sufficient Representative of the People under Monarchy, or under Lords on whom
they depended; therefore the like may be sufficient under a Commonwealth, where
they are their own Lords, and have no dependence. I beseech you to consider
whether it be natural unto any Assembly to resolve otherwise then according
unto the Interest of that Assembly. Whether it be not natural unto the Senate,
especially being not elected by the People, but obtruded, and, as I suspect,
for life, to Debate according as they intend to Resolve, and to Resolve
according to the Interest of the Few, or of a Party. Whether it be not
unnatural, confused and dangerous unto a Representative of the People, rightly
constituted, to Debate, whether it be not natural to such a Representative to
Resolve according unto the Interest of the whole People? Whether the Senate
Resolving according unto the Interest of the Few, and the Representative
Resolving according to the Interest of the Many, be not the certain way of
creating feud between the Senate and the people, or of introducing Blood and
Civil War. And last of all, whether to declare the Senate and the
Representative coordinate, be not to give unto either Council both the Debate
and the Result indifferently, and in that the inavoydable occasion of such feud.

Lastly, you propose, That the Executive Power be in a Council of State.

Upon which I beseech you to consider, whether ever the Prytans in Athens, the
College in Venice, or a Council of State in any Commonwealth, had any
Executive Power, except in the management perhaps of a War, or Treaty with
foreign States.

Upon the whole, I beseech you to consider whether these Propositions, and such
like, be not contrary unto the whole course of popular Prudence in all or any
one Commonwealth, and tending unto the certain destruction, or at least
intolerable confusion of the people. Yet are these, I suppose, intended by you
as a bar unto Monarchy, and a guard unto the Liberty of Conscience.

To the ORDERS of a COMMONWEALTH. The whole Territory is equally divided into
fifty Tribes or Shires: in every one of these Tribes, the people of each Parish
elect out of themselves one man in five to be for that year a Deputy of that
Parish. I but, they will choose Cavalieres or Presbyterians. Well, if that be
the worst, for discourse sake be it so. These Deputies thus chosen in each
Parish, are upon some certain day in their year to assemble at the Capital of
their Tribe or Shire, and there to elect a few to be Knights or Senators, and a
fuller number to be Burgesses or Deputies in the Representative of the people.
Good: and these also must therefore be such as were their Electors. So the
sovereign Assemblies of the Nation will consist of Presbyterians and
Cavalieres: and being thus constituted, will either introduce Monarchy, or
invade the Liberty of Conscience, or both.

But these at their Election take an Oath of Allegiance unto the Comonwealth.
An Oath is nothing. How! not among Christians? Let us see what it has been
among Heathens. Brutus having driven out the Tarquins, or Roman Kings, thought
the spirit of that people not yet fit to be trusted with their Liberty; and for
this cause gave them an Oath, whereby they abjured Kings; which was then
thought and found in that case to be enough. But if this would not have served
the turn, what could? For Brutus to have expelled the Kings, and yet not to
have given the people their Liberty, he well knew was not to have driven forth
Monarchy, but to have laid Obligation upon the people to bring it back again in
hatred of the Oligarchy; as we in our way of proceeding have felt, and continue
still to feel, yet blame the people upon as good grounds as if we should say,
The people are impatient of trusting Oligarchy with their Liberty; therefore
the people are not to be trusted with their Liberty. But supposing an Oath were
as slight a matter as indeed in these days it is made; these Sovereign
Assemblies, though they should be thus constituted of Presbyterians and
Cavalieres only, yet could in no wise either introduce Monarchy, or invade the
Liberty of Conscience, for these Reasons: The natural tendency of every thing,
is unto the preservation of it self: but Cavalieres and Presbyterians under
these Orders are a Commonwealth; therefore their natural tendency must be to
the preservation of the Commonwealth. It is not so long since a Roundhead was
made a Prince; did he make a Commonwealth? Or what more reason can there be,
why if you make Cavalieres and Independents a Commonwealth, they should make a
King? What experience is there in the world that the greatest Cavalieres being
once brought under the Orders of popular Government rightly balanced, did not
thenceforth detest Monarchy? The people of Rome (Libertatis dulcedine nondum
experta) were the greatest Cavalieres in the world; for above one hundred years
together, they obstructed their Senate, which would have introduced a
Commonwealth, and caused them to continue under Monarchy: but from the first
introduction of popular Government, continued under perfect detestation of the
very name.

Putting the case that the Senate could have a will to destroy it self, and
introduce Monarchy, you must also put the case that they may have some interest
to do it: for the will of every Assembly arises from the interest of the same.
Now what interest can there be in a Senate thus instituted, to destroy it self,
and set up Monarchy?

The Senate can do nothing but by proposing unto the people: it is not possible
for them to agree unto any thing that can be proposed, without debating it; nor
can any Debate tend unto any such agreement, but in the force of reasons
thereunto conducing. Now what reason had ever any Senate, or can any Senate
ever have, to incline them unto such an end?

No man nor Assembly can will that which is impossible: but where a
Commonwealth is rightly balanced, that a Monarchy can there have any Balance,
except the Senate can persuade people to quit three parts in four of the whole
Territory unto a Prince, or to a Nobility, is impossible. But if the
introduction of Monarchy can neither be in the will of the Senate, though that
should consist altogether of Cavalieres and Presbyterians, then much less can
it be in the will of the Assembly of the people, though this also should
consist altogether of Cavalieres and Presbyterians.

But while we talk that the people will be so rash in Elections, we observe not
that this is but the rashness of the Few, exalting their wisdom above the
wisdom of the people. If it be not seen that a Commonwealth so ordered as has
been shown, must of necessity consist in the Senate of the wisdom, and in the
popular Assembly of the interest of the whole Nation, after such manner that
there can be no Law not invented by the wisest, and enacted by the honestest,
what the people under such a Form shall do, cannot be judged: and if this be
seen, we must either believe that the exclusion of Monarchy, and the protection
of Liberty of Conscience, concern not the wisdom or interest of the Nation, in
which case they are points upon which the present power ought in no wise to
insist, or that being according unto the wisdom and interest of the Nation,
that wisdom and interest so collected as has been shown, must be much more
able to judge of, obliged to adhere unto, and effectual to prosecute those
ends, then any hundred or two hundred men in the world, were they never so
select and unbyassed. Which nevertheless is not said against the ways we have
to go, but for the end in which we are to acquiesce.

The distinction of Liberty into Civil and Spiritual, is not ancient, but of a
latter date; there being indeed no such distinction: for the Liberty of
Conscience once granted separable from Civil Liberty, Civil Liberty can have no
security. It was the only excuse that the late Tyrant pretended for his
Usurpation, that he coukl see no other means to secure the Liberty of
Conscience. Suppose an Oligarchy were like-minded, would it follow that the
Tyrant did not, or that the Oligarchy could not usurp Civil Liberty? Or is not
this the only plausible way by which they might? What encouragement (except
for present ends, or some short time) has liberty of Conscience had to trust
more unto men, then Civil Liberty? Or what became of that Civil Liberty which
was at any time trusted unto a Prince, or to the Oligarchy? On the other side,
where has that Free State or Commonwealth been ever known, that gave not
Liberty of Conscience?

In Israel at the worst, or when it was scarce a Commonwealth, Paul earnestly
beholding the Council, that is, the Sanhedrim, or Senate of the Jews, -- cried
out, -- Men and Brethren -- of the hope and resurrection of the dead, I am
called in question: and when he had so said, there arose dissension between the
Pharisees and the Sadduces. -- For the Sadduces say, That there is no
resurrection, neither angel nor spirit: but the Pharisees confess both, Act.
23. Howbeit the Sadduces, for the rest adhered unto the Scriptures of the Old
Testament, of which the Pharisees made little or no account in respect of their
Oral Law, or traditions. Whence it follows, that in this Senate there were
two Religions, and by consequence that in this Commonwealth there was Liberty
of Conscience; and so much the rather, in that besides these Sects, and that
also of the Essenes, this Commonwealth consisted in a good part of Proselytes
of the Gates, who did not at all receive the Law of Moses, but only the
precepts given by God to Noah.

Paul (Act 17.) in like manner, seeming to be a setter forth of strange gods,
(in the Commonwealth of Athens) because he preached unto them Jesus, and the
Resurrection; and the Athenians, being given to spend their time in telling or
hearing some new thing, they took him and brought him (not by application of
any violence, but out of curiosity and delight in novelties) unto Areopagus,
or unto the famous Senate in Athens, called The Areopagites, honored by
Cicero, to furnish an Argument against Atheists; where he argued, That to say,
The World is governed without God, is as if one should say, That the
Commonwealth of Athens is governed without the Areopagites. Paul being thus
brought unto Areopagus, or unto the place (that you may see it was not under
custody) where the Senators used to walk, stood in the midst of Mars-hill, and
preached: now the Areopagites or Senators, were some Epicureans, who held as
the Sadduces; and others Stoics, who held as the Pharisees: and when they
heard of the resurrection of the dead, some (that is, the Epicureans) mocked,
and others (that is, the Stoics) said, We will hear thee again of this matter.
And Paul (for another Argument that he was all this while at his own disposing,
and full Freedom) departed from among them. Howbeit, certain men clave unto
him, and believed, among which was Dionysius the Areopagite. So in the Senate
of Athens there were now three Religions; the Epicurean, Stoic, and Christian:
whence it must needs follow, that in the Commonwealth of Athens, there was
Liberty of Conscience. Men that are versed in Roman Authors will have little
Reason to doubt, that the Learned of this People gave not much credit unto
the fabulous Religion that among them was national: among these, as is yet
apparent by his Writings, was Cicero, who nevertheless lamenteth, That he found
it easier to pull down a Religion, then to set up any; yet was neither Cicero,
nor any man of his judgment, for this, less capable of being Consul, or of any
other Magistracy. All things are not equally clear in every Story, yet shall no
man give one reason or example that it has been otherwise in any Commonwealth.

It is true, that the Popish Commonwealths do not give the Liberty of
Conscience. No man can give that which he has not: they depend in part, or in
the whole, as to Religion, upon the Church of Rome; and so have not the Liberty
of Conscience to give: but even these do not take it away; for there is no
Popish Commonwealth that indureth any Inquisition. Now I say, If there be no
reason nor example that a Commonwealth ever did invade the Liberty of
Conscience, either there must be some cause in Nature, which has hitherto had
no effect, or there is no reason why a Commonwealth can invade the Liberty of
Conscience. But the reason why it cannot, is apparent: for the power that can
invade the Liberty of Conscience, can usurp civil Liberty; and where there is a
power that can usurp civil Liberty, there is no Commonwealth. To think
otherwise, is to measure a Commonwealth by the overflowing and boundless
passions of a Multitude, not by those Laws or Orders without which a Free
People can no otherwise have a course, then a free River without the proper
Chanel. Yet as far as we in this Nation do yet stand from this object, we can
perceive a difference between men, and Orders or Laws. A man will trust the Law
for a thousand pound, nay must trust it with his whole Estate. But he will not
trust a man for an hundred pounds; or if he do, he may repent it. They who dare
trust men, do not understand men; and they that dare not trust Laws or Orders,
do not understand a Commonwealth. I told a Story of my Travels to some
Gentlemen that were pleased with it. The Italians are a grave and a prudent
Nation, yet in some things no less extravagant then the wildest; particularly
in their Carnaval or sports about Shrovetide: in these they are all Mummers,
not with our Modesty, in the night, but for diverse days together, and before
the Sun; during which time, one would think by the strangeness of their Habit,
that Italy were once more overrun by Goths and Vandals, or new peopled with
Turks, Moors and Indians, there being at this time such variety of shapes and
Pageants. Among these, at Rome I saw one which represented a Kitchen, with all
the proper Utensils in use and action. The Cooks were all Cats and Kitlings,
set in such frames, so tied and so ordered, that the poor creatures could make
no motion to get loose, but the same caused one to turn the spit, another to
baste the meat, a third to scim the pot, and a fourth to make green-sauce. If
the Frame of your Commonwealth be not such as causes every one to perform his
certain function as necessarily as this did the Cat to make greensauce, it is
not right.

But what talk we of Frames or Orders? though we have no certain Frame, no
fitting Orders, yet in this Balance there are bounds, set even by His Hand who
stilleth the raging of the Sea, and the madness of His People. Let the more
wary Cavalier, or the fiery Presbyterian march up when he may into the Van, he
shall lead this Nation into a Commonwealth, or into certain perdition. But if
the old Officers, men for the greater part of small Fortunes, but all of large
Souls, ancient Heroes, that dared to expose themselves unto ruin for their
Country, be restored unto their most deserved commands, this will be done, and
done without a bloody nose, or a cut finger.

We hope ye are Saints: but if you be men, look with all your might, with all
your prudence, above all, with fervent imploration of GOD's gracious Assistance
(who is visibly crowning you) unto the well-ordering of your Commonwealth. In
the manner consists the main matter. Detest the base itch of the narrow
Oligarchy. If your Commonwealth be rightly instituted, seven years will not
pass, ere you^ clusters of Parties, Civil and Religious, vanish, not through
any force, as when cold weather kills flies; but by the rising of greater
Light, as when the Sun puts out Candles. These in the reason of the thing are
demonstrable, but suit better with the spirit of the present times, by way of
Prophecy. England shall raise her Head to ancient Glory, the Heavens shall be
of the old Metal, the Earth no longer Lead, nor shall the sounding Air
eternally renounce the Trumpet of Fame.

Ja. Harrington.
May 16. MDCLIX.
FINIS.

