THE SPEECH OF Maj. Genesis Harison, UPON His Arraignment, Trial, and
Condemnation; WITH The Sentence of Death pronounced against him, To be Hanged,
Drawn, and Quartered.

As also the Speeches of Alderman Tich Mr. burn, Hugh Peter's, Col. Axtel, and
Col. Lilburn; At the Sessions House in the Old Bayley, before the most
Honorable Lords, and others His Majesty's Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer;
Upon the reading of the Charge and Indictment of High Treason, That they had
Wilfully, Maliciously, and Traitorously, Advised, Abetted, Assisted, Contrived,
and Compassed the Death of our late Dread Sovereign Charles the First by the
Grace of God of ever blessed Memory King of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.

London, Printed for Charles Gustavus, 1660.

The Speech of Major Genesis Harrison, Sir Hardress Waller, and Hugh Peter's, at
Justice-Hall in the Old-Bayley; upon the reading of the Bills of Indictment,
etc.
THe Bill of Indictment being (on Tuesday last) read at Hicks-Hall, against
those unjust Judges, who contrived, arraigned sentenced, and executed that most
virtuous Prince our late Sovereign King Charles the First of ever blessed
Memory; And the said Bill being found by the Grand Jury of Knights and
Gentlem^n of quality of the County of Middlesex, on Wednesday (October. 10.)
Twenty eight of those whom the Grand Jury had found, were brought from the
Tower to Justice Hall in the Old Bayley before the most honorable Lords, and
other His Majesty's C^mmissioners of Oyer and Terminer; the names of the
Prisoners were, Sir Hardress Waller, Thomas Harrison, Robert Tichburne, William
Heveningham, Henry Marten, Robert Lilburne, John Carew, Isaac Pennington, Owen
Roe, John Jones, John Cook, Henry Smith, John Downs, George Fleetwood, Thomas
Wait, Simon Meye, Hugh Peter's, Thomas Scot, Gilbert Millington, Adrian Scroop,
Gregory Clement, Edmund Harvey, Vincent Potter, Augustine Garland, James
Temple, Francis Hacker, Peter Temple, Daniel Axtel.


The Court being sat, called three Prisoners to the Bar, viz. Sir Hardress
Waller, Col. Harrison, William H^venningham. The first was Sir Hardress Waller,
which with the two others were indicted to this purpose following:

That they together with Oliver Cromwell, Henry Ireton, Robert Titchbourn, Isaac
Pennington, Robert Lilburn, John Hewson late of the City of Westminster
Shoo-maker, etc. had Wilfully, Maliciously, and Traterously, Advised, Abetted,
Assisted, Contrived, and Compassed the Death of Our late Dread Sovereign
CHARLES the First, by the Grace of God of ever blessed Memory, King of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.

Sir Hardress Waller began to excuse his long being out of England, and
unacquaintance with English affairs; But eing bid to answer positively, whether
he was Guilty or not Guilty of the High Treason whereof he had been indicted,
and then Arraigned, answered, Guilty.

The next was Col. Thomas Harison, who at the first refused to hold up his
Hand, till the Lord Chief Baron, Judge Forster, and other Judges told him his
duty in that particular: After which, he said, I confess it is but a Formality,
and therefore I will do it; and so held up his Hand: Bu^ several times offered
to sally out into Discourses, refusing to answer Guilty or not Guilty, till the
Judges declared the necessity of answ^ring one of the two, which they were
forced to do diverse times before he would be brought to give an Answer, but at
last he did, and said, Not Guilty.

William Heveningham answered the like; but Col. George Fleetwood pleaded
Guilty without any demur.

These being dismissed, Isaac Pennington, Henry Marten, Gilbert Millington,
Robert Titchbourn, Owen Roe, Robert Lilbourn, were called to the Bar. Isaac
Penningtons Age gave him not time to make long Apologies, for he very suddenly
answered not Guilty; so did Gilbert Millington, and Owen Roe.

Henry Marten being the next began to Quibble with the Court, and to deny his
name to be mentioned in the Act; whereupon the Court were put to the trouble of
calling for the Act of Oblivion, and there read his name; but he answered, that
his name was Marten not Martin, as in the Act expressed. But being told they
knew him to be the Man, let his name be what it would, was bid to answer, who
then said, not Guilty.

Titchbourn being next, began to excuse his want of skill in Law affairs;
pleading, that he was before very Wise, Learned, and Judicious Lawyers, and
that being unable to plead for himself, desired the Court to assign him Council
to assist him therein: To which it was answered, that he was not yet come to
his Trial, but only Arraigned; and asked him Guilty or not Guilty? to which he
could not tell what to answer; He said he did acknowledge part of the
Indictment. But being told he must say Guilty or not; answered, not Guilty. So
did Lilburn and all the rest.

Col. Daniel Axtel desired he might have the liberty of an Englishman, that
the Law was his Birth right, and so he might lawfully claim it, That he did
conceive there was Law in his Case, and so desired to have Council in it, That
he did believe the Parliament -- But there he was bid to plead to the
Indictment, Guilty or not Guilty; which after much roving, and being told the
danger of standtng Mute, he answered, Why then, not Guilty. And being asked by
whom he would be tried he did not answer; at which one bid him answer, By God
and his Country. But he answered, he could not do so; For he did not believe
God to be there. In conclusion, he said, He would be tried by the Lord Jesus
Christ, and by his Country,

Hugh Peter's being asked whether he was guilty of the High Treason whereof he
was Indicted, he lifted up his hands and eyes, and said; Guilty? No not for ten
thousand Worlds.

It Is probable, he may have regret of Conscience, for ushering in his former
Doctrines (or rather Blasphemies) of Heresies and Rebellions; and with the
Penitent thus contemplate with a ferve^t Spirit O miserable and wretched Souls,
to use such Barbarism against our Gracious Sovereign, and Protes^^^^ (...)ay
the wisest of men and the b^st of Princes. O s^d and mis^rable are all those
who have committed such horrid impiety in the assassinating of their most
Gracious Sovereign, that whosoever heard thereof* it could not but make both
his Ears to tingle, his heart to faint, and his knees to tremble. O it was we
that in a tumultuous and disloyal way made Covenants to oppose the King, and
countenance that Empostress Maiden who (pretending to Enthusiasmes) persuaded
the People to Rebellion, and blasphemed Christ by the name of Covenanting
Jesus. It was We that was the Cause of the late execrable Miseries throughout
the three Kingdoms; Good God what Advocate shall We have to plead for Us at the
Bar of Gods Judgment, now ^hou art calling for us to make an account of
these things? when Inquisition is made for blood, and the cry of the Souls
under the Altar shall obtain their desired vengeance upon Us. How has every
loyal Bre^st shrunk* and every faithful Soul thrilled at the horror of that
fatal blow, which at one stroke murdered not only one Prince, but three Kings
in one, the best of men, and three Kingdoms, the most flourishing of all
People, and in them the most Royal Blood of Imperial Majesty, the purest of all
Religions, the justest of all Laws, the wisest Constitution of all Governments,
and (had we known our own happiness) the happiest of all people? What Tongue of
Men or Angels can sufficiently express the detestation of that bloody fact that
separated the best of heads from so lovely a body? The best of Kings from his
most Loyal Subjects? The best of Husbands from a most affectionate Wife? The
best of Fathers from most sweet and dutiful Children? And the best of Masters
from Thousands of most happy Servants. In a word, the horridness of that
transcendent impiety was such, that (next to the murdering of our most blessed
Savior) it was the most accursed act that ever yet was perpetrated upon the
face of the Earth.

On Thursday Major General Harrison was again brought to the Bar, and pleading
to his Indictment, after some time spent thereupon, he was brought in Guilty,
and received Sentence to be Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered; Upon pronouncing
whereof, he said, The Lords Will be done, although ye kill the Body, yet ye
cannot hurt the Soul.

FINIS.

