THE WEARY TRAVELLER HIS Eternal Rest, BEING A DISCOURSE of that Blessed Rest
here, which leads to endless Rest hereafter.

By H. H. D. D. Rector of Snaylwell, and Canon of Ely.

Matt. 11.29. Take my Yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly
in heart, and ye shall find Rest unto your Souls.

There remains therefore a Rest to the People of God,

Heb. 4.9. LONDON: Printed by A. G. and J. P. for R. Clavell, at the Peacock in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1681.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in God And my ever honored Lord, PETER, Lord
Bishop of Ely.
MY LORD,
MANY have labored, and wearied themselves in a restless enquiry after a
perpetual Motion, whose thoughts might have been employed to better purpose in
finding out perpetual Rest: There is no Man living but would have Rest, all our
labors, all endeavors tend that way: Your Lordships unwearied Active Motion,
in the high place and calling, in which Divine Providence has set Your
Lordship, leads undoubtedly, in a direct line, to this desired Rest; and as all
natural Motions make more have, as they come nearer their Center, so Your
Lordships more vigorous, and cheerful moving in this holy Function, makes us
jealous, lest Your Lordship should make more have to an Eternal Rest in the
Church Triumphant, than stands with the interest of the present Church
Militant, in which Your Lordships Care and Government, have been so eminent,
and are still so necessary: To no other therefore could I more advisedly
address these Meditations of Rest, than to the blessed hand of a Patron, whose
indefatigable labors have so fairly entitled him, to all the promises of this
most glorious and blessed Rest. Nor comes this under Your Lordships Protection
without design, for having once taken Sanctuary there, and past the dread it
has of Your Lordships view, I shall not need for ever after be sollicitous,
what Eye it may be exposed unto for its censure. But if it be asked why I
(after so many pious, devout, excelling discourses of this nature) should cast
my Mite at last into this Sacred Treasury; the poor Widow in the Gospel shall
answer for me, who at the same time when she beheld the richer Offerings of the
wealthy, thrown frankly in before her Eyes, yet held she not her self thereby
excused: And that this (though the meanest of all oblations that have gone
before it) may yet contribute something, toward the safe conducting some
drooping Travelers, that are weary and heavy laden, to their long home, their
last and happy Eternal Rest, has been sincerely in the desires, and shall for
ever be in the Prayers of,

MY LORD, Your Lordships most devoted obedient Son, and most obliged humble
Servant, HEN. HARRISON.

ERRATA.
PAge 25. Line 26. for (...) read (...) p. 45. l. 22. f. satisfied r.
falsified. p. 77. l. 11. Comma at sees, and l. 13. the sense to go on without
any new Paragraph. p. 87. l. 15. f. watchful r. wrathful. p. 114. l. 20. f.
modesty r. in modesty. p. 143. l. 7. f. up r. it up. p. 144. l. 5. f. dwell r.
duel. p. 152. l. 24. f. descend. r. descended. p. 153. l. 20. f. cease r. to
cease. p. 180. l. 13. f. (...) r. (...). p 184. l. 25. f. easily r. easy. p.
213. l. 17. f. natural r. mutual. p. 218. l. 17. f. Wifes r. Wives.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE general Catalogue of Books, Printed in England since the Year 1666. And a
Catalogue of School-books. As also, a Catalogue of Latin Books Printed in
Foreign Parts and in England since the Year 1670.

Brutum Fulmen: or the Bull of Pope Pius V. concerning the Damnation,
Excommunication, and Deposition of Q. Elizabeth, as also the Absolution of her
Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance, with a Peremptory Injunction, upon pain
of an Anathema, never to obey any of her Laws or Commands, etc.

Both Printed for R. Clavel, at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard.

THE WEARY TRAVELLER HIS ETERNAL REST.
MAN goes forth to his Work, and to his Labor, until the Evening; says the
Royal Prophet, Psalm. 104.23. The day of his Life is spent in a painful and
weary Travel, 'till the Evening come, 'till his declining Sun be fully set, and
he fitted to lie down in Peace, and enjoy the happy Rest of a long ensuing
night. But that Man, in this his day, might not disquiet himself in vain; that
he might not bear the heat and burden of the day, and yet miss of this Rest at
night; the holy Apostle St. Paul writing to the Hebrews (and in them to all
Christians) begins his fourth Chapter, with an Exhortation to Fear, lest a
Promise being left them of entering into God's Rest, any of them should seem to
come short of it. Wherein he lays down the Ground and Motive of Hope, plainly
implied in the same words; A promise being left them of entering into his Rest;
concluding the whole Chapter, with a most cogent endearing invitation, to come
boldly to the Throne of Grace, to obtain Mercy, and to find Grace to help in
time of need; That so he that went on his way weeping, and bearing forth good
seed, might doubtless come again with joy, and bring his sheaves with him; That
he that went sighing and groaning, under the weight and burden of his heavy
load, might have no cause to faint, or despond in the way, nor start aside
through the sad affrightments of hopeless fear. Hope and Fear (well tempered
together) are the two preservatives of our Safety or Spiritual Life; they are
that, which keep our Faith and Love, from despair on the one side, and from
presumption on the other; from slothful security on this hand, and tormenting
distrustful anxiety on the other. Fear, as the Rudder of the Ship, diverts our
Souls, in their sailings to Heaven, the Haven of their eternal Rest, from the
Quicksands and Rocks that are in the way; while Hope, as the Sails, filled with
the breathings of God's Spirit, his faithful promises, carries us forward,
against the tide or stream of the World, our earthly desires, and carnal
inclinations: Wherefore the wise Apostle, here, as every where else, throughout
this, and his other Epistles, seeks to temper and mix these two, in the Souls
of Christians: And having exemplified the possibility, both of attaining, and
also of losing God's Rest, in the ancient Israelites, chapter 3. v. 7. to the end;
now repeats, and presses the motives of Fear and Hope, upon the Hebrews, and
in them on all Christians. Let us therefore fear, lest a promise being left us
of entering into his Rest, any of you should seem to come short of it. Were the
promise of Rest unconditional and absolute unto some, and not at all propounded
to others, with any feazibleness of attaining it, by a true possibility of
performing its conditions; the former should have no reason to fear, nor the
latter to hope: But the promise being conditional and general, excluding none
from God's Rest, that will prepare themselves for it, by faith, hope, and love
unfeigned; sincere impartial persevering obedience and patience; giving them
full assurance of it, upon the evidence of their integrity in these things;
inclusive of none, but such as entirely, humbly, thankfully, believe and accept
it on these terms: They that as yet neglect these terms, or are in danger of
falling away from their former diligence in observing them, had need to fear,
lest they miss of it; and in that fear, work out their own Salvation, give all
diligence to make their calling and election sure; which as it seems by St.
Peter, is not so, unless by adding to Faith Courage, to Courage Knowledge,
Godliness, Charity, Temperance, Patience, more and more. Having these promises,
dearly beloved, says St. Paul, 2 Cor. 7.1. The promises of a most gracious
reception, all the mercies of Heaven hereafter; with so much on Earth, as is
for our good; I will receive you, and be your Father, and you shall be my Sons
and Daughters, says the Lord Almighty. Having these promises, let us cleanse
our selves from all pollution of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the
fear of God It seems then, that humble fear of offending God, and losing his
promises, by not performing of their conditions (not coming out from among the
wicked, or coming out, not cleansing our selves more and more, from all
pollutions of Flesh and Spirit) is not only the beginning of Wisdom, as you
have it elsewhere, but perfective of Holiness, which is our only true Wisdom.
Were all that profess the Name and Gospel of Christ Jesus, sincere professors;
or were all that begin to be so, secured for ever from ceasing to be so, by
turning back to disobedience and unbelief; Saint Paul, and St. Peter, would not
thus both of them exhort to fear, lest a promise being left them of entering
into God's Rest, any of them should seem to miss or fall short of it. But since
it is so clear and manifest, that many professors in all Ages have been
faithless, and hypocritical in their profession; and since it is so disputable
at least, nay highly probable, both from Scripture, and from reason and
experience, that many professors sincere at first, may prove backsliders, and
fall away from their former righteousness, faith, and obedience; it is both the
Duty and Wisdom of all to fear, lest any miss of the promises, for want of
performing sincerely and constantly the necessary conditions annexed to them.
Scarce is there any part of Divinity more dangerously mistaken, corrupted,
debauched, by the prejudices or interests, passions or lusts of several Men,
made more instrumental, to flatter and cherish that sloth in good, or security
in evil, for destruction of which they were made or propounded, than that of
the promises of Christ and his Gospel. Some give them the enclosure, or
monopoly, as I may so say, of our faith, while the precepts and threats, which
have as much right to be believed as they, his Kingly and Prophetic Office, to
which he was as particularly anointed, as to that of Priest, being too commonly
set aside as unnecessary; nay, with some not only looked upon as no part of the
Gospel, but as dangerous to be obtruded for the object of Faith or Duty. Some
would persuade themselves and others, that the promises of Christ are
particular and absolute, confined to some few, and to those howsoever they be
qualified; when as the whole tenor and current of Christian Doctrine proclaims
directly the quite contrary, that they are general and conditional; a Picture
that looks every Man in the face, that comes into the room, but cannot be
imagined to eye any Man else; unrestrained to all, provided they perform the
condition, and an (...); those diffusive rich Storehouses, sealed up against
all, who do not perform it. Shall we therefore have the patience, the justice
and piety, yea, the wisdom and faithfulness to our selves, to resist a while
these strong prejudices, to rescue the sacred object of faith from such
misprisions, to set up the promises of Christ henceforth in such a posture, as
may have the safest and kindest influence; the powerfullest and most benign
aspect on our Hearts and Lives, not to swell and puff up our phansies any
longer, with an opinion that we are the special favorites of Heaven, to whom
the promises of Rest are consigned unconditionally, or without possibility of
being forfeited; but to engage and oblige our Souls to that universal constant
righteousness, holiness, obedience, as well as faith, which may really instate
us in those promises, that may, like the Angel to St. Peter in Prison, awake us
out of our sleep and dream, and shake off those gyves and manacles, which keep
our feet from walking in the ways which God has prescribed, and thereby even
confine and fetter God himself, if I may so speak, from making good his
promises effectually, to such indisposed unqualified persons. If we look on the
lives of most Christians professing the Gospel, with great pretense at least of
confidence, that they shall be partakers takers of God's Rest, that the promise
thereof belongs to them, though they live as those that set up their Rest in
the lusts of the flesh, those lusts of the Eye, that pride of life which is
directly contrary to it, and the love of the Father; we have but too great
reason to fear, that unless they repent and reform speedily and effectually,
they will prove such as no Rest belongs to.

And if we look on the slothful negligence in good works, yea the wilful
backsliding to wicked works, to false Doctrines, to lewd practices, which are
to be found too visibly and frequently even in those, who once were sincere
Believers, such as had for a time obeyed both in heart and life the Gospel of
Christ, received his precepts into their practice, as well as promises into
their Creed; we shall have too great reason to fear, that they also may fall
away finally from those conditions, without the renewed presevering performance
of which, there is no rest of Gods to be had. Wherefore both in respect of the
former faithless Professors, and of the latter backsliding Professors, let us
fear, as the Apostle exhorts us, fear in wisdom toward our selves, and fear in
charity toward others; fear and watch over our selves and one another, watch
and pray, labor and strive, lest a promise being left us of entering Gods
rest, any of us seem to fall short of it, for want of attending to its
conditions, which is not only an outward profession but a lively faith working
by love, and that not only begun or continued for a while, but persevering to
the end. Despise not then the motive of Fear, lest you despise your own Souls.
To fear any mortal visible enemy, any earthly temporal danger, in an holy
righteous cause, is cowardice and servile baseness: to fear the labor of study
and diligence, is sloth and idleness: but to fear God and his righteous
threats, especially that of losing his rest, of incurring his endless
intolerable displeasure, this is a wise and gracious fear; not only the
beginning of Wisdom and Grace, but its safety and preservation, its watchful
Monitor, Exciter, and Furtherer all along; for it makes us examine and prove
our selves, whether we are as yet in the faith, well settled and grounded, such
a faith as works by love and sincere obedience, not a groundless or fruitless
credulity, persuasion, confidence of all being well, on a bare profession; and
when we have found that we are sincere in faith, repentance, love, obedience,
it awakes our care to continue so, by growing in grace, and persevering against
whatever allurements or terrors, lest we fall from our own steadfastness, and
hold not fast the ground of our confidence to the end. It works on our memory,
and revives our humility for sins past; it works on our reason, and stirs up
our care against sin for the future. The fear of missing or falling short of
Gods rest, of incurring intolerable eternal trouble, anguish, and pain,
restrains us from running on in the ways of destruction. In the restraint some
hope of pardon shows it self; in this hope we see the mercy and love of God,
and then at last perceive the horror and ugliness of sin, not only in its
punishment, but in it self. This last has more of love than fear in it, and
the fear is now become filial; for a good Son will fear the anger of his Father
so much the more, because he knows the greatness and sweetness of his love, and
by that fear preserves and increases his filial obedience. Our Savior commands
his Apostles themselves, who sure were Sons, and had the Spirit of Adoption, to
fear him that can destroy both body and soul in hell fire, that they might not
fear, but choose to suffer all that Man could inflict on their bodies, rather
than hazard the loss of his favor; for what is the fire of persecution to that
of Gods wrath? or the pains of a Rack for an hour or two, to the torments of
hell for evermore? The Fathers call this fear, (...), the bridle of lusts or
disorderly appetites, and not only the entrance to Piety, but the Guardian of
all Virtue.

St Jerome confesses he owed the strictness of his life to this fear; and St
Ambrose says, Love it self is upheld by it. Some would confine fear to Mount
Sinai, as if Mount Sion did exclude it; whereas the Apostle having compared the
Law on the one, and the Gospel on the other, Heb. 12.18, 22. adds presently
ver. 25. See ye refuse not him that speaks; for if they escaped not who
refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away
from him that speaks from heaven. And then concludes the whole Chapter with
these words, Wherefore let us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably,
with reverence and godly fear; for our God is a consuming fire. I know that of
St Aug. is true, Brevis differentia legis and Evangelij, Timor and Amor. But
it is the fear of temporal punishment which is proper to the Law, wherewith, as
also with hope of temporal promises, they were in that Nonage allured or
terrified, first to outward, then to inward spiritual obedience. We should
indeed for the great kindness and enamouring amiableness of our Redeemer and
Redemption, be all on fire with thankful love; but we must consider not only
what is the height of our duty we owe to our Lord, but what is that which at
first entrance into his School we can perform, and what afterward through the
remainders of corruption we still need, and what he will be pleased to accept.
Thus to be frighted and chased to happiness is an Argument indeed of our
imperfection; but since our state is as yet imperfect, it is our Wisdom to use
all such helps as our Lord allows of. And yet even in the state of innocence
our first Parents needed this motive, and had not fell if they had used it:
they fell with this thought, that they should not fall. They who in this lapsed
imperfect estate, require such Christians only as are made up of all love, do
but Votum accomodare, non Historiam, nec qualis est, sed qualis esse deberet
describunt. They tell us what their wish is, and our duty; but consider not the
real History of what is, and what is likely to be effected. Thus Tully says of
Cato, that optimo animo and summa fide utens, nocet, interdum Reipublicae, with
an honest and good meaning he did sometimes much hurt to the Commonwealth, by
imposing that strictness of Laws and Manners, which 'twas not able to reach or
keep. Tanquam in Platonis Republica non tanquam in faece Romuli; fitting his
sentence rather to Plato's phansied Utopian Commonwealth, than to the real
state of Rome. So I may say of these Perfectionists, they do not remember that
they have to do with Men, in whom some remainders of the old Man will still be
lusting against the Spirit; and those lustings must be checked, and chil'd and
suppressed sometimes, with this fear of falling short of God's Rest, and falling
into intolerable Troubles. And yet suppose they were as St. Paul, and feared
Sin more than Hell, yet the height of some Men's grace is no ground for a
general Doctrine; nor because Love is the best of all, therefore may Fear be
made unlawful; as if that were a Sin, which God propounds to keep us from Sin.
Hell I am sure is a part of our Creed as well as Heaven, and God has
propounded both a Tribunal and a Mercy-seat, and if we may serve God as Moses
did, with an eye of hope to the recompense of reward, why not with an eye of
fear toward him, who though a Father, will-judge every man according to his
works. Our Savior indeed, Luke 12.32. bids his flock, how little soever, not
fear, because it is their Fathers pleasure to give them the kingdom; but the
fear he forbids, is the fear of distrustfulness in him, or his promises, or
assistances; as if he would not or could not defend his obedient Children
against the numerous Herd of the wicked; not the fear of incurring his holy and
just displeasure, in case they should do what must displease him. We do not
fear as the Jews did, present punishment to restrain us from that lust, which
otherwise we love and would willingly follow. Our greatest motives of obedience
are not from that spirit of bondage, which looks chiefly on temporal things,
and thinks it self rejected for ever if chastised here, or tried with
afflictions; for the Gospel directs us to things invisible and eternal, much
more clearly than the Law, and makes afflictions patiently endured, the sign of
Gods favor rather than hatred; nor is it contrary to the Spirit of Adoption,
to fear offending him that adopted us, lest thereby he disinherit us. Though we
are received into the family of Gods children, and must love God above all as
our Father, love our Redeemer so much more than all Relations, than life it
self and its dearest contentments, as to forsake and renounce them for ever,
rather than him: Yet we are still exhorted and enjoined to pass the time of our
sojourning here in fear, not to fear what Man, but God can do unto us. To love
him as a Father, and fear to lose his love by offending him; to love the Son,
and kiss him with reverence lest he be angry; to love the Holy Spirit of God,
and fear to grieve, resist, and quench him, lest we turn his grace into
wantonness, and make him withdraw his gracious presence, that would enable us
in holiness and righteousness to serve him, without fear of any evil that can
befall us so doing, or of any enemy that can hurt us; and yet to fear him whom
we serve as our Lord and King. A good Son may fear to incur his Father's wrath
by ceasing to be so, and yet cry Abba Father.

Tertullian interprets that of Saint John, Perfect love casts out fear, of lazy
fear, that will not go on in the way of grace, for fear of a Lion in the way,
some hazard, and difficulties likely to meet him; not the fear of Gods wrath
possible to be incurred by sin and backsliding, but of temporal dangers and
persecutions. If our love be perfect, though with the perfection of sincerity,
that is, habitually prevailing over all other loves, 'twill cast out such fear,
and make us lay down our lives for the Brethren, to glorify God, and encourage
others by the evidence of our faith, content to adventure any thing for Christ's
sake, even death it self; but sure not the displeasing of God, and the torments
of Hell, that were too prodigal an alms, too wild a valor, directly contrary
to the love as well as fear of God in Christ. Charity again casts out all
fear, but by degrees; as that increases, so fear abateth. If our
Sanctification were as perfect for degrees, as universal for its parts; were
our obedience like that of Angels, which cannot fail, we should need neither
hope to encourage our love, nor fear to guard it; but while it is only in part,
the best Christians in this state of imperfection, may have use of a Deaths
Head, and make Gods threats as well as promises, subordinate means to concur
with the principal; Buttresses to keep the Building from swerving, while the
foundation of Faith and Love keeps it from sinking: Fides and spes tuta si
cauta, secura si sollicita. Tert. Fear makes our love reverent, our hope wary,
our faith discreet. If the Sails be too full, they may endanger us as much as a
Rock; for Fear as a Rudder guides and steers our Faith and Hope, between the
gulf or sands of Despair; and the rock of Presumption or proud Security. Serve
we the Lord then in love, but in fear too, and rejoice unto him with trembling,
as David speaks; fear him as Lord; love and rejoice in him as Jesus; yea, and
fear him as Jesus too; fear to offend so gracious a Savior, to vilify and
hazard such precious Salvation, sit timor innocentiae Custos, says St. Cyp. ut
Deus qui in mentes nostras clementer influxit, in animi hospitio justa
operatione teneatur.

If God has entered into our hearts through his Son by his Spirit, let us be
glad and rejoice in his presence, for thankful joy is his entertainment; but
let fear keep the door, that nothing enter that may displease so holy a
presence. -- Aiunt quidam, says Tert. se salvo metu (vel fide) peccare; some
say, they can venture on sin without any prejudice to faith or fear; sic ergo
and ipsi (salva venia) detrudentur in Gehennam, dum salvo metu peccant; so
shall such who say and do so, be thrust into Hell, without any prejudice to
God's mercy, or Christ's merit and intercession. Whether we consider the
infinite eternal worth and weight of this Rest, the intolerable endless
troubles of missing it, or the absolute necessity of hating and shunning all
evil, of loving and following all duties and graces, in order to attaining the
one, and escaping the other. Whether we look upon the weakness, inconstancy,
treachery of the flesh within us; or upon the variety of temptations, alluring
and terrifying us from the world without, set on by the Devil with all the
vigilance of subtle malice; or on the shortness or uncertainty of the time
wherein this Rest must be secured, or lost for ever. Whether we look on the
love and infinite mercy of God, in offering, purchasing, inviting, drawing us
to this Rest at such a price, by such powerful obliging variety of means or
motives; or on the deceitfulness of man's heart, willing to think the conditions
of it, fewer and easier than they are; and to satisfy it self in the hopes of
it on an outward profession, a speculative faith, or a partial obedience. Or
lastly, whether we consider the possibility of falling away through sloth or
impatience, from the sincere repentance and faith, love and obedience, which
was begun. All and every one of these call for an humble watchful fear, and
godly jealousy over our selves, solicitous cautions and diligence lest we fall
short of it. Take heed then, of thinking this fear of missing it, either
unnecessary, or unbeseeming Christian Professors or true Believers; since many
Professors are no true Believers, and they that are may cease to be so, unless
they watch and pray assiduously, and work out their own salvation with fear and
trembling. Look not upon it, as too slavish for Persons regenerate, and
Children of light; since sure it is that the Spirit of God, and the holy
Apostles made choice of no Arguments, but such as were fit to be made use of by
Christians; and the motives of fear, are more than once the Arguments they
chose, even to those who had been made partakers of Christ, and were of the
House and Family of God; such as had received the Kingdom that could not be
moved. Heb. 12.28. Who yet, are there exhorted (...), to have Grace, or to hold
it fast, by making an humble diligent use of that precious Talent. Or if you
will (...), to be thankful to God, the munificent donor of such a benefit, and
this duty raised to the height, to the serving of God (...), whether that refer
to the Persons, and signify serving with cheerful alacrity; for fear and
cheerfulness are very consistent, the former the Guardian, the Conservator of
the latter; Or whether it refer to God as we render it, serving him acceptably,
with reverence and godly fear, you have still in this Apostle, the motives of
fear annexed to this duty; for our God is a consuming fire. 'Twas wisdom then
and sober piety in him that said, He would not leave his part in Hell (meaning
the benefit he found in meditating on God's threats as well as promises) for
all the Goods of this world; knowing how useful the flesh of the Viper was to
cure its poison; the torments attending upon sin, to check its temptations; the
apprehension of a Fever or other distemper, annexed by consequence, to restrain
from those pleasant forbidden fruits, which courted his Senses, and solicit
his Fancy; the deadly hook, to keep from venturing on the bait; the Sea, from
the Siren.

Thus when the Apostle exhorts the Hebrews to fear, Lest any of them should
seem to fall short of this Rest: The word seem, signifies not only an outward
appearance of the things, without a reality of the danger or misery forewarned
of; but in Let us take heed, is also meant a real incurring the same, without
taking heed to the counsel given; or it may be, the Apostle chose to speak so,
to mitigate the sharpness of that which he spoke of to the Hebrews, that he
might not be thought to conclude them Apostates, but only to fear they may be
so, unless they looked in good time warily to it. Such charitable Rhetoric we
read him using Heb. 6.9. But beloved, we are persuaded better things of you,
and things that (are near or) accompany Salvation, though we thus speak. It may
be also he says Seem, to stir up their fear and caution the more, against such
coldness, sloth, and inconstancy of mind, as began to appear among the Hebrews,
which if not in time bewailed and rectified, might hazard the prize set before
them, and fall to peremptory infidelity. Thus he is charitably suspicious of
them, and jealous over them with a godly jealousy, as he speaks 2 Cor. 11.2.
and gives withal to understand, that it is not enough for a wise and thankful
Christian, to abhor and avoid utter Apostacies, and final missing of Gods Rest;
but it is their safety, duty, and honor, to keep from the very approaches to
it, and appearances of it; and not to give any occasions to others, to hear, or
see, or think that we are fallen, or falling away. Abstain from all appearance
of evil, 1 These. 5.22. lest while you indulge your selves to sloth, and give
your selves over as far as you may with any hopes of attaining Heaven, to the
pleasures and cares, or other concerns of this Life; you do not only seem to
fall short, but do so indeed, and plainly appear to do so. And this is the last
sense of the word lest ye seem, that is, appear and give too great undeniable
evidence, that you are of those that apostatize, and fall short of Gods Rest.

So when it is said, v. 2. The Gospel was preached as well to us as unto them,
It does not imply that the Gospel was preached as clearly and fully to them as
unto us; but that it was preached sufficiently to them, in such a manner, and
measure revealed, as was most suitable to those times, by types and Prophesies,
spiritual and eternal things, under the vail of external and visible temporal
things; yet so that the light shone through the vail on all their hearts, who
were attentive to the drift and true aim, the grounds and reasons of them, and
to the Prophesies that went before and along with them, to make them the
clearlier understood. The Apostle by saying As well to us, speaks by a (...),
or intimation, of so well at least, and much better; for to us the Gospel is
preached, without intervention of Types and Prophesies, in its clear, full,
actual exhibition, unveiling those Types, fulfilling those Prophesies,
revealing the whole Mystery of Godliness, and Counsel of God much plainer,
dispensing the Light and Grace of Gods Spirit more generally and plentifully:
So that the Argument runs thus; If they that had Gods Rest promised to them
more obscurely, and in a lower degree and measure, yet fell short of it for
want of being sound, and constant in Faith and Obedience; how much more shall
they do so, who having the Gospel preached unto them in its clearest fullest
degree of light and power, yet do not receive, believe, and obey it, with
faithful sincerity and perseverance?

Now by faith, for want of which the Word preached did not profit them, is
meant such a firm well-grounded persuasion of Gods unchangeable all sufficient
Wisdom and Truth, as to adhere and cleave thereto, against whatever appearing
difficulties or temptations. For the ancient Israelites, they had most of them
once believed God and Moses, when they slew the Passover, and sprinkled their
Doors with the blood thereof, went out of Egypt, though Pharaoh was ready to
pursue them, and went through the Red Sea into the Wilderness toward Canaan,
following the conduct of the Cloud and Pillar of Fire; but when there arose any
new difficulty or temptation, Moses his absence for 40 days, want of Water,
Bread for a while, nay want of Flesh, the Allurements of Women, though
Heathenish Idolaters, the news of Giants and high Walls, they strangely forget
the former evidences of Gods Faithfulness, Power, Goodness, and Truth; question
and tempt him, repine and murmur, and turn back in their hearts to Egypt.

Wherefore 'twas want of consideration, and serious attentive frequent minding
what they had formerly known and believed, which continually exposed them to
fall away to unbelief and disobedience: Such are the grounds and motives of
Faith propounded in Scripture, that they who attend impartially and seriously,
cannot with any true reason, deny their assent and approbation of that
Doctrine, which they prove and (...) and blind the heart, that final
impenitency; and infidelity is the issue in too too many. Let no man then
deceive himself with presumptious Hopes, of entering Gods Rest, on bare
profession of his Gospel (for that may be counterfeit; and void of any well
grounded faith; sure to fail in time of Trial.)

Thus we see the word and means of grace, though never so wisely and powerfully
dispensed, may prove very generally ineffectual, for want of being mixed with
faith in the partakers: And that they who enjoy the means of grace, and yet are
not wrought upon by them, to faith and obedience, sincere, and durable, their
call and profession, of being the People of God, does them not only no good;
but hastens and aggravates their condemnation; is it not time then for those
who live in the light of the Gospel (as never I think any Nation did, for
Hundreds of Years, if this has not) to look to their hearts and lives
impartially; and thence discover what grounds and stability of faith; there is
in the one, what fruits and good effects in the other; and if they find
themselves at a loss, to take the blame entirely and wholly to themselves, not
to the want of means and motives, Pastors or Teachers, skillful and faithful,
but to the want of their own attention and consideration; their taking up their
profession of Christianity on no better or surer grounds; than that which a
Pagan, or Mohammedan relies on, for their wicked errors. Or if they have taken
it up on better, and know what, and why, they believe; then they are clearlier
convinced, and condemned by their own conscience for not persevering, and
increasing that faith by living sincerely according to it, but contradicting
their very faith, as well as profession, until the custom of sin has darkened,
if not extinguished their former evidences; is it not high time then for any
that find it thus with them, to cast away all longer delays of self abhorrence
and repentance, to return to God and their own hearts with shame and grief for
their former backslidings, and for ever, from henceforth to be the more humble
for what is past, watchful and zealous for the future in reviewing their faith,
and living by it in Holiness and Righteousness, Purity and Peaceableness,
Obedience and Patience, lest that faith which has been deadned, and
contradicted so long and often; turn to a total and final apostasy in the end.

There Is nothing more clear in Holy Scripture than that they whom God
vouchsafes to call by his loudest voice; and powerfullest means, to Repentance
and Faith, and Obedience; are rendered thereby so much the more hainously guilty
of willful ingratitude, unbelief, and disobedience, and therefore liable to so
much the sorer Condemnation; unless they repent, believe, and obey according to
that light and grace which was afforded them: You have I known of all Nations,
therefore you will I punish the sooner and more severely.

This is the condemnation, that light is come into the World, and ye have loved
darkness rather than light. Woe unto thee Corazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida, for
if the mighty works, etc. they had repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.
How shall we of all others escape, if we neglect so great salvation.

It is indeed a great favor and mercy of God to send us his Gospel, to prevent
us with all the means of grace, but favors and mercies abused and perverted;
increase the guilt of those that receive them, but would not use them to God's
glory and their own Salvation: And yet what more common and general for Men and
Women of all sorts, to suppose themselves safe enough, and entitled
sufficiently to God's Rest, because they are of the visible Church, professing
that Truth which should purify and sanctify them, but does not, because it is
not aright considered and laid to heart, in its grounds and reasons, terms, and
conditions, as well as its promises.

The greatest part of the Jews you see, though brought out of Egypt with many
Miracles, made the peculiar People of God, the lively Oracles committed to
them, and what not that could be desired to make them holy or happy, yet for
want of considering and believing the word of God, forfeited and lost their
Title to Canaan. And the greatest part I fear of Christians; yea of the purest
professors of Christianity, will forfeit and lose their Title to Heaven; unless
they consider, believe, and obey the Gospel of Christ more sincerely,
impartially, constantly than hitherto they seem to have done. And if they miss
of Gods Rest, for want of considering and performing its conditions, their
anguish and pain will be so much the heavier to all eternity: They that have
the Oracles of God, the word and Sacraments; Pastors and Teachers granted to
them, and yet are never the better, and holier, are so much worse; because they
disgrace, and bring a reproach on the greatest and weightiest Truth in the
World, as if it had no evidence or power in it. The Israelites once were like
Gideons Fleece, full of heavenly Dew in a drought; endued with those high and
happy privileges, of which we read Romans 2.3. and Romans 9.4. But yet because
they lived not answerably to their vocation, but made their privileges
occasions of Pride, and vain presumption of Gods favor; till at last they
rejected their very Messiah, of whom they boasted as their peculiar, they are
at this day like the Mountains of Gilboa barren and dry, while the Dew of
Heaven has fallen abundantly upon the Nations. The favors shown to the
Christian Church are greater than theirs, because the Truth is clearlier
revealed, the means of grace more powerful and less burthensom. But yet these
favors, if trusted to, and yet neglected; will prove aggravations of God's
displeasure. To be surrounded with such helps of God from above, of Men below;
ready to further us toward Heaven, of precepts to guide, promises to encourage
us, and yet to fall short of Gods Rest, is a double and treble shame and
sorrow: Wherefore if not in gratitude to God, for all his mercies, yet for fear
lest these mercies prove by our own willful neglect and contempt of them, the
aggravations of our misery, let us while it is called to day; excite our
selves, and exhort one another to repentance and faith, holiness, and
righteousness, obedience and patience, against whatever temptations arise. We
have a promise infallibly sure, incomparably precious, of entering Gods Rest,
his word to quicken us; his Sacraments to confirm us; his Grace to prevent
assist and follow us; If we hearken to his word, and resist not his grace,
neither Profane nor Idolize his Sacraments, but receive them with faith and
reverence; as they were instituted in love: If we hear the Church, and watch
over our selves and one another, Sin shall have no dominion over us, we shall
be built up from one degree of faith and holiness to another, until we enter
Gods Rest; without any fear or possibility of falling from it: But if we
neglect the conditions of it, and trust to the promise as if it were absolute;
to the means of grace, as if they were even grace it self; our sloth and
confidence will end in despair; and find for ever so much the greater trouble
and anguish; for having missed of God's Rest, offered unto us on such
conditions. Let us awake then, and excite our selves and one another; by all
the arguments of hope and fear, love and gratitude, that so God may have the
honor of all his favors bestowed upon us, and we the everlasting comfort, of
being thankful, and hearing that beatifical voice: Well done good and faithful
Servant; enter thy Masters Joy and Rest.

Now this Rest of Gods, is not the Rest of the Sabbath or Canaan in this life,
but that eternal Rest with God in Heaven, implied indeed and preparation made
for it by the Sabbath; Typified by Canaan, begun here by believers to be
enjoyed in its first fruits, through faith and hope, but not to be had in its
full harvest; its perfect peace and joy in God, 'till we come to Heaven: We
which have believed, says Saint Paul, do enter into Rest, that is, shall if we
persevere in faith and holiness, enter into it perfectly; without possibility
of forfeiting or losing it; do enter into it now by faith and hope in God's
promises; by love and obedience of his precepts, which gives us a real Title to
it; yea a true, though initial imperfect defeasible admission into it, by that
Rest from the guilt of Sin, which faith and the merits and intercession of
Christ Jesus, receives and embraces with peace and joy, by that Rest from the
power, disorder and tyranny of Sin, which faith procuring Gods Spirit, and
looking upon the certainty and weight of his promises and threats, the beauty
and excellency of his precepts, together with the great obligation of God's
mercy in sending his Son to die for our sins, and rise again for our
justification, effects and enjoys. Thus believers, if such believers as rely on
the promises of God's Rest, with faithful resolutions and endeavors to perform
its conditions; do enter into it initially; and shall enter into it eternally.
But how proves the Apostle this? the proof of it is in these words. He said I
have sworn in my wrath that they shall not enter my Rest, who show themselves
obstinately unbelieving and disobedient: The Argument is taken a contrario,
from the nature of contrary things; If infidelity and disobedience, be that
alone which excludes from the promise of God's Rest; then faith and obedience,
or such a faith as produces obedience, is that which entitles us to enter into
it, for God's promise cannot be satisfied; nor wholly norutterly disappointed,
or made to become of none effect: And therefore though they who would not
believe it; nor keep its conditions, fell short of it, yet they who believe and
perform its conconditions must enter into it: Yea his very wrath and oath
against the one for their unbelief and disobedience, implies and inferrs his
complacency, and love toward the other, his undefeasible decree and oath, that
they persevering in faith and obedience shall enter, and fully enjoy his Rest;
And this Rest, was not the Rest of Canaan: For if Joshua or Jesus, the Son of
Nun, had given them Rest, then would not David afterward have spoken of
another Rest; from whence the Apostle inferrs, what he began with; there
Remains therefore a Rest to the People of God; another manner of Rest than that
of Canaan; eternal and perfect with God in Heaven, to which the true Joshua or
Jesus the Son of God; must give us entrance by faith in him; of whom Joshua the
Son of Nun, was but an imperfect transitory Type, as that Rest of Canaan, and
of the Sabbath, was of the perfect eternal Rest; which still remains for Gods
People (the whole Church of true persevering obedient believers.) From what the
Apostle has said we may make this observation: That Man has no true and
perfect Rest in ought but God: His Rest is Man's Rest, because he is the Rest
and happiness of Man; the ultimate complete satisfactory object of reasonable
creatures; To Rest in any thing but in him, as our happiness, without
dependence on him as the Author, and reference to him as the end thereof, is
sinful vanity and vexation, sure to end in eternal trouble without repentance.

Canaan it self was not to be the final Rest and happiness of the Israelites,
nor must any thing in this World, any thing less than God be ours: What God
has said to the Jews of old -- he much more clearly has said and proved to us
Christians: Arise and depart, for this is not your Resting place. The Heavenly
Rest and eternal life of seeing God, as he is, was but obscurely and
imperfectly revealed to them; who lived before or under the law till Christ
came, in whom the promise of it was made, when man had lost all hope of it. It
was till then, wrapped up as it were in the seed and bloome of Types and
Prophesies, implied and intimated in the Sabbath, and Canaan, and Temporal
blessings, attending Piety in this life rather than manifested, and brought to
light in its clearest evidences and strongest assurances, as now our Lord Jesus
has done, who has brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel,
and therefore if they were obliged only in God through Christ Jesus, to place
their happiness in nothing below, but to look on him through the veil of
Types, and Temporal blessings; how much more are we obliged, as well as
enabled, to do so, to whom Christ has been exhibited with all the fullness of
Truth and grace, revealing the whole counsel of God, our Rest in him, and the
way to attain it, without obscurity and beyond dispute? If David foresaw and
foretold this Rest to be remaining; when he not only enjoyed Canaan, and its
blessings, as the other Israelites did; but the very height thereof, as a
prosperous King; If he could say, Deliver me O Lord from the Men of this World,
whose portion is in this life; I am a stranger and sojourner here as all my
Fathers were; How much more are we obliged to think and say so, who have not
such Types and Temporal blessings to veil the Object of our Rest, and
interrupt our sight of it, to whom the Son and Lord of David, has been
exhibited, exemplifying and teaching us, our only Rest to be in God the Father,
through him the Son, by his holy Spirit, dying to purchase an entrance to it,
rising and ascending and sitting down in a Glorious Rest at Gods Right Hand to
assure us of it. It is no less than the sin of Idolatry to place our Rest,
confidence or happiness, in pleasures or honors, possessions or riches, or any
thing else that this World can gratify us with; it is the bitter spring or
Root of all sins; It contradicts the design of God, in giving us any Temporal
blessings; he gave them to help us unto him, that reflecting upon him as their
Author and end, we might be persuaded to love him incomparably above all; if we
fall in love with them, instead of raising our love to him, we quite pervert
the intent of his favors, and turn them into hindrances, to his dishonor and
our own ruin. He gave them to comfort us in our journey; and shall we so
mistake his meaning, as to set up our dwelling in the Inn, and Travail no
farther toward our Country but forget the giver, because of that gift which
was sent us on purpose, to mind us of him? This were to bring that curse on our
selves which the Prophet foretold, rather than prayed, might fall on Gods
enemies; Let their Table be made a snare, and that which should have been for
their wealth, be an occasion of falling to them. This were indeed to provoke
God, either to withdraw those favors, which thus he sees rested in, instead of
him, or else to embitter and curse them from yiedling any content; and if he
should suffer us still to rest in them to his dishonor, 'twould prove the
greatest, surest curse of all others, to live and die in this false deceitful
transitory Rest, which leads to, and ends in eternal trouble, and sorrow of
body and soul. That which is Man's true Rest, must be able to give him full and
perpetual satisfaction; But all things below do neither satisfy us, while we
have them, nor can continue with us longer, to yield us that Rest or Pleasure
which we fancy. We spend much time and care to get them, and when we have
gotten them, as we think, they die in the midst of our embraces, and leave
little or nothing behind them, but shame and loathing: Taedet adeptos, quod
adepturos torsit, we pine for them as Ammon for Thamar, and then repine at our
selves and them, that we were such fools as to seek our Rest, where 'twas not:
Therefore all carnal worldly Persons, whether the sensual or voluptuous, the
covetous, or ambitious, are fain to wander from one purstui and design to
another; till having run the whole circle, they are weary and giddy, perplexed
and tired, and cry out, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity and vexation, no Rest
to be had below, and how shall we hope for that above, who never sought till
'twas too late: Ahabs Kingdom seemed as nothing, unless he might have Naboths
Vineyard; and having obtained it by Perjury and Murder, it pressed him to
death and Hell. Alexander had no Rest, till he Conquered, he thought, one
World, and then had as little, or rather less, suspecting and killing his
nearest Friends, until he drank himself to Death and found that Poison in
Intemperance, which he feared to find from his Cup Bearer. Let Us consult our
own experience, and hearts, has any of us who have run through several states
of life, with Hopes of Rest, when this or that were attained, found the Rest
which we hoped for, and not, either quite missed what we sought, or missed of
that Rest, and satisfaction which we sought and hoped to have found? Or if any
of us have been so happy, and yet so miserable, so happy as to obtain our
desires; and yet so miserable as to desire no more, no Rest in Heaven, no Peace
and Joy of life eternal with God; can any of us without stupifying our very
Reason, common sense, as well as faith, take Rest in that which we know we must
leave e're many years, and which for ought we know may leave us e're many days?
Thus we see what an heinous sin; indeed the Spring of all sins is, to seek or
desire to Rest in ought but God, and withal, what a folly and madness it is
against our selves, as well as a sin against God: And yet how guilty of this
ingratitude and this folly are most Christians, if we reckon them so, who carry
the name and profession of Christianity? If God send Men health and wealth,
peace and plenty, possessions and honors; how ready are they to set up their
Rest on this side Jordan? whereas all this was given them to raise their
gratitude, toward its Donor, and make them thereby long after him, that they
might at length Rest in him: But if God send them afflictions and troubles, to
wean them and drive them from this their folly; they are troubled and grieved
as if they had lost their God and Savior in losing that which they had not
lost, if they would but have used it moderately and thankfully, as coming from
God, and leading to him. But woe, and restless trouble, and anguish for ever
more, must, and will be their portion; whom neither prosperity can invite, nor
adversity drive to Rest in God: Secondly, They who believe with such a Faith in
Christ Jesus as works by Love, the Love of God above all, as their perfect
eternal Rest and happiness, their All-sufficient shield here, and exceeding
great reward hereafter, they alone do enter God's Rest; Here by Faith Hope and
Love, hereafter by full immediate, inseparable sight and fruition: Here they
enter God's Rest inchoitive, by having a Title to it, as adopted Sons and Heirs
of God through Christ Jesus, by having a true, though imperfect prospect or
foresight of it, through Faith in Gods word and the merits of Christ. Now this
is a blessed Rest to the Soul, compared with that miserable toil and drudgery,
fears and troubles, which all unbelieving and disobedient wicked Persons lie
under, how prosperous soever their outward condition in this World seems. The
Rest of a Traveller, is far short of one that is come to his Country and Home,
and yet it is a true Rest, compared with one that wanders through deserts,
boggs and precipices into ruin.

He that now knows he is in the right way to his final Rest, his Fathers House,
where he shall be sure of a glorious inheritance, and satisfactory eternal
peace and joy, that through the way he goes also, he shall be directed in all
turnings, protected from all dangers, refreshed and relieved at every Stage;
with competent food and comfortable Rest; this Man's heart is calm and quiet
from those anxieties, which the other suffers; and though he must look to his
way as he goes, be thrifty and temperate in his Inn; and Travel forward with
watchful diligence, and painful industry, yet his labors and cares have the
Rest of Hope, and cheerful expectance; and as he draws nearer his Country and
home, so his Rest and joy increases.

This is the Rest of holy Travelers toward Heaven, their Country, their God
and Father: To which Christ, Matt. 11.28. Invites the weary and heavy laden,
and into which, when they come unto him, they enter by Faith; if such a Faith
as takes up his Yoke, and wears his burden with meekness, and lowliness, as
easy and gracious. Faith lays hold on the merits of Christ, and rests on him
that takes away the sins of the World; by the propitiation of his obedience,
for Pardon and Peace, as knowing nothing else can procure it but that. That
most certainly and fully shall procure it for all that come unto God by him,
for mercy and grace. God was in Christ, says St. Paul, 2 Cor. 5.19, 21.
Reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing their Trespasses to them; for
he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him. He might have declared his mercy to us some other
way, but this was the only best way to declare his Righteousness as well as
Mercy, that he might be just as well as gracious, in justifying the sinner, and
punishing the sin. Therefore being justified by Faith, we enter into Gods Rest,
having Peace with God through Christ Jesus, says St. Paul. He that relies his
weary Soul on this Rock and sure foundation, shall never be ashamed of his
Hope, if he rely with such a Faith and Hope on it, as accepts of the Yoke, as
well as the Rest; but shall by degrees, as he grows in Holiness and
Righteousness, find the Rest of his Soul increased and assured unto him more
and more, till he attain that (...), that fullness of Peace and Joy in
believing, which St. Paul expresses, Romans 8.38. Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods elect, it is God that justifies, who is he that condemns? It Is
Christ that died, or rather is risen again to God's right hand, and there makes
intercession for us. As for afflictions that often may and do follow this Rest
of Faith for justification; St. Paul shows in the next words that they rather
confirm and ratify the pardon, than question or lessen it; through that
experience of Gods wise and faithful love, in making all things work together
for good, to those that love him above all: Who shall separate us from the love
of God in Christ? shall Tribulation or Distress, Persecution or Nakedness;
Famine or Sword? in all these we are more than Conquerors through him that loved
us. If weak Christians coming to Christ with faithful desires; and resolutions
to wear his Yoke, and bear his Burden, meekly and humbly, find not this Rest
of justification, with such a degree of Peace and Joy, as St. Paul expresses,
it is not because Christ gives them not what he promises; but because he
gives it them gradually, according as they are able and fit, by their Faith to
receive it; for he says to every Soul now, as to them in St. Matt. 9.24. Be it
unto you, according to your Faith, if your Faith be strong, and lively; both in
believing my promise and merit, and in undertaking that Yoke of (...) his Yoke;
though they find not as yet that Rest and Peace which their Souls desire, pray
and stay for.

Blessed is he that stays and waits with humble Prayer Gods leisure; since
he has promised who cannot fail, that he will not break the bruised Reed, but
give in time the Garment of joy, for the Spirit of heaviness: and Isai. 57.15,
16. I will dwell with the contrite humble Spirit to revive it, for I will not
contend for ever, neither will I be always wrath, lest the Spirit should fail
before me, and the Souls which I have made. Thus you have seen the first Rest
which true believers enter into even here in this life, the Rest of Pardon, and
Justification upon their Repentance and Faith in Christ. The second, is a Rest
from the Tyrannous reign of sin, by those Motives of Hope and Fear, Love and
Gratitude; which faith propounds from Christ's Gospel and the Spirit of grace;
holiness and comfort, which faith procures by earnest Prayer. Now this is so
necessarily joined with the other, the Rest of Pardon, that it is its ordinary
standing evidence, and the means to obtain it more and more. For we may not
come to Christ for Pardon, to give us the Rest of justification from sins
guilt, and condemning power, by his Blood, unless we so value that pardon and
its price, as sincerely to hate, and be heartily willing to forsake that sin,
which the wisdom and holy justice of God could not, or would not remit or
forgive, but at such a price as his own eternal infinite Sons humiliation to,
and in that humane nature which had offended. We must feel as well the burden
of sins loathsome filth and hateful disorder, as well as that of its guilt and
punishment, before we are those weary and laden, those poor and humble ones in
Spirit, who have a Title to rely on Christ for Rest from both; but to those who
so come unto him, our gracous Lord never denies what he invites to, Rest from
the slavish service of sin, as well as from its intolerable guilt and
condemnation: His blood and spirit are never severed; wherever the one is
actually imputed to justification, the other is always imparted also to
sanctification, and therefore St. Paul joins them together, 1 Cor. 6.11. Such
were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God: And
Romans 8.2.9. The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has set me free
from the Law of sin and death. But if any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he
is as yet none of his, though he may be his by repentance and faith.

And indeed this Rest from sins dominion, you will easily see to be a
necessary, and great part of the Souls happiness in this life, if you will but
consider the burdensome drudgery, that wicked Men lie under until they obtain
it, and enter into it by such a faith in Christ Jesus, as works by obedience.
For every person living in any course of impiety, unrighteousness,
intemperance, is a self-accusing, self-condemning, divided creature, a terror
and shame unto himself.

He cannot choose but wish and desire eternal Rest, yet is customarily drawn by
his lusts and passions, to do that which certainly leads to eternal anxiety and
tribulation. His reason invites him to that good which is Spiritual, immortal,
infinite, and therefore a satisfactory Rest to his Soul; to the only God who
made him at first, and who alone can make him happy. But his lust and passions
draw him away to that which is earthly, sensual, devilish. Not only finite and
fading, and so disappointing him, but filthy and base, and so distracting and
vexing his Soul with foul disorder and guilty shame. His Spirits and conscience
often tells him, that he ought to maintain an humble holy communion with God,
by Faith and Hope and Love, Prayers and Praises; that so he may be prepared to
see him in that immediate clear revelation of his glory; but his lusts and
passions, so burden and oppress him, that he cannot lift up his heart to God,
nor draw near his holy presence with any delight, but studies to shun him, and
live without the remembrance of his goodness and mercies; that he may forget
his power and justice. To behold the Creator in the Creature, and love the
giver in his gifts, to contemplate his power wisdom and goodness, shining in
his word and works; to be thankful for his past benefits, rejoicing in his
present favor, and panting after his blessed presence to all eternity; to fit
himself for that presence, by purifying himself, as he is pure; by being
righteous holy and merciful, as he is; to govern himself and those that are
under him, in such order as God prescribes; this is the Rest as well as the
Labor of rational Souls in this life, a pleasure and honor as well as a
task. But sin is such a burthenous Tyrant and oppressor, that it makes the
sinner employ his reason, made to serve, know, love and enjoy God: It makes him
employ this reason in the drudgery of covetousness, in the brutishness of
lusts, and sensuality, in the devillishness of malice, envy, revenge, pride and
ambition. His reason was given to study God and his Will, to please and delight
in him here, that he may for ever see and enjoy him, with mutual complacency;
to help others to do so by word and deed, and who is there that has not quite
unchristian'd and unmanned himself, but in sober retirement, thinks this a work
that has pleasure in it, and Rest as well as Labor? But sin is such a
wearisom Tyrant and oppressor, that it makes the reasonable immortal Soul, that
heavenly breath, that Image of God, a sneaking Pandor to his lusts; a drudging
purveyor to his belly and appetite; a fawning dissembling false hearted
flatterer, to his pride and ambition; a slanderous sycophant, detractor and
whisperer to his envy; a brawling railing reviler to his wrath or anger; a
bloody assassinate to his revenge; a griping extortioner, or theevish cheater
to his covetousness; a seducer and tempter, that is an assistant to Satan in
ruining his own and other Men's Souls: And when all this is done, see what
wearisom, restless toil remains for the sinner. He would live for ever in this
World, but sees he must die and be called to account; and seeing that, he would
die for ever, and turn to nothing, but that he sees he cannot neither. He would
have Gods favor, but dares not come near him. He would live in peace and
approbation with himself, but a civil War and contrary desires, lusts and
passions, contrary each to one another, and all to reason, tear and divide him
from himself. He would live at Rest and Peace with other Men, but his
covetousness and pride makes him injurious, his wrath and revenge, his malice
and envy makes him impatient, and quite bereave him of this Peace: He would be
rich, but either his sloth will not gather, or his lusts and vain glory
scatters as fast as his industry gets. He would live in safety and ease, but
his haughty ambition, makes him endure labor and danger day and night. He
would be in honor and high repute, but his sordid lusts and cowardly fears,
griping covetousness or wrathful revenge, makes him hateful and contemptible.
His pride and ambition would command all Men, but it makes him first fawn and
flatter, bow and cringe to those whom he secretly hates and scorns. He would be
true to his own principles and religion, not give himself the lie, by
professing what he does not believe; but his love of the World, and fear of
poverty or of death, does so disturb the Rest of his Soul, that he coucheth
under every load, complies and conforms to any profession of faith or worship,
which those who prevail would have him subscribe to, till he lay down his
faith, hope, and conscience, at the feet of a Man, whose breath is in his
nostrils, who threatens and strikes, and is no more. Thus he that serves is
restless indeed, oppressed and tired with contrary Tyrants, crossing and
thwarting one another, till they wrack and tear the Man in pieces, and drag him
to everlasting trouble, anguish and sorrow. How sweet then and highly precious
is that Rest, which faith in God through Jesus Christ enters into, when under
the light and worth of that truth, which it has received, it guides and
subdues all its appetites, affections and passions from a right principle by a
right rule, to a right end; which is nothing but God and his word; God as its
author governor and happiness, or perfect Rest? For though the Rest be yet
imperfect, because the World the Flesh and the Devil do yet oppose it; yet
Christ has promised that no opposition shall overthrow it, unless we wilfully
and obstinately grieve that Spirit of truth, holiness and comfort, which was
given us as the Seal of our faith and peace with God, the preserver and
finisher of this Rest, the assurance of our present adoption, and future
inheritance, if we will but wisely and thankfully value that Rest, into which
we are entered, humbly and watchfully pray unto Christ to confirm and increase
it; all oppositions shall prove advantages, all dangers, travails and labors,
so many evidences of Gods faithfulness to us, and ours to him; of his being our
all sufficient shield and supporter here, our exceeding reward and satisfactory
Rest for evermore. Now see what a blessed Rest there is in faith and holiness,
and all those graces which wait on them. Faith in God gives the mind a Sabbath
of Rest, from all those anxious perplexing enquiries, and self contradicting
resolutions, which humane reason left to it self is vexed with; and settles the
heart on that divine Wisdom and truth, which can neither deceive nor be
deceived, humbling at once the understanding and advancing it, because it is
its greatest advancement to be humbled under God, who never fails to honor
those who honor him; and makes the conscience arise and rejoice, to see that
it has submitted it self to such a guide. Take faith in its meanest Offices,
of trusting God in our temporal affairs, resigning our selves to his wisdom,
power and goodness, as one that can and will choose better for us, than we our
selves; what peace and rest is this to our Souls, from all those servile fears
and cares, those base submissions, and baser oppressions, which the covetous
worldling, or cowardly trembling unbeliever undergoes? Though the Waters rage
and the Earth shake, yet he whose heart trusts in the Lord, that all things
shall work together for good, he is the only (...), or a squared Man, whom no
change can make a changeling, because his heart stands fast, and believes in
the faithful God; he is gotten above this region of meteors, clouds and winds;
because the Lord is his sun and shield, which no cloud can intercept, no wind
shake. But then in the higher Offices of faith, whereby it considers and
embraces the glorious truth of God, our Redeemer and Savior, and sees that
they are as certainly true as gloriously great.

That former sins confessed and forsaken, are blotted out for the merits of
Christ, the Law satisfied by such a surety; Satan's accusations silenced by such
an Advocat; That afflictions and death have lost their sting, and are turned
into benefits. That he who has begun a good work will also finish it, and
never leave us in life and death, until he has brought us to perfect Rest,
and full happiness both of soul and body; what fruit can this produce but peace
and joy in the holy Ghost, cheerful constancy and perseverance in doing and
suffering the will of God? It rescues us from all those trembling fears, and
sorrowful agonies, which else must seize upon our hearts, from the weakness of
the flesh and the strength of our enemies, from the curse of the Law, and the
horrors of conscience, from the malice and subtilty of the World and the Devil.
How well then might St. Paul say we that believe enter Gods Rest; do already,
in good degree; shall completely and unchangeably, if we persevere. Hope, the
second Christian grace, is so near of kin to Faith, that it is lineally derived
from it, and born of it; nor can that heart but find a comfortable blessed
Rest, which hopes in the fountain of all blessedness, hopes to see and enjoy
him for ever; and in that hope purifies himself: All other hopes are dead or
dying, sure to leave him void of Rest, full of anxiety that builds on them.
This is the only lively hope as Saint Peter calls it; because placed in the
fountain of life and joy it self: This is that grace which applies to our
selves the general promises, the Souls Anchor, which makes it ride safe and
triumphant in the midst of tempests here below, because it enters within the
vail of Heaven it self, and takes possession before hand of all its treasures,
and by its joyful expectations becomes that helmet in St. Paul, which guards
the head against all blows of the World or Devil; wherefore he bids us rejoice
in hope, be patient and cheerful in tribulation, instant in Prayer, and tells
us, Coll. 1.11. That this is that which strengthens the heart with all might,
to all patience, and long suffering with joyfulness. It is indeed the
anticipation of Heaven on Earth, and makes the Rest of that World, our portion
in this. As for Charity the third grace, the Image and transcript of God
himself who is goodness and love; greater than either, or faith or hope, is
holy charity; greater than they for Rest and joy as well as use, because the
very fruit and end, the evidence and perfection of both. Can there be any more
blessed Rest, or satisfaction in this life, than the love of him, who is
infinitely amiable, whose glorious perfections ravish the Angels, into an
ecstasy and admiration of endless felicity? what ever we do or can love else, we
can neither be sure to enjoy it long, nor if we could, would it satisfy, but
cloy or tire, and leave us empty and discontented: But to love God, is to Rest
in him: Nor can any thing tire or finish, intercept or disappoint the Rest and
peace, and joy of that love which is fixed on him, who is the eternal boundless
good: This is Godliness, this is Holiness, to love God in all, and above all
what we love besides, and it is our happiness as well as holiness, that which
gives reason its throne, and proper dignity, above all those blind, violent
lusts and passions within, or temptations without, which keep a Man from
possessing himself with any freedom or solid peace; nor can a Man be firmly
united to himself, but by being united unto God: When once the Soul loves God
sincerely, and constantly above all; and has resigned its will to his, it has
its Rest; whether the world smile or frown, nothing can come amiss to it, come
what will it cannot destroy its Rest in God. As is the Object or main end on
which the Soul of Man fixes as its happiness; so is the Soul for its condition,
quiet or restless, constant or wavering, discontented or satisfied: He that
parsues earthly things as his main end, becomes vain, unstable, unsatisfied and
perplexed, led up and down by the foolish fire of sense or fancy, changing as
they and the World change, disquieted with that vexation, and vanity which they
find abroad, and that sedition they find at home, 'twixt reason and
unreasonable lusts, affections and passions. But he that rests and centers
himself on God through Christ, on that one end, and sovereign good, in that way
which he has appointed, which is indeed but himself, become a suitable way to
that end he has chosen; that which will unite and reconcile him, not only to
himself in all his faculties, desires, and actions or pretensions; but to all
the various, providential dispensations in this World, which seem so intricate,
perplexed, and perplexing to flesh and blood; wherefore they that by faith have
entered into the love of God above all, must necessarily have entered into Rest,
in the same degree in which it is evident to themselves, that they have done
so: And then the Charity which flows from the love of God above all, on his
Image or Proxy or Neighbor, our Brother, our fellow Christian; is their any
thing besides that principle, from which it flows more full of Rest, Peace and
Joy, than to love and promote his virtue and happiness, to love that nature
which Christ assumed and died for; to love the Image of God in Man, which is to
love God himself by reflection and consequence, and so indeed to love our
selves, increase and secure our own happiness? It is the voice of all Mankind
not quite degenerated to beast; That Friendship and Charity is the sweetest
delight of this life, next to that in God himself.

That malice and envy, to be hateful, and hating one another, is one of the
greatest, odiousest miseries, the very Image of Hell it self, where there is
nothing but hatred and cursing; whereas of Heaven we understand little more,
than that the blessed inhabitants of it love God above all, and one another as
themselves; nor can their happiness fail or abate, because their Charity or
Love cannot. Bounty and Mercy, the fruits of this Charity, makes a Man Gods
Vicegerent, in doing good to those that are, or may be his; in rescuing them
from the Devils malice and wicked Men, by seasonable relief of their Soul and
Body, and is so pleasant, so joyful a duty, that it renders the giver more
rest and delight, than the needy receiver, and returns with usury at the
present into his bosom, by the comfortable evidence of his own sincerity, and
so of his interest in many promises; both of securing his temporal welfare, and
increasing his eternal. Love toward Men, especially Christians, for Christ
sake, melting our hearts, and opening our hands, with cheerful joy to relieve
their wants, free's our Souls from the chilling cold of unmerciful
covetousness, which gripes it self as well as others; gives us rest from the
Canker of envy, and fretful malice, which makes us take delight and content in
another Man's graces, welfare and happiness, as part of our own; gives us Rest
from the rack and fire of rage and revenge, gives us the peace and honor, of
conquering evil with good, and then makes us rejoice again, that this is our
plea for Gods mercy toward our selves: And who then would refuse or neglect
the Rest of Charity? Humility is another grace, which besides the Calm and Rest
of Soul, which Christ has peculiarly promised to it, has such an attractive,
controlling loveliness, that it is the rival of Heaven and Earth. God himself
that inhabits eternity, dwells with the humble; (as the God of Peace brings
Rest and Peace wherever he dwells) and what wise or good Man, loves not to
dwell with such also? So true is that of Prove. 16.19. It Is better to be of an
humble Spirit, than to divide the spoil with the proud. How restless is pride
in all its designs, and haughty pursuits? How discontented with God and Man if
it miss of them? And if it attain them, how full of ingratitude and scornful
disdain, of fears and jealousies on the one side, of tumors and swellings, of
endless ambition on the other? But the humble person enjoys the Rest of
thankful contentment in all conditions, thinks himself less than the least of
Gods mercies, had rather by far obey than rule; and if he receive contempt or
injuries, is not disturbed with wrath or revenge, but sits down in humble
silence, as fearing he may have some ways deserved it. Great is the Rest which
meekness and patience brings to the Soul of Man: Meekness is the ornament of a
quiet Spirit, very precious in Gods sight, and therefore ought to be so in
ours. I appeal to the reason and experience of any Man, whether it be not rest
and ease, to forgive an injury rather than be provoked to revenge; and to lay
aside the consideration of other Men's malice, envy and peevishness, rather than
imitate it, and suffer the vexing remembrance of it, to boil and ferment in our
watchful minds, until it has conquered, and transformed us into the same
troublesome evil? Is it not Peace, and a blessed Rest to sit still, and lift up
no hands, but those of Charity, and Charitable prayer, rather than labor in
fighting and wounding one another? To hold ones peace, than to rail and revile?
Which has more Rest in it, to study to be quiet, and do ones own business, or
to be prying and intermedling with other Men's office, faults or secrets? To
speak evil of no Man, or to be always finding fault, and speaking the worst we
can of any, who differ from us in any respect? Which is the greatest trouble
and burden, meekly to obey our Lawful Governors, in Church and State, where
God has not commanded the contrary; or be allways disputing against a few
harmless indifferent ceremonies, until we have quarre'ld our selves, and
others into a causeless scandalous, pernicious separation? Then for humble
contented patience, that precept of the Old Testament, but wisdom and mystery
of the New: Thou shall not covet, but be content patiently with thy own
portion; what is it but a Rest rather than burden, a purchase or privilege,
rather than duty when once learnt? Let the Carnal or Worldly Man, with his
bored tub of insatiable desires, cry as the Horseleach; give, give and seek
after wealth as he should after God, without bounds: Yet the Heathen
Philosopher could resolve it the only way to true Rest, not to seek to raise
our fortunes to our desires, but to bring down our desires to our fortunes and
present condition: The one is not only uncertain, because not in any Man's
power, but impossible, because his desires increase with his purchases, as fire
with fuel; whereas the other is possible, and certain. Contentment and
patience glorifies God, by placing its wealth in his favors, who having
promised him necessaries here, and a Kingdom hereafter, has taught and obliged
him to be contented, with any fare upon the way; because he sees his being so,
confirms and increases his future happiness. Nullo egere Dei est, quam
paucissimis Deo proximum. As for sobriety, temperance, chastity, reason
secondded by experience, assures any Man, that to drink to the quenching of
ones thirst, or at most to the moderate cheering one Spirits; to eat to the
satisfying ones hunger, or at most to the gratifying of festival joy,
hospitality, friendship and thankful delight, in what God has bountifully
given, is all the good that is to be had from Meat and Drink; that it is a
trouble as well as a sin, to swill as if one were in a Fever, or till one
brings himself to a Fever, or Dropsy; to Eat and Drink till reason is drowned,
smothered and buried under the load, and till the Fantastic, forced pleasure
of two or three misspent hours, end in the pain of head and stomach for whole
days after, if not in some villainous lust or passion, and bloody quarrel, in
sickness and death both of Soul and Body. The conscience finds all trouble in
it, and the Body it self (for gratifying of which, God and Conscience was
despised) find no Rest within some hours: And what comparison between the rest,
safety, health and honor, of either virginal or conjugal chastity, which keeps
the desires of the flesh, under the power of reason and faith, lives in the
hope of seeing God, preserves the bond of love in Families inviolated, and the
unclean shameful excesses of wandering lust, which are conceived with fear and
anxiety, brought forth and finished with shame and sorrow; begin in disorder of
Soul and Body, end in loathing; begin in trouble, end in worse; burn at first
and consume at last the peace of the mind, if not the health of the Body also;
besides the confusions, tumults, quarrels it breeds in Families, and all for
the sneaking brutish delight of a few minutes?

There is indeed one grace, which seems to have little Rest in it: The
suffering persecutions to death, rather than disown the Truth, or violate duty:
But God has made so many promises to mitigate, and temper all temptations to
the strength, which we either now have, or shall receive upon our prayers, of
his turning to good, whatsoever seems most evil: And of his rewarding our
courage and patience with so much the greater weight of glory, that these
promises being believed, we are enabled as well as obliged not only to be
contented but joyful also in tribulations for truth and righteousness sake; and
therefore no wonder, if suffering miseries for the honor of God, and our Lord
Jesus, for the furtherance of our own salvation and other Men's, has more rest
than trouble in it; without this Rest, a flow of all other good things, which
this world can give, will leave a Man but a miserable wearied Traveller, under
a heavy load and burden of discontents and sorrows; and with this Rest, all
labor and sorrow is inconsistent, and though we may not expect to have this
promised eternal Rest, endless felicity as our deserved wages, yet we may and
ought to hope for it, as our promised reward. Angels -- and Saints departed
this life, they have it already, the Devils and damned are past all Hope.
Great pains and labor do the Men of this World take, but not in order to this
Rest, and therefore a Multitude of mistaken sinners, lay out the chief of their
days and time, in pursuance of pleasures, and honors, and profits of this
World, as if Heaven and Salvation were easy atchievments, as if they might with
a wish only at the last, come to die the death of the righteous, who had so
notoriously lived the life of the wicked. It Is not only the doing of evil, but
the not doing of good, which shall be punished at the last day, the judge shall
then condemn for not feedings, for not clothing. Go ye cursed into everlasting
fire, for I was hungry and ye fed me not, for I was naked and ye clothed me
not. Not doing of good is none of the least evils; He that sits still and moves
not one step toward this Rest, by wearing Christ's Yoke; and bearing his
burden, shall lose Heaven as infallibly, as he that runs from it; who so hides
his Talent, shall receive no other wages save that of the slothful Servant. The
way to Heaven is narrow, the Gate straight, it must be striving that gives us
entrance; not only the hopes of Heaven but the escaping of Hell, makes it our
duty to be doing of good, and by so doing, we express our fear, lest a promise
of Rest being left, any of us should seem to fall short of it. So run that ye
may obtain, is the command; and all precepts of Scripture are backed with
threats for ill (or not) doing, as well as promises for doing well, and are
intended by God, as so many arguments, and strong motives to hold us to our
duty; do we our part and God will certainly do his, and we cannot lose the
reward of Well done good and faithful Servant, enter into thy Master's joy: The
last judicial sentence of Christ of which we read, Matt. 25. Come ye blessed of
my Father inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the World;
is an invitation of so much mercy and loveing kindness, that none can give, nor
can any expect or require more? What can the eloquence of Man add to it, or
what better assurance can be desired, than the gracious promise of so powerful,
so faithful a Lord? Or what greater reward can any hope to receive, than that
which the Author and dispenser of all good assures us, by letting us know what
ever we do to the poor and needy, he will interpret it as done to himself and
so reward our labor of love as to Crown it with eternal Rest; an inheritance
of that Kingdom, and all its joys, as well as honors which fade not away? But
we must not understand this award of eternal life, this glorious inheritance,
to be the reward of the righteous, for the merit of their good works, as
everlasting fire is to the wicked for their demerits; what ever the Romish
Church pretends to, from those words of our Savior in the forenamed 25th of
St. Matt. The particle for (say they) is as truly causal by way of merit and
efficiency in the one as in the other; the form of Speech in both sentences the
same: Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire. For I was hungry and ye gave me
no meat. Come ye blessed inherit the Kingdom, for I was hungry and ye fed me.

In answer to this, it is clear enough, that though the particle, for, be
granted to signify causality in both sentences, yet need it not signify the
same kind, or degree of causality in both; and if it need not, then it must
not, unless they resolve to contradict many other plain Scriptures, rather than
depart from their own vain, and proud conceit of meriting Heaven in strict
justice: For first, The word or particle for, may signify only the cause of
our, or others knowledge, that the Kingdom of Heaven is their inheritance by
true title of gracious promise, or the Covenant of grace and mercy in Christ
Jesus, which accepts and rewards repentance, and faith, working by love,
whereof these works of Charity, are the fruits and signs. For every Authentic
Declaration, or Revelation of any truth, before unknown, is the true cause of
our knowledge of it, though not of the real truth which is so known: Now among
such as profess Christ and call him Lord, it is hidden to us, who are the true
heirs of the Heavenly Kingdom, and who not, until at the day of final
judgment, when all Men shall be judged by their works. The first infallible
certain knowledge which shall be had of this difference, is from the
declarative sentence of that infallible righteous Judge, who has declared he
will proceed, with one, and the other, according to their several works, when
all must appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive
the things done in the Body, according to that he has done, whether it be good
or bad. 2 Cor. 5.10. The ones performance of good works, declared and testified
by the Judge, shall be the true cause by which Men and Angels shall know them
to be the heirs of that Heavenly Kingdom, which here they sought and longed
after, with faithful desires, and endeavors, such as prepared and fitted
themselves for it. The others omission of good works, testified by the same
Judge, shall be the true cause by which we shall know them to be utterly
unworthy of Gods everlasting favor and mercy, most worthy of death eternal. We
shall then truly know, that the one are Crowned (as says St. Cyprian)
according to Gods grace, which graciously accepts of faithful sincerity in
stead of strict legal perfection; and that the other are condemned according to
justice, because they neither fulfilled the law, nor embraced the Gospel, upon
its gracious terms and conditions. That the ones omission of good works, and
commission of evil ones, is the true meritorious cause of their condemnation:
And that the others performance of good works, at least in faithful resolution,
and that hearty inward faith, hope, and love, which would have produced them,
if time and space had been granted, is the testimony or declaration, that they
are the Sons of God, heirs of everlasting life, though not the meritorious
cause of their Salvation and life eternal.

We commonly come to know the cause by the effect: and therefore this word,
for, may, and does often point out, not the cause of the thing it self, but the
effect, and our knowledge of the cause by it. That Is the Major, it is commonly
said, for the Mace is borne before him: Let no Man think, that the bearing of
the Mace before him, is the cause of his being Major (his lawful Election was
the cause of his Majoralty, and his Majoralty the cause of the Mace being
carried, or borne before him) but the bearing the Mace before him, is the true
cause of many Men's knowing him to be the Major. And this answer to the
question, may serve with greater probability, than ought our adversaries bring
for themselves. But with more clearness and evidence of reason, agreeing with
the Analogy of Faith, and the current of Scripture, I answer, That the particle
for implys a causality in both the sentences, but in one, that of the wicked,
the strict meritorious sole cause of their condemnation; whereas in the Godly,
and Charitable Persons, the heirs of Heaven, the for implys such a causal
influence as that which they call conditio or causa sine qua non, good works,
or that faith working by love of God and Man, whence they spring, and the
necessary conditions, without which no Man shall inherit the Kingdom; yea the
necessary qualifications, without which he has not only no worthiness, but no
capacity, no fitness to prepare himself for that Kingdom, whose happiness is to
see God, with mutual complacency. And no Man can so see the holy, merciful,
gracious God, the God of Love, and Father of Mercies, the faithful, righteous,
unchangeable fountain, of all that is pure loving or lovely, unless he be like
him, and bear the Image of those his perfections, though imperfectly as to
degrees, yet impartially and sincerely as the transcript and resemblance of
that Wisdom which comes from above, first pure, then peaceable. Unless his
religion be that undefiled one before God, which visits the Fatherless and the
Widow in affliction, and keeps himself unspotted from the World. These and the
like graces, with their fruits (if time be granted to bring them forth) are not
only described and required, clearly and frequently in holy Scripture, as the
necessary conditions, without which no Man shall, but as the necessary
qualifications, without which no Man can see the Lord, with holy eternal love
and joy. And therefore no doubt the for has a rational inference in it, as to
the acceptance, and reward of the godly, and righteous person. Come ye blessed
of my Father inherit the Kingdom prepared for you: for I was hungry, and ye fed
me, etc. For ye have performed the conditions, which I in my Gospel (or
gracious covenant) required of you, with promise to accept and reward them; for
ye are qualified with those graces, and holy dispositions, which are my own
Image and likeness, the impress of my holy Spirit, which renders you capable of
enjoying me and my Father with endless delight; which makes you (though not in
strict justice worthy of my Heavenly Kingdom) yet in my gracious mercy and
bounty, and through my merits, not utterly unworthy, that is, not wholly unmeet
to inherit it; for these all have confessed, and forsaken their evil ways, fled
with penitent believing hearts, to that propitiation which God had set forth in
his only Son through faith in his blood: By doing so they have received that
holy Spirit, by whose direction and assistance, they have mortified the flesh,
with its lusts and affections, conquered the World with its temptatations,
resisted the Devil, and quenched the fiery darts of the wicked, fought the good
fight of faith, till they finished their course; and though the remainders of
sin and the flesh, abide lusting and struggling against the Spirit, yet no sin
has reigned over them, and the very remainders of sin, they have bewailed,
watched over, and resisted, betaking themselves to Christ's intercession for
their pardon; therefore they are heirs of the Kingdom through the merits of
Christ imparted to them, whereby they are entitled to it, as the meritorious
cause on his part, whereby they have an actual plea, title and interest in
Christ's merit, as the condition and qualification on their part. And thus the
Kingdom and eternal Rest is theirs, though not by right of justice or merit,
but by right of gracious promise. And may not all this be thought sufficient to
justify the truth of the for, or causal particle, unless it be granted that it
signify meritoriously in strict justice on their part, as strictly and fully
as in the other, Depart ye cursed; for ye did no good works, but many ill ones,
without repentance and reformation, without faith and love to me? The goodness,
and justice of Gods Majesty will not suffer him to sentence any Man to any
punishment, much less to eternal intolerable sorrow and pain, unless it has
been strictly and fully deserved, or demerited. But the goodness and bounty and
mercy of God, may without wrong to any perfection, or attribute of his, accept
and reward any Man, that is not utterly incapable of it, but in some sincere
degree qualified for it, with such an abundant measure of happiness as he
thinks fit, although no ways merited by him. The Lord Jesus has satisfied his
Fathers justice and honor, in his Government, and holy Laws, and made it a
righteous thing with him, to save the penitent sinner, upon condition of
reformation and holy obedience: They that are saved have performed these
conditions; and therefore they are admitted with a for. Come ye blessed, etc.
For I was hungry. If a gracious Prince, of his own free goodness, proclaim a
general merciful pardon, to all Rebels, Traitors, and Thieves, provided they
will by such a day acknowledge their fault, and profess and resolve to do so no
more, and make their peace with their Neighbors, whom they have wronged:
Suppose, all accept the pardon in outward show, but some of them secretly
practice the same wickedness against their Sovereign, and their Neighbors,
when as the others perform faithfully the conditions of their pardon: If at the
General Assizes, the Judge upon notice of their demeanours, should say to the
one, I restore you to your former condition, state and dignity; for (or
because) since your pardon proclaimed, ye have so demeaned your selves, as
penitent, loyal, faithful Subjects: And to the other, You I condemn to death
and torments; for (or because) ye have abused your Sovereigns clemency: No Man
of sober reason, or common sense (I think) can deny, that either the
condemnation of the one, were entirely to be ascribed to their own willful
choice, and vile misdemeanors, as due in justice to their demerits; or that
the restoring or saving the other, were to be attributed, not to the merit of
their demeanor, but to the Kings gracious mercy, and bountiful favor. Their
good demeanor, could be at most but the necessary condition or qualification
of their pardon or restoration, without which, it could not consist with the
wisdom or honor of the Prince, his Laws, or Government, so to use them; with
which, it might well consist with his wisdom and honor so to do, and that with
advantage to the glory of his mercy, without disparagement to his Justice,
especially in case his Justice and honor, had been satisfied for their former
misdemeanors, by the merits and intercession of the Prince, his Royal Son: Now
just so it is in this case of which we now speak. They whom our Lord calls here
to eternal life, and that with a for: For ye have fed, clothed, lodged me; are
so far from this proud conceit of Romish merit by their works, that they are
ready to disclaim them, as nothing worthy of such acceptance, ready to blame
their sluggish backwardness. Lord, say they, when saw we thee hungry, thirsty,
naked, or a stranger, or prisoner, and relieved thee?

Nor is it amiss what is observed and acknowledged by Jansenius, (though a
Romanist, and too far engaged in this error) what Saint Chrisostom had long
since observed before him; that our Savior says to those on his right hand,
Come ye blessed of my Father, but to those on his left hand, he says only,
depart ye cursed, but adds not, Of my Father; implying that God the Father is
the Author and gracious donor of life everlasting, but every Man that does
wickedly, and dies in his wickedness without repentance, is the only Author and
cause of his own accursed estate: The one are blessed freely, and mercifully by
God the Father, for his Son Christ's sake, in whom alone he is well pleased with
all that come by him, with such a faith as works by love: But the other are
accursed most justly, because they sought not, or refused when it was offered
them, that grace and mercy which would have blessed them, first with grace to
do good works, then with glory, a superabundant weight of glory for doing them:
And this is consonant to that of St. Paul, Romans 6. v. the last: For the wages
of sin is death, but the (...) or gift of God, is eternal life. Again the same
Janfenius also observes, That our Savior in the sentence of condemnation, does
not say, depart ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for you, but for the
Devil and his Angels: Whereas in the sentence of the righteous, it runs thus:
Come ye blessed inherit the Kingdom prepared for you. By this, says he, it is
implied, That the Salvation of the righteous, must be ascribed to the mercy of
God, who has prepared the Kingdom, and the damnation of the unrighteous, not
to God, but to their own iniquity. How this will consist with his, and his
Mother Romes proud Tenent of meriting Heaven, I cannot see; nor is it much
material to see, save only that this may be seen thereby, That Wisdom and Truth
is often justified, not only by her Children, but by her enemies; forced by
that light sometimes to own, what by their prejudices they study and labor to
deny. Such was also that final extorted confession of Bellarmine himself, after
all his disputes against the truth. Tutissimum est in sola, Dei misericordia
totam fiduciam reponere, but that more common, and owned saying of all their
Schools and Divines, Fundamentum meriti non cadit sub merito, The Foundation of
merits, (or the first grace by which Man is first justified) cannot be merited;
and although granting this, yet they earnestly contend, that by the good use of
this first grace, life eternal is properly merited; but they say it, without,
and against Scripture and reason.

For reason tells us, whatsoever any Man has interest in, by mercy and grace,
and gracious promise, it must be expected, sued for, and humbly accepted, on
the same terms that it is granted, or else it is forfeited. But not only the
first grace, but all increase of grace whatsoever, must be grace, and freely
bestowed not merited. The preparations of this heavenly Kingdom for us, and us
for it, are the fruits of mercy. No Man can do well, unless he be first enabled
by God to do so, and the more he is enabled by Gods gifts and graces bestowed
upon him, the more obliged he is to God. The least increase of grace, given
after the first use of grace, exceeds the measure of our service and
thankfulness, and that which creates new title of debt unto God, cannot
possibly be any ground or title of merit from God, to be adopted in Christ
Jesus, or made the Sons of God by grace, who were by nature the Children of
wrath, strangers and enemies, is a blessing, for which we become so deeply
indebted, Servants to God our Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier; that should we
do abundantly more, and better than we do, we could not make the least
recompense, for that he has done for us; and yet we cannot continue, to will
or do well, but by the free undeserved continuance, and increase of that grace,
and holy Spirit which first prevented us: Yet who is there, that does all that
good so well and constantly, as that Spirit did or would have enabled him?

The manner of the Apostles question Romans 11.35. Who has first given to him?
includes an universal denial; no Man has, no Man can give any thing to him,
and therefore none can receive any thing from him; none to be sure, that are
not only his mere creatures, but sinful creatures, can receive any thing from
him, by way of merit, but of free mercy and bounty. If we view and scan the
Tenor of all Gods promises made in Scripture, from the first grace, to the
increase and perseverance, and final accomplishment of them in glory, we shall
find that he promises only this, to be merciful and bountiful unto us, and if
mercy and bounty be the complete object of all his promises, then may we not
expect their accomplishment, as the merit of our service, but as the fruit of
his mercy and loving kindness. If a loving earthly Father, should give his Son
a liberal pension, before he could modesty ask, or discretion expect it, and
promise him also, that if he employed this present years allowance well, he
would allow him more liberally the next year; in this case, how well soever the
Son used his present pension, yet seeing the profit is wholly his own, not his
Fathers, the more bountifully his Father uses him the next year, the more
still he is obliged and bound unto him: Although this good use of his Fathers
bountiful allowance, were the condition and some kind of motive or reason, why,
and on which, he was treated: A gracious and ingenious Son, would not challenge
the second or third years pension, as due to him, by right of merit, more than
the first, although he had his Fathers promise, for these two years, which he
had not for the first: For his Fathers promise was only to be good and
bountiful unto him, so he would be dutifully thankful for his bounty: Now to
expect and challenge that by right of merit, which was promised out of favor
and loving kindness; although a condition of dutiful demeanor, and faithful
diligence, especially if that demeanor, or diligence came after former
misdemeanors, and be not such in all respects, as it should be neither, is an
high degree of unthankful, undutiful pride, especially from a Son to a Father,
a Son that was once a rebel and enemy. On our Heavenly Fathers part, no debt of
doing us good can be laid; It was his mere free goodness, to give our first
Parents such being as once they had; having lost that goodness wherein we were
made, 'twas more than mere goodness, 'twas abundance of mercy, to make us any
promise at all of restoration, to our lost inheritance, the eternal life of
his favor; and after this promise made, it is the continuance and increase of
the same mercy, to adopt us, and to increase his grace upon us daily, and
lastly to Crown all this with an exceeding great reward, which is himself, the
endless vision of him, from whom we have all we enjoy here, or hereafter. Non
fuisti and factus es, Malus fuisti, and liberatus es, quid Deo dedisti? We may
deserve the diminution or withdrawing of Gods mercy, favors, and blessings,
but we cannot merit, or deserve their increase. Merit supposes such an
inducement as may not only prevail, but such as must oblige, and tie in strict
Justice; whereas no such tie, or obligation, can be laid upon the fontal,
original goodness, much less upon free mercy; which yet multiplies it self to
all that provoke not its withdrawing or abatement. Methinks Men should be
afraid, of this proud opinion of their own merit; because it is so like that of
the Pharisee's, when even that Publican, whom he condemned, will rise up in
judgment against them, for he went away justified, rather than the other. Luke
18.4. The Pharisee absteined from many gross sins, and wanted not many good
works, to allege for himself. He gave Tithes of all he had, fasted and prayed,
and seemed also more humble than the Romanist, for ought appears, for though he
thought himself better than the Publican, yet he acknowledged both his
abstinence from sinful works, and his perseverance in good ones, to be from
God. God I thank thee, for this, and for that; he says not as they, God I
thank thee, thou have given me the first grace, only to restrain me from such
sins, as the Publican walks in, whereas my proficiency, in doing of good? is
from my own meritorious choice, but I thank thee for one and the other. Yet
because he so glories in Gods graces, as if they had not been received from
free mercy, because he is not truly humbled by that grace, which in words he
confesses to have received from God alone, therefore is he less justified than
the Publican, for the use of all the graces, which God bestows in this life, is
to teach us true humility, not to glory in our selves, but in him, to whom all
grace and glory belongs: And if we make not this use of it, if we say not with
Jacob, Lord, I am less than the least of thy mercies toward me: If when we
have done justice, and loved mercy, we walk not humbly with our God, and say
not as our Lord has taught us, forgive us our trespasses, we have been but
unprofitable servants in respect of what we might, and should have been; we
turn his grace into pride, and vain glory, and are worthy to lose the
acceptance and reward, which was promised for Christ's merits, not ours, though
not without sincere performance of those conditions, to which his mercy, and
grace enableth us. Our good works are acceptable to God, a sweet Sacrifice, but
still it is through Jesus Christ. Better is it for us, to hear one Saint from
Heaven, one of those Spirits made perfect, than thousands of daring, sinful
Disputants here below. For what are all the Chairs, and Schools of Men on
Earth, to the suffrage of Heaven, where not only one, but all the Saints, and
perfected Spirits, cast down their Crowns before him, that sits on the Throne
at the feet of the Lamb. Rev. 7.5. Saying aloud, To him that has loved us, and
washed us from our sins in his blood, and made us Kings, and Priests to God, and
his Father, be glory, and power, for evermore? Thus have we seen, that it is not
merit that will bring us to this promised eternal Rest, and yet they that will
attain to it, must employ their Talent well, they must come unto Christ, as
Christ came unto us, by charity and by humility. To obtain this Rest, will cost
some care and pains, and therefore we must expect it, but this care and pains
will be highly rewarded, and therefore 'twill be our wisdom to undergo it: The
Men of this world are apt to think Christianity, and coming to Christ a joyless
thing, because it speaks so much of holy living, of presenting our bodies a
living Sacrifice, of mortifying and Sacrificing its lusts and affections, as if
they were no longer to enjoy themselves, who voluntarily deny themselves in all
these; but they are but false hearted Spies, that would bring this bad report
upon a good land, for the mortifying the lusts of the flesh, the presenting our
bodies a living Sacrifice, is not the destruction of our joys, but the increase
of them, and gives assurances of this eternal Rest: For let the body be never
so backward to be presented unto God, and offered up in Sacrifice to him,
though it shrink at the sight of the Altar, and tremble to see the Sacrificing
Knife, yet are we not to hearken to its foolish tenderness; no cruelty like
such indulgence; the life and safety, and Rest of the Soul, depends upon this
disciplining, this mortifying the body: For he that mortifies and kills, and
slayes his lusts, does but Sacrifice that which would hurt, destroy, and ruin
himself, it is but a carnal, worldly Man that is killed at most, nay it is but a
beast, it is but the unreasonable appetite that is slain; reasonable Man is
saved alive, and made more reasonable by so doing, and exalted thereby to a
Spiritual life. He that leaves this beast alive, and is led by his unruly
passions, is hurried even in this life, to more sorrows, cares, and vexations,
than any Saint or Martyr endures in his passage to Heaven, when he offers
himself up unto God, by an holy life, and patient death: Therefore who so
desires in good earnest, not to fail of this promised eternal Rest, must
crucify the whole body of sin, must subdue and bring into subjecton every
unruly member thereof. The lustful, covetous, disdainful evil Eye which has
made thee blind, or ill sighted to all that is good, must be closed up and put
out, and the charitable, peaceable, contented good Eye set open; and then God
will one day ravish that Eye, with Objects of eternal joy and Rest and delight
in Heaven. Our Ears must be closed up and deaf to all ungodly profane
discourses, and unsavory communication, but open to all that is harmless and
good, sober and wise, rational or Christian: If the ungodly wanton cruel Ear,
that itches after falseshood and wrong be cut off, and the religious believing
chaste merciful Ear remain; then thou have made thine Ears, the gates of Heaven
and Life and Rest, for the Spirit of truth to enter in; being thus opened thou
shall hear the joys of Heaven sounding in thy Ears, such joys as God has
prepared for them that love him.

The Lips also must be closed, and the Tongue tied up from Oaths and Curses,
profane allusions to holy Scripture, bitter revilings, strife and clamor,
open slanders and secret detractions, but they must be opened, and the Tongue
loosed to all holy duties, of Prayers and Praises toward God, wholesome counsel,
admonition and instruction, toward Men. If the profane seducing, contentious,
provoking, bitter Tongue be tied up and silenced, and the wise, pure, and
peaceable and faithful Tongue, be loosened and set on work, thou art no loser
by this change, because thou have exchanged folly for wisdom, shame for honor,
strife for peace, the discord of infernal Spirits, for the music of Angels;
thou have exchanged the Tongue of an Atheist, for the Tongue of a Prophet, or a
Saint. Next, the hand must be withheld from violence and oppression, from theft
and sacrilege, fraud and deceit, but open to all the works of Piety and
Charity. If the injurious griping, bloody hand be cut off, and the innocent
holy pure hand be lifted up to God in Prayer, and stretched out to Man in
Charity; what have thou lost, but the hand of a Murderer, a Thief, an Usurer,
or Adulterer, and have for it, the holy hand of a Priest, the Royal hand of a
Benefactor: Holy and acceptable unto God, pleasing and beneficial unto Men? The
feet also must be restrained from wandering into the ways of wickedness, where
we meet with temptations and vanity, snares and dangers; they are to carry us
from the seducing assemblies of Schismatics, the bloody Conspiraces of Rebels,
the riotous assemblies of gluttons and drunkards; they must be ready and
forward, to go to the place, where Gods honor dwells, where his word and
Sacraments are dispensed, to the house where the Widow and Fatherless inhabit.
If the wicked perverse sinful foot be cut off, and the holy charitable foot be
left thee, to carry thee to thy duty toward God and Man, what have thou lost,
but the disconsolate walk of a wilderness, amongst briers and thorns, and
serpents the path of dismal darkness, and death and error, where no Rest is to
be found: For that of truth, light, and life, and eternal happiness? Last of
all, we must be sure to keep the heart for God; that of all the rest he chiefly
expects, without which, the putting out of the Eye, the cutting off the hand,
and setting a watch over our Tongue, and offering up our dearest and only
Isaac, in obedience to Christ's Command, will be thought but an Hypocritical
mockery of God, who knows the heart and cannot be mocked.

My Son give me thy heart, Prove. 20.26. That he asks, and that he will have,
and surely no Son will withhold that from his Father. The heart is the Throne
of the great King, where he sits and rules the whole Man; this is the most holy
place of the Temple, where the Spirit of truth and holiness inhabits, and
therefore he that gives him not this, gives him nothing that he will accept, or
that will make for our everlasting Rest. If the heart be first presented, the
rest will and must follow, a wise and holy Tongue, a diligent and liberal hand,
a watchful and attentive Ear, a wary foot, obedient sober chaste flesh, will not
stay behind, but will all conduce to the carrying us on in peace to this
desired Rest. Every part and member of the body looks to be at Rest and in
perfect happiness in Heaven, and therefore every part must look to praise and
glorify him on Earth; it is not enough that the Tongue be holy and chaste, if the
hand be covetous, nor that the Ear be diligent and attentive at holy duties, if
the Tongue speak not, and the hand act not according to what the Ear heard.
Every member must do its office, the head was made to know God, the heart to
love him, the Tongue to praise him, the feet to follow him, wherefore withhold
no part from him; remember he made the whole Man, and redeemed the whole, if
any thing be withheld, no Rest, no happiness to be expected; it is in our choice
whilst we are here, what we will do, and which we will choose; whether to take
part with Satan, whose work it is to destroy us, or come when Christ calls us
to him, who will assuredly save us; one of these we must do, there is no
neutrality between both; either we must be the Members of Christ the Children
of God, and Heirs of Heaven, or else we must be the Children of Satan, and
Heirs of intolerable endless condemnation. Remember the dreadful misery of
their choice, who take hell for their portion, and remember that a short
delight here unrepented, will cost a lasting sorrow hereafter. Shall the Son of
God, become the Son of Man, to present us unto God his Father, to give us
eternal Rest, and shall we refuse, and flee from our own happiness, and become
profoundly miserable in despite of all his mercy, and tender care over us? If
Christ say, Come unto me, all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will
give you Rest: Shall we stop our Ears at this gracious call of Christ, and
continue in wilful sins? What do we else then, but knowingly prefer the
whispers of Satan, before the loud cries, and calls of Christ? We choose hell
and death, and the company of infernal Spirits, before Heaven and life, and the
Society of Saints and Angels. If we refuse to come now when Christ calls us, at
the last day he will refuse to receive us. If we appear with hearts filled with
iniquity, and hands full of blood, with feet that walked in the counsel of the
ungodly, and stood in the way of sinners, he will not know us for his Children,
having lost his Image, in which we were made, he will say unto us, Depart from
me ye cursed, I know ye not. But if we carry with us the resemblance of our
Maker, that Image and likeness of him which he once stamped upon us; if we can
present him with a wise and pure heart, if we can lift up unto him holy hands,
if we can see him with chaste Eyes, and if our feet have walked in his
Commandments and trod his Courts, if our feet have stood in thy Gates O
Jerusalem, then shall the Gates of Heaven open unto us, then our Heavenly
Father will take us for his obedient Sons; such as heard his voice, and such as
shall hear it again, when he will say, Come ye blessed of my Father inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the World, for I was hungry and
ye fed me, in Prison and ye visited me, etc.

All the Sons of God from the first born, to the last, are all heirs to a
Kingdom, all his invitations are to a Crown, his Sons are inheritors of those
joys which fade not away and of that Rest which never shall have end. Whereas
the sinful Person's immoderate desires of the things of this World, are but his
torment, till he be satisfied, and then his satisfaction is his torment,
because there is no Rest, nor quiet in it, and proves so much less than his
expectation. Thus is the restless sinner always sick, one while of too much,
another while of too little, now of loving, then of loathing, now of want, then
of satiety, for he never cease to want, till he cease to desire; and Man is
always desiring either the presence of something he cannot have, or the absence
of something he cannot remove, or else the continuance of something he cannot
keep. Hence the sinner appears to be as the Prophet Esaiah speaks, Isa. 57.20.
Like the troubled Sea when it cannot Rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt,
The Winds within him, and the Waves and Tide without him, give him no Rest, and
when his delights are at the highest flood, they do bring him the sad news of
an approaching ebb. Ask but the unclean Adulterer, and let him tell you, what
Rest and Peace he finds in his vice; compare but his short pleasure, with the
tormenting fire of his lusts, joined with the worm of his guilty conscience:
Have but patience to look upon him in his nasty diseases and rotten bones, his
wasted flesh, as well as estate; (for that is often the event, always the
hazard) and he will have little to boast of, but will find himself really to
endure more misery in the way to eternal death, than many a holy chaste
Christian finds to eternal life. Ask the Glutton or the Drunkard, whose highest
thoughts are for the cloying, not satisfying their disordered appetites; Ask if
they find not themselves uneasy, when they consider how short and low their
pleasure is, compared with the irksom diseased shamefulness of their sin. See
how heavily the Ambitious proud person walks, between his eager desires and
doubtful expectations, under his false hopes, and true fears, and then judge
whether his wearisom days, and restless nights, can bring him any true content.
Should I instance in the idle Gallant, whose time like a burden lies upon his
hands, or in the contentious wrangler, or unpeaceable brawler, the secret
whisperer, or the open detractor, I should tire your patience sooner than want
a proof, that sin is a wearisom uneasy heavy restless burden, and that it is
necessary by the way of virtue to come unto Christ for ease and Rest. The Angel
in Tobit, bids Tobias take out the gall of the fish, to cure his blindness; if
we rip the bowels of worldly, sinful lusts, and pleasures, and take out the
gall of them, that is to say, seriously look upon the bitterness they bring
with them, and the gall and wormwood they leave behind them, it may prove a
remedy of our Spiritual blindness; yet such is our shortsightedness, that we
think we are at ease under our load, and at Rest in our sore Travel. Sin turns
all things up side down, it sets Earth above, and Heaven below: Reason at the
footstool, and brutish appetite on the Throne, and having thus looked downward
for our Rest and happiness, we are ashamed to look Heaven in the face, and
having lost Heaven for Earth by sin, we look downward still, as fearing that
Hell, which we have so well deserved; and this is it which makes Men suffer all
sorts of diseases, the Gout, the Stone, Toothaches, and all kind of Tortures,
rather than die, because ill led lives leave Men under anxious fears and sad
doubtings, what shall be their future state. When Tamberlin commanded all
Leprous persons to be put to death, lest they should lead a miserable life, the
poor Lepers thought his mercy cruel, and would have endured more willingly two
Leprosies than one death; not because of any great comfort they took in their
lives, but because they knew not what might follow after death. To lose this
life without assurance or hopeful probability of a better, is doleful and
bitter, but to lose it with assurance from Gods own Mouth of a far worse, of
incurring an eternal death, anguish and pain without mitigation, this makes
death deadly indeed, when the sinner must die again, for the sin he dies in,
when the first death leads to a second; and when all the terrors, and sorrows,
and pains, of the first death, are but the evidences of more, or worse to
follow; when the fire that is now begun to be kindled, will burn down to the
lowest hell, Deuteronomy. 32.22. If we believe this in good earnest, why do we not
hate sin, worse than death? Because sin is the cause of all this; the cause of
death and all that is deadly: It makes us liable to a dreadful account at the
day of Judgment, and makes our whole life restless and uneasy. This being so,
how dare we trifle away one day or hour more of that term, or time of Trial,
upon which, though so short, and so uncertain, depends such a life and such a
death, such joys and such sorrows, such rest and such disquiet, to all
eternity? Methinks if Heaven cannot allure us, with all the joys and blessed
eternal Rest there to be had; Hell might affright us, with its dreadful
sufferings, into our duty, and compel us to make God at least, our last refuge,
if not our first choice. No loss so great as the loss of God, and the Kingdom
of Heaven, and that Rest we are there invited to. No Prison so loathsome, as the
bottomless pit of horror and darkness: No sight so ghastly as that of frightful
fiends: No shriekings so terrible as those of damned Ghosts: No stench so
noisome as that of the lake of fire and brimston: No fire so hot as of the wrath
of God, which puts the sinner into chains never to be loosed, into darkness
never to be enlightened, and gives him gnashing of teeth never to be remedied,
gnawing vipers never to be pulled off; and this makes up such a mass of woes,
such a deadly death, as exceeds all humane eloquence to express, much more all
patience to endure. Now to avoid all this St. Paul tells us, Heb. 12.1. what we
must do, we must lay aside every weight, and the sin that does so easily beset
us, and run with patience the race that is set before us; running the way of
Gods Commandments, which St. Paul calls here a race, is the way to this
everlasting Rest; therefore let us so run that we may obtain it, and then our
recompense is, a Crown of life; if we slothfully neglect it, our punishment is,
Tribulation and anguish, endless and intolerable, the worm of conscience that
never dies, the fire of hell that never goes out. Were we left to the
glimmering suspicious light of natural reason, as most Nations were of old, and
many are still, to guess at the way that leads to this everlasting Rest, or to
find it out by a painful enquiry, through many difficulties, and impediments of
a contrary erroneous Education, we were by far the more excusable, but when by
the mercy of God, we have the Gospel sounding in our Ears, and the way to this
Rest chalkt out before our Eyes in holy Scripture, and lively Oracles, with all
the powerful persuasive motives of hope and love, inviting us to it on the one
hand, and all the cogent constraining motives of threats and fear, to drive us
to it; hearten'd on with promises, assistances, and instructions on the other
hand; what pretense of excuse can we have, that we should fall short of this
Rest? But some are often enquiring, what is the lowest degree of holiness,
faith, and obedience, that is consistent with the escaping of hell, or hope of
Heaven? They would know, what is the lowest rate that Heaven and eternal Rest
will come at? The greatest part of those that would be resolved in this
enquiry, are of a most disingenuous unworthy disposition; for when God has
obliged us, by so many mercies, assistances, encouragements, and rewards, thus
to beat down as low as they can, the price of all his kindness and bounty; it is
a dangerous sign that he that seeks heaven and happiness so faintly, will not
seek it long; for we Sail against Tide, in our Voyage to Heaven, and earnest
diligence is required in the passage thither, but if we begin to lay aside our
Sails and Oars, we shall by the very stream of our nature, (the world and the
flesh) be carried backward to perdition. The way to Heaven is upward, but the
ground is falling that we tread on, and the heaviness of our nature, does
perpetually expose us to relapses. It Is very probable, that he that is so
jealous and wary, of doing ought more than is necessary to this eternal Rest,
will never attain to do so much: He is likely to shoot short of his Mark, who
is so afraid of over-shooting it. He that said: So run that you may obtain,
meant, so diligently, so earnestly, as if you were never sure enough of
obtaining it, but by running as fast as your Spirits can hold out, till you
come to the Gaol, the high price of your calling in Christ. The slothful
Servant that said his Master was an Austere Man, did but slander his Master, to
hide his own negligence, thinking all too much that he did, and that eternal
Salvation, which cost no less than the death of the Lord of life, the Son of
God, was set at too high a price.

Such as are thus niggardly of their pains, will find at last, that by not
improving their Talent, they will lose at once both Heaven and it. Take from
him the Talent, says Christ in the Parable, Matt. 25.28. and cast the
unprofitable Servant into outer darkness. That this may not happen unto any one
of us, let us follow the advice of the Apostle, Heb. 12.14. which says, follow
peace with all men, and holiness, without which no Man shall see the God of
peace. God is not disquieted or troubled, or angry, though for our sakes he
seems to be so, when his wronged justice must punish us, unless we repent: It Is
our sin not his wrath, which whets the Sword of the destroying Angel, and shall
not we desire to be like the Angels, yea like our Heavenly Father, in being at
Rest and quiet, and keeping the peace of our Spirits, in the midst of a froward
generation? To be sedate and quiet in the midst of as many humors as Men? To
be the same when others run several ways to break our Rest? To be humble when
one scorns us? Meek when another provokes and rages? Silent when this Man
reviles? Charitable when the other hates and persecutes us? Not to be
transported with passion at others violence? To stay at home, and keep our
selves in calmness, and peaceable Rest, when the World is gone out of order,
not to pull it more in pieces, by seeking to settle it as we please? Not to
enrage the fire that threatens us, by blowing up with violent words, but to
quench it with soft answers, and to overcome evil with good, following peace
with all Men, and fighting only against our lusts and passions, which War
against the Soul, and disturb and hinder its rest and peace? From whence come
Wars, and fightings amongst you, are they not from restless lusts and desires
of all sizes, that War and rage with in you? These lusts are the spawn of the
two great sensual principles, Desire and Anger. Sometimes pride, sometimes
coveting that which God has not made ones lot, and then disturbing and
confounding properties, in hope of attaining it: All the unpeaceableness in the
World, is forged, and managed by these lusts: And the graces which Christ
prescribes, Matt. 5. as Humility, Meekness, Contentedness, are sent to root
them out, and to dwell with that impatience, and insatiable restless ravening,
which troubles the World: But too many there are amongst us, who have not thus
learnt Christ. The wrathful Malecontent, who disturbs both Church and State,
sails through a stormy tempestuous Sea and Rocks and Sands ready to ruin him,
that by the ruin of many others, in soul and body, estate and good name, he
may arrive at his wisht-for haven of riches and power: But what does he find at
the end thereof, but a miserable Shipwreck of himself, as well as others,
horror of conscience, hatred from Men of all parties, perpetual jealousies of
his being bereaved of his dearly bought, unjust acquisitions, and at last, it is
likely, Hamans Gallows, Absalons Tree, or Joabs Sword? However an infamous name
and memory, after an anxious perplexed life, and that which is incomparably
worse, eternal intolerable sorrow and pain both of Soul and Body. The like may
be said of the Heretic or Schismatic, who, when he has prided himself a
while, by leading a numerous party or sect, of unstable Souls, from the faith
that was once for all delivered to the Saints, from the unity of peace, and
order of obedience to lawful Governors, into destructive Error and Schism,
finds himself wilder'd, and those that followed him crumbled into subdivisions,
'till one and the other end in shame and self confusion, bringing them either
to repentance, or intolerable endless misery. But on the other side, the
peaceable, meek, obedient follower of Christ enjoys his Rest, and the benefit
of good Government, with cheerful thankfulness to God and Man; bears the
troublesome oppressions, and disorders, of an evil one patiently; and if the
violence of seduced Governors, call him to the fire and faggot, imprisonment,
banishment, sequestration and what not, he chooses rather, poverty and death,
with torments for an hour or two, than the far worse rack of an evil
conscience, the Worm that dies not, and the fire that is not quenched. They
that go about to build a Tower up to Heaven, if they be once confounded and
divided in their Language, 'twill prove but a Babel, or shameful Chaos at best:
When one builds and another pulls down, what profit have they then but labor?
Eccl. 34.23. A house divided against it self, be it a Family, a Kingdom, or
Church, it cannot stand to Gods glory; And it were to be wished, that they who
have the glory of God in their Mouths, when they separate from the Church
(which Baptized, and taught them their Christianity) for matters of an
indifferent nature, no where forbidden, would take heed of dishonouring God,
and his glory, by pretending to make them the end of their groundless quarrels
and jealousies. The common enemies to true Religion are Atheism, and
Supersttion. Whereto then serves all this ado, about gestures, and vestures,
and other external rites and formalities? That for such things as these (never
imposed but for decency and order) Men should clamor against the times, desert
their ministerial office, fly from their Country as out of Babylon, stand at
open defiance against lawful authority, in Church and State, draw their Pens
and Swords against them; whereto serves all this, but to give scandal to
Atheist and Romanist? The Atheist, to think there is no certainty in Religion,
and scoff at all; the Romanist, to think that theirs is the true, when their
adversaries have so little unity and peace with each other? Unity and Peace,
are the order and harmony, the beauty and strength, and comfort of our own
Spirits, as also of Families and Neighbourhoods, Cities and Kingdoms, Church
and State. Peace gives a seasonable opportunity of gathering wealth, and of
employing and enjoying it, with thankfulness to God, and charity to Man; it
gives an advantageous leisure for learning, and knowledge of all sorts;
especially that which most concerns us, the Knowledge of God and Christ Jesus.
But division and strife, are the ruin and misery of single Persons, the bane
of private Families, public Societies, Church and State, and all that is
profitable, or comfortable to Man. When the World is out of frame, peace
establishes the pillars of it, brings every part to its own place, the sensual
under the rational, the flesh under the beck of the Spirit. It draws the
Servant under the Master, the Subject under the Magistrate. The peace of
Families and Kingdoms, makes every part to dwell together in unity, it keeps
every Man in his right place, the Master on Horseback, the Servant on the
ground; the King on the Throne, the Subject in his private station; the pastors
in their place of teaching, and the people in theirs of attention and devotion:
Like an intelligence, it moves the lesser Sphere of a Family, and the greater
Orb of a Commonwealth or Kingdom, composedly and orderly in its happiness.
Peace is so necessary in all conditions to rest and happiness, that without it,
ones Family is a prison, or sad confinement to trouble and molestation:
Neighborhood, gives but the opportunity of vexing and injuring one another:
Towns and Cities, are but so many wildernesses of wild beasts: The Church no
Church, more like Babel, than Jerusalem: A Kingdom or State, a disorderly
Chaos; yea an Aceldama, or field of blood.

By peace at home, good Laws and Orders are made and kept; Magistrates
respected, Subjects relieved according to their necessities: By peace and
agreement in the Church, Gods ordinances are duly observed, good discipline
executed; Pastors and Teachers maintained and encouraged, the People edified,
Gods houses preserved and beautified: Who is there then that would not seek his
eternal Rest hereafter, by seeking peace and ensuing it here?

Christian Religion, that leads and conducts us to this eternal Rest, is also
the wisest and most powerful preserver of peace in order to it; It commands us
to study and pray for it, to follow it, with all diligence till we overtake it;
we are commanded to lose our right for the sake of peace, to part with Coat, or
Cloak, or any thing tolerable, rather than it.

Peace levels the hills, and raises the valleys, and casts an healthful
peaceable influence, on all conditions and qualities of Men: That as it was
prophesied, Isa. 11.6. The Wolf may dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard lie
down with the Kid. And if it be not so with Christians, it is because they are
so in word, but not in heart; have received the Gospel of peace in their Ears,
and heads perhaps, but not in the love thereof: For were they indeed the Sons
of peace, in whose hearts the peace of God takes place, were they Members of
that body of which Christ is the head, then every Member of such a Kingdom or
Church, would keep its place, with subordinate dependence; the rich by
supplying the poor, the poor by blessing the rich, the wise by teaching the
ignorant, the ignorant by hearkening to the wise; every Man being as an Angel,
or ministering Spirit, to another. But the restless, unpeaceable person, counts
it his honor, to speak and do what he list:

To pursue his enemies till he take them, and beat them as small as the dust
before the wind; to stand in the valley, and touch the Mountains till they
smoke; reach at that which is above, and pull it down; divide that which is
united; shake that which is established, violate that which should not be
touched; and are ever moving and heaving upward, to gain a name, though it be by
firing a Temple, or setting a Kingdom or Church in combustion. Thus are honors
valued and sought among Men, the Sons of Belial, that would be yokeless.
Honorable Schismatics descend from Jeroboam, who made Israel to sin; from
Corah, Dathan and Abiram, who rose up against Moses and Aaron, till they
perished in their contradiction: Honorable Hypocrites, Pharisees, and the Sons
of Pharisees, whose name, and profession was, to separate as more holy; though
the Baptist and Christ himself, condemned them as more wicked.

Honorable Murderers, of their Father the Devil, who was so from the
beginning of sins entrance into the World; ambitious, covetous, discontented,
revengful, humorous, unpeaceable persons, and these would be accounted the
Honorable grandees of the World; but in the Court, and Heraldry of Heaven, we
find no such Titles of Honor. An Honor it is to be at peace and rest; cease
from strife, Prove. 20.3. The peaceable Man, he is the Honorable Man in
Scripture, and in Gods account: By peaceableness, and following peace, Men
procure to themselves a sure Title to everlasting peace and rest; knowing that
the merciful shall obtain mercy, the peaceable, peace, and Rest at the last.
But there are amongst us, unquiet restless persons who pretend to inspirations,
and boast themselves of the Spirit; but we are exhorted by St. John, 1 Ephesians.
4.1. Not to believe every Spirit, but to try the Spirits, whether they are of
God or no, because many false Prophets are gone out into the World: And our
Savior's direction for the discovery of them we have, Matt. 7.16. Ye shall
know them by their fruits. Our Saviors meaning could not be only, nor chiefly,
the fruits of their lives in their outward conversation, for falsehood is often
set off by Hypocrisy; and a show of sanctity, goes for great purity; and
pretenses of Religion and Reformation, serve to delude, and mislead unstable
Souls. This is the Wool which the Wolf wraps about him, when he means to do
most mischief, with least suspicion. The old Serpent is not so silly as to
think, that his Ministers (whilst they are working the works of darkness)
should be able to draw a considerable party into their communion, should they
appear in their dismal colors; therefore he puts them into a new dress, before
he send them abroad in the World; transforming them, as if they were the
Ministers of light; therefore our Savior could not mean the fruits of their
lives so much, as the fruits of their Doctrine, that is to say, the necessary
consequences of their Doctrines. If what is spoken and Taught by them, upon
examination do plainly appear inconsistent with any one branch or duty of a
Christian life, the words we may be sure are not wholesome words. It can be no
Heavenly Doctrine, that teaches Men to be earthly, sensual, and devilish, that
tends to make Men unjust in their dealings, uncharitable in their censures,
undutiful to their superiors. It was not the purpose of God, in publishing the
Gospel, and thereby freeing us from the rigor and curse of the Law, so to turn
us loose and lawless, to do (as when there was no King in Israel) what seemed
good in our own Eyes; follow our own crooked will, gratify any corrupt lust;
but to oblige us the faster, by these new benefits, and heavenly promises, and
to bind us to our good behavior the more strictly, allowing no liberty to the
flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof, but to exact of us sincere sanctity and
purity, both of inward affection, and outward conversation; otherwise no true
Rest to be expected.

But our pretenders to the Spirit, who call the Scriptures a dead letter, boast
of new inspirations, and endanger greatly the bringing in confusion amongst
Men, and disturbances into States and Kingdoms; the Governors whereof, having
no other authority, than what is either founded or agreeable to the word, or
will of God, it will still be in the power of each pretender, to deliver
Oracles out of his own breast, as the immediate dictates of Gods Spirit, quite
contrary to the safety, and interest of that Government, which any where is, or
may be established: And so the peace of Kingdoms, must be as uncertain and
changeable, as the phansies of Men, and the Laws as alterable as Testaments are
while the Testator lives; every illuminate breast pretending to come like Moses
from God in Sinai, with new Tables of divine Commandments, which must abolish
and exclude the old; but it is our great comfort, blessed be God, that the
public Doctrine established in the Church of England, is at this day such,
that it is not chargeable, with any one thing, contrary to any part of that
duty, which a Christian owes, either to God or Man.

Let these pretenders consider what the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 12.7. The
manifestation of the Spirit is given to every Man to profit withal: As if he
should have said, let no Man pretend to the Spirit, for any other end or
purpose, save for what it was given, and that was not to procure himself glory,
not to separate from his Brethren, not to pride and puff up himself by
despising and scorning others, but to advance the glory of God, and promote his
own and others salvation.

If what thou have or pretends to have, be given, the honor is the givers, and
the receiver must give an account how he has used, what he has received. Now
in order to the procuring this eternal Rest, there are indeed in the Church
several gifts, in several men; different Offices, and diverse operations, which
look at first as if they proceeded from several principles, and tended to
division; but as all this variety tends to unity, so all indeed proceeds from
unity, Unity in Trinity, one and the same God truly distinguished into three
Persons, but always united into the same Godhead.

But what Rest may those Men expect, who dig at the foundation of our Religion,
and stick not to deny that blessed Trinity, into whose worship, and in whose
name we are Baptized: The name of the Father, the Son and Holy Ghost? To which
three Sacred Persons we so often say, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son,
and to the Holy Ghost. These are the Three which said to each other, when they
made Man, Genesis 1. Let us make Man after our Image, in our likeness. These are
they which manifested themselves at our Lords Baptism; joining again to renew
that Image, in which we were made. The Father in the voice, the Son owned by
that voice, the Spirit in the Dove abiding on him: These are that Holy, Holy,
Holy, to whom the Seraphims in Isaiah, under the old Testament, gave all glory.
These are they to whom the Angels and Saints in Heaven, sing that Anthem of
praise in the Revelations. This is the sum of Christian Religion, and that
which brings Rest and peace eternal to all that well understand and receive it.

And therefore the Council of Nice ordained that the Literae formatae, or
Commendatory Letters, which were the solemn warrants of entertainment, and
hospitality, between Christians, should be subscribed by these Letters (...),
denoting the Trinity, and their faith who carried those Letters. There are
three (says St. John) that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and
the Spirit, and these three are one and the same God blessed for ever: One
Essence, according to what our Lord has said, I and the Father are one. Thus
to believe, highly concerns us all, because of all errors, none so pernicious,
none so intolerable, as those which concern the first fountain, whence all
things flow; and the last end to which all things tend. Derive all from the
blessed Trinity, ascribe and refer the glory of all to the blessed Trinity, and
then we shall come to enjoy him in blessed rest and happiness, whom we thus
believe, adore and honor.

St. Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 12.8. That there are diversities of gifts, but the
same Spirit; differencies of administrations, but the same Lord; diversities of
operations, but it is the same God, that works all in all.

This should stand as a great argument of Unity, and Charity amongst our
selves, Humility and Thankfulness to God, who has made us partakers in several
measures, and degrees of these gifts, these administrations, these operations;
that though our gifts, and places, and works are very different and unequal,
yet they come all from the same Spirit, Lord, and God; who wisely governs and
orders all things by his Council here below: The Apostle tells us, v. 8. To one
is given the word of wisdom, [a special ability of understanding] To another
the word of knowledge, [to interpret the mystical senses and veiled meanings of
holy Scripture] To another Faith, [or a firm belief to work all miracles] To
another the gift of healing, [a peculiar power to cure diseases without the
help of Physick] To another the working of Miracles, [such as was the
delivering Hymineus and Philetus, to be afflicted by Satan; the striking Elymas
blind, and Ananias and Saphira dead] To another diverse kinds of Tongues, [the
gift of speaking several and strange Languages, which he was never taught;] And
all this works that one and the same Spirit, who divides his several gifts,
to several Men, according to his good pleasure.

Other Scriptures tell us the same, as that of St. Matt. 25.15. The Master of
the house gave to one Servant five Talents, to another two, to another one, to
every one according to his several ability: He gives such, and so much as he
sees every Man is fit to make use of, to Gods glory and the Common good. Thus
God will show himself both a free donor, and a wise disposer of all things. For
if one Man should have all abilities, and others few or none of any worth, the
World might seem to be guided, either by blind fortune, or fatal necessity; but
now that Men have their several Offices, and their several abilities, by which
they are each fitted for another service, and all for the beauty and benefit
of the whole frame; the hand of divine providence, appears in the disposing of
them. God would have Men take notice of their gifts, and of their defects, that
by the one they may learn humility, and by the other thankfulness. For if any
one had all parts, he would be too proud of his perfections, and begin to think
he needed not the supply of Gods farther favors, who had so much of his own
already. Again, if any Man were destitute of all Gods gifts, and mercies, he
would want matter to bless God for. But now that God has given to Men a
measure of good things, and has tempered their gifts, with many defects, they
may easily see, they are both indebted to God for all they have, and depending
on God for all they want. And so this dividing Gods gifts, should teach us to
think humbly of our Selves, and thankfully of God, and to set up our Rest in
those gifts and graces, which his bounty has so freely conferred upon us. Not
inwardly to repine and envy, nor outwardly to disturb and pervert, that order
which God has made, but to let God alone with his wise and gracious dealing
with us, and to rest satisfied with our own portion, and to prize and esteem
the gifts of others, acknowledging their due worth and value where ever we find
them; for if the holy Spirit of God, divide his gifts as he will, and his will
is always gracious and wise, then either to deny, or envy, or debase them, is
no better than to thwart God, in one especial work of his wisdom and goodness.

Some Men indeed would have greater gifts, and most Men would have greater
callings and places in the Church and State; all secretly grudging against God,
and envying one another; and if it were not the mercy of God, to over rule such
secret swellings, they would burst out to the overthrow of peace and order, and
would prove no less destructive, to our temporal quiet and Rest here, than to
our eternal Rest hereafter. 'Twas good Counsel which Joseph gave to his
Brethren, when they were returning with their Sacks of Corn to their Father in
Canaan, See ye fall not out by the way. We are all Travelers returning to our
Fathers house, the Heavenly Canaan, in which are many mansions, enough
certainly for all the Sons of Adam, and God has given to every Man, such gifts
and graces, such guides and assistances, for their conduct, that were they not
wanting to themselves, they need not doubt their safe arrival. But such are our
fallings out by the way, such our jarrings and dissentions, our lingrings,
delays and backslidings, that we may have cause to fear, the greater part of
these Travelers will fall short of these mansions, and never take up their
Rest in their Fathers house.

It is an ancient and true saying, Unum quodque est propter operationem suam.
God has made all that he made; ordered all things that he ordained (and there
is nothing but what he made and set in order) for that work and operation, to
which its nature, place and faculties, are fitted. The work and operation
therefore, is the first in order of intention or design, though the last in
order of execution and accomplishment. But nothing can operate or work aright,
except it be gifted, or endued with some faculty, or hability to that work. And
that this faculty or hability may produce its work in due order, it must have
its due place and office, appointed by him who orders all things.

Now as this is true and certain in the universal body of the World, and in the
particular natural body of all Men; so it is chiefly to be observed, in the
Spiritual body of Christ's Church. First there are gifts to enable Men to
perform the work for which God has appointed them. Then there are Offices
(...) or administrations, to authorize them, and give them Commission, in their
several places to exercise those gifts, with which they are endued, and perform
those works, for which they are gifted and authorized. Then there are works,
which must be performed by Men endued with those gifts and those Commissions.

This is the wise method and order which he that has made all things in
number, measure and weight, has prescribed, and observed himself in all his
works, and prescribed us in his word to observe. Gifts are first mentioned,
because they are first necessary, for the qualifying of the Person both for his
office and his work. What ever we have, what ever we are, by nature or grace,
in our worldly condition, or in our spiritual, is a gift: For what are, or what
have we, in any respect, if good it be; that we have not received, from that
God, who is the only self-subsisting, all-sufficient fountain, and fullness of
all being and life? For in him we live, and move, and have our being: From him,
and through him, and to him are all things. He spoke the word, Let it be thus,
and thus, (by that eternal word his only Son) and it was so.

His Spirit moved upon the Waters, and all things that he pleased to have done,
through this word, by this Spirit were produced; for by the word of the Lord
were the Heavens made, and all the host of them by this Spirit, or word of his
mouth. All then is his gift: Ab unissimo Deo manant multiformia, ab aeterno
temporalia; All diversity comes from Unity, all times and temporal things, from
the eternity, of this Trinity. It is God alone that has made and ordered the
dull Earth and the active Sun, distinguished the World into such diversity of
Creatures, in order to serve one another, the Elements for the mixed bodies,
herbs and grass for the living unreasonable Creatures; those for Man, and Man
for his own service and glory.

If God had made but one Creature, that one had proved him an infinite God, as
to his power, for nothing but an Almighty power, can bring forth any thing,
though but an Atom, or dust or sand out of nothing. But now that he has made
and appointed so many Creatures, in such a just and excellent order, this makes
the riches of his wisdom and bounty, clearly appear to the Eye of reason, and
then he demands of Man, who has this reason, in all humility and thankfulness
that he adore and revere that God, who has made so many diverse Creatures to
serve him, that he may learn thereby to serve and love his Creator, and
gracious benefactor; and so at last come to enjoy him, whom he has thus served
and loved, in eternal joy and rest.

If any one should ask, why was I made a liveless Element, a senseless Plant,
an unreasonable though a living Creature, but a reasonable Man, above all
these, able to see, and consider what I see and know; to the honor of God?
There can no account or reason be given, but the free bounty of his gift, who
thus distinguished and ordered all things. And so also amongst Men; why one is
noble, another obscure; one rich, another poor; one beautiful, witty, and
strong, another weak, dull, or less comely, what account can any one give, but
that there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit, Lord, God, who thus
orders them? And this must teach us contentedness, without envying Superiors;
and Charity, without despising or neglecting inferiors.

But besides these gifts, these Offices and administrations, which God has
placed in the World, for its Temporal Government; there are gifts supernatural
and spiritual, which God has ordained and placed in the Church, for the
spiritual Government of Men's Souls, in order to Gods service here, and Man's
eternal Rest and Salvation hereafter. And these gifts, Saint Paul in the first
to the Corinthians, 12.28. reckons up to be eight in number. First Apostles,
Secondarily Prophets, Thirdly Teachers. After Miracles, then gifts of healing,
helps, Governments, diversities of Tongues: Whereof five were needful only at
first, and so to continue but for a time: But those that were to abide for
ever, are reduced to Three, Teachers, Helps, Governments. Priests or Presbyters
to teach, Deacons to help, Bishops both to teach, help, and govern. These all,
the Church had from the beginning, and our Church blessed be God, still has
them. These the Synod of Carthage calls the Three degrees of the Clergy; and we
find frequent mention of them, in all the Monuments and Records of the Church,
whether Provincial Synods, or general Councels, Public Liturgies, or private
Writers, Historians or Fathers; Canons made for their several Offices and
Administrations, bounding and limiting each from other, in their proper works
and operations.

That of Presbyters and Deacons, has been less questioned; but that of Bishops
more disputed in late times: yet who can question, or doubt of their being
placed in the Church, by the Apostles themselves, that has with any impartial
Eye, read and considered, either the Scripture, or the ancient expositers of
Scripture. Timothy at Ephesus, and Titus at Creet, have their Episcopal Office
and duty plainly described, and ordered in Scripture by St. Paul. The Seven
Stars in Christ's hand, Rev. 1.20. are the Seven Angels of the Seven Churches,
says Christ himself. And he that considers what these Churches were, of how
numerous Christians, of what large circuit, containing several Cities and
Countries, can hardly doubt of what the Ancients have said: That the Angels of
these Churches were not only Bishops, but Metropolitan Archbishops. Sure we
are, that Church Writers and Historians, set down the very particular names of
these Seven Angels or Bishops, and not only so, but their Successors for
several Ages.

The first general Counsel of Nice, from which the Nicene Creed has its name,
consisted of Three Hundred and Eighteen Bishops, as many as Abraham had in his
Army against the Kings, in the story of Genesis, as St. Ambrose wittily
alludes. And the first general Synod, calls the Government by Bishops,
Archbishops or Metropolitans (...) the ancient guise: So ancient it was, that
the ancient writers we have (and some we have of the next Age after the
Apostles) mention it as universally spread over the Church, and from no other
at first derived, than from the Apostles.

Nor could it indeed have been so early, or so generally diffused, from any
less authority than theirs. These are they whom St. Paul calls (...), giving
them power of ordination and of Government, Rulers and Presidents. Ignatius
every where distinguishes them from Presbyters, and Deacons, as being above
them, and calls them (...), Governors. So does St. Cyprian, Origin, Eusebius,
Epiphanius, and who not? attributing to them not only the chief place, but the
highest authority and power of Government. Hierom himself, though but a
Presbyter, and a zealous defender of Presbyters dignity, derives the difference
of degrees no lower, than from the times of the Apostles, for so are his words;
When they began to say, I am of Paul, I of Appollo, I of Cephas, then were
Bishops every where placed to prevent Schism. And that we may know, that these
Apostolical traditions are taken from the Old Testament; what Aaron and his
Sons, and the Levites, were in the Jewish Temple, that Bishops, Presbyters and
Deacons, were in the Christian Church. And therefore if we will not make so
learned, and so religious a Person, plainly contrary to himself, he must be so
understood in his other sayings, as not to deny what he plainly affirms, That
Episcopal Government came from the Apostles.

But this has been so fully discussed of late years in this Nation, Dr.
Templer, 1676.
and particularly by a Person of great worth and learning, at a Visitation in
Cambridge, (to which I refer you) that I shall no longer insist upon it, only
remind you, that differences there are of Administrations, that is, of Offices
in the Church, as well as diversities of gifts; and all these different
Administrations, high and low, as well Bishops, as Priests and Deacons, are
called (...), the proper term of the lowest of the three, the Deacons; which we
translate Administrations, but might as well be rendered Ministeries, or
Services: But why are they so called? Surely to teach the highest of them, both
diligence and humility in their Office. Every honor, has its burden
answerable to it; and the higher the Office of Government, if it be truly and
conscienciously discharged, the pain-fuller is its work and service. It Is an
old saying (...). The Master in a great house, is the greatest Servant; while
all they serve him, in their several places, he is fain to serve them all,
study and watch to provide for all, to govern all. In no house is this so true,
as that of the Church: For whose cares, studies, dangers, watchfulness are so
great, so various, so perpetual, as theirs, if they do their duty? And whose
Condemnation is so great, if they do it not? Bishops are Generals in this
Spiritual Army, and yet faith St. Paul, fellow Soldiers; accountable to our
Common Lord Christ Jesus, not only for their own Souls, but for others too; nor
is the meanest Common Soldier, by the hundredth part, obliged to so many cares
and pains, exposed to so many dangers and troubles, as these Generals. Rulers
they are in Gods House, but their ruling is for Gods service, and Man's
Salvation: And what a load of cares and pains, does this ruling lay upon them?
Fathers they are in place and dignity, but Brethren in love and humility they
must be. Stars and Angels they are called, but how do the Stars run their
course, day and night for the service of this inferior World? How do the Angels
condescend to be ministering Spirits to the poorest of Gods Family?

Read but what our Savior says, Matt. 20.27. Whosoever will be chief amongst
you, must be your Servant, even as the Son of Man came to Minister, and to give
his life a ransom for many. Read what Saint Paul says, 2 Cor. 11.23. to the
30. and you will surely confess, that the highest Offices in Gods Church, are
the most painful dangerous services: Ministeries truly so called, so truly,
that the Ancient Bishops entering that Office, might truly say, nolo
Episcopari. But the more painful their service is, the greater ought to be
their honor, both of inward respect, and outward maintenance. All that are
under these Ministeries, or Administrations, ought to take heed of despising
them for this reason, because they are Ministeries; but rather honor them
because they are over you in the Lord.

The higher powers, Kings themselves, are twice called by this very word (...),
the Ministers of God, Romans 13. The Angels are called Ministering Spirits, yet
are still Principalities and Powers, Thrones and Dominions. Nay, our Lord
himself, whilst he was yet on Earth in the form of a Servant, is called by this
word (...), the Minister of the Circumcision for the truth of God. This must
teach those in this high place, humility and diligence, but others it must
teach obedience and thankfulness, to esteem them highly, for their works sake;
to obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, because they
watch for your Souls, as they that must give an account.

He that desires the Office of a Bishop, desires a good work, says St. Paul:
Good indeed, and a work indeed. To govern and guide so many flocks and their
Pastors, with zeal to God, and Charity to Man; with unwearied patience and
humility; without corruption or partiality, through favor or fear, of high or
low, small or great, poor or rich; to govern and teach wisely and diligently;
to look so carefully to ordination, that all the truth, and none but the truth,
be constantly preached, and the service of God be constantly performed, with
all reverence, free from profaneness, with all purity, free from superstition.
That the Sacraments and discipline of the Church, be administered in their power
and beauty; all this is a work indeed, as full of labor and care, as of
honor: Even the lower Administrations, those of Presbyters and Deacons, have
not they their work too? They have sure in their several places enough to spend
their time, and Spirits wholly in, if they do their duty. The Presbyter has a
great share of all. The Bishops work is in a great part committed to him, and
would the People make that use of Gods Ministers, which their Eternal Rest and
Salvation requires, it would quickly be found, that preaching were not half of
the Ministers work and care: And yet Preaching is no small work. To instruct
clearly in all the Mysteries of Faith, to exhort earnestly, and affectionately,
to all the duties of life and practice; to convince so many numerous errors, as
daily arise; to rebuke and reprove so many sins, and sinful Persons; without
fear of the great, or the many; to comfort the feeble minded; to humble the
haughty; to stir up the slothful, and temper the furious; to uphold the
falling, and relieve the wavering, and reduce the wandering; to stop the mouths
of so many, and subtle gainsayers, from the Atheist to the Schismatic; from
the Profane to the Superstitious; to clear those Obscurities, to answer those
difficulties, remove those scandals, which so many Men in weakness, or
wilfulness are subject to, and to second all this with a life unblameable; this
certainly, is a work of great variety, study, and pains: and yet a work so
necessary it is, that better for us, we had no gifts nor Ministry at all, than
not to perform it: and the more it behooves the rest of the World, not to
hinder, not to discourage, not sacrilegiously to rob, not to perplex us in this
our work; but to strive to make it as comfortable to us, and as fruitful to
your selves as you can, seeing the end of these Ministeries, these services,
these works, the end of all our labor, is to bring you to endless Rest.

All our abilities, all our gifts are from the same Spirit, all our works are
wrought by the same Lord, who works all in all, that is well wrought; both in
him that writes, and him that reads, both in him that speaks, and him that
hears, in him that is governed, and in him that governs. if this be so, let us
banish all pride, If our gifts, and places, and works be never so high, never
so many; Envy, if our gifts and places seem never so few and low; for what are
the highest amongst us, but the instruments and servants, of this supreme
donor, and mover; receiving all from him, accountable for all to him? And how
can the lowest and meanest murmur, or object any thing against it, since they
that have the lowest and meanest, have it a gift, and could not challenge it as
due, but have it by the wise disposal of that Lord, whose wisdom knows what
is fittest for each; and whose goodness bestows that which is most fit, and the
meaner, or less gifts and places any one has, the more easily is both his
work, and his account?

Away then with haughty Pride, or mutinous Envy. Let not one say with repining
regret, I am slow in apprehension, weak in memory, shallow in judgment, whilst
others are quick, tenacious and solid: I have neither wealth to buy voluminous
Authors; nor arts, nor parts, as others have, to dive into those difficulties,
and obscurities, and gain a clear solution of them, as others have.

Nor let others say in haughty contempt of their inferiors, or meaner Brethren;
how mean are such and such compared with me, in graces, and places? I can lead
my amazed Auditors, whither I will, with my eloquent Tongue; whilst others
freez in their Pulpits, and tire their Auditors into wearisomness and
drowsiness. But let the one and the other say, These are gifts freely bestowed,
where it pleases the giver, and who shall say unto him, what do thou with
thy own? He owes nothing to any, who can demand any thing of him as his due? He
is the supreme Wisdom, who shall direct him in his Counsel; where and how to
dispose and bestow his gifts? The supreme Lord, who shall command him, where
and how to dispose and order his Administrations? He is the only Almighty God,
who shall accuse his work of weakness or defect?

Let the lowest and meanest remember to say, Though God has denied me this or
that which others have, yet has he given me something which others want. He
has not given me an high place, but he has given me that retirement and
safety, of which those that are in high places, are bereaved. He has denied me
promotion, but given me that health, which they that are preferred before me,
would willingly purchase.

On the other side, let those that have highest gifts and places, say to
themselves, Why should we boast of our Lords bounty, and not rather tremble to
think, of ascribing that to our selves, which is his free gift and
dispensation; least he take it away, when he sees it abused; or if he continue
it, condemn us the heavier for being unthankful?

Since it is thus ordered, by the wise disposer of all things, let one, and the
other remember, that all are the Spirits Almsmen in their gifts. The Lord's
Ministers in their Offices, Gods Workmen in their works, and thus when every
one shall be contented with his Talent, each one shall find peace and quiet,
and Rest within him here, and be qualified for eternal Rest hereafter.

The World has many pretenders to this Rest, and those so contrary one to
another, that their very pretenses to it, show this eternal Rest to be very
desirable; but the contrariety shows, that this Rest has so much of difficulty
in it, that all that lay claim to it, cannot justify their claim: And though
they cry with the Mathematician (...), I have found, and I have found it; yet
they are so much to seek, that their confidence, without evidence, has brought
many to put it to the question, Whether there be any such Rest to be found? We
must not be so foolish, or so slothful, as those Scepticks, who question, or
deride the possibility of searching, and finding out this eternal Rest; but
with humility and diligence, humbly apply our selves to those Rules, which are
given us for its discovery. Some there are that lay claim to no other, nor
higher felicity, than that which either natural Philosophy, or civil Policy can
help them to: And these, though they have gone far, discovered and published
many truths, pleasant and profitable for the World; yet their aims are too low,
to give the soul of Man satisfaction, or acquiescense here: The light and rules
they walk by, too weak, and too uncertain, to reach those very aims, which
themselves own; much more must they needs fall short of Man's great eternal end,
this endless Rest: The pursuit whereof, is our wisdom here; the attaining
whereof, is our happiness hereafter.

There are in the World Men (and those not a few) who seek after wealth and
honor, and great power; and weary themselves day and night, to attain their
ambitious desires, and think themselves still in the way toward this eternal
Rest: But our Savior's appearing in the World, as he did, in much humility,
demonstrates unto us the contrary. The innocence, righteousness, charity and
holiness of his life, were so conspicuous, that the Scribes and Pharisees, nay,
the Devil himself, could not find any true accusation against him; and he that
betrayed him, went and hanged himself, because he had betrayed so innocent, so
good, and holy a Person: Because he came not to gratify, the wordly and carnal
expectations of the Jews, with any outward pomp or splendour, suitable to their
desires, they vilify his Person, revile his doctrine, persecute his followers,
contrive his ruin: Yet what was a temporal advancement, or deliverance to an
eternal redemption, from sin, death, and hell; to an eternal advancement, above
all enemies, to those honors and joys at Gods right hand? And how contrary had
it been to the design of his incarnation, which was to satisfy for Mankind's
former Pride and Ambition, intemperate voluptuousness, insatiable covetousness?
To exemplify, as well as teach them, the grace of piety, and contentedness,
with the meanest condition here below, by setting their hearts on things above?
How contrary had it been to such a purpose, for our Lord to have appeared in
the plenty of wealth, or the splendour or pomp of worldly honor, in the power
of Armies, to conquer Nations, by Sword or Force, all which would have but
enraged the sinful distempers of Man's Soul, which he came to cure? He had given
the Jews abundant evidence, both at his birth, and throughout his life; yea, at
his very death, that 'twas not weakness, or any necessity that made him appear
in such mean condition; but his voluntary choice, and love to Mankind; to draw
them off from the love of this World, to that of God and a better life: For
surely he that could command a Star, to attend him at his birth, and an
Heavenly Host to sing an Anthem of Glory to God, at his Nativity; might more
easily, had it pleased him, been born in another place than a Stable, with
other manner of attendants, than a poor Virgin, and a Carpenter. He that could
feed five Thousand, with a few Loaves and Fishes, might have maintained as
numerous an Army, as he pleased: He that could cure the Blind, and Lame, and
Deaf at a word; heal all manner of Diseases, command the Waters, and the Wind,
raise the Dead, cast out Devils, might quickly have had an invincible force, of
Men and Angels, to quell the Romans and other Nations. He that could strike his
apprehender to the ground, at the beck of his will; make the Sun withdraw his
light, at Noon day, and full Moon; the Earth tremble, the Rocks rend, the
Graves open at his death; could easily have saved himself from death; but then
he should have by his Example, renowned that love of worldly riches, pleasures
and honors, which by his Doctrine of humility, self denial, and contempt of
the World, he sought to mortify and disgrace.

High and lofty thoughts, do much hinder our progress toward our eternal Rest,
and hide from us the true knowledge of our selves; whose first Element is but
dust; Dust thou art, and to dust shall thou return: Dust is our native soil,
and last home; to which we must by a firm decree, repair ere long. By soring
aloft after worldly honors, we do but make our wearisom way, the longer, and
more crooked; our fall more grievous (especially if sudden) and our final
account after death more heavy. Aspiring ambition overthrew the Tempter,
Lucifer himself. What Spirit is it then think we, which moves such young and
tender Plants, as scarce thrive under the walls of Gods house; such Vines as
hardly bear fruits, in the warm and well fenced vale; (I mean the retirements
and vacations of a low and private condition;) to affect the cold and open
Mountains, exposed to blasts of noysom winds? Is it their glory to be above
others of their own rank, and education? This might be purchased, with less
danger to themselves, and more good to Church and State; if they sought to
overtop them, more by their own proper height, or true growth, in all graces
and good works, than by mere advantage of ground: For when every Valley shall
be exalted, and every Mountain made low; that is, when all worldly differences
of States, shall be laid aside, (as at the last day they will be) the fruit
which has grown in the vale of humility and contentedness, will appear both
higher, and better far, than the ordinary offspring of the Mountains or
highest places of preferment. Were Men so wise in heart as to consider, that
the lower their place or condition is (so it be not exposed to floods of
violence) the apter it is to suck in the dew of Heaven, and bring forth fruit
in its season.

There are in the way to this eternal Rest, great variety of Travelers,
furnished with various and different abilities; whose faces differ not more than
their minds and manners, and these though they run contrary ways, yet all
pretend they are in pursuit of the same end, and are upon their march to this
eternal Rest, even then, when their backs are turned upon it.

The bloody restless Traitor would be thought to be in search after this
eternal Rest, and Life, though he seek for it in the paths of death, and works
like the Mole under ground, and thinks that no Man shall see him, 'till his
abominable wickedness be found out, and 'till, in the same Net that he laid for
others, is his foot taken, and 'till his own demerits, and the justice of the
laws, halter him into a shameful death, and swing him into another World,
there to have his portion, with (the first and greatest of rebels) the Devil,
and his Angels, and (unless prevented by a timely repentance) to remain in
flames that burn to all eternity. Another sort of Rebels there are more noble,
though not less bloody than the former, of an higher and more honorable
extraction; yet such as move in the same Sphere, who hide their heads aloft in
the Clouds, who also think that none shall see them; but he that is higher than
the highest, laughs them to scorn, and lets them drop into the same pit, which
they made for others; 'till the Sanction of the Laws, strikes the Coronet from
off their Heads, their Heads from their Bodies, and lays the Ax to the root of
that Tree, which brought not forth good fruit, and is therefore hewn down,
rieven out, as it were, and cleaved for the fire. Were Religion as much in
these Men's hearts, as it has been in their pretenses; that Religion I mean,
which is, first pure, then peaceable, they might have been gathered to their
Fathers in peace, and not have pulled upon themselves, a speedier, and a sadder
mortality, than that which God and Nature had first appointed for them.

Next, The Zealous Schismatic thinks he is making sure of this eternal Rest,
for himself and also for his followers, who runs, before he is called, and
intrudes himself into that holy function, of which we read, Heb. 5.4. No Man
takes that honor unto himself but he that is called of God, as was Aaron.
That is, no good, or holy Man, must or ought, or does take this honor upon
himself, but he that is truly called of God. Such as Corah, have too often, and
too presumptuously taken it upon them, without being called, appointed, or
ordained, by lawful authority; But how heinous a sin it is so to do, may appear
by the dreadful punishment thereof; the Earth opened and swallowed him, and
his, up in a moment, Uzza may not touch the Ark, the Bethshemites may not so
much as gaze into it. And though now, no such punishment be inflicted any more;
nor such a death as St. Peter inflicted on Ananias, befall Sacrilege, (for
Miracles are ceased) and such Examples at the first were inflicted on purpose,
to signify the guilt of that sin, and so to terrify from it for ever; yet God
and his law is the same for ever, and they who profane his holy orders, and
institutions, by bold obtruding themselves upon them, will find a punishment
meet for their sin, here or hereafter.

What more prophanes holy things, than that which makes them common to all, who
have but the forehead to claim and take them? But since the acceptance of the
office, and its work on Gods part is all in all, as that which can bring a
blessing on Priest or People; it highly concerns us, both in wisdom to our
selves, and in duty to God, and in Charity to others, neither to take that
honorable office to our selves, nor give admittance, or countenance to those
that do so, since it is indeed no honor, nor office, unless as it is derived
from him, and is more likely, if not more certain, to bring a curse and not a
blessing, on such invaders of the Priesthood, and their followers.

If God will be Sanctified by them that draw near unto him, then surely most,
by them that draw nearest; by having the office of being his mouth unto the
People, and theirs unto him. And sure it were a great dishonor unto Religion,
that all great and public things, nay every profitable Science and Art, should
in all societies be distinguished, by their proper professors, Ministers or
Artists, and only Religion should be in common, exposed to be bruised by the
hard hands of any Mechanics, and sullied by the rude touch of undiscerning,
undistinguisht, unconsecrated Persons. In reason the means should hold some
proportion with their end; and therefore the end of this holy office, being
divine and supernatural, it is reasonable Persons which enter into it, should be
able to show their vocation, mission and ordination; for that the very design
of Religion, forces us to a distinction of Persons, and solemn call and
ordination, in order to the office and work. And because every one is not fit
to approach to God in the public addresses of his Church; there must in reason
be a solemn separation, and ordination, made of those Persons, whose calling
peculiarly is holy, and they thereby taught, and obliged to be so. That such
Persons being made higher than the People, by their calling (though our
Brethren in nature) may be the instruments of conveying the Peoples Prayers
unto God, and Gods blessings unto the People.

Thus it was throughout the World, Jew and Gentile, before Christ's time,
either pretendedly or really, and if Christian Religion allow otherwise, we
must in effect confess, that we have the worst Religion (which is blasphemous
dishonor to Christianity) and as false as its greatest infernal enemy: Or that
we are the worst of Men, which is intolerable shame to our selves, and
therefore to be disowned and detested, in heart and deed.

Let any favourer of these intruders, name if they can, but one true and sound
Doctrine, which any one party, dissenting from the Church of England, has
recommended to the World, which was not before, sufficiently and solidly,
taught and proved, by lawful Pastors: But who can number the dangerous errors,
which have been multiplied and spread abroad by these dissenters? Heresies and
Schisms, abroad and at home, have invaded the unity, peace and prosperity, of
almost all the reformed Churches, to the extreme hazard of the Christian Faith,
to the introducing Sedition in State, Schism in Church, darkness and confusion
in both. While many pretend to strive for the Truth, how do they darken their
own understandings, as well as others, with tumult and clamor, wrath and
bitterness, amongst which truth is lost on both sides, as well as Charity? They
write, and fight, as they say, for the Truth; but Truth and Love are slain in
the quarrel, and pressed to death, is it were in a throng, whilst they that stand
by as neuters, laugh at both.

What good Christian can remember without sorrow and detestation, the horrid
confusions, and dismal effects, in Church and Kingdom, which they have
introduced and maintained? The like whereof, if not greater, threatens us
daily; if God in his mercy, overcome not our evil with his goodness.

As to their several pretenses to piety and holiness; what hindered, or yet
hinders them, from living as godlily, and as holily, with thankfulness and
honor, within the Church, to its preservation; as without it, and against it,
they pretend to do, to its disturbance, and destruction? A Surplice and Hood, a
signing the Child with the Cross at Baptism, a bowing to our Lord Jesus, when
he is named, we have been often told, is what they bring, as their greatest
proof, of superstition and will worship; whereas the last, is manifestly no
more, than to glorify with the body, or knee at sometime, that which is lawful
to do at any time; to whom God has commanded us to bow our souls and bodies,
and that to the glory of the Father.

And to think that a Surplice is more superstitious, than a Gown or other
garment, which God has neither Commanded, nor forbidden, is it self a great
superstition: Nor can that, or the signing with the Cross, be with any color
of truth or reason, called will worship; which the Church professes, she uses
not, as any part of Gods Worship, but as an indifferent, yet decent ceremony;
to signify and teach Man with, not to Worship God with; and what is not owned
as any Worship, cannot surely be called Will Worship.

But when all is done, is this all, that must keep us at everlasting difference
and separation? Can they strein at such Gnats, or rather startle at such
shadows of Dreams in their own phansies, yet swallow such Camels, as
disobedience to lawful superiors in Church and State? The hanious breach of
Unity and Charity, peace and order in one and the other, exposing both to the
common enemy, first to deride, reproach and despise us, then to undermine and
ruin us?

How many Papists, how many Heretics of several sorts, yea how many Atheists,
and scornful deriders of all Religion, have these our causeless, obstinate
divisions, bred amongst us? And shall not these dreadful effects of Schism at
length affright us into Unity? Woe be to them by whom these offenses come; and
woe be to them by whose default they still continue. Woe to them that have so
torn the Church in pieces, that now the great things of the Gospel of Christ,
which God has written, with the Pen of a Diamond, or Sun beam, are either
neglected, or called in question, while they contend without bowels of pity,
mercy or piety; write in gall, and fight in blood, for such things as are at
the best, but Hay and Stubble; compared with the precious foundation of our
Religion. God grant both us and them, while it is time (if yet it be so) wisdom
and grace, to know and follow the things belonging to our peace, here and
hereafter; and to take Christ's Yoke upon us, and learn of him, who was meek
and lowly in heart, that so we may find Rest unto our Souls.

And let us do this the rather because what health is to the body, or calmness
to the Sea; such is peace and concord to a Church and State. But should it be
asked of us, as Joram did of Jehu, is it peace Jehu; we must answer now, as he
did then; what peace so long as our rents and divisions, our separatists and
dissenters, are so many?

Our Savior foresaw and prophesied of these very days in which we live,
inimici domestici, ones foes shall be they of ones own household: perditio tua
ex te, Jerusalems sorrows are from her own Sons. What contentions so sharp and
lasting, as those which arise amongst Brethren? The nearer the Relation, the
greater the feude; and the farther off usually from reconciliation: Witness the
sad breaches, which too often happen, between persons solemnly conjoined by the
strictest ties, and bonds of amity, above, and before any other. I mean the
Married Couple, who might come in, and claim their portion of this eternal
Rest; who are presumed to assist each other, in all the great affairs of life;
whose joys are or might be doubled, and their sorrows abated, by a mutual
bearing of each others good, or adverse fortune; insomuch that when their scene
of life is come to an end, and the Curtain drawn, they may lay them down in
peace, and change the labor of a weary life, for the joys of a blessed eternal
Rest: But how much otherwise falls it often out, even between these dearest
friends? What bitter complainings are frequently heard in our streets, from
Persons joined in holy Wedlock, when but once disaffected to one another? The
unruly torrent of dissentions, often times runs so high, that the Man hates his
own flesh, and the Woman man makes head against her Husband, and these though
sacredly conjoined and made one, become two again, so bitterly divided, that no
wholesome words, nor sage counsel, can ever sweeten, or reconcile them.

For prevention of this great unkind mischief, which so often happens amongst
us, and so much hinders that Rest and quiet here, that much conduces to a
blessed, endless Rest hereafter; Men should do well wisely to consider, that
whosoever enters the State of Marriage, casts a Dye of the greatest contingency,
and yet of the greatest concern in the World (next to that of Eternity it
self.) Deliberandum diu, quod statuendum semel. Men had need consider well of
that, which must be resolved on once for all, and must either bring a great and
lasting content and happiness, or trouble and misery, as lasting as life it
self. A Woman indeed ventures most; for she has no Sanctuary to retire to,
from the sad misfortune of an ill choice; she must dwell upon her sorrow, and
has no appeal from his unkindness, but that of Subjects from Tyrant Princes,
Prayers and Tears, and though the Man has more diversions, (yet when it comes
to his turn, to lie under this unremediable sadness) he must return to it
again, and whilst he is sitting amongst his Neighbors, he remembers the
objection in his bosom, and sighs deeply.

It has been the unhappy chance of many, who enter the honorable state of
Marriage, upon some dishonorable aims or other, to be bound to sorrow and
vexation for many years, by the Cords of their Consorts peevish disorder; and
the worst of the evil is, they are to thank their own follies, for making no
better choice: For God and goodness were less in their thoughts, and had less
interest in their choice, than money, to gratify their worldly covetousness; or
beauty, their inordinate lust.

Men and Women change their liberty of single life, for a rich fortune, prefer
Gold before virtue, and show themselves to be less than money, by valuing it
more than the wise content, and lasting felicity of their lives: and when they
have counted their money and sorrows well over, how willingly would they buy
with the loss of all that money, modesty, sweetness of conversation, temperance
and faithfulness in their Consort.

But they are chained with the fetters they chose, and they are no whit the
less chains, nor the easier, for being made of Gold or Silver, but sometimes
the worse.

Nor does he honor Marriage aright, who chooses it only, or principally for
beauty; Cui sunt eruditi oculi, sed stulta men's, Whose Eyes are judicious, but
his soul and thoughts sensually foolish. A little thread of red and white, is
an ill band of Conjugal affections, to tie hearts together, in all conditions
till death, since their love is, nor can it be any better, or more durable,
than its cause: and they are fond of each other, as long as fancy and health
lasts: But sickness, childbearing, care, time, and any thing almost that
destroys a flower, may destroy that love, which at the best is but earthly and
sensual.

He that will find Rest and quiet in his Conjugal State here, must begin it
with God and goodness, with wise and virtuous designs. Then is Marriage
honorable indeed, when good and fair intentions conduct and manage it. The
preservation of a Family, the production of Children, the avoiding of
fornication, the refreshment of a wise and virtuous society, all these are
honorable ends. Society was the first designed, it is not good for Man to be
alone. Children the next, increase and multiply. The avoiding Fornication the
last; and that will be hardly avoid by Marriage, unless you choose such a
Consort, whom you can love in all conditions, and outward changes. The first,
makes Marriage delightful; the second, necessary to the public; the third, to
this or that particular Person. The first makes the Man's heart glad; the second
is a friend to Families, Cities and Kingdoms; Churches and Heaven; the third is
an enemy to Hell, and an Antidote to the chiefest inlet to damnation.

To have a lasting quiet, and sure content in the Conjugal life, it is prudent
and useful, that all offenses of each other be warily avoided, at the first
beginnings especially of their conversation: An infant blossom is quickly
blasted, and the love of lately Married Persons is busy and tender,
inquisitive and jealous, and apt to take a fright, or alarm, at every unkind
word, or carriage: But after the hearts of Man and Wife are endeared to each
other, by natural confidence, and experience, trifling accidents cannot disturb
their united affections, but will vanish at the sight, and remembrance of
weightier obligements; and so after their having lived in peace, and love, and
joy, for a while on Earth, they may meet and rejoice together in Heaven to all
eternity.

That the Married life may prove happy, Let every one love his Wife as himself,
says St. Paul. The Husbands power over his Wife, is Fatherly and Friendly, not
Magisterial: She that is bound to leave Father and Mother, and Brother, for
thee, is miserably abused, if she find it otherwise. A Man's dominion over his
Wife, is like that of his Soul over his body, for which it takes a wise care,
and uses it tenderly; and it is often led by its tolerable inclinations and
desires, save when they are evil, or dangerously tending to that which is so.

The Government is, and ought to be divided, since the Woman also has Gods
Image stamped upon her, and may sometimes assist, and supply her Husbands
wisdom. And as to the Family, si tu Cajus, ego Caja, was publicly proclaimed
upon the threshold of the Husband, when his Bride first entered under his roof;
and although there is a just measure of obedience, due from the Wife, yet
that is scarcely at all expressed, in the Husbands directions in holy Scripture;
but all his duty is signified by love, by nourishing and cherishing, by
honoring her as the weaker Vessel, by not being bitter to her, by dwelling
with her according to knowledge. (...), be not bitter against her, that is the
first and lowest signification of love. A civil Person is never bitter against
a stranger, much less a friend that enters his roof, and is secured there by
the laws of Hospitality; and he surely is strangely rude, who uses her rudely,
that quits all her interest for him: and is besides, as much the same Person,
as another can be the same, having the same Religion, Children, and Family, and
is fled for protection, as to a Sanctuary, not only to his house, but to his
bosom and heart.

Marcus Aurelius said well, that a wise Man will often admonish his Wife,
reprove her seldom, but never lay his hands upon her. St. Chrisostom tells us,
that an Husband reviling or striking his Wife is, as if a King should use his
Viceroy so, from whom most of that reverence and Majesty must needs depart,
which at first he put upon him, and the Subjects will pay him the less duty, by
how much the rudelier the Prince has treated him; the loss redounds to the
King himself, and the Government will be thereby disordered and ruined. He that
loves not his Wife and Children, feeds a Lyoness, and breeds nothing but fears
and sorrows to himself, nor can blessing it self make him happy: All the
Commandments of God, injoyning a Man to love his Wife, are but so many
invitations to him to be happy himself, and make her, and his Children so. If
mutual love be once secured, there can be no great danger from any thing else,
because such love as makes the Man chaste, keeps the Woman also within the sober
bounds of modest chastity.

Obedience is the Woman's duty, which though no where expressly enjoined the Man
to exact, yet is often commanded the Woman to pay, and the less it is exacted,
the better and more kindly is it, when duly paid, both in the sight of God and
Man: And this proclaims her humility, and reverend esteem of his Wisdom, and is
an acknowledgment of the injunction imposed by God; and though in sorrow she
bring forth Children, yet with love and joy she may bring them up.

The Woman's obedience though largely extended by St. Paul, (...), Ephe. 5.24.
In every thing, yet it is limited, by (...), as it is fit in the Lord, Collos.
3.18. The Woman's duty obliges her to put on the Ornament of a meek and quiet
Spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price: Sweetness of manners,
humble comportment, fair interpretation of all things, that are capable of it,
an industrious hand, a silent tongue, a faithful heart, to his Person and Bed,
his Purse and Estate.

And that this may be done with cheerfulness, it is one excellent height of
Christian Religion, above not only the Heathens and Mahometans, but the
Mosaical allowances; that it has provided for Union between Man and Wife, by
forbidding strictly Poligamy, or the having many Wifes; and also has forbidden
divorce, except in case of Adultery. By forbidding Poligamy, our Religion has
prevented all those Domestic emulations, which would necessarily almost arise,
between a Leah and a Rachel, though in Jacobs Family; a Sarah and a Hagar,
though in Abraham's house: The Man's love runs in a fuller stream, because not
divided into many rivolets; and the Woman's love and faithfulness is demanded
more justly, because it has an equal proportionable answer, without the
provocation of any Corrival. And then by forbidding divorce upon any pretense,
but that of Adultery, it makes peace more necessary, and contention more
terrible, seeing if they will not become a mutual comfort, they must always
endure that mutual torment, from which they are allowed no refuge. If all this
be not enough to settle Domestic peace, turn but your Eyes upon the wildest
Creatures, let the Beasts of the field, and the Fowls of the Air, shame us into
it: For even the most unsociable hurtful Creatures, keep peace at home, in
their own nests and dens. What bloody Tygar is there, that does not softly and
tenderly demean himself over his Female Mate, and young Issue? What ravenous
Kite, does not join with his she partner, in Building his nest, sitting upon
the Eggs, feeding his young ones? The Lion does not roar at home, nor tear his
Lioness, nor devour his Whelps, but maintains peace at home, by his very enmity
abroad: The prey of his foreign cruelty, is the common food of his private den.
Thus God from Heaven, Men on Earth, the Beasts of the field, and Fowls of the
Air, do all teach and instruct Man and Woman how to be happy, and to go by
Couples to the Ark of their eternal Rest.

Now this eternal Rest, must not be sought, (because it cannot be found) by a
partial obedience, by leaving one sin, and cleaving to another; every Man is
not alike inclined to every sin, nor can the pursuit of some pollutions,
consist with the prosecution of others; for sins are contrary one to the other,
as well as to grace: Nor is there any thing more usual, than for the violent
unruly nature of rash Man, to run out of hatred to one extreme, into another
opposite to it. Superstition dotes, profaneness is mad: And how many hating
Superstition, turn profane? Whilst others hating to be profane, turn
Superstitious? Covetousness gathers all, prodigality scatters all; Men usually
fall into one extreme, whilst they run from another; either they despise
prophesying, or think it all in all. To abhor Idols, and yet to commit
Sacrilege; to worship the walls, or else to beat them down; is to drive out one
Devil with another. The necessity of cleansing our selves from these
enormities, is plainly seen, by those very reproofs, which one sinner gives
another contrary to him. How does the lukewarm or profane detest the
Schismatic and Superstitious? Or how does the furious Superstitious, or blind
Zealot, detest the lukewarm or profane?

How does the squanderer hate the niggard? And how does the niggard hate the
prodigal? Let me take my fill of lust, says the wanton, and I will trample
upon wealth: Let me hug my Mammon, says the Miser, and I will bid defiance to
lust: Let me wash my hands in the blood of mine enemy, says the revengeful,
and I will be content to give freely to them that have not provoked, or injured
me: Thus as the Nations in times of darkness, had each of them their several
Idols, which they Worshipped, and neglected others, but all agreed in
dishonouring the only true God; so every partial false hearted reformer, has
his bosom darling pollution, which if he may cherish, he can be content to
leave the rest; yea be forward and zealous against them, that he may either
hide, or satisfy, or get an indulgence in what he affects. But all the virtue
in the World, cannot satisfy for one willful, habitual pollution, indulgently
cherished: Yea, that one indulged pollution, proves all the other seeming
cleansings to be but counterfeit.

Saul slew many Amalekites, but sparing some, when God had commanded all to the
Sword, he forfeited his Kingdom by his hypocrisy; and one of that Nation whom
he spared, became afterward his Executioner: Though it be but one known sin
you live in, the sparing of that, shows your hatred against the rest to be
falsehearted and hypocritical: For though it be but one, it is contrary to that
sincere holiness, which God indispensably requires as his due; though it be but
one, it is a reigning one; defiling the purity, defacing the beauty, destroying
the peace of an upright conscience; yea though it be but one in actual
appearance, yet in seminal virtue it includes many, and may in time be fruitful
of many: thus one sin weakens grace, grieves Gods Spirit, prepares matter and
fuel for others. Covetousness and pride beget envy and strife, that, anger;
that, murder. Ambition led Absalon to treasonable conspiracy against his
Father, that, to open bloody rebellion; that, to incest; any one pollution
indulged unto, may introduce a whole Legion: And though it be but one, it is a
vilifying, and dishonouring of God in all his perfections, for some
unsatisfactory, transitory phansy; and if it be habitually, unrelentingly
continued in, will be punished eternally with separation from Gods presence, to
endless miseries: And what folly is it, to lose Gods favor, and incur his
intolerable, eternal displeasure, for one defiling transitory vanity? Thus you
see he that will enjoy eternal Rest, must cleanse himself from all pollution,
without deliberate habitual indulgence to any one.

And that we might not miss of this eternal Rest; the Apostles, the Ambassadors
of Christ, they woe and entreat us by the kindest compellations, as you may
see, 2 Cor. 7.1. Dearly beloved: Having these promises, Dearly beloved, let us
cleanse our selves from all pollution; It Is a Style you shall hardly find in
the Old Testament, unless in the Canticles, where Christ woes his Spouse the
Church, with all the endearments of kindness and love, although there are
sometimes such expressions as contain the same in real effect. But the ordinary
style runs there, with more severity, agreeable to that administration, where
the Spirit of bondage, was more ordinary, than that of adoption: But here in
the Gospel, though threats are sometimes intermixed, yet kind entreaties, and
condescending invitations, are oftener found; for God most justly expects now,
when his Son has appeared, and given his life for us, to redeem us from all
inquity, to purify us and make us zealous of holiness, that we should not need
so many threats to drive us to him, as if he were only our last refuge; but
that in the sense of his admirable mercies, we should be drawn with the Cords
of a Man, the Bands of Love, and make him our first most acceptable choice.
Wherefore we see his first Ambassadors that he sent, transcribed the pattern
of that humility, and heavenly charity, which he had set them; and make it
their humblest, earnest entreaty, that we would be reconciled unto God; that he
would be blessed, in suffering them, to turn us from our iniquity; that we
would be holy and pure first, and then happy; as if it were rather their
happiness, and his that sent them, than theirs to whom they spoke so
passionately, so humbly, so charitably: Dearly beloved, because so dearly
beloved of God, that he sent his only begotten Son, to buy and reclaim us to
purity and holiness, to learn of him, to learn of his messengers, to value our
selves at that rate, which he has valued us at, who thought it an acceptable
bargain to him, to lay down his life, with agonies of Soul, and torments of
body, rather than suffer us to wallow here in filthy pollutions, which lead to
eternal intolerable misery, and not to that eternal Rest, in the Kingdom
prepared for the blessed of his Father.

Despise not then the goodness of God, who made you at first, after his own
Image: Despise not the mercies of Christ the Son of God, who came to take your
nature, and die for you: Despise not the Spirit of God, who waits, and longs,
for your Sanctification: Despise not those precious promises, which yet are
offered to all that cleanse and purify themselves; nor those endless
intolerable woes, and miseries, which are threatened to all despisers.

He that seeks not this Rest, but walks in the ways of his own heart, 'till he
can walk no longer, and thinks to delay from time to time, his faithful
conversion, and reformation, 'till he must take Sanctuary at last, in the sighs
and groans, sorrows and purposes, of sickness and his deathbed; he that 'till
then retained his sins, and now when he knows, or fears at least, that he must
die, is sorrowful for having walked contrary to God, and a good conscience, he
is in all probability sorrowful only for his danger, which may possibly consist
with as great an affection to sinful ways, as in perfect health; for even then,
in some circumstances, he would have withstood the greatest temptation; the
boldest lust would refuse to be satisfied in the Market, such restraint is no
abatement of the affection: He that grieved not, 'till death and hell pressed
him hard, and doom was ready to seize upon him, grieved for the sad
consequences of sin, not for its baseness and disorder. For a remedy herein,
all such Persons, had need to cure themselves of these tormenting fears of
death and hell, by a timely, and early repentance; because a late repentance is
seldom sound, and never save: And this repentance, which necessarily foregoes
remission of sins, can no ways better be obtained, than by constant and fervent
prayer: Ask and ye shall have, said our Savior; The prayer of Faith avails
much, said St. James. God is nigh unto all them that call upon him faithfully:
Seek, and ask, and beg, and sue for what you will, by fervent and faithful
prayer, by prayer that goes not out of feigned lips, and it shall be given you.
Prayer is the very breath of Gods Spirit, whereby our Soul draws in, and sends
forth Gods grace; and its own gracious desires: Prayer, it is our very scaling
Ladder, and Engine of battery, whereby heaven is beseiged, and suffers violence:
It Is our arrow by which we pierce the Clouds, and having gotten audience above,
it is our weapon by which we wound our enemies below: It Is the Rudder, and
Anchor which keeps our Souls steady in many waters, when many winds and billows
beat upon us: It Is the Compass by which we Sail when all is clouded: It Is our
Key, by which we open Heaven, and wrestle with God; resolving with Jacob, not
to part without a blessing.

But it is not every lazy Prayer, born in the lips, or at most in the phansy,
uttered only for fashion sake, or to quiet for a while a galled conscience: No,
it is the Prayer of a righteous Man (though a Man of infirmities with others)
when fervent, that avails much; so much, that it has shut, and opened
Heaven, made the Sun stand still, and go back. Though the Person be righteous,
if the Prayer be not fervent, God has no regard to it; no reason to hear and
consider that Prayer, which he himself (that makes it) scarce hears and
considers.

Great reason then have all to watch and to pray, to make our calling and
election sure, and wisely in time to provide, whilst the day of Salvation
lasts, that our labors here, may terminate, and end in eternal Rest; because
we know not how short our time is. All flesh is grass, said the Prophet Isaiah,
40.6. And all the goodliness thereof is as the flowers of the field: The grass
withers, the flowers fades away, because the Spirit of the Lord blows upon
it, surely the people is as grass; for as the grass, how green and flourishing
soever it seems, yet it sprang from the Earth, and shortly after beasts devour
it, or winds blast it, and if it come to last out its full time, even then the
Sithe comes to cut it down: So is Man's life, with all its fresh seeming
contentments, at the mercy even of every Creature; Fire and Water, Air and
Sickness, Famine and the Sword, and what not almost? And though he escape all
sad accidents, and casualties, to the utmost length of Man's Age, yet there is a
natural Sith of Gods decree, and Man's inward corruption, that will not fail to
cut him down: No Age, no condition, can be exempted by any art, by any means
from the stroke of death. Every Age has proper to it self some posterns, some
out-lets of death, besides those numberless open gates through which thousands
yearly pass.

The bud is blasted as soon as the blown Rose; the Lamb comes to the shambles,
as well as the grown Sheep; Death looks not at Men's Estates, or Degree, or Age;
it comes not to the Church book to summon them by that; the Womb, the Cradle,
protects not many, Infants die in both we know: And the Jews Proverb is daily
fulfilled, in Golgotha are skulls of all sizes: Childhood is so tender, and yet
so unwary of running into harms-way, that Parents Eyes, and Nurses Arms, are
scarce sufficient to keep one Child, from strange and early calamities, and
death it self; unless a guardian Angel be granted it, to watch its very
playings and sleepings, eatings and drinkings.

The more uncertainty, and instability we find here in things below, the less
ought we to rely and trust in any Creature, and so much the more ought we to
put our trust in God. The very unfaithfulness of all things else, should renew
and confirm our faithfulness and to God, who makes sickness and death, become
life and health, by removing the vail of flesh, which intercepts the light, and
sight of the fountain of life, and gives an immediate access to him; in whom
alone this eternal Rest is to be found.

It is the honor and triumph of true Religion, that having chosen God for its
Rest, it cannot be bereaved, or defeated of its choice, by any calamities
whatsoever of this life. It lifts up the Soul, above all the winds and storms
of this uncertain, transitory world; and fixes the heart upon that eternal
fountain of joy, and rest and happiness, where there is no variableness, nor
shadow of turning.

Wish, and desire, and love, whatsoever you please besides God: Put your trust
in any thing less, or lower than him; and you are not only sure, that your love
will be turned into hatred, your liking into loathing, your trust into despair,
when death comes; but even while life, and health lasts, you are at
uncertainties, tossed perpetually betwixt the ebbs and flows of chance, 'twixt
hopes and fears, like an unstable wave of the Sea, or hanging like a doubtful
Meteor in the Air; whilst the humble, patient Christian, that trusts in God,
and takes him for his Rest, and exceeding great reward, waiting on him, as his
all-sufficient shield (with resignation) for life or death; Contented to live,
but willing to die, and to be with Christ; he is the only fixed Star in this
lower firmament: His feet stand fast, be the pavement never so slippery.

In the term of Man's life, there is a vicissitude of good and evil, a mixture
of labor and rest, joy and sorrow; there is a seed-time, and an harvest; a
sowing in tears, and reaping in joy; He that now goes on his way weeping, and
bears forth good seed, shall doubless come again with joy, and bring his
sheaves with him: But we may not expect Summer in the Winter season, an harbor
in the main Ocean; our portion before we are of Age, a reaping in joy 'till we
have sown in tears: The Traveller cannot think to find home in his Inn, nor
Heaven upon Earth. The Children of Israel had the Wilderness, and the Red Sea
to pass through, before they could arrive at the Land of Canaan, the place of
their Rest. They were all laborers that were sent into the Vineyard, and could
not expect their Penny, 'till the day, and their work was done; let us therefore
pray the Lord of the Harvest, that our Labor and Travel, may happily be turned
at last into ease and Rest; that when the six days of our life are at an end,
we may cease from our works, as God did from his; and enjoy with him an
everlasting Sabbath of eternal Rest.

And the rather is this Rest hereafter, to be labored for now; because whilst
we are here upon Earth, we have nothing pure and unmixt; our very joys are
mingled with sorrow; and Solomon tells us, even in laughter, the heart is sad:
Expenses here wait upon honor; care of Education goes along with the blessing
of Children; and our most comfortable hopes, are mixed with perplexing fears:
But when we come to Rest in the holy City, that City which is above; we shall
have a perpetual day without night, light without the Sun: Our hunger shall be
satisfied without food; No need of Clothing there to cover our shame (for shame
and sin shall cease together) then all sad doubtings, what shall be our
condition and state hereafter, shall vanish away, and we shall agree together
with one heart and mind, to sing Halelujahs, and perpetual Prayers to God in
the highest. There will be no dissenters there, no seperatists, to break or
interrupt that harmonious everlasting concord.

What wise Man then, will set his heart upon the World, when all things in it
are but for so short an abode, so unstable and so unsatisfactory, and not
rather on that abiding City above, where the joys and pleasures are durable and
eternal? Christians of all others ought to remember what St. Paul says, Heb.
13.14. Here we have no abiding City, but we seek one to come: Our very
profession exposes us to all affliction, and obliges us to live as strangers
and pilgrims upon Earth: What is Canaan or Jerusalem below, to that above,
whereof the other was but a Type? Things that are seen and perceptible by any
bodily Eye are temporal, transitory, subject to changes every day, and sure to
be abolisht at length, they will be taken from us, or we from them, when death
comes (which may come every day) and therefore not worthy to be looked upon by
such an immortal Soul or Spirit, as constitutes Man; which being made for
eternity, cannot be satisfied with ought that is temporal, how long soever it
may abide, much less when it is sure to continue no longer as to us, than this
uncertain short life; and therefore in respect of our own, and the Worlds end,
we may be truly said to have no abiding City here, and are therefore the more
carefully to seek and expect our eternal Rest and habitation from above.

While the World continues, and we in it, we have no continuing City here,
because neither habitation nor goods, health nor wealth, honors nor pleasures,
or any contentment is, or can he assured us for our lives: How many Villages,
Towns and Cities, have Fires and Earthquakes and Wars destroyed? How many
Kingdoms and Commonwealths, have civil disorders, and foreign invasions
overthrown? Or rather what one in any Nation have they not? The Histories or
Records of all Ages, all places (besides the infallible Oracles of God which we
have in our hands) will give us a full induction and proof of this truth. This
Island wherein we live, has given us not only many Historical, but
experimental sensible proofs, that from the King to the meanest Subject, we
have no continuing City here, nor settled Rest and true happiness.

But besides these public revolutions, vicissitudes and changes, every Family,
every private Person lies continually exposed to casualities, to variety of
sickness invading their health, variety of molestations from those above them,
from those below them, from those about them, and also from their own follies,
lusts and passions, from within them; in so much that whatsoever Men fix their
hearts upon in this World, to take their greatest contentment in, they cannot
be sure on reasonable grounds, that it shall continue with them one year longer.

The felicity and satisfactory happiness of this City above, in which this
eternal Rest is to be found, ought to be valued so much the more, because St.
Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 2.9. That Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor has
entered into the heart of Man to conceive, the fullness of those good things
which God has prepared for those that love him. A grateful and pleasant taste
of these good things, God affords the Souls of the faithful here in this life;
how transcendently then, unutterable and unconceivable will be the full
fruition of all that, which the Gospel reveals to us but as in a glass, when
enjoyed to the height in the highest Heavens, through all eternity, when we
shall see God as he is with everlasting, overflowing satisfaction to all the
faculties of the Soul? The Eye of Mart has seen here admirable things in Art
and Nature; the Ear has heard, and the Tongue has tasted delicious things;
and Man's heart can conceive much more than Art or Nature could ever present our
senses with. The very pleasure of natural knowledge in the judgment of Persons
exercised therein, exceeds whatsoever sensuality, vain glory or covetousness
pursues or enjoys; and yet the knowledge and love of God in Christ,
incomparably surpass, St. Paul tells us, whatsoever the heart of the natural
Man (advanced to the height) can conceive as pleasant or delightful to it. How
much more does this City to come, and its endless unconceivable pleasures,
where this everlasting Rest is to be had, exceed even our expressions and
conceptions when they are at the highest?

If God has provided such good things for Mankind here below, in this World,
which was not made for the place of our happiness, but only to give us a
transitory glimpse, of his infinite wisdom, power and goodness, and to draw our
hearts after the Author of what we see; if he has built this inferior World or
City, which has no foundations in comparison of those to come, with so much
wisdom, power and bounty, and made such glorious Heavens as shine it forth to
our admiration, and enameled it with such variety of pleasures, as even the
best find it a matter of difficulty to part therewith; and yet God never
intended when he built it, that it should continue long: If there has been so
much cost of accurate contrivance, and mighty bounty, laid out on that which
was to last but for a time, what think we, must be the riches, beauty and glory
of that City, which he intended should endure to all eternity? Surely this
World where we now live, is but as some outhouses, to that Heavenly Palace, an
(...), as St. Paul says, a workhouse, a place for Labor and Travel, before
we come to our resting place, that (...), or place of rewards, as he calls
Heaven. This is but a place to fit our selves in for the City above; a place it
is wherein the greatest part of its inhabitants, have dishonored their maker,
and him that made the World, by preferring its transitory pleasures before him;
disordered themselves, injured their brethren, and thereby fitted themselves
for that (...), that Hell, or place of everlasting punishment. And if the most
wise and holy God, who made this World, and knew when he made it, that it
might, and would be so abused, yet so bespangled its roof with Stars, Sun and
Planets, and laid its flowery foundation so pleasantly, fragrantly, fruitfully
and usefully; certainly that City which he has erected for none but his
beloved Servants to live in to all eternity, must vastly surpass this in glory:
And because we can hardly conceive of invisible future good things, but by some
resemblance to present and visible, and Men are of several tempers,
apprehensions and desires; the Scriptures condescend thereto, and strive to
express the next life's happiness, in all the variety of several notions which
either sense, phansy or reason can desire.

The voluptuous seek for pleasure and mirth; if they will have it, let them set
their hearts and affections on him that made them and redeemed them, that he
might sanctify them and bring them to these delights they seek in him, they
shall find when entered the City above, a feast of new refined Wines, a feast
of Marrow and all delicacies, the joy of Harvest, and of those that divide the
spoil of their enemies. They shall find a celestial Paradise or Eden of God,
whereof that which was made for Adam and his posterity, continuing innocent,
was but a transitory imperfect Map. There is the hidden Manna, hidden here but
revealed there; a new Song always Sung, a Garden of Lillies and Roses which
never die, and whose fragrant scent never decays.

The ambitious Man's heart is set on honor and glory, but if he will set his
heart on God, and that honor which comes from him, in him he shall not fail to
find a Kingdom of glory and immortality, a Crown of righteousness, whose weight
is exceeding and eternal, for his having preferred the God that made him,
before the empty false hearted honors, which come to tempt him from his duty
of humility, goodness and holiness.

The covetous Man's heart is set on riches; but if he will set his heart on God,
in him he shall find everlasting Treasure; Mansions that fail not, able to
satisfy the utmost desires of him that possesses them, either for duration or
abundance: A City whose Walls and Gates are full of all manner of precious
stones, an Inheritance, as St. Peter describes it, incorruptible and undefiled,
that fades not away, 1 Pet. 1.4. What ever we can inherit here is Subject to
some, nay all of these; Corruption, defilement, and fading away, both we and
it. The substance is embased and soiled, by some bad thing coming to it from
without. All things in their best Estate, lose their luster, and fade away: One
Man's inheritance corrupts, by another Man's unthriftiness, and is purchased by
another, another's escheated or confiscated.

We are weary here and then we Rest, and are quickly as weary of our Rest as of
our weariness. The Creatures fail and tire, and disappoint us, that we should
not set up our Rest in them, or in any inheritance here below, but be chased,
and forced to seek our Rest in God; with whom there is an inheritance laid up
for us, in danger of none of all these; incorrupt, that shall hold its being,
and none can disseize us of it; undefiled, never embased by any mixture, and we
our selves become undefiled, incorrupt and unfading too, and what can the
covetous in his largest thoughts desire more.

We have, or may have a natural certainty, by light of reason, that there is
another future State, a life of Rest and joy, after labor and sorrow here. The
Soul of Man which is a Spirit, whose operations are not only far above, what
any body or matter is capable of, but can overrule and contradict, what ever
the body most vehemently inclines to, embrace poverty, reproach, and death,
with peace and joy.

Since for certain, by light of reason, there is a God that made the World, and
governs the World, and has obliged Mankind by notions imprinted in his Soul,
to piety and righteousness, charity and temperance, and yet has left him a
liberty to choose or refuse; that he maybe rewarded for choosing good, and
punished for the contrary: And since many choose the ways of sin, who are not
punished in this World; and many choose the ways of virtue, who are not rewarded
in this life; it follows by necessary consequence of reason, from the justness
and holiness and goodness of God, that there must be another future life,
wherein the prosperous wickedness of sinners shall be punished; the labors and
sufferings of godly, righteous, temperate, charitable persons, abundantly
rewarded.

All this the very Heathens many of them, have expressly owned, and fairly
proved, by their general acknowledgemt, that 'twere better to suffer the loss
of life, and all its comforts, than to live in the practice of heinous vice,
which could not be true, if there were no other life after this: And surely the
notions of good and evil, being so deeply interwoven with Men's Souls, that the
consciences of those who choose, and act that which is evil, though never so
secretly, and so succesfully, reproach them with the guilt of it, and terrify
them with the apprehensions of future punishment: And the consciences of those
who choose and act that which is good, though never so much reproached and
afflicted for so doing, cheers and comforts them with joyful hopes, and
expectations of some future reward. The Souls and Consciences of Men being so
deeply stamped with this, by him that made them, that no evasions, or arts of
hypocrisy, or subtle wickedness, can blot it out; it necessarily follows, as
necessarily, and as surely, as that the reason and conscience of Man was not
made in vain, nor given him to make him the most abused, deluded, miserable
Creature in the World; even in that, which is the very dignity, and excellency
of his nature; that there must be a life, wherein these notions and
apprehensions, so natural and so general, must be verified. Thus far Reason by
natural light may enable, and has in effect empowred many to believe, that
there is a resting place for the virtuous, not to be found here but hereafter;
Commorandi locum natura nobis, non habitandi domicillium dedit: No abiding City
here, but one to come: Heaven is the proper Country for Man's Soul, which came
from thence inspired by God, Divina quaedam particula aurae; and thither tends.

But because this light is obscure and imperfect, compared with that of
Revelation; therefore the main irrefragable evidence, both that there is
another state to come, and of its transcendent happiness, blessed Rest and
tranquillity, as to Soul and body, is to be fetched from the holy Oracles, and
there we have it indeed, as fully and as clearly revealed, as this our
Mortality is capable of; proved by all the demonstrations of the Spirit, which
attentive reason can desire.

For, there we have the Son of God descending from Heaven, to take our Nature,
and in that nature to teach and exemplify, the only way that leads thither, and
purchase our admission to it, (to this Crown of life, to this resting place, to
this City to come) by his death; thereby procuring for us an inheritance
incomparably more worthy, than all our labors and sufferings here can come to.
This Rest is not allotted for sluggards, drowsy, slothful Persons, who squander
away their precious hours in earthly trifles, and think not this glorious
eternal City, and Rest there, which Christ has bought with his own blood,
worth their seeking, until they have nothing else to seek: Yea, when this
eternal Rest is offered them, by Gods preventing grace, have no heart to give
him his price, when the price is only to part with that which is vain and
temporal, for that which is satisfactory and eternal.

The way to this Rest, says our Lord, is straight and narrow, through
temptations without, and corruptions within, and therefore cannot be found but
by those that seek it, with attentive heed. God indeed seeks us first, shows us
this City where this happiness and Rest is to be found, and the way to it,
invites and enables us to obtain it, by walking in holiness, and righteousness,
which qualify us for it. Even the things of this transitory life here below,
its riches and honors (such as they are) are seldom attained but by diligent
seeking; and can we think this heavenly inheritance, with all its joys, and
riches, and honors, should be attained without a constant studious diligence?
And the more we labor and suffer here, the more sweet and pleasant will be our
Rest when it comes. Grata quies fessis, Rest we know is welcome to the weary
Traveller: And now, Courteous Reader, I have by this time possibly wearied, and
tired thee out, in a long and tedious walk; but it was, only the better to fit
and prepare thee for an happy, seasonable and lasting Rest, that I have thus
carried thee through a rough unbeaten path (the path of Faith, Hope, and
Charity, Meekness, Patience, Temperance, Humility, Chastity and Obedience;) all
which come, but as so many faithful guides, safely to conduct thee to the gates
of Heaven; and give thee even in this life, by anticipation, a taste of the joys
of that other, even of that place, where Saints and Angels shall be thy
Companions, and where thou shall see God Face to Face, who is Wisdom, Purity,
Holiness, and all perfections. I cannot leave thee better, than where thou have
so near an approach to this glorious prospect of eternal Rest: Only one thing I
have, at parting, to remind thee of, viz. Go ye cursed into everlasting fire,
or Come ye blessed inherit the Kingdom; one of these two must be thy doom, and
the final sentence of all flesh: Let it therefore be thy Wisdom as well as
Duty, to choose that better part, which can never be taken from thee, to choose
God and eternal life, before riches and honors and pleasures, and all that
this World can give: And to prefer an eternal boundless good, before uncertain
transitory vanities, sure to end in eternal sorrow; that so thy toilsom weary
Travel here, may have its accomplishment in eternal Rest hereafter. Amen, Amen,
Amen.

FINIS.

