Christ's First SERMON, OR The absolute necessity, Gospel Duty, and Christian
Practice of Repentance, Opened and Applied, by a godly, able, and faithful
Minister of Jesus Christ.

Wherein is discovered, what Repentance is; as also the great necessity thereof
to salvation: with the great folly and desperate madness of all those that
delay and put off their Repentance unto a Sick Bed, or Old Age.

Together with the great Benefit, Joy, and Comfort that shall be to the Souls
of all those that timely and truly Repent.

The eleventh Edition, with many Additions.

Matthew. 4.17. From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent, for the
Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.

Luke 13.3. Except ye Repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

London, Printed for Eliz. Andrews, at the White Lion near Pye-Corner. 1663.

Christ's first Sermon. OR, The absolute necessity, duty, and Christian Practice
of REPENTANCE.
Acts 17.30, 31. The times of this ignorance God winked at, but now commands
all men every where to repent: Because he has appointed a Day, in which he
will judge the world in righteouness.


THE Blessed Apostle Saint Paul in these words, beloved, endeavors to take off
the superstitious Athenians from their Idolatry and worshipping of false gods;
gods of silver and gold, which indeed are no gods, but the work of men's hands;
and this he does, first, by endeavoring to convince them of the folly of their
Idolatry; and then secondly, in laying before them the power and goodness of
God, in making and preserving the world, and all things therein. God (says he
in the foregoing verses) made the world, and all things therein, and is Lord
over all, and gives to all life, and breath, and all things; and in him we all
live, and move, and have our being: and it is he that has set the bounds of
our habitations. Therefore (says he) you need not think that the Godhead is
like unto gold, or silver, or stones, graven by art or man's devices; for God is
Lord both of heaven and earth. I but say these Idolaters, (like some now
adays) we did as our forefathers did, they shorshipped such gods as these,
and were of the same Religion as our forefathers were. But says the Apostle,
this was done in ignorance, and the times of this ignorance God winked at; your
forefathers had not the light of the Gospel, they never heard of Jesus Christ:
But now, says he, Christ is preached, and the light of the Gospel shines forth
in the world, therefore now ye must repent, and turn from these idols, and
serve the living God. Now God commands all men every where to repent, although
God in times past suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways: Now has he
sent us to preach Christ unto you, that you should turn from these vanities,
and serve the living God. If your forefathers sinned, it was through their
ignorance and want of the knowledge of Jesus Christ: but if you sin and go on
in your idolatry, it is through wilfulnes, and God will be revenged on you. In
the words you may observe these four things; first, a duty commanded, and that
is repentance; secondly, the commander, and that is God, God commands;
thirdly, the persons to whom this command is enjoined, and that is all men,
every where, high and low, rich and poor, all the world over; fourthly and
lastly, the time when, and that is now; now God commands all men every where
to repent, now in these times of the Gospel: To day if you will hear my voice,
says God in Psalm 95.7. From the worlds thus opened, I shall give you these
four pra^tical observations: The first is this, that Repentance is a needful
and necessary duty commanded by God. Secondly, that every man and woman in the
world is bound to repent. Thirdly, that the doctrine of the Gospel is a
doctrine of Repentance: It was Christ's first Sermon, as you may see, Mat. 4.16.
Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent. Fourthly and lastly, observe from
these words that God expects more, and looks for more from men under the
Gospel, then from those who never heard of the Gospel. These four observations
are all of them very clear from the words of the test, I shall only therefore
give you some few futher proofs of them from Scripture, and so proceed in the
opening and handling of the two first observations, and from thence I shall
draw sundry practical uses, which I shall endeavor, by Gods assistance, to
apply home unto your souls, I shall therefore join the two first observations
into one entire proposition, thus. That repentance is a needful and necessary
duty commanded by God, and that every man and woman in the world is bound to
repent. Except ye repent (says Christ, Luke 13. 3) ye shall all perish. And 2
Per. 3.9. God is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come
to repentance. As I live (says the Lord, Ezekiel. 33.11.) I have no pleasure in
the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live. Turn
ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house of Israel. And
in Mat. 3.2. Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. And so likewise in
Act 2.38. Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ,
for the remission of sins Repentance is needful for all, there are none so
wise, none so learned, none so holy, but stand in need of repentance. In many
things (says St. James) we sin all, Jam, 3.2. And in Romans 3.23. All have
sinned. Young ones have sinned, and therefore have need to repent, and that
betimes, lest as St. Paul says, Heb. 13^3. Through the deceitfulness of sin
their hearts be hardened. Its good for young ones, yea its the best course they
can take, as Solomon says, Eccles. 12.1. To remember their Creator in the
days of their youth; and not to put off repentance unto old age, or the
deathbed, for then it may be too late: For although true repentance is never
too late, yet late repentance is seldom true. It is a good observation of a
holy man; says he, speaking of the repentant Thief, God saved one at the last
hour, that none might despair, and but one, that none might presume. Thou that
wilt not repent when thou may, it may be God will not give thee time to
repent hereafter when thou would: Do thou think to do that in thy old
age, which thou will not do in thy youth? Can thou do that in one hour on thy
deathbed, which thou art not able to do sufficiently all thy life time; And
then likewise old men have need of repentance, they have lived a long time in
sin, and have long enough, yea, too too long neglected repentance: Young men
may dye soon, but old men cannot live long; therefore both young and old have
need to repent, that they may receive the remission of their sins, Mark 1, 4.
And for your better understanding of this great and necessary duty of
repentance. I shall little show you what it is, and that briefly. Repentance is
of two sorts, either real or unfeigned, or else seeming and hypocritical;
seeming repentance that is common to wicked men, and is altogether Legal arising
from the accusations of their own consciences, such a repentance, as this, was
that of Judas; and then there is a real and unfeigned repentance, which does
properly belong to the godly, and this is likewise of two sorts; Legal and
Evangelical: Legal repentance that comes from the Law, giving us the sight of
our sins and our misery by sin; the Law is our Schoolmaster to bring us to
Christ, Gal. 3.24. But Evangelical repentance that springs from faith in
Christ, and carries out the soul unto Christ in opposition to every sin, and to
a forsaking of every evil way: repentance then I shall thus describe, I say
repentance is a gift of God by which a believing sinner being cast down in the
sight and sense of his own sins, does utterly forsake and abhor all his
former evil ways, and turns to the Lord with a perfect heart.

I say it is a gift of God, that which comes from God and not from nature, its
a flower never grew in natures garden; neither birth nor breeding, neither art
nor learning, nor any other sublunarypower or qualification, is able to beget
repentance: true repentance comes from above. Every good and perfect gift
(says St. James) comes from above, Jam. 1.17. Grace does not grow here below,
but comes down from the father of lights. The Apostles, Acts 11.18. glorified
God, that to the Gentiles he had granted repentance unto life. Repentance is
the quickening of a dead soul, and therefore must be the act of him who is the
giver of all life. We are all of us by nature dead in sins and trespasses
Ephesians. the 2. and the 1. A man by nature is no more able to perform an act of
true grace, then a dead person in the grave is able to do an act of nature.
They that live in sin (as St. Paul says of the widow that lives in pleasure, 1 Timothy 5.6.) are dead while they live. Repentance then is the gift of God, Acts
11.18. God granted repentance unto life. So in 1 Timothy 2.25. the Ministers of
God are required to instruct those that oppose themselves, with meekness; if
God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth,
that they may recover themselves out of the snares of the devil. It is said of
Christ, Acts 5.31 He is exalted to be a Prince and a Savior, to give
repentance unto Israel. Faith and repentance are supernatural works, and we may
as well create new heavens and a new earth, as do these acts of our selves; it
is God alone that works them in our hearts by the efficacious operations of his
Spirit. 2 Cor. 3.5. We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as
of our selves but it is God that works in us both to will and to do, of his
good pleasure, Phil 2.13.

Secondly, repentance is a change, first of the heart, then of the whole man:
there must be a new heart, and a new hand; a new life, and a new head: all
things must be new where repentance is. If any man be in Christ (says the
Apostle) he is a new creature, 1 Cor. 5.17. Repentance makes a man a new man,
and it is only in the power of God to renew our hearts, neither Angels nor men
are able to do it. In Jer. 31.18, 19. says Ephraim, Turn thou me, and I shall
be turned, for thou art the Lord my God, Surely after that I was turned I
repented, and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh, I was
ashamed, yea even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth. Here
is the character of a true repentance, it is the Lord that must change our
hearts, it is he only that must give us new hearts, and take from us these
hearts of stone: it is the Lord that must pluck us out of the snares of the
Devil, and cast down the strong holds of sin in us, if God do not turn us, we
shall never be turned. After that I was turnned, I repented says Ephraim. But
I proceed in the description of repentance.

Its a gift of God, I say whereby a believing sinner turns from all his sins
unto God; I say, a believing sinner, because faith must first precede and go
before repentance, for none can truly repent, but he must first believe: there
may be in a sinner that which we call Legal repentance, which may cause a
sinner to fall out with his sins, and it may be to loath them with a kind of
detestation: its possible a wicked man may repent that ever he knew what sin
meant, or that ever he had to do with sin; all this may be, and yet no true
repentance, because no true faith, for true repentance causes a hatred of sin,
as it is displeasing to God, as well as hurtful to our selves; yea, he hates sin
as hell, yea worse then hell it self, which cannot be in an unbelieving soul.
It cannot be denied but that repentance is a saving grace; and if so, then none
can partake of this saving grace, till he be first united unto Christ the
fountain of all grace: so then faith must needs be before repentance.

Secondly, where true repentance is, there is a change wrought in the whole
man, and a turning, first, to our selves: secondly, to God: and thirdly to man.
An unrepentant sinner is out of himself; and he is not only out of his way,
but out of his wits. In Luke 15.17. when the Prodigal came to himself, he said;
Father I have sinned; this is the first step to repentance, self-returning.
Secondly, repentance is a returning to God, If thou will return O Israel, says
the Lord, return unto me, Jer. 4.1. The grace of repentance is suitably
expressed by this act of returning to God, and they who did not repent, are
said not to return to God. In Amos. 4 1. God says, Notwithstanding I have
given you cleanness of teeth, and want of bread, yet have you not returned;
notwithstanding I have withheld the rain from you, and smitten you with
blastings and mildew, and sent among you the Pestilence: Notwithstanding I have
slain your young men by the sword, and overthrown some of you as I overthrew
Sodom and Gomorrah, by fire; yet have you not returned unto me, says the Lord.
Repentance is a turning from sin to God: Sin turns men from God, and draws the
soul into the ways of death, Jam. 1.14. A man is drawn away of his own lusts
and enticed, drawn away from God and from the truth of God: but when once
Repentance comes, he turns back again, he changes his mind then, and abhors
himself for what he has done, Job 42.6. I abhor my self, and repent (says
Job) in dust and ashes. The prodigal was drawn away from his fathers house
through his own lusts, and yet at last he returned first to himself, secondly
to his father, Luke 15 17. When he came to himself he said I will arise and go
to my father, and say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven and before
thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son.

Sinners are said to be mad, but repentance brings men to their right wits
again: chery impenitent sinner is a mad men, a meet Bedman; who but a mad man
will run himself wilfully into the fire, as every wicked man does, he runs
headlong to destruction; but repentance turns men from this madness. In Acts
16.18. it is called, A turning of men from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan unto God. Sin is a darkness, and when men sin they know not what
they do; but Repentance enlightens men, and sets them at liberty. In Acts
20.20. Repentances and turning to God are put together, they are one and the
same, the one cannot be without the other; but it is not any turning that does
this, but it is a turning of the judgemant, and a turning of the will and
affections: so that men that are turned, are carried wholly from sin and
wickedness, unto God, Joel 3.12. Turn unto me (says God) with all your heart:
If it be with a piece, it is nothing worth, it is altogether deceitful.

Thirdly, Repentance is a returning to men; we must not be ashamed to
acknowledge our faults one to another, Jam. 5.16. Confess your faults one to
another, and pray one for another. If we have dene any man wrong, we ought to
acknowledge it. Is it so then that Repentance flows from Faith in Jesus
Christ, and turns men from sin unto God, then I observe, that there are many in
the world, who as yet never knew what true repentance means, because they are
yet in unbelief and without faith, without which there can be no repentance:
Men may cry bitterly, and humble themselves in sackcloth and ashes, as Ahab
did: men may have the hort ours of Hell in their consciences as Judas had; Men
may reform many things that are amiss, as Herod did, and yet being unbelicvers,
they are still in the estate of impenitency: It is an infallible demonstration,
that they never yet truly tasted of the love of God in the pardon of their
sins, who dare presume to take a liberty to sin, or delight themselves in any
sin whatsoever; they that truly believe, cannot, dare not allow themselves in
any sin: for as faith purifies the heart, so faith and repentance keeps the
heart pure, and makes the conscience tender: and the more pure the heart is,
the more will it abstain from all things that are evil.

Then secondly, is Repentance the gift and grace of God, whereby a believing
sinner being humbled under the sight and sense of his sins, does truly turn to
God. Then we may observe, that where true repentance is, there is also
humiliation for sin. It is not possible that ever any soul should truly repent,
that is not truly humbled and cast down in the sight and sense of his sins.
Turn unto me (says the Lord) with all your heart, with fasting, with weeping,
and with mourning, Joel 2.12. The Ninivites when they repented, they humbled
themselves from the highest to the lowest; and this also shows us, that the
greatest part of men and women in the world never yet truly repented, because
they were never yet truly humbled: IT is not every kind of sorrow that works
repentance, but as it is in 2 Cor 7.10. Only goldy sorrow works repentance
never to be repented of. And as there may be a counterfeit repentance, so there
may be a counterfiet humiliation: The signs and marks of true humiliation are
these, First, the soul that is truly humbled for sin, is very free in
confession of sin; and the Scriptures tell us, that those that have been most
humbled for sin, have bin freest in the confession of their sins: as David,
Nehemiah, Job, and others, Psalm. 51.3. says David, I acknowledge my
transgression, and my sin is ever before me. And this confession of sin, will
be in some measure suitable to our humiliation; if our sorrow for sin be
sincere, our confession will be so too: Therefore all those who are less afraid
to commit sin then they are ashamed to confess sin; were never yet truly
humbled for sin, neither shall their souls reap any ben fit by it. Prove. 28.13.
He that covers his sins shall not prosper, but whosoever confesses and forsakes
them shall find mercy. They that will not find out their sins to confess
them, to be sure, one day or other their sins shall find them out to forment
them: if sin find us not out in youth, it will find us out in age; if it
find us not out in health, yet it will find us out in sickness; if it find us
not out in life, yet it will find us out in death; if it find us not out in
death, yet it will find us out after death in the day of judgment: either one
time or other out sins will find us out. Numb. 25., 33. Your sins (says God)
shall find you out.

Secondly, godly sorrow and humiliation for sin, causes the soul that is
humbled utterly to loath, and abhor, and hate sin: Ezekiel. 20.43. Ye shall
remember your ways and your doings wherein you have been defiled, and ye shall
loath your selves in your own sight, for all your evil that you have committed.
Sin is odious and hateful to an humble soul: I abhor every false way, (says
David) Rivers of tears run down mine eyes, because men keep not thy law, Psalm.
119.164.136. Nature may teach a man to loath sin in others, but its only grace
that teaches us to abhor sin in out selves, When Judab, Genesis 38.24. heard that
his daughter Thanmar had played the harlot, he presently cast sentence of death
upon her; Bring her forth (says he) that she may be burned: But when he saw by
the pledges that sin was his own, Judah was then silent, no more talk of
burning her then. A soul truly humbled, will hate sin wheresoever it is;
especially in his own bosom; men will fly from venomous and hurtful creatures
wheresoever they are, especially if they be near them, because they are then in
most danger to be hurt by them; all the sins of the world cannot do a soul so
much hurt as his own sins; then they that do not hate sin in themselves, are
not truly humbled for sin.

Thirdly, he that is truly humbled, is willing to take shame to himself, the
humble sinner is willing to be ashamed of his folly: Ezekiel. 16. 63. That thou
may remember and be ashamed, and never open thy mouth more, when I am
pacified toward thee for all that thou have done, says the Lord.

Fourthly, a truly humble soul will be willing to receive the word of God with
all readiness: what is the reason men are no more humbled for sin; Surely this,
because they despise or neglect the good, word of God, which is the only means
to get humility: the humble penitent soul, is the most tractable and teachable
soul in the world, and he above all other is willing to embrace the word of God.

Fifthly, a true humble soul is ready and willing to put in practice all these
duties which he has formerly learned out of the word of God: When Paul was
once truly humbled, he conferred not any longer with flesh and blood, but
laying aside all carnal reasonings, goes on thoroughly in his work of preaching
the Gospel, Gal. 1.16. Thus you maysee that where true repentance is, there is
also a true humiliation and sorrow for sin; then every one learn to be humble
and that betimes: for as women the longer they are ere they bring forth
children the harder is their labor; even so, they that put off repentance to
old age, must expect the sorer travel. Lamentably are they mistaken, who put
off their repentance to their old age: is it likely that the pains and weakness
of old age will be any advantage or ease to thy repentance. Rev. 16.19. its
said, that at the pouring forth of the fourth viol, when God smote the
inhabitants of the earth with a scorching heat, that they blasphemed the name
of God and repented not. Its a woeful thing to put off repentance to a pained
body, or to a sick bed: pain in its own nature fits rather to blaspheme, and
turn from God, then to return to God; and its very common that sick persons
either repent not at all, or if they do, at the best their repentance is but a
sickly repentance: sickness does only abate and restrain the power of men's
lusts, it never destroys the life of sin, death it self cannot kill sin;
wicked men's sins live when they are dead, the grave cannot consume them, nor
the fire of hell: the sins of unbelievers remain not only in their guilt, but
in their power to all eternity.

Is it so then, that repentance is a turning from sin unto God, then I observe,
that there can be no true repentance where sin is delighted in: he that lives
in the love and practice of any sin knows not what repentance means, for
repentance takes off the heart from the love of sin, and works it to such a
dislike of sin, that it abhors the very occasion of sin; if sin comes and tells
a gracion penitent soul of the profits and pleasures of sin, O says a gracions
heart, the sweetness will prove bitterness in the latter end. True repentance
takes off the heart from all sin, as well small as great, not from some few
sins, but from all sin; for he that turns not from all, turns from none in
truth: and it is not enough to turn from all sin, but we must turn from the
commands of sin and satan unto the commands of God; from worldliness, to
heavenly mindedness; from pride to humility; from hatred and envy, to love: the
Tree that bears not good fruit will be hewn down and east into the fire, as
well as the tree that bears ill fruit. I beseech ye therefore brethren in the
bowels of mercy, for the Lords sake I entreat every one of you that desire to
be saved, that you would turn away from all your iniquities, and that speedily,
lest your repentance be too late: And to this end, be earnest with God by
prayer, for the assistance of his spirit in the subduing of thy sins, and cast
thy selt wholly upon the Lord.

Chery true Penitent is wholly the Lords, the disire of his soul is to God, and
to the remembrance of his name; with his soul he desires God in the night, and
with his Spirit within him, he seeks the Lord in the morning, Isa. 26.8, 9.
He is now a constant suitor at the throne of grace, and with full purpose of
heart he cleaves to God, and loves the place where his honor dwells, Psalm
26.8. All his desire is to know more of God, and how he may love him more and
serve him better; the service and servants of God, how joyful are they to his
soul? He takes all opportunities of doing good, he keeps his heart with all
diligence, and the door of his lips that he offend not with his tongue, Psalm
39.1. His heart is enslamed with the love of God, that he endeavors with all
his might to show forth the praises of the Lord. By which it appears, that a
turning to God, is not barely a turning from sin, but a practicing of good, and
a walking up rightly before the Lord in all well-pleasing, all out days.

Is it so then that repentance is needful and absolutely necessary for all
persons; in what a sad condition then are the greatest part of men and women in
the world, who as yet are as far from true repentance as light is from darkness,
and yet poor souls, they smooth themselves up with this conceit, that God is
merciful, and they hope to be saved as well as the best, and they thank God all
is well with them; and yet notwithstanding they never repented of their sins:
true repentance is a Grace almost out of fashion in these self-conceited times,
wherein men's minds are so much running after novelties and outward formalities;
but the power of holiness, and the doctrine' of repentance and
self-mortification, these are not minded; nay, by many are accounted Legal, and
altogether needless.

There are three sorts of people that I shall have occasion to speak of in the
use of this Point: and the first are such as altogether abhor repentance; the
second are such, as although they acknowledge repentance is needful, and
necessary for others, yet think that they themselves have no need of it; and
the third sort are such as do confess, that repentance is needful even for
themselves, as well as others, but not yet; its time enough here after, there is
no such haste of it. And I hope in the handling of these three sorts of
persons, I shall make it appear that reprntance is needful and necessary at all
times, for all sorts, Having done this, I shall remove some lets that hinder
men from repentance, and so give you some few Motives to stir you up to
repentance; and then to wind up all in a few words of Application.

I begin with the first of these, those that abhor repentance; and they are
wilful sinners, such as go on in sin, and make it even their trade to sin:
wilful, desperate, and dissolute wretches, that laugh at repentance, who
declara their sin as Sodom did, and hide it not, Isa. 3.9. Who will not be
brought to abandon their wicked ways, but go on still in swearing and cursing,
lying and blaspheming, whoredom, drunkenness, and all uncleanness, and that
with greediness, as the Apostle says: Who mock at faith and repentance, as
those scoffers did in 2 Pet. 3.4. These are they, as S. Peter says, 2 Pet. 2.
That walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, and count it pleasure to
riot in the day time; whose eyes are full of adultery, that cannot cease from
sin: O but the latter end of these men is worse then their beginning. How many
wicked wretches are there, that live as if they had made a covenant with death
and hell, and were at an agreement with the grave, who had rather hazard their
souls then leave their sins, who as if there were neither heaven nor hell, run
on from one sin to another. Come (say they) we will fetch wine and fill our
selves with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more
abundant. But Isa. 56.12. Woe unto them (says the Prophet) they have rewarded
evil to themselves. How little do these men think, that God will one day wound
the hairy scalp of such as go on in sin: and that tribulation and wrath,
indignation and anguish, shall be upon every soul that does evi, Romans 2.9. Let
men slight repentance never so much, a time will come when they shall repent,
but that too late, even in hell fire for ever. For sin must be repented of, if
not on earth, yet in hell; and if you will not loath your companions in sin
here, you shall loath them in hell hereafter, you pot-companions, and your
harlot companions shall loath one another in Hell: then these bloody wounds
shall bleed which you have given your souls in the days of your sollity and
pride, and in the times of your desperate impieties; when nothing but wrath and
horror of conscience shall appear before you, then these sweet morsels of sin
which have been sweet as honey to your lustful appetites, shall be vomited up
as the bitterest and loathsomest things in the world. Consider this all ye that
forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you, Psalm.
50 22. Be willing to forsake your sins, for sin and the soul must part, or else
hell and the soul shall meet together: The wicked shall be turned into hell, and
all the Nations that forget God, Psalm 9.17. O that you would seriously lay
these things to heart, and now, even now in this your day, that ye would know
the things that belong unto your everlasting peace. To day if you will hear my
voice (says God in the 95. Psalm) harden not your heart. Slight not, scorn
not, resist not the good word of God that invites you to repentance, but break
off your sins by repentance, and turn to God in righteousness.

And now for the second sort, and they are such as think they need no
repentance: And they are either such as are morally civil, and honest before
men, or else formal and hypocritical professors, who seem to be, and are not,
who profess God with their lips, but deny him in their lives; O they have no
need of repentance they are no drunkards, nor swearers, nor such like: God I
thank thee (said the proud Pharisee) I am not as other men are, extortioners,
unjust, Luke 18.11. These are such as profess God and know much of the mind of
God, and therefore have no need of repentance, they are guilty of no sins to
repent of: But of these it may be said as Peter said of Elimas the sorcerer,
Act. 13.10. That they are full of all subtlety, and enemies to all
righteousness, who never yet know what sin meant. For they that think they have
no sins left to repent of, its a clear argument that they never yet truly
repented themselves of any one sin at all, but that they are still in the gall
of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity: For repentance is a continued art,
and a grace that must have its daily operation, as faith and love must
continue, so must repentance; when once the rocky heart of a sinner is smitten
by God, the water of repentance will continually flow; sincere repentants
cannot content themselves with one art or two of repentance, but they must
daily renew their repentance, for sin will renew, so must repentance: renewed
sins must have renewed Repentance; till we have done sinning (and that will not
be till we have done living) we must not have done repenting: if there be a
leak in the ship, the water must be pumpt out, else the ship is in danger of
sinking; we are leaking vessels all of us, yea the best of us sin leaks in
daily, and is renewed daily, and there must be the pump of repentance to carry
it out daily, else our souls will be in danger of sinking, And for the other
sort who think they need no repentance, they are pure moral honest men, who
live in a course of civility, and take their penny to be as white as any
others, these are as good as the best, and therefore have no need to be any
better; they are not desperately wicked as many are, they are no blasphemers,
nor drunkards, they go to Church and give every man his due, and are loving to
their neighbors, and what needs any more. Its true, these things are necessary,
and are required in a Christian: but yet civility without sanctify, at the best
is but gilded Atheism; morality and seeming virtues are but gilded sins and
glistering abominations; the Lord sees many a rotten, base, stinking heart
under a civil coat It civility and morality would have served the turn, then
the Pharisees would have gone to heaven before any other; they were civilly
honest, they were no swearers, nor drunkards, they paid tithes, and gave alms,
and prayed often; and carried themselves so exact in the world, that it was
thought that if but two men in the world should go to heaven, a Scribe should
be one, and a Pharisee the other. But what says Christ. Mat. 5.20. Except your
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall
not enter into the kingdom if heaven: And yet their righteousness far exceeded
the righteousness of all our moral honest men. Let a man be never so honest in
outward appearance, let his carriage and behavior be never so specious and
plausible in the eyes of the world, let him be never so exact ano just in his
dealings with men, yet if he be not renewed in the spirit of his mind, he is
never the better for this. If he be not a sanctified Christian, the word of
truth never as yet came home to his soul, in the power of it; he is still in
the state of nature, and without God, and as yet far from repentance and
salvation

And then there is a third sort of impenitents, and they are such as are
convinced of the necessity of repentance, but they do not think it a time now
to repent: they believe they must repent, but all in good time, there is no
haste of it yet, it will be time enough hereafter; at the hour of death, when
age and sickness is upon them; and they think it a thing of nothing to repent,
they can do it when they list, its done with a wet finger, there needs no more
but to say, Lord have mercy upon me, when they are going out of the world, this
is the general disease with which most men are infected. But let such men know,
that it is a hard matter to repent, ans sin is very powerful; and if they do
not seek to get it subdued in the strength of their days, it will be too hard
for them at the last for although men grow weaker and weaker, yet sin grows
stronger and stronger; and being as we say, bred in the bone, nursed up by us
in our youthful days, it will not easily be rooted out of the flesh. Can the
Blackmore change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? Jer. 15 23. No they
cannot; no more can they that are accustomed to do evil, leave it when they
list.

If repentance be a thing so easy, how is it that many who sought after it
could never obtain it? How many are there that have reared and cried in the
bitterness of their souls, and in the horror of their consciences, that they
could not repent. O that I could repent, O that my hard heart would break in
pieces! This has been the cries of many. It is not in the power of man to
repent when he pleases, does God give us space to repent now, it may be he will
not do it to morrow: a man by nature as he cannot of himself, so he has no
inclination of himself, to repentance. Repentance its a heart-work, a
circumcising of the heart, and casting of sin out of the soul, which indeed
will make the heart to bleed; which thing no natural man is either willing or
able to do. Mortify (says the Apostle, Col. 3.5.) your Members which are upon
earth; which thing suits not with a natural man. Let no man then put off
Repentance, upon such foolish wicked thoughts as these, that repentance is an
easy work, which a man may perform when he pleases, such sinful thoughts as
these will deceive you: Thou that wilt not repent now thou may, when thou
would it may be thou shall not be permitted; you that will not repent when
God gives space, how justly may he when thou would deny it thee? because
when it was offered to thee thou refusedst. Ezekiel. 24.13. Because I would have
purged thee, and thou wast not purged; thou shall not be purged from thy
filthiness, says the Lord. The longer men live in sin, the stronger will sin
grow in them: he that will not leave sin when he is young, will hardly leave it
when he is old; it is said of wicked men, in Job 20.11. Their bones are full of
the sins of their youth, which lie down with them in the dust. Not that men's
sins are buried with them in their graves, for then they might be happy, but
that they continue with them till death, yea after death. Many a time and often
has the Lord stood at the door of men's Consciences, and knocked to come in,
Rev. 3.20. Behold I stand at the door and knock, (says Christ) O do not let
God wait long, he has waited a long time already to be gracious unto thee,
Isa. 30.18. Do not give the devil the prime and strength of your days, and
then think to serve God in your old age: You do not leave sin in this, but sin
leaves you; you have not the strength and power to sin then as you have had,
but still your hearts are as bad as ever they were, then put not off your
repentance till sickness comes. Happy, yea thrice happy is that man, and
blessed shall he be, that in the time of his youth and health furnishes his
heart and soul with comforts against the evil day; happy is that soul, who when
age and sickness comes, is so sitted for death by repentance, that when death
comes he has nothing else to do but to dye. Be persuaded th^n to repent
betimes, before you go hence and be no more seen; there is no time ours but the
present time, we do not know whether we shall live another day, another night:
many that are in health one day are brought to their graves the next. Our life
(says St. James) is but a vapor that appears for a little time, Jam. 4.14.
we are no sooner born; but we begin to die. Put not your souls off then from
day to day, he that is unfit or unwilling to repent to day, will be so to
morrow; therefore seek the Lord while he may be found, Isa. 55.6. There is a
time when God will not be found: Prove. 1.24. to ver. 30. sath God, Because I
called and ye refused, and set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my
reproof; therefore will I laugh at your calamity, and will mock when your fear
comes; when distress and anguish comes upon you: then shall ye call on me,
but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but shall not find me. For
that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord; therefore
shall they eat the fruit of their ways, and be filled with their own devices.
There is a time when mercy may be had, but if we neglect that time, it will not
be recovered again though it be sought for with tears: there is a time, when
with the wise Vigins we may enter into the wedding, but if we take not that
time, we may with the foolish ones have the door shut against us, Mat. 25. Then
may we knock and call, yea, cry, Lord, Lord, open to us: but the Lord shall say
unto us, I know you not. The old world had a long time of Repentance, a hundred
and twenty years did Noah preach repentance to them, and yet they repented not:
but the Ninivites they had but a short time given them, but forty days, and
yet they repented: they made the Day of Repentance whilst the Sun of Gods
patience shined upon them.

God is not bound to wait men's leisure, the Soul is but a tenant at will, and
may suddenly be turned out of doors, and when you lie upon your sick beds, the
Lord may fill your hearts with such fears as may make your consciences
altogether despair of mercy. God sent you his servants early and late, in
season and out of season, to invite you to repent, but you will repent you say
hereafter, you will if you can, you hope God will work it in you. What ground
have you of this hope? has God made you any such promise? Thou can not draw
out the thread of thy life one minute, for ought thou know this may be thy
last day; the tenders of mercy, and the offers of grace are at an end when thy
life ends, if not before: you know that time and tide stays no man's leisure,
every one is so wise as to take time and tide for worldly affairs; will any man
be so sottish as to defer the time of his sowing till harvest? men will not be
carrying out of dung, when they should be fetching in of Corn: no, they will
dispatch those things first which are of most necessity. And is there any thing
of more necessity then the salvation of your souls? will your souls be saved
without repentance? or can you repent when you will? but you will say, you are
young, and therefore may be born with a while, which is the Devils divinity;
for young men have no more liberty allowed them to sin or to put off
repentance, then old men have, its the Devils policy to infuse this into thy
brains, that he may ensnare thee. It was the commendation of Timothy, that from
a Child he had known the holy Scriptures, 1 Timothy 1. Young Saints, say some,
but not the word of God, prove old Devils, But I am sure it is a rare thing to
see and old sinner to become a young Saint, When the devil and sin has lorded
it in your soul, yea tyrannized both over soul and body, for thirty or forty
years together, do you think then that a little groaning or crying, Lord have
mercy upon me, will be able to dispossess him at the last, he having gotten too
strong a footing in your soul to be beaten out of his quarters so easily; he
that will not remember God when he is young and living, its greatly to be
feared God will be unmindeful of him when he is old and dying. Therefore once
more I beseech you in the bowels of Christ, speedily to set about the work of
repentance, lest when it is too late you repent, weep, and mourn, that you
repented not before. Do not say of repentance as Felix spoke to Paul, Thou will
repent when thou art better at leisure, another time shall serve the turn: it
may be thou may not live to another time, or if thou do, thy heart may
then be as hard, if not harder then now it is, Would you not in the day of the
Lord be in a worse condition then heathens or infidels are? Then repent. Would
you not when you are dead be in a worse condition then toads or serpents? then
repent.

It may be said of every impenitent sinner, as Christ said of Judas in the 26.
of Matthew, and the 24. ver. It had been good for that man if he had never been
born. Heathens in the day of Judgment shall be in a better condition then
impenitent Christians, for they shall have the lesser condemnation, because of
their ignorance; who it may be would have done better if they had known more.
It shall be more tolerable (says our Savior) for Sodom and Gomorrah in the
day of judgment, then for thou Capernaum: Thou England that art exalted up to
heaven in Gospel-mercies, take heed and beware lest thou be not thrown down to
hell in Gospel-vengeance.

I should now show you the lets that hinder men from Repentance, and so
endeavor to remove them; but I shall only name them, and so conclude with
some few motivhs to stir you up to Repentance. Now the lets that keep men off
from Repentance, are either from Sin and Satan, or else from our selves and the
World; the Devil persuades men that repentance is a needless work and men need
not trouble themselves with it, for those that God has ordained to live shall
be saved, let them live never so loosely; and those that he has appointed to
wrath shall be damned, let them repent never so much. But to remove this let
out of the way, know this, that all those, that God has ordained to salvation,
shall first or last, more or less, be brought to embrace the means. In the 13.
of the Acts, and the 48. As many as were ordained to eternal life, believed.
God has joined the end and the means together, and cursed is he that dares to
separate them: Salvation without repentance is impossible; without holiness no
man shall see God, Heb. 5.19. A second way by which the Devil keeps men off
from Repentance, is Gods mercy; God is merciful, says the devil, his mercy is
over all his works, and he that made you will not damn you, you need not to
fear it: True it is, even to wicked men God is merciful; but these are but
mercies on the left hand, common mercies; its a mercy to men that they live,
its a mercy that we were not born monsters, and its a mercy to have outward
enjoyments, but what are these to the peculiar mercies of God? It was a good
speech of a godly man, says he, He that made thee without thee, will not save
thee without thee; if thou art in a ditch and wilt do no more to come out but
cry, God help me, thou may lie and perish. O do not dare to go on in sin,
because God is merciful; Shall we sin (says St. Paul) that grace may abound?
no, God forbid. I dare not says a gracious heart: If ever you would partake of
mercy, you must depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19. Let every one that names
the name of Christ depart from iniquity. I dare holdly say, that if all the
clouds of heaven should continually shower down mercy, there would not so much
as one drop fall upon any impenitent person.

Thirdly, the devil labors to keep men off from repentance, by bringing them
to despair of mercy, if he cannot work men into presumption by the
consideration of Gods mercies, he will do what he can to bring thent into
desperation, by telling them that mercy is out of date. But let not this hinder
thy repentance, for as it cannot be too soon to repent, so its never too late
to repent, better once then never. I do not speak this that any should neglect
to repent betimes, but that none should ever despair of mercy, and thereby be
hindered from this duty of repentance, A second let that hinders repentance, is
the world, the lusts of the flesh, and the pride of life, the pleasures and
preferments of the world: these fight against the spirit, and resist the work
of repentance: Voluptousness and Drunkenness unfits men for repentance,
therefore these must be abstained front (1 Pet. 2. 11.) as things that war
against the soul. Mortify therefore (says the Apostle) your members which are
upon earth, fornication, uncleanness, etc. Col. 3.5. These must be mortified.
And then a third let that keeps men from repentance is sin, sin has such a
commanding power over the souls of unregenerated persons, So that (as it is
Romans 6.10.) they give themselves over as servants to sin, and to uncleanness. O
then for the Lords sake, avoid all occasions of sin; Let not sin therefore
reign in your mortal bodies, that you should obey it in the lusts thereof:
neither yield you your members as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin, but
yield your selves unto God, as instruments of righteousness, Romans 6.12, 13.
verses. O that I could prevail with you, and that the Lord would persuade your
hearts of the dreadful and doleful condition of all umpenitent Sinners.
Consider then I beseech you in the fear of the Lord these following
considerations; and first of all know this, you that live in the love of sin
you live in the hatred of God; for the love of God and the love of sin cannot
possibly dwell together, and they that dwell in it shall never dwell with God,
Psalm. 15. says David, Lord, who shall abide in thy Tabernacle, who shall dwell
in thy holy ^^ill? He that walks uprightly, and works righteousness. And
the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 6.9. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor
Idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with
mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor
extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God. And Psalm 97. Ye that love the
Lord hate evil. Also 2 Timothy 2.19. Let every one that names the name of Christ,
depart from iniquity. Secondly, all those that sin, or are under the power and
command of sin, are of the dev^^ For he that commits sin (says St. John) is of
the devil, John 3.9. And is it not a sad thing to be under the power of the
Devil? Every wicked man is the Devils stave, and be does the devils drudgery:
where ever sin is, in the love of it, there is also the devil; the devil keeps
court in wicked men's hearts. Thirdly, sin is the high way to destruction, Is
not destruction to the wicked? says Job, Chap. 31.3. Yes, that it is, And a
strange punishment to the workers of iniquity. Fourthly and lastly, sin brought
wrath and condemnation upon the soul: If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die,
Romans 8.13. The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the Nations that
forget God, Psalm. 9.17. These things being considered and seriously taken to
heart, methinks should not only awaken sinners out of their sleepy security,
but also provoke them to repentance. And then there is another let which
hinders men from repentance, and that is in themselves, which is of all other
the greatest let; for did not our own base hearts deceive us, the devil the
world, and sin, could never hinder us from coming to God by repentance; and
these lets from ourselves are either from ignorance or hardness of heart, Ephesians
4.18. Men, says the Apostle, through the ignorance that is in them, and
through the hardness of their hearts being past feeling, have given themselves
over unto lasciviousness, and to work all uncleannes with greedines. Ignorance
must needs be a great let to repentance, no wonder when men know not the danger
of sin, nor the necessity of repentance, that they live in sin and never come
to repentance; who is there that seeks for that he knows not of? If
impenitent sinners did but know what a dangerous condition they were in without
repentance, they would never suffer their eyes to sleep, nor their eyelids to
slumber, before they had made their peace with, God by repentance: O then for
the Lords sake get acquaintance with God, and learn to know what an odious
thing sin is, Job 22.21. Acquaint now thy self with God, an^ be at peace,
thereby good shall come unto thee, thereby thou may be brought to repentance.
Then secondly, there is in us hardness of heart, which hinders the work of
repentance: It is said of Zedekiah, 2 Chronicles. 36.13. That he hardened his heart
that he might not return to the Lord his God. And this hardness of heart is
very lamentable, because all the means which God uses to soften, work not upon
it at all; And Pharaoh hardened his heart, and would not let the children of
Israel go, Ex. 8.32. All the sore judgments of God upon him could not prevail
with his hard heart, he would not let them go; so wicked men whose hearts are
hardened, they will not let their sins go, neither the judgment, nor the
mercies of God will prevail with wicked men, to turn them from their sins. Amos
4 12. says God, Though I have sent among you judgment upon judgment, plague,
famine, and no^som beasts, yet have you not returned unto me. Therefore I
beseech you, in love to your poor souls, that by prayer you would beg of God to
give you softened hearts, that may melt and tremble at the word of God, lest by
going on in your sins, ye bring upon your solves swist destrution. And so I
come to give you some means and motives to stir you up to repentance, and I
shall conclude.

The first and principal means of workin^ repentance where it is not, is the
word of God Mat. 4.17. And Jesus began to preach, and to say Repent, for the
Kingdom of Heaven is at hand Christ's frist Sermon was a Sermon of repentance,
therefore if ever you would repent (...) your sins, attend upon the word of
God. (...) ha^ a woeful sad condition are those in that want the word of God:
What the Preacher said, Eccle 11.6. In the morning (says he) sow thy seed,
an^ in the evening withhold not thy hand; so say I (...) hearing the word of
God; Hear it in the morning, and hear it in the afternoon; hear it on the Lords
day, and hear it in the week day, take a^ opprotunities of hearing the word of
God.

And then a second help is, to consider the goodness and power of God, his
almighty, an^ his all seeing eye; consider God sees and know and thy ways, and
is able to punish thee for a^ thy sins, if men were but convinced of this
truth, they durst not sin so boldly as they do But I pass by this to give you
some few Ch^dences of the truth of repentance, and they ar^ briesly these.

First, the soul that has truly repented is very careful to avoid even the
occasion of sin, an^ keeps himself at a distance bath from sin and sinners; he
will dispense with no sin at all, but will ^y as Ephraim did, What have I to do
any more ^ith sin? And secondly, he that is truly turned ^^ont sin unto God,
will endeavor to turn there is also: he is not content that he himself is ^urned
to God, but he will draw others to God ^lso. Thirdly, he that has truly
repented is very careful tofurnish himself against the assaults of the devil;
Thy word (says David, Ps. 119.11.) have I hid in my heart, that I might not
sin against thee. A true repentant treasures up the word of God in his heart,
and walks worthy of the Lord unto all well-pleasing, being fruitful unto every
good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God, Col. 1.10. They do it, as it
is in Ps. 110.23. They keep the testimonies of God, and seek him with their
whole heart; they also do no iniquity, they walk in his ways. Their delight is
in the law of God, and in his law they do meditate day and night, Psalm. 1.2.
Fourthly, he that has truly repented, is full of holy indignation against sin,
and turns sin quite out of doors, he cannot endure the sight of it. Fifthly, he
that has truly repented, is full of fear, he is filled with an awful,
reverencial, and filial fear of the Majesty of God, and he is afraid of
displeasing God by sin, Sirthly, a true penitent is full of holy and heavenly
desires; he desires more of God, and more acquaitance with the ways of God,
more communion with God in Ordinances Seventhly, true penitents are very
zealous for God: O how do I love thy law, says David (...) the 119. Psalm. A
godly man cannot endure t^ see God dishonored; as it is said of Lot in the
second of Peter 2.8. He vexed his righteous son^ from day to day with their
unlawful deeds. An^ then lastly, where true repentance is wrought it will work
a holy change in the soul; an^ whereas sin was formerly delighted in, the true
Penitent has it in indignation; they will not only turn sin out of doors, but
also are ready to cut it in pieces as it were: true penitents have a feeling on
their hearts for sin, (...) will loath themselves for the evil of their ways. It
is a hard thing for a man to loath himself, every man naturally loves himself,
but true penitents loath and abhor themselves, as Job did. A repentant eye sees
matter enough in himself of self-abhorrency: Repentance lets us see what black
desiled creatures we are by nature, Ezekiel. 20.43. You shall remember your ways,
(says the Lord) and shall loath your selves in your own sight. And so much for
the Evidences of repentance.

Is it so then, that repentance is so absolutely necessary to salvation, an
that there is a great danger in putting it off from day to day; and that a sick
bed repentance is no repentance, or at most but a sickly Repentance, how highly
then does it concern every one of us, even to day, while it is called to day,
to begin our repentance, and not only to begin, but to persevere in it to the
end of our days: Let the time past of our lives suffice us to have wrought our
own wills, and to have walked in our own ways, and ley us resolve for the time
to come to live unto God, and be not weary, for in due season thou shall reap
if thou faint not. Make repentance thy daily work, that so thy peace may be
made with God, and when thou come to dye, thou may have nothing else to do
but to dye. He that labors not to kill sin by repentance in his life, will be
very unfit to die when death comes, death is only welcome to a gracious
penitent soul; they are not fit to die, in whom sin is not killed by
Repentance; they have done nothing of that work which God sent them into the
world to do, that have not repented: repentance sweetens our lives, and takes
away the bitterness of death, and only to penitent sinners is mercy promised.
Consider there is an absolute necessity of repentance, we cannot be saved
unless we repent; Except ye repent (says Christ) ye shall all likewise perish,
Luke 13.3. Consider also thy life is but short: thou have but a little time to
live in the world, thou have need to bestir thy self then, and to husband thy
time to the best advantage thy soul; thy precious and immortal soul w^ be in
danger of hell fire, if thou repent not: no repentance, no salvation; and if
thou do not repent thee here of thy sins, thou will surly to thy cost repent
thee hereafter in hell f^^ the neglect of repentance; thou will then cur^ the
day wherein thou did despise repentanc^ then if there be any love in thee to
thy precio^^ soul, whatever thou do, repent. Consid^^ also the end, for
which Christ came into t^^ world: Mat. 9.13. I came (says Christ) to c^^
sinners to repentance. Be zealous therefore an repent, and as John says, Mat.
3.8. Let us a labor to bring forth fruits meet for repentanc^ Now the Lord
work these truths upon you hearts, and the Lord give every one of us repentance
unto life, repentance never to be repented of: Which the Lord of hi infinite
mercy grant unto us all. To whom be glo^^ and honor for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
A short Motive to Repentance.
THe Glass does run, the Clock does go,
Awake from sin, why sleep you so:
In sin sleep not securely still,
Lest thou by sin thy soul do kill:
While thou have time do not delay,
Defer not off from day to day;
Thou art not sure to tarry here,
No not one quarter of a year;
No not one week, nor yet one day,
One hour thou art not sure to stay;
Thou have not space in thine own power,
To live one minute of an hour:
The present time see then thou take,
Thy peace with God in Christ to make.
Keep Faith and true Repentance still,
And then ley Death come when it will.
Thou art prepared for to dye;
And thou shall live eternally.
FINIS.
Courteous Reader,
There is lately published an excellent an^ profitable Sermon, called, The
Christian blessed Choice. Likewise Christ's first Sermon. Als^ Christ's last
Sermon. And the Christians best Garment. Also Heavens Glory, and Hells Horro^^
And the School of Grace. Also, Awarning-piec^ to the Sloathful, Idle, Careless,
Drunken, and Secure Ones of these last and worst of times. Ver^ godly Books,
and are but three pence price.

Likewise, 1. Englands Faithful Physician. 2. Doomsday at hand. 3. The
dreadful character of a drunkard. 4. The Fathers last Blessing to his children.
5. The sin of Pride arraigned and condemned 6. The Plain Man's Plain Pathway to
Heaven 7. The Black Book of Conscience. 8. Peter's Sermon of Repentance. 9. The
Charitable Christian. 10. Death Triumphant.


All very necessary for these licentious times, and each of them being but of
two pence price. They are to be sold by Elizabeth Andrews, at the White Lion
near Pye-Corner.


