A DECLARATION OF Maj. Genesis Harrison Prisoner in the Tower of LONDON: WITH His
Rules and Precepts, to all Public Churches, and Private Congregations: And an
ANSWER thereunto;

Also, the Resolution of the Fifth-Monarchy-Men, Anabaptists, Quakers, and
others.

London, Printed for Nathaniel Tomkins, 1660.

A DECLARATION OF Major General HARRISON, Now Prisoner in the Tower of LONDON.
SInce the committing of Major General Harrison to the Tower of London, diverse
of his Friends and Relations have had a Conference with him, touching the
Grounds and Motives of his Actings: To which he declared, That he was thoroughly
convinced of the Justness of the Cause he first engaged in; That he esteemed
reading of the Word of God an Ordinance of God both in private and public, but
did not account reading to be preaching; That he esteemed that preaching best,
wherein was most of God, least of man, when vain flourishes of wit and words
were declined, and the demonstration of Gods Spirit and Power studied; yet
could he distinguish between purest plainness, and negligent rudeness: That he
accounted perspicuity the best grace of a Preacher, and that method best which
was most helpful to Understandin^, Affection, and Memory: That he esteemed the
Lords Day a Divine Ordinance, and rest on it necessary so far as conduced to
Holiness: That he was very conscientious in observance of that Day as the Mart
day of the Soul; That he was very careful to remember it, to get house and
heart in order for it, and when it came he was studious to improve it; That he
redeemed the morning from superfluous sleep, and watched the whole day over his
thoughts and words not only to restrain them from wickedness, but wordlyness.
And that all parts of the day were alike holy to him, and his care was coninued
in it in variety of holy Duties: what he heard in public, he repeated in
private, to whet it upon himself and Family: Which Rules and Precepts, he
desired to be made practicable throughout all public and private
Congregations, for the enlightening the dark Corners of the Earth, etc.

A Gentleman standing by, being transported with sundry Reflections, replied as
follows:

Sir, I might with reason believe that first election of the Party wherein you
stood engaged, proceeded from inexperience and the mistake of your Zeal; not to
say from your compliances to the passions of others; because I know how
obsequious you have always showed your self in several Actions, especially in
your former Obedience to the Commands of a Monstrous Tyrant and Rebellious
Usurper.

But, upon discovery of the Impostures which perverted them, and the signal
Indignation of God, upon the several Periods which your eyes has lately
beheld, of the bloodiest Tyrannies, and most prodigious Oppressors that ever
any Age in the World produced. To put the Balance (therefore) into the hands
of every Rational Englishman, to poise the State of this Kingdom, which
through the unexampled distraction and confusion of a most sordid and horrid
Rebellion, was an unsufferable weight to be born by any Man, who could make
Title to Understanding; To hear with silence, people pretending to Religion,
and to nothing else; crying up against Reason, a Reformation, in which
themselves are (however in themselves insensibly) to the stranger standers by
visibly ruined. Provoked therefore by compassion to my Country, I shall
endeavor to convince the Opiniators of a Reformation, by putting yesterday and
to day, this and the end of a preceding Septenarie in the Balance. And
therefore invite such who are in any capacity of being advised, to a
retrospection, so far as the year, 1639. Where they may, if they look not
through State-Spectacles, see a King selected, whose Royal, or Christian
Reputation, Fame dared not; could not, with so much as whisper, ^^lley; Rich in
the accumulate Hearts of a Numerous and Loyal People; and a Court in which
(himself being President) the Men and Manners completed an Academie. They may
see a Church full of Light, Order and Discipline, having a form beautiful, and
an inside garnisht, and enricht with as much (not to swell the comparison)
Learning and Piety, as Observation or Story can attribute to any since
Christianity was a Profession. Those then inconsiderable few Opposers, or
interrupters of its Peace and Government, being persons of as obscure mark, as
of clandestine and mycheing motion, skulking like young Foxes, and no sooner
unkenel'd, but as Vermin pursued, the general Odium being contracted upon
them: They may see a Nobility, Lustrous, like Mirrours by the Suns, their
Princes, reflex in the badges of their Honor and Office, a flourishing Gentry,
plentifully sharing Dignities, and Trusts in the Military and Civil Magistracy.
But behold the Scean is again changed, blessed be God; and these
State-Mountebanks, that formerly served and raised up themselves to that pitch
and Investiture, are blown away; and these Puppets of policy are also taken in
the same Nets and Gyns that they laid for others. When I seriously reflect upon
all this, I cannot but detect them in their procedure, and deplore the sadness
of their condition. For, since you are apt to recriminate, and boast the
Justness of your Cause, let us go back to the source, and search the very
principles; and then see, if ever any Cause had like success indeed. First
then, be pleased to look North-wards upon the Scots, who made Reformation their
pretense, to gratify their own Avarice, introduce themselves, and a more then
Babylonish Tyranny, imposing upon the Church and State, beyond all example. I
say, look upon what they have gotten by deceiving their Brethren, selling their
King, betraying his Son, and by all their perfidie; but a slavery more then
Egyptian, and an Infamy as unparalled, as their Treason and Ingratitude. Look
nearer home, and tell me if there be a person of them left, that can show me
his prize, unless it be that of Sacrilege, which he or his Nephews must
certainly vomit up again. O the perpetrated Actions of these Sons of Thunder!
What has been spawned under their Atheistical Government, is beyond all
comparison: Under the Sun was never such things heard of: Yet those that died
by the sword, fell in the bed of honor; their Religion and their Loyalty will
be renowned in the History of Ages, when the Names of Traitors will rot with
their Carcasses, a^ dung upon the face of the Earth.

To proceed to the essential Parts of our gracious Sovereign, this beyond
comparison is observable: 1. If we consider him in the Natural Endowments of
his Mind, those his most Transcendently Symmetrical Organs are full stretched,
with the internal gifts, and most accomplishing graces of a serene Soul: Of a
most piercing Apprehension, nimble Wit, but sound Judgment: Of so constant a
Reservedness and Majestique gravity, it is questionable whether he can be angry
or pleased, grieved or rejoiced, so far as to betray his Sensations to every
Beholder; so merciful and kind in his very Severities, and so severe in his
Kindnesses, that his greatest Enemies become his greatest Friends, and his
Friends can never be otherwise, but by the envy of his Virtues, and winning
Sweetness; So moderate, He pleads for his cruellest Adversaries, and so tender
a Father to his unnatural Subjects, He pities (not inveighs against) their
miscarriages: Of a constant Resolution, and undanted Courage, none more
valiant, none more merciful; none more Amiable, none more Chaste and Temperate,
and withal so Religiously Devout, and so Piously Constant in all Divine
Worships and Services, that He may truly be called a good Churchman, as well
as a good King.

But least I lose my self in so large a field, give me leave from this sweet
Subject to come to his Education, where you may expect I should bewail the
averseness of his Stars, and those Disastrous Times, and Tempestuous Seas, and
Avious Deserts, he was forced to trace the Muses in. But we find no want in
him, either of a strict and constant Tutorage, the Nurse of Art, the Converse
of a Flourishing and Glorious Court; yea, we cannot but see that those
Providence which to others would become the greatest disadvantages, have been
to this most Excellent Person the highest Improvements.

In a word, Those ingenuous and candid Principles connaturall to Him are so
approved by his Afflictions, the experience of the inconstancy of this
Transitory World, those true sparks of Religion and pure Conscience which seem
to flame in him, and the sweet content his Majesty took in his innocent
Retirement, that he could seem to project nothing in his return to England, but
the saving his unnatural Children from that inevitable ruin and misery they
would have brought upon themselves and the Three Kingdoms, had they gone on in
their disobedience: Nay, often has his Majesty been heard to say, No
Enormities could or should disoblige him from that Fatherly tenderness to his
Contrymen and Subjects, would they but return to their duty, and that he saw
no reason any Sect whatsoever should be disowned by him (as such) more than a
deformed Child by a Natural Father; since it is in the power of God alone to
reform the Conscience.

To conclude, so affectionately does many of these Sects with Loyalty submit
under the influence of so good a Prince, That diverse of the People called
Quakers, Anabaptists, Fifth-Monarchy Men, and Levellers, Do wish from their
hearts, that our gracious Sovereign may be, and the Kingdoms by Him, more happy
than any; and that the true ends of Government may be had and communicated
fully; that every honest Heart may have cause to rejoice in GOD, the KING, and
their LAWS. Resolving, (through Grace) to rest quiet and content under God's
Vicegerent, and to let the King of Kings alone with ruling the World, to whose
Wisdom and Power all Creatures ought to submit.

And further they have declared, That they will be passive under Authority,
rather than impatient; to procure the quiet and peace of the Nation to their
utmost; to mind things invisible, and of a better consistence then these below,
and to pray for the happiness and welfare of his Majesty, and the rest of the
Royal Issue, Whom God long preserve.

FINIS.

