Harry Hangman's Honor: OR, Gloucester-shire Hangman's Request TO THE Smoakers
or Tobacconists in LONDON.
Gentlemen,
YOu that trade in that Weed called Herba Exotica, Herba Nicotiana, Petum, but
commonly called TOBACCO, and by your Profession are called Smoakers, or
Tobacconists; give me leave to address my self unto you, and make my Grievances
known; forasmuch as I understand, that the very same thing which offends me, is
also very offensive unto you: and I shall gladly assist you to the present
Power, for a redress of those our Grievances.

But take it not ill at my hands, that I should offer to associate my self with
you: for I shall prove my Place and Calling to be far before and beyond yours,
for 1. Antiquity, 2. Dignity, 3. Integrity, 4. Innocence, 5. Utility, 6.
Necessity, 7. Piety, 8. Civility.


1. For Antiquity; I shall be able to prove, that there was a Hangman in
Gloucester-shire, before there was any Smoaker or Tobacconist in London: and I
doubt not but I shall produce a Coat of Arms, not from William the Norman
Conqueror, Dane or Saxon; but from Julius Caesar, 1600 years since, who brought
the Romans first into this Nation: and with them came in this death which I
inflict upon offenders.

2. For Dignity, My place is above the Judges; and if above the Judges, much
more above yours. That it is above the Judges, I Will prove it: for although the
Felon or Murderer be apprehended, by the Justice of Peace committed, by persons
concerned prosecuted, by the Clerk of the Assizes arraigned, by the Jury
convicted, by the Judge condemned; yet Execution (which is the life of the Law)
lies in my hands. Finis coronat opus: in all Trades, he that finisheth the
work, is commonly reputed the better workman. And this I can speak with
confidence, to the comfort of my soul, I am as much honored in the hearts of
the people, as any Sequestrator or Excise-man in the Commonwealth of England.

3. For Integrity, My place is far before you: ye use mixture and composition,
compounding English with Virginia, Virginia with Spanish: I deal in honest
plain simple Hemp; and never promise a man a good turn, but commonly I make
good my word. And indeed, I work above-board, and above ground, heartily and
clearly, by virtue of no Hocus Pocus at all, or using fraud or deceit, cheating
the State, whose servant I am. And to speak truth, it behooves me so to carry my
self; for the eyes of the Congregation are more fixed upon me and my actions,
then they are upon the Preacher in the public Assemblies: neither do they
sleep in my Congregation, although they sit up all night, or although it be at
a Summer-Size. There is one Calling which indeed seems to aspire near my
Calling; that is the Tailor; but that has not been originally so: for anciently
the Tailor sat upon the ground at work, until a great Sow came into the Room,
and caught a little Tailor up in his mouth, and ran away with him; since which
time, the Tailor got upon the board to work; and the rumout thereof, struck
such a terror and amazement to the Tailors in London, that ever since they work
in Garrets on the top of the houses.

4. For Innocence, Likewise I am before you: ye consume either Wax, Tallow,
Waste-paper, or Fire; I consume neither, for I do my work by daylight: I go to
work after the Sun is up, and leave work before the Sun is down.

4. For Utility, I am more profitable then you: I take off ill members, as the
Poet long since said, Sed immedicabile vulnus fune recidendum est, ne pars
sincera trabatur: and herein I go beyond your Barber-Surgeons; Barber-Surgeons
take off corrupt members from the natural body, but withal, dull the edge of
the instrument, and put the body to the sense of pain; but I am so much an
Artist, I never dull the edge of the instrument, or put the body politic to
any sense of pain at all. I go beyond Physicians too; Physicians, some, are
good at one disease; some, at other diseases: but I make a perfect cure of all
diseases in my Patients at once, and that with one Medicine.

6. For Necessity, Likewise I am far before you: There is a necessity of my
Calling, there is none of yours; neither you nor any man else could properly
call any thing his own, that now he does enjoy, were it not for my Trade; nay,
ye might look to have your throats cut in your beds.

7. And for Piety, which is the principal thing, I exceedingly surpass you. It
may be said of Tobacco, as sometime Tarlton said of Oysters, That they were
ungrateful meat, because they were always eaten before grace; and so it may be
said of you, and of your Customers or Friends, when you take Tobacco, you use
no devotion at all; but now when I go to work, there is a great deal of
devotion used; many times singing of Psalms, saying of Prayers, strong
Ejaculations, and liftings up of the heart; and I think my Congregation is the
freest Congregation in England from Hypocrisy: and to tell you the truth, I am
a Preacher too, although my voice be low, that it cannot be heard; yet I preach
by my works and actions, but all legal Sermons, threatening nothing but death
and mortality to the creature, judgment without mercy; yet some crumbs of small
comfort I afford them, for I cheer them up by the chin, and make them see the
heavens through a hole in a three-penny halter, not opening a wider gap, or
proclaiming more liberty then anciently has been, thereby destroying
Fundamentals, because indeed I took the Covenant or protestation, wherein I did
protest against all innovations, and I stand to my first principles; howsoever
some flexible tender spirits can take Protestations and Engagements every week,
and every Engagement blowing in the face of each other; nay, although they be
as long as the Crest in my Coat of Arms, I mean, the Gallows beam: and I much
have scorned the baseness of those Parsons that have taken the Covenant because
they would get other men's livings, and took the Engagement because they would
keep them. And indeed ye might call my Sermons Funeral Sermons if you please,
but that I scorn to daub and flatter, and send men to heaven in halters, as
some Preachers do in coffins, for ten or twenty shillings, a mourning gown or
cloak; and I might have the upmost place at the Funeral-Table, but that when I
come to make application of the point, I cannot speak a word of commendation
concerning the party deceasing, or a word of consolation to any of their
friends, who are spectators, and my hearers. I am above Preachers too:
Preachers preach, that a man cannot attain unto happiness by natural will; I
show, and am able to teach, how men may be brought unto those high seize
under my dispensation by the freedom of a natural will, without grace
supernatural or restringent, (only in a string;) and yet many that live above
themselves, come up to me and die above-ground, and many that live below
Ordinances are brought up to be acted under my administrations, and turn
Quakers before they die.

8. For Civility, I am to be preferred much before you: yea if a Customer or
Friend come to you, ye say, Sir, will ye be pleased to take or taste a pipe of
good Tobacco? here is that which is good, come, here is a sort I can commend unto
you, London affords not a better sort, then I can show you; come, take one pipe
more, it is but such a hour of the day, or such an hour of the night; and thus
ye idle out your precious time: but now, as dearest friends must part, so do
we, but always in due time; and I have a privilege before any Calling in the
Commonwealth of England, I have the remission of the greatest action of
unkindeness, that one man can possibly express to another, before it is
committed; for I take him by the hand that comes to be acted by me, and say
unto him, Wilt forgive me? Yea, says he, with all my heart; and as soon as he
has said thus, I turn aside the ladder and take away his life. And yet the
greatest gallant that ever fought a Duel upon Callice-sands, never comes off
with so much honor and credit as I do; for he, if he kill his adversary, as he
besmears his sword with blood, so he besmuts his soul for ever with the guilt
thereof, unless wiped off by a more precious: and it must be murder or
manslaughter at the best; but I do my work so artificially, I never shed one
drop of blood, it is neither murder, nor manslaughter, but an act of justice;
and herein I come off more a Gentleman, then the best of them.

By this time, Gentlemen, I hope you will admit of my Society, and accept of my
assistance in the prosecution of the design for the remedy of those our
grievances.

And now, Gentlemen, I cannot but tell you, it has been a sad thing to my
spirit, to see some of you written Esquires, most or all of you called
Gentlemen, and I all this while but plain Harry Hangman.

The truth is, Gentlemen, the very planting of Tobacco has proved the decay of
my Trade: for since it has been planted in Gloucester-shire, especially at
Winchcomb, my trade has proved nothing worth. It Is well known, that for
several Assizes at Gloucester I have had but three suits of clothes at a Size,
and at some Assizes no suit of clothes at all; only by great luck and good
fortune, I had four this year. Is it not a sad thing, when a man's wife shall
meet him coming from work, and shall ask, O husband, what trade at Gloucester
to year? and when I have told her, But only three suits of clothes, and very
little money; she has said to me, Husband, if this trade hold, we may go hang
our selves; and were it not but only for the credit of being a States officer,
you should never follow the trade more.

It Is well known, that heretofore I was used to keep Deerhurst-Fayre, a place
in Gloucester-shire famous for three things; old Clothes, Lice, and shitten
Styles.

1. For old Clothes, because the comers thereunto wanted money to buy new.

2. For Lice, they have been so proper, goodly, fat and tall, that a Louse from
that Fair, according to his proportion and stature, has carried as much
Tallow as an Ox that comes within Smithfieldbars; and, that he has marched
about the Table carrying a half crown upon his shoulders, only for his
recreation sake, they that have seen it can speak it by experience.

3. Famous for shitten Styles, and that is conceived to be done out of
State Policy, to preserve the place from any infection, or contagion that might
be left there, by means of clothes coming from diseased parts and places; for
take a fresh stool from a sweet proper beautiful Lady or Gentlewoman, aged
forty years, being wrapped up in a sweet, clean linen Handkerchief, and applied
unto the Nose, it is an excellent Antidote against the Plague; the juice
whereof being strained into a dish, dipping a liquorish stick into the same,
and anointing the lips and teeth therewith, and chewing the same, cures the
Toothache, kills the Cankers, and is good for the Cough of the Lungs, and is
as good in the judgment of the learned Physician, as a receipt taken from a
cheating Mountebank upon a Stage; and had it but one operation more with it, to
preserve the Father of lies from lying between the lips of men, it were the
most precious Medicine in the World. They that have tried it, can set a
probatum upon it.

This Deerhurst-Fayre I have kept many years, at both Fayrs, and with eight,
ten, twelve suits of Clothes at a Fair, and some of the same Clothes that I
sold there, at one Fair, were brought to me at the next Assizes; then Trading
was something worth, then 'twas a merry World with me: for indeed before
Tobacco was there planted, there being no kind of Trade to employ men, and
very small Tillage, necessity compelled poor men to stand my Friends, by
stealing of sheep, and other Cattle, breaking of Hedges, robbing of Orchards,
and what not? insomuch, that the place became famous for Rognes, as 'twas taken
up in a Proverb by many that stood on the top of Breedon-hill viewing the
Country, would say, Yonder is rich Worcester, brave Gloucester, proud
Tewksbury, beggarly Evesham, drunken Pershore, and roguish Winchcombe. And
Bridewel was erected there, to be a terror to idle persons; but since Tobacco
was planted there, Bridewel marched away in discontent to Gloucester, thinking
to find some idle persons among the Soldiers; but when it came there, it
found none of the Soldiers idle, some slept on their Beds, others slept on the
Guard; some playing at Ball, others playing at Skittles: thereupon the Country
having bestowed six hundred pounds to put a suit of Clothes on Bridewel's back,
they had none to put into it, but the Keeper and his Wife; I dare not say, The
Country were cheated of one half of the money; and if there be no toleration
given to them, they must either beg, famish or steal; they have lived
handsomely by their labor, and now they are loath to go a begging: famish they
will not, for hunger will break stone walls, that is burglary; and if they go to
steal in the fields, they will be quickly brought over to me. Gentlemen, we may
be instrumental to do each other good; you may serve me, and I shall be glad to
serve you in any office that falls within the power of your poor Servant,

Harry Hangman.

The DISCOURSE between the Hangman and his Wife.
Wife. HUsband, did not I tell you at the beginning of the troubles, when you
see the Kingdom run mad, and so many thousands run to cut each others throats,
and one neighbor ready to hang another, could you imagine, that ever your
Trade would be good again? I may well say, they were mad, when so many
thousands lost their precious lives, and to this day know not what they fought
for, more then for their pay.


Husb. Yes, Wife, I Will tell thee what they fought for; The Liberty of the
Subject, and the Privileges of Parliament.


Wife. The liberty of the Subject, and privileges of Parliament! but where is
it?


Husb. Speak one word more of that, I Will lace your Coat with the best halter I
have.


Wife. What need you to be so angry, Husband? I thought it had been nothing but
paper, because I was wont to see men hold papers before their eyes, and say,
Liberty of Subject, and privileges of Parliament: and truly I thought, that
the same accident had befallen it, as befell the Engagement which the poor man
went to Eveshome to take, and bringing it home in his pocket with some crumbs of
bread and cheese, laying it upon a stool by the fireside, the hungry dog, that
profane car, eat both crumbs of bread and cheese and Engagement together;
insomuch, that the poor man and his wife could willingly have hanged the dog,
but only for fear of bringing themselves into trouble, for hanging the dog and
the Engagement together.


Husb. No, Wife, I partly understand my self, as well as another man does, I Will
tell thee what the liberty of the Subject and the privileges of Parliament
were; they were two Ceremonies setting forth these things: 1. The liberty of
the Subject was a type and figure of that licentiousness that some men should
assume unto themselves in these days of reformation, to live as they list, and
others to do what they please. 2. By privileges of Parliament, were lively and
notably shaddowed forth, those many excellent, good and precious things which
some men have attained unto in these times, by seeking themselves; and now the
substance being come, the Ceremonies must needs be abolished.


Wife. Ah, Husband, I might have gone to Church long enough to a Preacher,
before I should have heard any such matter.


Husb. I think so too, for Preachers are not the best Interpreters of these
things; old Parliamentmen and Officers of the State give the plainest
explanation of this truth; and we see it by experience, and experimental
knowledge is the best: and it is as clear to me, as the Gallows at Summer Sizes.


Wife. But, Husband, what is all this to us? you had been better have been
ruled by me, and followed my counsel. Did not I persuade you to leave your
Calling, when Trading grew dead, and turn Excise-man? though it were a Place
below you, there were some honest men of the Trade; and at the beginning when
it was first set up, you might have got the grace of forgetfulness, and kept
money in your hands, and you could have but paid for it at last, if it had been
called for. O no, not you, that would be a disparagement unto your reputation.


2. I persuaded you to turn Sequestrator: O no, not you forsooth, you were the
man to whom the Judges were so much beholding, for turning their promises into
performances, (they indeed, as you then could tell me, could say) Thou shall go
to the place from whence thou came, and thence to the place of execution; but
without you, what should he do there? and thus your ambition and confidence in
the Judges favor, could more take with you, then any persuasion of mine.

Had you turned Sequestrator, you might have informed against a man, or
procured others to have informed: provided always, it had been such a man that
had some considerable estate, and then you could not ordinarily have wanted
witnesses upon some considerations to prove his malignancy: then besides the
salary, having seized his goods, you might have prized it at a low rate,
compounding with him upon condition he should give you ten or twenty pounds,
according to the proportion of his goods and stock; and if he would not rent
his Land himself, you might have set it to his loving neighbors, and then you
might have terrified other Farmers and Yeomen in the Country, telling them,
That they sent Money, Horse, Arms, Plate into the King's Quarters, or you were
raising money at such a time and place, and then rather then they would be
brought upon the stage, they would have given you ten or twenty pounds to hold
your peace: not you, your honor lay in the way. Ah, hang this honor!

Then I persuaded you to obtain friends to be a Committeeman in the Country. Oh
not you! though you had not the same regard, yet you had the same guard as the
Judges had. I gave you all the encouragement I could, and told you what good
opinion the Country had of you, which was, that you had as good a face and as
honest a face as some of them: then you might have set Delinquents estates
worth two or three thousand pounds a year, for two or three hundred: six
hundred for one hundred and fifty pounds, and got money of the owners of the
lands, to set them good bargains, and so cheated on both sides.

And when you had received four or five hundred pounds into your hands, you
might have paid it to the Captains and Lieutenants the one half, upon condition
you should keep the other.

I persuaded you to stand up for a Captain's place: not you, your valor had
been so great, that you had showen your face where the best of the^ would be
ashamed to show theirs. Then you might have made false musters, when false
musters were in fashion; you might have mustered ten, sixteen, twenty, thirty
men in a day more then you had, or by making one man answer to two or three
names, and then bought your Soldiers Debenters, at 3s 4d the pound, or
thereabouts; and then away to Gurney-house, Worcester-house, and got Bishoys,
Deans and Chapters lands, Kings lands, Kings rents, and the like: and then to
that you pleaded tenderness, forsooth, 'twas against the hair, and it would
bring a curse upon what was well gotten. O that you had been at Hereford, when
that City was plundered, when the Country and City in a short time sustained
the loss of 300000 l. had you had a command then, especially of Horse; and
likewise at Worcester, when that was taken, how bravely did that set up many
Soldiers and other Tradesmen, who had brave bargains to increase their stocks?

And then I persuaded you to turn Gullector for the years 44 and 45. for
British money as 'twas then kirsned, when its thought there was a general cheat
over the whole Nation: an instance may very well be given by our County, and
County of the City, when the tax laid upon them for two years, amounted unto
thirteen thousand nine hundred seventy pound, or thereabout, and not 40 l. left
in arrear, and but 8000 l. brought into the treasury, as acknowledged by the
Treasurer; and your Secretary can speak something to that business, who was
part of the time employed in the service, by way of receiving.

Husb. Call him hither.


Wife. Ah poor man! he is not, neither has been well, ever since the last
Assizes: for as he said, He waited upon you then, and saw you execute two poor
men, one for picking of a pocket of 12 s. and another for picking of a pocket
of 30 s. when there are many, and some of them great ones too, that have picked
the pockets of thousands cum privilegio, with a face of authority, and nothing
as yet said to them: but here he comes, let him speak for himself.


Secr. Sir, what my Mistress has said, is true; and this I can say, That I
went thrice to London to make a discovery of the same, not so much for
conscience, as for that I had an old public spirit, and was willing to do good
to my self, and the Commonwealth too, hoping to have something for the
discovery; but purse and patience being spent, I returned as wise as I went.


Husb. But prithee, Wife, tell me, with what face could I gather contribution
from others, when I my self pay none? our Calling being freed from it: And it is
upon this account, because there is an Ordinance which exempts Hospitals and
Schools; and upon the matter, I am a Schoolmaster, for I read moral
Philosophy, and teach men good manners, as it is written in the Primer, To keep
their hands from picking and stealing: and when my Scholars will not receive
admonition, then all the correction I give, is to tie them to the good
behavior.


Wife. I Will tell ye what course you shall take; go and solicit causes for
Ministers before the Commissioners for approbation; there is a friend and a
neighbor of ours has got a great deal of money there, who has been able to
pass and repass men; yea, able to detain men from Augmentations and Parsonages,
who are reputed able men, and help very able Dunces to pass by; and his word
has been taken, before a Certificate signed by the Mayor and Aldermen of our
City: which has caused the Commissioners to be as much admired for their
simplicity, as approved of by others for their known integrity.


Husb. I am not a Scholar.


Wife. You are more a Scholar then he is; for it is known that he can neither
write nor read, and you have your Neck-verse.


Husb. Truly, Wife, I have heard the Gentleman much commended for a great
Scholar, and that he far surpasses Sir Oliver Fleming the Lord Protector's
Interpreter; for he is able to read Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Italian, Syriack,
Arabic, Chaldee, and all other Tongues and Languages expressed in Weem's book of
Antiquities, the names of the Tongues and Languages taking up a leaf in quarto:
and all these he can read as well as English, which is the main thing that
brings him in that great esteem with the Commissioners.


Wife. That Is but a jest put upon him, because he cannot read English.


Husb. Is that it? But I know little in matters of Religion.


Wife. No matter for that, a little Religion will serve turn; get but a form of
words, that will do; learn the language of the honest Officers of the Army, and
ingratiate your self with the Gentlemen in private, and tell them, Such a man
is a gadly man, deriving the word from Gad, the brother of Many-asses, as some
of them are; tell them, that such a man is honest in the main, etc. but be sure
to arm your self with confidence, and a good portion of impudence, that will
stand in great stead: and lest Mr. Marston should print you for a Bribe-taker,
Broker, and Forger of hands, help him to a living, and stop his mouth. But make
haste, for the Commissioners are but of humane institution, and down they will
and must.


Husb. Thou have told me of many undertakings: if such things should fall out
again, how should I do by Conscience?


Wife. I am ashamed to hear you speak, a man of such a trade as you have; I Will
tell thee, Harry, put a threepenny halter in thy pocket, and wherever thou
meetest him, hang him: but put that edge-tool out of thy pocket again; for if
the devil and a bad conscience meet together. they may do you a shrewd turn;
but fear him soundly with a hot-iron, and then he will never trouble you until
the hour of death; and when you find your self begin to be sick, then hang
your self. But further, there are a sort of very knowing me^ who are of
opinion, that there is nothing sin, but what a man apprehends to be sin; no day
of judgment, unless a man apprehend that there is a day of judgment, and no
hell hereafter: and get to be of Pythagoras opinion, (of which some are at this
day) who held the transmigration of the Soul, that when it goes out of one
body. it enters into another: get acquaintance with such persons, learn and
believe these things; and then, when the Soul departs out of this body of
yours, it enters into another, and there let it shift for it self as well as it
can, we shall live happily in the mean season.


Husb. Secretary, I am a little proud of thy service, because thou have served
the State, and art now come to serve me; I do promise at the next Assizes thou
shall have the ends of all the halters, and peradventure a whole one may fall
to thy share.


Secr. That Is more then I desire.


Husb. But not much more then thou deservest.


Secr. Keep your halters, Masters for if all great Thieves should come to the
Gallows, you may want halters before your die, and one to bless your self.


The Smoakers Answer your may expect.
FINIS.

