A DISCOURSE Showing, That the Spirit of PARLIAMENTS, With a COUNCIL in the
Intervals, Is not to be trusted for a Settlement: Lest it introduce MONARCHY,
AND Persecution for Conscience. By JAMES HARRINGTON.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Henry Fletcher, at the three gilt Cups near the
West End of Paul's. 1659.

A DISCOURSE, etc.
THe present case considered, I need say no more, then, If there be no Bar, a
Parliament may consist wholly, or in the greater part, of Presbyterians or
Royalists; and if there be a Bar, it is no Government by Parliaments, but by
the Bar that is upon them; which must be of greater danger. But the House of
Commons, as has been hitherto usual in England, consisted of about four
hundred Deputies of the People, for the most part Gentlemen, and old Stagers,
elected again and again unto the same employment, without vacation; this is
that which being sweet in the stomach of diverse, is the old love for which they
detest new forms. Such an Assembly, for the number and nature of their
elections, is somewhat too low and too large to come up unto the true interest
of a King, and too high and too narrow to descend wholly unto the true interest
of the People; they have anciently provided diligently that they might hawk and
hunt without impediment of the King, and of the lower sort, to whom it was
almost capital to spoil their game: and though this may seem but a jesting
instance, yet have the rest of their Laws, for their pitch, been much of the
middle way, or of the like Genius, while they were under a Nobility; but since,
through the natural decay of that order, they came to a greater height, it has
been to endure no check. Wherefore, as it has been found under a King, that
such an Assembly will endure no King, through the check they apprehend from
him: so it will be found that under a Commonwealth they will be addicted unto
the introduction of Monarchy, through the check they apprehend from the people.

Certain it is, that an alteration of Government going no farther then the
institution of Parliaments, and a Council in the Intervals, can come to no more
then that, so often as the Council shall be changed for a King, or the King for
a Council, so often the Commonwealth (if this deserve any such name) must be
changed into Monarchy, and the Monarchy into a Commonwealth; which changes may
be made with such ease and suddenness, that every night it may be a cast of a
Dye, what the Government shall be the next morning. Where the alteration (I
say) of the Government is no greater then from a Kings Chair, to a narrow Bench
of Counselors; there goes no more to make a Single Person, then throwing
down the Bench, and setting up the Chair; nor to make a Commonwealth (such an
one as it is) then throwing down the Chair, and setttng up the Bench. But for
the farther discovery of such Causes, as in so strange and unheard of
innovation may give frequent or continual mutations, if this posture of things
be upheld (as I cannot see how otherwise it should stand) by an Army, Let us
consider three things.

First, What is incident unto such an Army.

Secondly, What is incident unto such a Council.

And thirdly, What is incident unto such a Parliament.

It is incident unto such an Army, let the body thereof be never so popularly
affected, to be under a Monarchical Administration, or to be top-heavy in their
great Officers, which will have power, whether they will or no, to oversway
both the Army and the Government; as in the setting up of the late Single
person: Again, if the body of the Army mutiny against the Government, neither
their great Officers, nor any thing else in the Parliament or Council, can
withstand them; as in the pulling down of the latter Single Person: whence it
is evident that such an Army can be no foundation of any Settlement.

A Council in the Intervals, though it should rule well, will yet have a
tendency toward preservation or prolongation of it self; and if it rule ill,
will be obnoxious unto Parliaments: for which cause, what help for themselves
shall be in their power, is to be presumed, will be in their will: and they
have the same power which the King had, or which is all one, are in as
effectual a posture to obstruct or elude the meeting of Parliaments; therefore
it will be in their will to do it: and if they will this, they reduce the
Government into Oligarchy, then into Faction, and last of all, into Confusion.

The people this while must unavoydably perceive this Council to consist of too
few to be Fellows, and of too many to be Masters: for which cause, being all
broken into Faction, some for a Commonwealth, and some for Monarchy,
Parliaments coming by gusts, whether with or against the will of the Council,
will either be torn with like Faction among themselves, or pull down the
Council as no Government, and endeavor some Settlement. Now if a Monarchy (as
most likely, because most obvious) be set up, it can be no settlement, because
it is quite contrary unto the Balance of the Nation; and so they mend nothing,
but make greater confusion: and a Commonwealth or Democracy consists of such
Orders and such Novelties in this Land, as will never be light upon by an
Assembly, nor credited by such as are unexperienced in the Art: so that this
Nation going thus far about, will come but unto that very point, where it now
stands at gaze, or to far greater confusion; for which there is no Remedy, save
only that they who are in power would lay aside all prejudice unto pretended
Novelties and innovations, or rather, not give themselves unto such Novelties
as tend unto confusion, (for such have been the late changes) but consider such
Antiquities as have been, and must be the Rule and Reason of a wise proceeding
in that, which by the Providence of God never was before, and yet is now come
to be the truth of their Case.

But if what has been hitherto shown, be the certain consequence of
Parliaments with a Council in the Intervals, as that it will be no setlement,
but a State now setting up, then pulling down Kings, or single Persons; it is
apparent that what introduces Monarchy, introduces suppression of civil
Liberty, and in that, of Liberty of Conscience. Wherefore certain it is, that
the Spirit of a Parliament with a Council in the Intervals, is not to be
trusted, lest it introduce Monarchy and suppression of Liberty; and in that, of
the Liberty of Conscience: nor the spirit of any Form whatsoever, but that
only of a Democracy or Free State, which is the same that through Novelties
introduced by God himself, is only practicable as a settlement in the present
case of this distracted Nation.

The true Form of a Democracy or Free State consists especially in this, That
as to Law-giving, the wisdom of the Nation propose, and the interest of the
Nation resolve. If this be possible in England, then is it impossible, that
there should be in England greater security unto Liberty, whether Civil or of
Conscience, which but for a new distinction is the same. Now that it is
possible and easily practicable to frame such standing Assemblies in England,
whereof the one shall contain the Wisdom, the other the Interest of the whole
Nation, has been long since evinced.

But men that go upon picking up Arguments against an House out of the rubbish,
and distinguish not between the people under the ruins of the Old Government,
and what they must needs be when raised into the proper structure of a New
Frame, will say, That the people have a general aversion from being built up
into any New Form at all. So has the Rubbish, and yet it may have good stones
and beams in it. They will say, that there is a general dis-affection, nay
hatred, thorowout the Counties, unto the Government; and that more now, then in
the time of the late Usurper. Which I easily believe, because the change of a
Person, with what loss soever, is yet a less Change then the change of a
Government: the former is a change from a thing that was known, to another that
is known; but the later must be a change from a thing that has been known in
this Nation, to a thing that was never known in this Nation. A man that
walks, treads with almost equal boldness his next step, if he see it,
though it be in the dirt: but let it be never so fair, if he see it not, he
stands stock-still. This is the present state of the people, and this effect in
the People is especially occasioned by their natural distrust of such Novelties
as they cannot penetrate or discover what they are. Nor is it an ill Pulse, the
case considered, in which it signifies no other then their constancy and dear
affection unto their Old Laws and ways, how unfit soever they be now become.
Wherefore, so soon as you have fitted them better, none of this will be against
you, but all for you. It is certain, that a people under proper Orders, is the
least Effeminate, and most Manly Government in the world. But such an one as
has no experience or knowledge in these, has a frowardness, that is
altogether childish: what they find uneasy, they tear off, and throw away; as
in the late War: but no sooner find the nakedness unto which by like means
they are brought, then being unable to cloth themselves, they fall into an
unmanly penitence, and betake themselves unto picking up of their Old
Trappings. If there be not men at the head of them, who by introduction of a
proper Form, can cloth their nakedness, and reduce their passion unto temper,
there is nothing to be expected, but darkness, desolation and horror.

Now if you be Saints, do good unto them that hate you, and would persecute
you. Now cast your bread upon the waters, and after many days, nay after a few
days, you shall find it.

That the People of this Land have an aversion from Novelties or Innovations,
that they are incapable of discourse or reasoning upon Government, that they do
not understand the true form of a Free and Equal Commonwealth, is no impediment
unto them, nor excuse unto wise and honest men, why they should not be
imbarqued.

As the Soul of Man being by the Wisdom of God imbarqued in Flesh, does all the
Functions of the Body, not that she understands it, but that she can work no
otherwise; so the Body of a People, by the wisdom of one Man, (if there be any
such Man, as having such power, can be so honest) or of a few Men (if there be
any so few, as having such power, can agree in such a matter) imbarqued in the
true Form of a Government, do all the Functions of the same, not that they
understand it; for how much understood they the late Monarchy, when it was in
the greatest vigor? but that through the necessity of the form, except it come
to be insufficient (as through the late decay of the Church and the Nobility)
they can work no otherwise then according unto the nature of it.

If the Form thus introduced be that of a Free and Equal Commonwealth, the
People not being able to work otherwise then according unto the nature of it,
can never introduce Monarchy, nor persecution for Conscience, because either of
these is contrary and destructive unto the nature of the Form.

That the former is so, I need not prove; and that the latter is so, is
obvious: for without invading Civil Liberty, there is no invasion of the
Liberty of Conscience; and by invading Civil Liberty, this Form is dissolved.
But some will say, Thrust the People into Innovations unto which they have so
great aversion? before they can be brought to understand them, and against
their consent? what a violation of Freedom! what a Difficulty! what an
Injustice!

But taking all this together; what less can be said to whatever the Parliament
shall next introduce? Or if you take them apart.

As to aversion, I have already spoken; it is not any malice in the People, but
their nature in this case, which being through mere want of acquaintance with
such things as they can no wise understand but by Trial, is not to be rectified
but by the introduction of such a Form as they finding far more worthy of their
holding, will by changing of the hand, but improve their more deserved
constancy.

As to the difficulty of introducing a new Form, of obtaining the Peoples
consent, and the violation that in faylure of the same may be made upon
Liberty, I say, that Elections, at diverse times, have already been diverse; that
in this there has been no violation of Liberty, nor difficulty in obtaining
the peoples consent: and such Elections as will necessarily introduce (...)
Form of a new Commonwealth, have no such difference in them from the former,
that they should not be as easily consented unto, and performed by the people;
and this done by ordaining the cause, they have ordained the effect, and so
introduced the new form by common and universal consent.

Lastly, If it be just that the people should have their Liberty, they will
soon find by this change, that they both have it, and know how to hold it:
which a People once finding, were never willing to part with: and in this
consists the strongest security against Monarchy, and for Liberty of
Conscience.

To conclude: This to our present Commonwealths-men, is dictated by universal
experience, and written by the best Politians, as their certain Doom.

If they introduce a well-ordered Commonwealth, they shall be safe while they
live, and famous when they are dead; and if they introduce not a well-ordered
Commonwealth, they shall be unsafe while they live, and infamous when they are
dead.

July 21. 1659.
CERTAIN MAXIMS Calculated unto the present State of ENGLAND.
WHere nothing is to be obtained by Reasoning, there every thing is referred to
Event; and so are these Maxims.

1. Where there is no public endowment of a Ministry, there can be no National
Religion.

2. Where there is no National Religion, there can neither be any Government,
nor any Liberty of Conscience.

3. Without Invasion there may be Tumult, but can be no Civil War in England.

4. Without a Civil War, there can be no Monarchy in England.

5. Where there is no Situation like that of Venice, there can be no lasting
Oligarchy.

6. A Commonwealth upon Intervals is against Nature.

7. Parliaments upon Intervals set up Kings or Tyrants.

8. Parliaments when they are salariated, will sit in harvest.

9. Caput Reipublicae est nosse Rempublicam. When the Orders of any one
Commonwealth that is or has been, are rightly understood by such as have the
power, England will be a Commonwealth.

10. If the narrowest Commonwealth require at least twice the root of the
largest Monarchy, and the English Monarchy were founded upon two Assemblies
containing six or seven hundred; then a Commonwealth in England, must be
founded upon Assemblies consisting of about thirteen hundred at the least.

11. If Justice be the common Interest, and the common Interest be Justice,
then private or partial interest, opposed unto the common, must be Injustice.

12. If the Laws of the people must needs go upon the common Interest, and the
Laws of the Oligarchy must needs go upon partial or private Interest, opposed
to the common, then the Laws of the people must be just, and the Laws of the
Oligarchy must be unjust.

13. Evilmen, that can do no other then make just Laws, are safer then good
men, that must either make unjust Laws, or ruin themselves.

FINIS.

