A REMONSTRANCE Of the present State of things in and about the City, and
Parliament, since the King and Queens departure to Hampton Court. Wherein is
contained, 1. The Examination of his Majesty's Attorney General by the House
of Commons, about the Articles against the 6 Parliament men, with his Answer to
every particular. 2. How 2 boats laden with great saddles to be carried down to
Kingston, were staid, and those that should have transported them, examined by
the Parliament. 3. A letter of dangerous consequence, directed to Colonel
Lunsford, and found scattered at Paul's, 4. Seven Articles of high Treason
against the said Colonel Lunsford. 5. An Order of both Houses for the speedy
Apprehension of the Lord Digby, and Colonel Lunsford, for raising arms at
Kingston, to the great terror and affright of his Majesty's good subjects. 6.
The discovery of a Hellish gunpowder plot in Ireland, laid by the Papists, to
blow up the Protestant Army, at their first Arrival: found out by Captain
Morton, who with 200 of the Protestants, went into a suspected Vault, fetched
out great store of powder, and took away much arms and munition.
Lastly, the advice sent from his Majesty's Commissioners, in Scotland, to both
the Honorable Houses of Parliament, in England, January 15. 1642. for
composing the present differencies and distractions in this Kingdom. Likewise
that Colonel Lunsford was taken at Sr. John Thorowgoods, at Bi^singbere, nere
Windsor. in the County of Barkshire.

Published, this 18. of January. 1641.

London Printed for John YYright.

The examination of his Majesty's Attorney General by the House of Commons.
1. WHether he contrived, framed or advised the Articles exhibited in the House
of Lords, against the Lord Kimbleton, and Mr. Hollis, Sir Arthur Hasterig Mr.
Pym, Mr. Hamden, and Mr. Stroud, or whether he knew or had heard who did
contrive, frame, or advise the same. To which he answered, That he did none of
these three, and if he was proved so to do, he would be contented to die for
it.

2. Whether he knew the truth of those Articles; To which he answered, That he
knew nothing but what was said to him by his Master the King.

3. Whether he will make them good when he shall be called thereto? To which he
answered, He was no way able to make them good, further then his said Master
should enable him.

4. From whom he had received them, or by whose advice he did exhibit them. To
which he answered, That from his Masters hands he received them: and by his
command did exhibit them.

5. What proof and testimony he had to maintain those Articles; To which he
answered, To which he answered, That he received the Command from his Master,
and had no other proof or testimony but such as his Master should enable him
with, And being pressed to deal clearly, what testimony that was, He said he
was of his Majesty's Council and therefore desired further time to consider
what further answer to make.

On Wednesd^y the 12 of January, upon the report of the great Hurly-Burly,
raised ar Kingstone, by Colonel Lunsford, and the Lord George Digby, who with
300 Troopers, and diverse other desperate and suspicious persons, appearing in
arms much affrighted the Country People thereabout, and bred great fears in
the City.

There were warrants granted out to the Sergeant, to stay two Boats laden with
great saddles, to be carried down to Kingstone, and to bring them that
transported them to be examined which was accordidgly performed.

A Letter of Consequence, directed to Colonel Lunsford, scattered in S. Paul's,
and since come to public view.
Renowned Sir,
We are generally joyful beyond expression, to hear of the Honor his
Majesty has bin pleased to confer upon your so well deserving self, though
we confess we are no less sorrowful for the unexpected commotion of that
ungoverned Commonalty, which have bin the occasion of suppressing your power,,
and losing that Prerogative and place of honor of being Lieutenant of the
Tower we make no question but the luster of Knighthood which his Majesty has
bin pleased to transplant since upon you, will be a means to strengthen your
Authority, to the assisting of our poor Brethren there with you, of which we
shall be vigilant to employ our furtherance in whatsoever you shall be pleased
to put in practice for their relief; and establishing the supremacy of the
church of Rome. Privacy will likewise be expedient, and a special care ought
to be had in electing such as you may impose trust in; you know our enemies,
therefore I need not specify them, as for our friends, we have a faulkon, and
pepper is very dear to us (you understand me) you may draw together some
forces of our friends, under pretense against us: make your self as strong as
you may, as for the charges we will be correspondent in defraying of them: if
any scurrilous spirits should scandalize you, and endeavor to defame your
person, with opprobious speeches, or a suspicion of some illegal intents, you
may soon help that, for you are not without those on your side who are of
sufficient ability to resist a mean power, as for what shall be wanting in
you, shall be made good by our endeavors, and what you begin we will end.

As for the present, we have been lately scattered by reason of a sudden
approach of the Scots upon us, so that we lost some of our Officers, and some
thousand soldiers. Captain Denis Carley dyed valorously, and Captain
Thurlougking, with Lieutenant Matchet, whose names with us shall be eternized,
who those rather to dye valiantly in the defense of the Church of Rome, then to
yield themselves prisoners to the Heret^cke Scots; I will cease to speak
further of them, whom we daily lament: We are gathering up our scattered
forces, and make no question but to be of ability to give them battle
speedily, our eyes are upon you in behalf of our brethren, we know there is no
want of valor, power, wisdom, assistance, or whatsoever may be availeable for
the design in you or your friends: be valiant for the truth then: in so doing,
you shall joy us, deliver our brethren, and prove your self an everlasting,
real, and constant friend to the Church of Rome.

G. Sartwell, Redmond, your friends, E. T. VV. S. M. O. join.

Die Jovis 13. Januarii. 1641.
WHereas information has been given to the Parliament, that the Lord Digby
(son to the Earl of Bristol) and Colonel Lunsford, with others, have gathered
Troops of Horse, and have appeared in a warlike manner at Kingstone upon
Thames in the County of Surrey, (where the Magazine of Arms for that part of
the County lies) to the terror and affright of his Majesty's good Subjects,
and disturbance of the public weal of the Kingdom.

It is this day ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that the
Sheriffs of the several Counties of England and Wales, calling to their
assistance the Justices of the Peace, and the trained Bands of those several
Counties (or so many of them as shall be necessary for the service) shall
suppress all unlawful Assemblies gathered together to the disturbance of the
public peace of the Kingdom in their several Counties respectivelye and that
they take care to scour the said Counties, and all the Magazines in them.

The manner how the Gunpowder Plot in Ireland was laid.

THe Rebels in Ireland, for bringing their bloody and Hellish designs to
perfection, had provided Shovels, Spades, pick^acks, and many other instruments
for the said bloody design and about the number of 400. soldiers, and there
with all spe^ they set them to work, which was to undermin the ground for the
space of two miles, and laid there great store of Gunpowder and so by that
means to blow up the aforenamed Lords in their marching over: this being done,
the Rebels intended to march against the City of Dublin, and to destroy it by
wildfire: b^ they were prevented, and their hellish designs discovered by a
miraculous means.

The manner how this Plot was discovered.
Colonel Morton marching before the protestant Army, and the two other Lords
bringing on their forces with puissant courage, they being come within the
space of six miles of Dublin, Colonel Morton feeling the ground quiver under
his feet, i^ seeming like dry ground, caused the Army to stand, and said, that
he feared that there was treachery intended against them, be therefore
immediately took one of their strongest pikes, and thrust it into the ground,
to see whether it were hollow or not, the pike running in with such great
force, and he laying no strength to it, immediately caused some of his
soldiers to dig to see what Plot there was intended against them, and digging
a yard deep, they espied a vault, and great store of Gunpowder, whereupon the
aforesaid Colonel caused them to retreat back, fearing that they had come too
far, but not knowing how to discover the same: unless that some man would
venture his iife to go in: where presently a young man stepped forth, and spoke
to them as follows. Noble Captain, to do you and my Country good, I will
venture my life to find out this hellish plot, then they let him down, who
presently espied six men, they immediately questioning of him, he answered that
he came from General Negle, chief General for Rebels, to help them in their
good enterprise, who being thereabout the space of two days, they resolved
that only one of them should tarry to bring this to pass, which was to give
fire to the Gunpowder, for to blow up the Protestant Army, the rest should go
forth, and retire back to the Rebels: therefore they concluded together to
dra^ cuts which of them should tarry, which as the Lord would have it, it fell
to his lot: and they being gone, he seeing the place which they came out at,
came presently to the said place, and opened the door, which was of wood, and
covered with turfe, in such a manner, that no man could perceive whether there
were any door or not: and coming forth, he related to Captain Morton how it
was. Who presently set a strong guard about the said vault, and then 2000. of
the Protestants went in, and fetched all the powder out, and great store of
Ammunition they have also taken.

Advice sent from his Majesty's Commissioners in Scotland, to both Houses of
Parliament, January 15. 1642.
OUr Treaty concerning the Irish affairs, being so often interrupted by the
emergent distractions, gives us occasion earnestly to desire your Lordships,
and these Noble Gentlemen of the House of Commons; for to present to the
Honorable Houses of Parliament.

That we having taken into consideration, the manifold Obligations of the
Kingdom of Scotland to our Native Gracious Sovereign, his person and
Government, considered and multiplied to the great and resent favors bestowed
by his Majesty on that Kingdom, at his last being there; and settling the
troubles thereof; and considering the mutual interest of the Kingdoms, in the
welfare and prosperrty of each other, acknowledged, and established in the late
Treaty, and finding our selves warranted and obliged by all means to labor
to keep a right understanding betwixt the Kings Majesty and his people, to
confirm that Brotherly affecton began betwixt the two Nations, to advance
their Unity, by all such ways as may tend to the glory of God, and Peace of
the Church and State of both Kingdoms, to tender thanks to the Parliament of
England, for their assistance given to the Kingdom of Scotland, in settling the
late troubles thereof wherein, next to the Providence of God, and the Kings
Majesty Justice and goodness they do acknowledge, themselves most beholding
to the mediation, and Brotherly kindness of the Kingdom of England, and
likewise to proffer our service for removing all Iealousies and mistakings
which may arise betwixt the Kings Majesty, and his Kingdom, and our best
endeavors for the establishment of the affairs, and quiet of the same.

We do therefore in name of the Parliament and Kingdom o^ Scotland
acknowledge our selves, next to the providence of God, and in his Majesty's
justice and goodness most beholding to the meditation and Brotherly kindness
of the Kingdom of England in many respect, and Especially in Condescending to
the Kings Majesty's down coming to Scotland in the midst of their great
affairs whereof we have tasted the sweet and comfortable fruits, and do
heartily wish the like happiness to this Kingdom*

And as we are hearty sorry to find our hopes thereof deferred, by the present
distractions daily growing hear to greater height, And out of the sense
thereof, have taken the boldness to send our humble and faithful advice to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty for the remeding of the same, to the just
satisfaction of his people; So out of our duty to his Majesty and to testify
our brotherly affection to this Kingdom, and acquit our selves of the trust
imposed upon us.

We do most earnestly beseech the Honorable Houses in the Depth of their
wisdom, to think timously upon the fairest and fittest ways of Composing all
present difference; To the glory of God, the good of the Church, and State of
both Kingdoms, and to his Majesty's honor and Contentment wherein if our
faithful endeavors may be any ways useful, we shall be most ready at all
occasions to contribute the same.

15 January 1642. Ia. Primrose.

FINIS.

