A LETTER To the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire, Speaker of the Honorable
House of COMMONS: Concerning The late successful Proceedings of the Lord
Inchiquine In the Kingdom of IRELAND.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Letter be forthwith
Printed and Published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
Sept. 28. 1647.

A Letter to the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire; Speaker of the Honorable House
of Commons.
SIR,
BEing constrained by diverse necessities of the soldiers to retire about five
weeks sithence out of the field, where I had been in the Rebels Quarters of the
County of Limrick, before I could look into the County of Tipperary; I did
after some short refreshment, and the best (though but mean) provision which I
could make for the Soldier, apply my self and this Army forthwith again into
the field: And being for want of Oxen, and other carriages unable to draw forth
any Artillery, or to carry any larger proportion of bread then what the
Soldiers Knap-sacks would contain, I marched with the Army into this County
which I entered upon on Saturday the third of this instant; and having taken
several Castles therein, to the number of ten or twelve, putting to the sword
the VVarders of such places as stood in opposition to the Army; I passed over
the River Shewer, not far from the Castle of Cahir, an ancient and eminent hold
of the Rebels, environed with two branches of that River, which was observed to
be in all appearance of that strength, as it was both by them, and by the
Officers of this Army, esteemed impregnable: notwithstanding which, the
importancy of the place being seriously considered by us, we were occasioned to
make an attempt upon it by this accident; one of our horsemen being plundering
near the Town, was by some of the Rebels wounded and carried a prisoner into
the Castle, from whence he was admitted to send for a Surgeon into our
Quarters to dress his wounds, of which we made this use: One Col. James
Heppesly, who had formerly served the King, and was (upon some assurance given
me by a friend, of his doing service) admitted to come into our Quarters, being
an ingenious person, skilled in Surgery, and in Fortifications, took upon
him to go under a disguise into the Castle, and to dress the wounded Trooper,
which accordingly he did, with so good caution, and circumspection, as that he
discovered perfectly the condition of the Castle in each respect, the weakness
of the Ward, and especially some defects in the wall of the outward Bawn,
which rendered it assaultable by our men, the taking whereof would probably
induce the surrender of the Castle, which he collected from the observed
timorousness of the VVarders; which sorted to so good purpose, as that falling
on the place defective, with a party lead on by: Col. Heppesly himself, we
carried that outward Bawn, and some out Turrets by storm, and with in a few
hours after had the Castle surrendered unto us, on Quarter only for life, though
upon entry of it, we found that the same was by no force of ours to be reduced,
if the Defendants had not been by Divine Providence deprived of any courage to
oppose us.

The place is justly looked upon by this Army, as the most important in the
whole Province, being of that strength, as not to be taken from us, so long as
we have victual to support a Garrison therein, whereby a pass is kept open for
us to make daily incursions into this country, which has been a principal
contributary to the Rebels Army.

To the performance of which service, the Soldier was enabled with no other
food then the roots under, and corn above the ground (all their cattle being
driven away before us out of our reach) of the latter whereof we had great and
abundant store, so as we have burned in this County above 20000. l. worth,
whereof there could be no use made through want of hand-Mills (for which I have
often and earnestly written) the water-mills being for the most part either
burned or deserted.

From Cahir we marched this instant to the city of Cashel, formerly the
Metropolitans See of this Province, where the Citizens and Inhabitants (amazed
at the reducing of Cahir) left open the gates, and fled to the Cathedral, a
large and spacious Pile, seated upon a rock near the walls of the Town, and of
late very much fortified, and at present fully manned with diverse companies of
the Rebels, which will render any attempts we shall make upon it very
difficult; notwithstanding which, we determine by Gods assistance, to leave no
means unassayed for the reducing thereof; after which, we design to fall upon
the Town of Fethard an eminent walled Town, and from thence to march unto
Cloumel, to reduce which, we have yet no great hopes, in regard we understand
that place to be very regularly fortified, and strongly manned, so as without
Artillery there can be no feisible attempt made upon it: But if it shall please
God to bless us with success on that place, We may then with confidence assert
the Parliaments Interest in this Province to be high, and the Rebels mean, and
inconsiderable. Sir, the Gentry of this county, by the reducing of these
places, and the burning of their Corn, begin to make suit, that they may be
admitted to a contribution, which shall be embraced so far as may conduce to
the better carrying on of the War, and supporting of this Army, and advancing
(as my zeal and duty obliges me) of the Parliaments service: For which I have
no other means, then this of keeping the field: From whence if I shall be
driven to our Garrisons by the violence of the weather, or by an over powerful
Army, I am utterly ignorant how the Army may be preserved from starving,
without seasonable supplies from the Honorable Houles to whose service I have
faithfully devoted my self, remaining, Sir,

Your humble servant, Inchiquine.
Cashel, 12. Sept. 1647.

