Mr. JOHN IRETONS ORATION AT The Choosing of the new LORD MAYOR.
IF my fortunes and my desires had run equally along together, I should not now
have stood here soliciting a Plaudite at my exit; For I had the Fortune to be
Lord Mayor, and to have a Horse, and trappings for my Horse, and likewise for
my self; truly I have worldly honors, for Saints may have their saylings as
well as other men: Now you know I might have kept my preeminence a year longer,
and for that I may thank the Parliament, but you Petitioned against me, for
which I am much beholding to you. Verily Inever thought this City would have
proved so unfaithful to me, I am sure I well remember when it was otherwise:
when my brother Harry in the behalf of the Good old Cause was mangled into
pieces by Gunshot, that very little if any part at all were left of him, Oh how
did you the Grave men of the City wait upon and walk after his empty Coffin!
what fine verses were made upon him! how did the Heralds stretch their wits,
and tenter their invention, to emblazon his Gentility? 'Twas even a hard work,
verily a hard work, of much time and great labor: and do you imagine I can
think of such things without much hugging of my self? it is pretty well known
upon what foundation I first raised the fabric of my greatness, O it is a fine
thing to have faith, I had faith and it failed me not, I trusted the Cavaleers
men of quality, men of estates, when there wealth was a refining at Goldsmiths
Half: they paid me, I got by it and ever since I hated them, it is agreat
eyesore Gentlemen, nay it is a heartbreaking when any person can hit it in our
teeth that they raised us; Oh those steps must be pulled down: by such worthy
acts I thought to have endeared the City, and Consequently to have merited an
everlasting Government, and truly I must confess it was (as a worthy Alderman
lately said) my own seeking, and can you blame me for such a seeking? the
great-men, the Governors the Parliament they approved of my seeking, but you
were not pleased with it, you were offended, you cried out of your Privileges,
that you should loose your Charter. Why Gentlemen is it not better you should
lose your Charter then I the reward of any good service? If old things are to
be laid aside, you might have as well laid aside your old Charter, as refuse
me, for fear I should be an old Mayor. Truly Gentlemen ye need not court the
Mayoralty so much, for there are no Protectors to Knight ye now as soon as ye
are out of your time. I am sorry that a roll of Parchment should stick so in
your stomachs, pray God you may be able to digest it, I am much afflicted to
see you have so little manners in you, I am sure you have chosen a thousand
Mayors and you might have given the Parliament leave to choose one. I was once
a Mercer, and cheated the people with false lights, then I became Religious,
and cheated them with false lights, afterward I was a Publican, and
consequently a public sinner, but as I am a sinner, did not think you would
have used me so unkindly; what need you keep such a stir with your Charter,
suppose you had never a Mayor, do you think your City would perish? Pray tell
me where do you find that the City which Cain built in the Land of Nod had any
Mayors? and yet for all that, I know it was Governed as well as London.
Besides, I read no where in Scripture that there were any Mayors of Cities;
indeed we hear of Kings of particular Towns, as of Sodom, and Gomorrha etc. I
would I were King of London, I believe I should be as great a King as
Kedor-laomer, for all his hard name: I have likewise heard of the Rulers of the
City, but now I perceive a Mayor is no Ruler of your City, for if I could have
ruled this City, you may be sure I would have had my will a little better than
now I have. But hanged, let it go; take your Mayorality and your Charter; and
wipe your tails with your Charter and your Mayorality. For when I consider
what Metaphorical girds the Mayor is liable too, truly I cannot conceive it so
great a dignity as you imagine, for some men call me Swin-herd of the people,
some call me Goat-herd of the people, and some Shep-herd of the people; against
the two latter, I knew not how to defend my self, considering your tamenesse
and wantonness, but for the first, said I, Gentlemen, pray do not lay that
aspersion upon me, for I never saw any Beast break under my charge but what had
horns on. Well I cannot blame ye, for men are covetous of novelties: Nor can I
blame my self, for having an ill opinion of ye, for you were always deserters
of your friends, no longer pipe no longer dance with you; If the Parliament be
interrupted, then Oliver his red Nose must be met by you with Hosannaes, all
the glories you can invent are too little for his Highnesses entertainment; he
is no sooner dead but you creep to his Son, no sooner did he like a tame fool
yield up his power, but ye whirld off to the Parliament; truly friends he
deserves to be whipped, who pulls down his breeches for the lash, Oh that Prince
that would be, had a soft place in his head, and did he think we would stand up
for a fool? Nay verily we are other wise taught. The Good old Cause appeared,
Oh the Good old Cause! who would but fight for the Good old Cause? On the sweet
air of a Commonwealth! It makes me rejoice to breath in it; I played Rex, I
domineered and played the Devil etc. Gods sake; for to have played the Devil
any otherwise had been Profane, Unsafe, and perhaps unprosperous. Yet give me
leave to tell ye, I think I acted my part better than he, for he kept a noise
and bustle in the World to no purpose; I did my business quietly, making no
noise but only with my tongue and my horse heels; He only pulled up Trees, I
rooted up Men, mine and your Enemies, Some have said, that the Devill's an
Ass; truly I believe it, For we hear how St. Dunstan pulled him by the nose;
and we see how every Conjurer, with saying a head word or two, is able to send
him on every pity full errand, though it be only to fetch a farthing-worth of
mustard. Some have said that he is honester than we are: but would they could
make it out, I Will assure you they are none of the Devils friends that say so;
for then (a thing which perhaps they little dream on) whereas he thinks to
punish us, we ought, and it must be out right to punish him. For what reason
were it that he being more wicked than we are, should punish us that are not so
wicked as himself? And now I think not, I have a just complaint against him in
this worshipful Court. I have a house here Marihoue, for it is mine as long as
I keep my Office; Now this Rascally-devill has had possession of it these many
years; there he keeps open house, and ill hours, is tenant at will in his own
sense, and yet denis to p^y a farthing of rent. It Is true, possession is nine
points of the Law, Yet give me leave to tell ye Gentlemen, right's right, the
loss has been my predecessors, is this year mine, and will be yours, I
profess brother, if you do not take some speedy course with him.

But they say the Devil can appear in sundry disguises to fright people; so
can I too, Did not I transform my self into any shape? I was a Dipper, a
Quaker, and what not, whereby I might fright the City to perfect my designs;
how was I fayn to labor to settle the Militia therein, and what did I leave
unattempted to confirm my self in the Government, whereby you would have been
for-ever enslaved? but the Ass would not crouch, the Jade grew skittish, and I
was forced to leave my seat: but thanks to my Great Masters I went not off
unrewarded: it is something I Will assure you to be Commissioner of the Excise: to
have a good Salary and always to be singing money is a fitting reward for a
Saint, else why should my good friend Mr. Praise God Barebone be made
Controuler of the Treasury for sequestrations, with 300 l. per annum salary?
Believe it, the Saints ought to enjoy the earth, although the wicked repine and
murmr thereat. But my Stomach, which now sticks to me when all my friends are
leaving me, tells me now there is much to be done, little more to be said: There
are certain Pies and Custards, which expect my Mittimus to send them down into
my belly; and therefore I must hasten home; yet before I go, give me leave to
justify my self, as old Samuel did at his exit off the stage of his
employment. What my original was I need not discover; yet were it never so
mean, I have heard of as mean men that have been Lord Mayors of London. What
think ye of Whittington, whose Cat was a greater stock to him then Duttons
nineteen thousand and odd sheep, Truly there seems to be something more in a
Cat than ordinary; for they are the emblem of Gravity and Formality, which two
things: are very requisite for a Citizen that will thrive; They keep much at
home; to show a shop keeper must never be out of his shop; They hunt after Mice
thereby teaching a Citizen to hunt after money, and then they creep with
eagerness on their prey, to show how eager a Citizen must be to finger money. O
thou bleffed thing called money what have not I attmpted for thy sake if it lay
within my power? money is that balm of Gilead that heals the wounds of
misfortune, and cures the aches of your mind; it makes a man a Saint, it
makes him a Devil; it plumpeth up your wives, and enables them for the work
of generation; Money is the cream offelicity; it is better than the Crumbs of
Comfort, yea it is comfort it self. Therefore faith the wiseman, My Child get
money in thy purse.

Let me speak a little for my Justice; was not my Sword a terror to the
Bakers? at the old Bailey I used to hang as many as I could for my life, and
would have hanged more, if the Judge would have let me; Could I have had my
will I would have hanged up all the Cavaleers, men that ride on horseback to
the terror of the Saints. But will you say then all men that ride on
horseback are Cavaleers? No god forbid; for then you all should be Cavaleers;
Besides, I can assure you some of them are sayn to go on foot; and indeed we
have made them so poor, God be thanked, that they are not able to buy Horses:
give them horses, and they will ride upon our shoulders: but I hope I have taken
an order with them this Summer.

For my Charity I find it very cold, and therefore dare not let it come near my
heart, by reason of its venomous and benumming quality.

For my Honesty I shall say little; most men know it better than my self. I
shall say only this, that if I have cozened the State, I have done no more than
what my Companions did, and what I can justify from the example and continual
practice of the Church.

As for my Religion I have I think as much as any other among ye; it is true I
can change it upon any lawful occasion; for there is no reason a man should
destroy himself, and it is a point of Religion to be obedient to Superior
powers.

If I have done any body wrong; as for some of them I care not a pin, as for
others; if they will forgive me, so, if not, let them let it alone; for thanks
to our Masters, my faults, and the faults of all such as I am, are blotted out;
And one Act of oblivion is to us as if we had tasted of so much Lethe; and now
I think on it, I wonder Lethe is not used instead of Coffee, Oh it is a precious
drink; it makes us forget our Allegiance, our Religion, our Friends, we can
think of nothing but what is for our present turn: but 'twas well for you that
drink was not in fashion, for if it had, then had the Parliament forgotten all
those promises in your late Petition mentioned: but all is well that ends well:
but I have done, for since friends must part, better here than at the Gallows.

FINIS.

