A LETTER FROM The Lord Deputy-General OF IRELAND, Unto the Honorable William
Lenthal Esquire Speaker of the PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND; Concerning the Rendition of
the City of LIMERICK: Together with the Articles formerly offered, and the
Articles upon which the same was Surrendered: As also a Particular of the
persons excepted, the Ammunition and Ordnance in the Town delivered upon the
Surrender of the said CITY.

Friday the 28th of November, 1651.

ORdered by the Parliament, That the Letter from the Deputy-General of Ireland,
and Articles, together with the Particulars enclosed, be forthwith Printed and
Published; and read by the Ministers on the day appointed for Thanks to be
given in the several Congregations.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of ENGLAND, 1651.

For the most Honorable Willian Lenthal Esquire Speaker of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of ENGLAND.
Mr. Speaker,
IT was no small Blessing in order to your Affairs here, nor without manifest
appearances of the Power and Providence of God, That your Forces entrusted with
me, got a Passage over the River Shanon so early in the Summer; But that for
the matter of it (to such as neither saw nor can have a clear Relation of the
manner and Circumstances wherein God appeared) being rather but the making way
for further progress in your Businesses, then a thing of visible effect in it
self, and nothing since then considerable having been effected by that part of
your Forces with me, save the taking of some few small Castles in Thomond, and
possessing of others that were of advantage and consequence for you, with
Garrisons; and those things of the like, or other nature, wherein God has blessed
the rest of your Forces and Parties in other Parts, having, I suppose, come to
your knowledge more immediately from the several persons commanding them. I
have forborne to trouble you with any immediate account from my self of what
has been done; But God, who having only given some Testimonies of his
continuing Favor to your Cause, and presence with your Servants here in the
beginning of this Summers Service (in the giving of such a seasonable and easy
Passage to us over the Shanon) and therewith (in a few days more, the
Possession or Command of almost all the Passes over it, when before we had not
any) has since seen it good to deny us thus long any further considerable
effect in any thing, and to exercise our Faith and Patience with diverse small
Losses in the surprise of several small Garrisons and Parties, by the lurching
Enemy (mixed with the smaller Successes he has given to any of your Forces,
having now vouchsafed to Crown the Summers Service in the close of it, with
giving into your hands a place of such Strength, Value and Importance, as the
City of Limerick, I thought it my duty hereby to give you an account of it, and
present to your view the Conditions on which it is Surrendered to you, wherewith
I thought it not amiss to send also a Copy of the Conditions, which about the
end of June and beginning of July last, were thought fit by advice of your
Council of War, here with me to be tendered to the Soldiery and people within
(if they would have Surrendered then, but were rejected) by both which being
compared together (as you will see them in enclosed Papers) you may find how
far God suffered them to be hardened then to their own loss in the issue, and
has made their Obstinacy then and since, serve to your greater advantage at
last, not only in point of Freedom for prosecution of Justice, one of the
great Ends and best Grounds (before God and men) of the War you have maintained
here; and in point of safety to English Planters, and the settling and securing
of the Commonwealths Interest in this Nation; but also in respect of valuable
benefit to the State, which in the value of Arms and Ammunition, with some
Goods of excepted persons, and of the Houses and Lands of the rest by the first
Conditions tendered, in great part to have been granted away, but by these at
last reserved clearly in your Power) may be some considerable Compensation for
your charge in the Four months longer Siege: For the length whereof, and
detaining so great a part of your Forces from any other work considerable in
all this Summer past, I can at this distance give only this account at
present, That it pleased God after that loss he left us to in the attempt upon
the Island (which had it succeeded, had given us an easy way and visible
advantage for a speedy attempt of the City by way of Force, that has since
been fully provided against by their industrious working) not to incline the
hearts of our Officers at any of the Councels of War held since for that
purpose, to think a way of present force against the place advisable, but only
to provide by way of Siege to starve them, until of late (after we had largely
provided both for security and subsistence of a sufficient part of the Army
(through Gods blessing) to have attended the Siege unto a far longer issue of
extremity, finding the supposition of their sudden falling into want (which was
conceived would have been in two Months, or three at the most, and so have
given us some competent season for the work remaining) to fail us; and finding
also some hopeful advantage for an attempt by way of Battery, at a place we had
little observed before (God having as it were till very lately hid the
advantage of it from our eyes) we resolved at last to try that way, whether it
would please God (by the apprehensions of present danger to them in the way of
force, added to the foresight of more certain extremity by Famine at last,
though the other should fail) so to work upon their hearts within, as might
induce a present Surrender before extremity of Winter, and so save your sickly
Army from the hazards and hardships of a Winters Siege: And since this
Resolution taken, sending to several places as speedily as we could for some
more Battering-Guns to recruit our Train (in lieu of those so carelessly lost at
Clare, as I suppose you have heard) so soon as we had a number of them
competent for such a work, we began our Approaches in one night, and finished
our Batteries and planted our Guns the second, and next morning began to
Batter; whereupon they presently sent out to give us assurance they would
accept our Conditions for the matter (which upon an overture of Treaty about
three weeks ago we had tendered them, and about which they had sent out
Commissioners since from time to time, still continuing or renewing the Treaty,
but with no effect; and that day sending out Commissioners to us again in the
evening, to have the Articles perfected in Circumstances) we came to a
conclusion upon them by the next morning; we cannot tell whether the danger of
present Force, or foresight of want did more incline them, but find clearly
that Divisions and Distractions within (which God alone had wrought amongst
them) were most prevalent toward the Surrender: There marched out at the
Surrender about Twelve or thirteen hundred Officers and Soldiers in pay (being
decreased in the Siege to that number, from about Two thousand by the best
account we had) and we find yet in the Town, I believe, no less then Four
thousand men able to bear Arms: It appears still very Populous, though since we
came last before it, they have lost, as they account to us, above Five thousand
Souls, what through the Sword without, and the Famine and Plague within (the
last whereof is still violent amongst them, to the great endangering your
Soldiery here, if God by distinguishing mercy prevent not) and this way, as
well as in the outstanding of better Conditions from us, God has rendered their
Obstinacy a scourge to themselves, and made us in the way he saw it good to
incline us to a means to keep them under his own more immediate and righteous
Judgment. We have about Three thousand five hundred Foot Arms already
delivered up and brought into stores for your Service, and Eighty three Barrels
of Powder, with some store of other Ammunition, and some Pistols and old
Saddles, but no Horses: We hope to find yet more Arms and Ammunition, and
intend speedily to clear the place of a multitude of People that are most
dangerous (either in Quality or Infection) and by degrees it may be rendered
more English, as you or your Ministers shall find opportunity of Planters,
though there are now diverse of the now Inhabitants (and some persons of Quality
amongst them) whose carriage all along toward the English People and Interest,
and particularly in this surrender, may deserve your admittance to continue
here, and favorable dealing in point of their Estates. Of the persons excepted
from quarter there was only the Governor and ten more, whose names are
mentioned in the enclosed note, that rendered themselves at our mercy, none of
which we have yet executed, nor are yet well resolved how to deal with them,
though I suppose we shall see cause to execute some of them in a Military way,
in relation to the holding out of the place, and for terrors to others; and
there are others of them fit to be reserved for examples of Justice in a
Judicial way, in relation to the first Rebellion and Murders: But it has
pleased God since the surrender, providentially to discover and deliver into
our hands, three persons of principal Activity and Influence in the obstinate
holding out (the last years Major, the Bishop of Emley, and Major General
Purcell; all whom we presently hanged, and have set up their heads on the
gates; the two latter being original Incendiaries of the Rebellion and
Mischiefs in it, or prime Engagers therein, and also one Captain Welsh a
Priest, whom we have not yet executed, but I think shall. Now besides the real
importance and advantage of this place toward the further carrying on or
ending the War, and the settling and securing of your Interest in this Nation
(if God see it good) it is not unhopeful that the terror and sad example of it
may so work upon other places remaining (through Gods blessing) as to hasten or
facilitate the reducement of them, as much as the long detaining us at this
Siege has retarded it, save that the winter season and difficulty of
subsisting now (for Horse or men) in the Field, about their remaining Garrisons,
may give them so much breathing time, as to digest and forget this example;
however, it was a Mercy most seasonable, in relation to the present condition
of your Men, and state of your Affairs in this Land (as well as great in
effect) that this place was now Surrendered to you on such Terms; and God does
(by the extremity of Winter weather, ever since our Agreement, whereas he had
till then, favored us with a more dry and gentle Season then has been
ordinarily known before for so long time together, and so late in the year)
make it appear more feeling to be so: And you (as we that serve you here) may
accordingly add it to the account of those other great Blessings and
Deliverances, and more glorious Workings of Gods good hand toward you this
year in England and Scotland, which you have to acknowledge to the Praise of
his Great Name, and improve to his further Honor and Service in the Advancement
of Righteousness and Truth in the Three Nations, and furthering the Exaltation
of all that is indeed the Interest of the Lord Jesus Christ, who has so
graciously owned, and thus far Upheld and Established yours. Now that you, and
those that serve and partake with you in these things, may be both intent to
consider and seek, and taught of him more and more what manner of persons we
ought to be, and what to do for his Name, and made (through his greater Grace)
both really to be, and faithfully to do in some sort more answerable to such
peculiar Favors of his, and Experiences or Testimonies thereof toward us, and
preserved by him from the many Snares and Temptations, attending such
Advantages to such corrupt Natures, is still the hearts desire and prayer of
him, who has been very little, and grows less able otherwise to serve you.

Your most humble Servant, H: IRETON.
Limerick, 3. November. 1651.
A Copy of Conditions tendered to the Garrison and City of Limerick June 30.
1651. upon surrender thereof.
1. AN Article for the surrender, etc.

2. That in consideration of the surrender, etc. all persons whatsoever within
the City and Garrison of Limerick shall have quarter for their lives, and
liberty of their persons, without pillage, plunder, or other Militery violence
to their persons or goods during their continuance under safe Conduct or
Protection, by virtue of the ensuing Articles respectively.

3. That all Officers and Soldiers of the Forces in pay, and not belonging to
the Militia of the City of Limerick, shall have liberty to march away to any
Garrison or Quarter of the Irish party with their Horses, Arms, and other
equipage suitable to the several qualities they serve in respectively, Bag and
Baggage, Drums beating, Colors flying, their Firearms laden and primed,
Bandeliers and Flasques full of Powder, Matches lighted at both ends; and to
have such Carriage for their Goods as the County will afford provided for them
(they paying reasonable rates for the same) And shall be allowed (...) Months
time for the removal of any goods to them duly belonging which they leave
behind them, except Arms, Ammunition, or other furniture of War.

4. That all other persons of what quality soever now in the said City, that
desire to march with them, shall have liberty so to do, with the same freedom,
privilege, time and benefit, for the carrying away of their Bag and Baggage,
and removing of their goods (except Ammunition, and all Arms or other furniture
of War, save traveling Arms, with which they shall be allowed to march) as is
granted to the Soldiery in the last preceding Article.

5. That any of the Officers, Soldiers, or others now in the City (except
Clergymen, and such as were in Arms or otherwise in Hostility, which, or for
those that committed the murders and outrages in the first Insurrection before
the first general Assembly, or that sat in the said first Assembly) if within
(...) days they shall desire to lay down Arms, and to submit to the authority
of the Parliament of England, shall be admitted so to do, and to live at their
homes or with their friends, and shall have Protection in their persons and
estates on the same Terms as the rest of the inhabitants of the Country of the
same Conditious or Qualifications with themselves.

6. That all the Citizens or Inhabitants in the said City that are Freemen or
members of the Corporation, and were so before the first of October, One
thousand six hundred and fifty, and all the Widows and Children of them that
were such (with their families and servants) who shall be willing to live under
the Government of the Commonwealth of England, and submit to Contribution
proportionably with their neighbors (except such as come within the exception
made in the last foregoing Article) shall freely enjoy all their personal
estates where ever the same be (except Arms, Ammunition and other furniture of
War) to themselves and their assigns (paying to the State of England one third
part of the value of their personal Estates visible within this Dominion, from
such only as have personal Estates visible within this Dominion, from such
only as have personal Estates to the value of one hundred pounds and upwards,
but the rest to enjoy the whole freely; and shall likewise enjoy two third
parts of their Estates real (lying without the City of Limerick and Liberties
thereof) or the full value of the same to themselves, their Heirs or Assigns;
and shall also enjoy their respective Interests in their Houses in the City,
except such of them as shall be thought fit to be removed out of the Garrison,
in order to the securing thereof, who shall have liberty to set or sell their
said Houses to the best advantage of themselves, their Heirs or Assigns, paying
(in case of sale) a third part of the price they make, to the use of the State
of England, and shall have months time (after warning given them to depart)
for removal and disposing of themselves, their families and goods as they
please, and Protection to live in any part of this Dominion within the Power of
the Parliament of England (not being a Garrison, or a Country planted entirely
with English, or set apart to be so) or shall have Passes to remove to any
Foreign parts if they so desire. And those of the said Citizens (not within the
aforesaid Exception) who shall submit upon these Terms, and perform the same on
their parts, shall have Indemnity for any things done in prosecution of the
War.

An Answer of the Commissioners of the English Army to the particular
Exceptions of the Commissioners for the City of Limerick, against the
Conditions tendered upon the Treaty in June and July, One thousand six hundred
fifty one.
1. TO the first Exception, we shall allow a proviso for the Citizens as
follows; Provided, and and it is hereby declared concerning all and every the
said Citizens, That they or any of their being engaged in Arms in the besieging
and reducing of the Castle of Limerick, after the coming in of the Irish Forces
under General Barry into the Town (though it was before the said first general
Assembly) shall not conclude or be understood to conclude them or any of them
within the Exception before going, except such of them as shall appear by
sufficient evidence to have contrived, procured, endeavored, or wittingly
furthered the letting in of the Irish Forces into the Town, or to have been
otherwise guilty (as parties or immediate accessaries) to some particular
murder of the English or Protestant people before the said first general
Assembly.

And as to the Soldiery, Nobility and Gentry now in the City, we are content
that they be admitted to live in Protection, they submitting themselves and
their Estates to the judgment of the Parliament of England, although they were
in Arms during the first year of the War.

2. To the second, We cannot allow any Ordnance or other furniture of War, but
what is granted by our Articles, only we are content that all Ships belonging
to any private persons remain to the disposal of the owners.

3. To the third, We shall not grant any power to leavy Arrears in our Quarters
as to the Runaways, and hertofore Protected persons, although they be not
mentioned expressly, yet it is intended the Quarter should extend to them, we
are willing to prefix a time, and grant an Indemnity from Suits during the
time mentioned in the Exception.

4. To the fourth, We shall be willing to allow all the Protected persons
Horses and traveling Arms as we do to other Protected people, as to persons
formerly Protected and not within the reach of the Exception, paying the
Arrears of their Contribution due to the Parliaments party, they shall be
received into Protection as formerly. To the rest, we adhere to our Articles.

5. To the fifth, We shall not treat concerning Religion.

6. To the sixth, We shall adhere to our Article, unless they be willing to
wave their Indemnity from private Suits.

7. To the seventh, We must adhere to our Proposal.

8. To the eighth, We shall adhere to our Proposition.

9. To the ninth, It is intended that all such of the Citizens as are by these
Articles allowed to enjoy their Estates real and personal, should have full
liberty to sell and dispose the said Estates to their best advantage and
liberty, with their Wives, Families and Goods to pass beyond the Seas when they
shall think good.

10. The tenth, We shall not Treat upon.

11. To the eleventh, It is intended that all such of the Citizens as are not
within the Exception, shall have full liberty to trade at home and abroad as
other English Subjects.

12. To the twelfth, The proviso of our Proposition enjoins no sale of any part
of their Estates in the City.

13. To the thirteenth, It is intended they should enjoy all their real Estates
in any Corporation or place of this Dominion, except Garrisons.

The names of the Commissioners in behalf of the Parliaments Army, Lieutenant
General Edmund Ludlow, Adjutant General William Allen, Judge Advocate Philip
Cartret, Major Anthony Morgan, Major Brian Smith.

Articles agreed upon the twenty seventh day of October, One thousand six
hundred fifty one, by and between Henry Ireton Esquire, Deputy General of
Ireland on the one part, and Bartholomew Stackpoll Recorder of the City of
Limerick, or Dominick White Alderman of the same, Nicholas Haley Esquire,
Lieutenant Colonel Piers Lacy, Lieutenant Colonel Donogh O-Brien, and John
Baggot Esquire, Commissioners appointed by and on the behalf of the Governor
and Major of the said City, to Treat and Conclude for the surrender thereof on
the other part.
1. THat the City of Limerick, with the Castle, and all places of strength in
the City be surrendered into the hands of the said Deputy General of Ireland,
for the use of the Parliament and Commonwealth of England, upon, or before the
twenty ninth day of October instant at noon, together with all the Ordnance,
Arms, Ammunition, and other furniture of War therein, and all the Goods of any
kind not allowed by the ensuing Articles to be carried away or kept by the
owners, and this without waste, spoil, or embezlement. And the full possession
of John's Gate and Priors Mill shall be delivered unto the said Deputy General
or such Guards as they shall appoint (not exceeding an hundred men for John's
Gate) this day by Sunset; and for performance hereof, the above named
Lieutenant Colonel Piers Lacy, Lieutenant Colonel Donogh O-Brien, Alderman
Dominick White, and Nicholas Haley Esquire, shall remain as Hostages with the
said Deputy-General, until the Surrender of the said City.

2. That in consideration thereof, all persons now in the City (except such as
are hereafter excepted) shall have Quarter for their Lives, liberty of their
persons, their Clothes, Money, and other Goods, so as to be free from Pillage,
Plunder, or other hostile violence in their Persons or Goods during their
continuance under the said Deputies safe Conduct or Protection, by virtue of
the ensuing Articles respectively: But whereas through the practices of some
persons more eminent and active then the rest, both amongst the Clergy,
Military-Officers, the Citizens, and other sorts of men within the large
Conditions formerly tendered for Surrender, have been rejected. The subsequent
occasions or opportunies for timely making of Conditions neglected and avoided,
the dispositions and desires of many persons within to that purpose, is
opposed, resisted and restrained, and the generality of the people partly
deluded and deceived (to the keeping of them in vain expectations of relief
from one time to another) and partly overawed, or enforced by their power to
concur and contribute this long to the obstinate holding out of the place;
therefore the persons hereafter named, viz. Major General Hay Oniel the
Governor, Major General Purcel, Sir Jeffry Galway, Lieutenant Colonel Lacy,
Captain George Wolf, Captain Lieutenant Sexton, the Bishop of Limerick, the
Bishop of Emley, John Quillin a Dominican Friar, David Roch a Dominican Friar,
Captain Laurence Welsh a Priest, Francis Wolf a Franciscan Friar, Philip O
Diepe Priest, Alderman Dominick Fanning, Alderman Thomas Stretch, Alderman
Jordan Roch, Edmund Roch Burgess, David Rocheford Burgess, Sir Richard Everard,
Docter Higgin Maurice Baggot of Baggotstown, and Jeffry Barron (being as
aforesaid the Principals appearing in such Practices in this Siege, and the
holding out so long; as also Evan the Welsh Soldier who ran into Limerick; and
all other persons that have been employed, and come into the City as Spies
since the Fourth day of June last, shall be excepted and excluded from any
benefit of this Article, or any other Articles ensuing, and such of them as can
be found within the Garrison, shall be rendered up at Mercy upon the Surrender
of the City: And any such persons as shall be found to hide or conceal any of
the said expected persons, or be privy to their Concealment or attempt of
Escape, and not discover, and do their best endeavor to prevent the same, shall
thereby be understood to have forfeited the benefit of these Articles to
themselves; but otherwise, none shall lose that benefit for other men's default
in their Concealment or escape, or for the not rendering of them up as aforesaid.

3. That all Officers, Soldiers and other persons now in the City (not excepted
in the last precedent Article) shall also have liberty to march away with their
Clothes, Bag and Baggage, Money, and all other their Goods of what kind
soever, except Arms, Ammunition, and other Utensils of War (carrying nothing
but their own) to what place or places they shall choose respectively within
the Dominion of Ireland, not being a Garrison for the Parliament (all the
Field-Officers of Horse and Foot, and Captains of Horse, with their Horses,
Pistols and Swords, and other the Commissioned Officers with their Swords
only) And shall have Three Months time after the Surrender to remove any
Goods of their own, that they shall not think fit sooner to carry with them;
and such of them as shall choose to go to any Garrisons, or Parties of the
Enemy, shall have Convoy or safe conduct for that purpose, for such time as
shall be requisite for their march, at the rate of Ten miles a day, and shall
have Cariages and provision allowed from the Country at the usual rates.

4. That such of the Citizens and Inhabitants interested in the City, as are
not excepted in the second Article, and shall not presently march away as
aforesaid, but desire to continue longer in the City, shall (upon application
for that purpose to the said Deputy General, or the chief Officer commanding
in Limerick after the Surrender) have License given them to stay, either for
such further time as the said Deputy General, or the said chief Officer present
shall find convenient, or until further warning given them to depart; and in
case of such License given till further warning, shall have Four months time
allowed from and after such warning, for the removal of themselves and their
Families, and Six months for the removal of their Goods, and during such
further time limited, or in case of reference to further warning, during their
continuance there to the time of warning given; and for the said Four months
and Six months after respectively, shall be protected in their Families and
Goods from all Injury and Violence, and at any time as they shall desire within
the said space or spaces respectively shall have liberty and safe conduct for
the removal of themselves, their Families and Goods, to any place or places
within this Dominion, not being garisoned for the Parliament as aforesaid; and
if they shall not be admitted to reside elsewhere in protection within this
Dominion, they shall have liberty, for themselves, their Wives, Children and
Goods, to pass beyond the Seas; Provided that they pay their due proportion of
what Taxes and other Contribution shall be charged upon the City, from the day
of the Surrender to the day of the removal, in due proportion with other places
in Ireland, and behave themselves as becomes: And such of the said Citizens
and Inhabitants as having not License to stay until further warning, shall
within a month after the Surrender be ordered to depart, shall have the same
benefit of the Third Article, as those that march away immediately upon the
Surrender.

5. That all such persons now in the City, as shall desire to live peaceably
under protection, and submit to the Parliament of England (except the persons
excepted in the second Article aforegoing, and except all Clergymen, Priests
and Friars of any Order) shall upon their application to that purpose, have
License and protection to live quietly at any such place or places within this
Dominion as they shall desire, and the said Deputy General find convenient to
admit; but such Protection shall not be understood to extend either to the
assuring of them in the enjoyment of their Lands or other Hereditaments; or to
the granting of other Indemnity or Freedom from any Question or Prosecution to
Justice in a Judicial way, for any Crimes they may be guilty of, except to such
persons as shall be found fit to have that Mercy and Favor expressly granted to
them, or to others for a certain time to be limited for that purpose; but to
such as shall have protection for a limited time, either Citizens or others, it
is intended they shall be freed from any Suit or Censure in the Civil
Judicature for things done in relation to the War during the time limited.

Memorandum, As to the fourth Article aforegoing, it is intended, That the
Citizens (not excepted against within a Month) may tatry (without particular
Application) and have Four Months after warning given to remove themselves and
Families, and six Months to carry away their Goods.

Memorandum, Also that all Soldiers or other persons, not excepted in the third
Article, who through Sickness are disabled to remove themselves at present,
shall have liberty to march away when they shall recover, and have equal
benefit with others in their Conditions respectively; And that from twelve of
the Clock this day, there shall be Cessation of all acts of Hostility on either
part, but the persons Besieged not to come without the Walls or Island, saving
into John's Gate, until the time limited for Surrender, without License from the
other part respectively.

And lastly it is agreed, That no person shall be understood to forfeit the
benefit of any the Articles for another man's Breach thereof, unless he be found
to be consenting thereto, or privy to it, without discovering or endeavoring to
prevent it, provided this extend not to Indempnifie the Hostages in case of
failer of Surrender. In Testimony whereof, the parties first above mentioned
have Interchangeably set to their Hands and Seals the day and year first above
written.

Bar: Flacpol, Hen: O Bryan. Domi: White. Pu^s: Lacy. Nic: Haly. John Bagot.


The Names of those excepted persons that rendered themselves up at mercy at the
Surrender of Limerick, 29 Oct. b. One thousand six hundred fifty one.
Major Gen: Hugo O Neil. Sir Jeffry Gallway. Sir Richard Everard. Mr. Jordan
Roch Alderman. Mr. Jeffry Barron. Major Maurice Baggot. Doctor Daniel Higgin.
Edmund Roch Burgess. George Wolf Captain. Lieutenant Coll Piers Lacy.
These were taken since the rest submitted, and Executed.
The Bishop of Emley. Major General Purcel. The late Major. Tho: Stretch.
Captain Welsh Priest.
An Account of the Ammunition and Arms received from the Soldiers and
Inhibitants of Limerick, 30 October 1651.
Barrels of Power 83 Barrels of mixed shot 23 Match three Tun and an half Fixed
and fixable Muskets 1654 Broken Muskets and Musket Barrels 1610 Fowling
Pieces, Firelocks and Carbines 215 Pikes 512 Half Pikes 30 Holberts 93 Brown
Bills 27 Pistols most unfixed 109 Collers of Bandeliers 246 Old Swords 140 Old
Saddles 72
Besides round Shot, Backs, Breasts, Head-pieces, Pioniers Tools, Powder,
Flasks, etc. whereof an account is not yet taken. Nath: Boysh.

A list of the Ordnance taken in Limerick. 30 October, 1651.
Brass Guns. Demi Cannon 2 Demi Culverin 1 Saker, 1 Faulknet 1 Small Drake 1
Iron Ornance. Culverin 1 Saker 2 Menion 7 Falkon 2 Falkenet 3
Friday the 28th of Novem. 1651.
Ordered by the Parlliament,
THat the Ministers in the several Congregations within the Cities of London
and Westminster, and the late Lines of Communication and weekly Bills of
Mortality, Do on the next Lord's Day come Seven-night, render solemn Thanks to
Almighty God for his great and seasonable Mercy to this Commonwealth, in the
delivering up into the hands of the Parliament Forces in Ireland, under the
Command of the Deputy-General, the strong and Populous City of Limerick, with
all the Artillery, Arms and Ammunition therein, upon the Thirtieth of October,
One thousand six hundred fifty one; and in the taking of the Isle of Jersey and
the Isle of Man, with all the Castles and Forts, Ordnance and Ammunition
therein.

Ordered, That the Lord Major, and Committees of the Militia's, be required to
take order for notice of this Order to be given.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

FINIS.

