emblem of the City of Edinburgh NISI DOMINVS FRVSTRA

INFORMATION, For James Mclurg late Dean of Guild of Edinburgh, George Clerk,
Robert Blackwood, and others, Merchants and Tradesmen of Edinburgh, against Sir
John Hall, Sir Archibald Muir, and others the present Magistrates and Council
thereof.
THe perpetuating of the Magistracy and Government of the City of Edinburgh in
the same persons, or in the Hands of few by Turns, being contrary to the
fundamental Laws and Constitutions of the City, tending not only to the
discouragment of other well deserving Citizens, but also to the appropriating
and wasting of the Common good, for supporting the private Interest and Ends of
such as aim at perpetual Magistracy; these Projects and Designs have always
been most unacceptable to the generality of the Inhabitants.

There was never a more open and manifest design of perpetuating the Magistracy
in the Hands of a few, than at this time, a particular Faction having continued
constantly in the Council, and influenced all the Elections these four years
bygone; during which time, more Violations and Invasions have been made upon
the Set, and Constitution of the City, then can be instanced in any preceding
Age, and that not only by overturning and contemning the Laws for regulating
the manner of Leeting and Election, but by gross and exorbitant Gratifications
and Donatives, without either cause or pretext, notwithstanding that during the
Influence of this Magistracy, the Good Town lost the Imposition upon Malt,
which was the greatest part of their Revenue, and which was enjoyed and possessed
by their Predecessors, with the universal consent of the Inhabitants, the
Brewars, and all who bore the Burden, and thereby was so far differenced from
the case of the illegal Exactions, discharged by the Claim of Right, that the
Privy Council upon full Debate did continue the Magistrates in possession
thereof, and accordingly they did possess it until it was discharged and cut
off by an Act of Parliament; and if their Imprudence was not the occasion of
that Act, at least it must be said, that no Donative (whereof ever their
Predecessors were possessed) was discharged by any King or Parliament, except
what fell out during their Magistracy; yet that Misfortune did not hinder the
exorbitant Gratifications, which were designed to support and advance their
Faction, for which there lies a Complaint at the instance of the same Pursuers
before the Lords Commissioners of Their Majesty's Thesaury, against these who
have had the influence of the Magistracy these years bygone, and who
unwarrantably elicit and delivered up a Bond for a great Sum of Money, and who
to cover their shame in delivering that Bond, do appear before the Thesaury to
support it as a just Debt, contrary their Trust, which does oblige them to
defend the Common-Good against all unjust Burdens and Impositions.

There is such regard due to the Magistracy of this Metropolitan City, that the
Citizens of it could not be induced to state any public Complaint against them
upon a few or small Transgressions; but finding at last that the fundamental
Constitutions had been utterly neglected and contemned at three several
successive Elections, and that by these Streatches, the Government of the City
is now divided betwixt Sir John Hall and Sir Archibald Muir, who have succeeded
by Turns, and who still continue the same persons upon the Council, that
influenced the former Elections, and who were retained, and acted in the
Council manifestly contrary to the Set, and the general Inclination of the City
both Merchants and Trades, and all that were any clog or weight upon them,
being now thrown out of the Magistracy and Council. Some of the Neighbors who
joined not in any of their Illegalities, nor were elected to any Office since
Michaelmass 1690, and refused to sit and act with Sir Archibald after his
Election, until they took a formal Protestation, which the Records bears, that
their coming to Council should not import any approbation of the Election.)
Have at last been constrained to raise a Process before the Privy Council, for
punishing of these who contraveened the same, and have entered into the
Magistracy by illegal Elections, and for annulling the last Election that the
Magistrates and Council of the preceding year, may proceed to a new legal and
formal Election, excluding only such particular persons as shall be proven
guilty, or accessory to the Invasions and Encroachments Libelled.

This Process being called, the Privy Council were pleased to hear Parties
distinctly in their own Presence upon every Article of the Libel; point by
point, and afterward to allow both Parties to inform upon the Grounds that
were Debated, that the Business might be distinctly understood, and deliberatly
determined, according to the Weight and Importance of it.

The first Article of the Libel, is, that Sir John Hall being Elected in May
1689, and being bound by Oath in the usual form, not to continue above two
years in the Office together, was necessitate to dimit in April 1691, at which
time there appeared a Faction in the Town Council, who were determined by right
or wrong, to advance Sir Archibald Muir to the vacant Office, and albeit that
Party had a great Support at the time, yet the appearance of a Faction, gave
early suspicion of the design, of perpetuating the Magistracy in the hands of a
few, and this procured such Opposition to that design, that it could not be
brought about without extraordinary Streatches.

The ordinary Council of Edinburgh consists of 25 persons, and the Provost or
Praeses does Vote first, and has a second Vote in case of equality, and the
Set requires a Council of thirty persons, to be all present at the Leeting of
Magistrates, and 38 at the Election, who must also be all present, so that the
Council of 30 having power of making Leets, may exclude whom they please from
these Leets, and consequently from the Magistracy, and therefore the great
Intrigue of Elections, is the framing of the Council of 30, for whoever is
Master of the plurality of that Council, is by consequence Master of the
Election, by excluding all Competitors.

The Method of making up the Council of 30, is by calling all to be present,
who have Right to Vote in the Leeting, and if any be absent, these who are
present have power to choose others to represent the absents, and these who are
Elected to fill up the Council are called Proxies, so the Strugle on either
hand was to have Proxies Elected favorable to the design of either Party, and
upon the matter the plurality of these who were present and upon the place, had
the true influence to turn the Election to either side.

It happened that there were only 22 of 30 upon the place, whereby eight
Proxies were to be Elected for filling up the Council of 30.

The Provost having Demitted, the eldest Baillie did precede, and as Praeses,
had the first and last Vote in case of equality; and in the choice of the eight
Proxies, some were elected cross to the Design of advancing Sir Archibald, by
an uncontroverted plurality, but as to the greatest number of Proxies, the
Council divided equally eleven to eleven, whereby the Praeses, who did not
favor Sir Archibald, did cast the balance against him, by his odd Vote.

Sir Archibald and his parties hopes being defeated by loss of all the Proxies,
they protested against the Praeses, his taking an odd Vote, and did withdraw in
a most irregular and mutinous manner.

These who remained might have joined with the eight Proxies nominat, who being
elected, had as good right to act as any other Members of the Council, and
might have elected new Proxies in place of these who had withdrawn; but having
no other design, than peace and concord, they rather choosed to adjourn the
Council to another diet; and to justify their procedure, did exhibit an
Information to the Duke of Hamilton, President of the Privy Council, which his
Grace having communicate to the Board, and Answers being made to it, both
parties were called to debate the Point anent the right of the odd Vote.

Sir Archibald and his faction, finding themselves worsted in the matter of the
odd Vote, did take the boldness and confidence to assert a manifest falsehood at
the Council Bar, which was the foundation of annulling the former Election of
Proxies, and introducing Sir Archibald to the Magistracy, and of all the
stretches in the following Elections, viz. That the Proxies were not at all
regularly Elected by either party, in so far as two old Counselors of the
former year, who were upon the place, had right to have concurred with the
present ordinary Council, which would have made up the number of twenty four,
whereby there was no place for eight, but six Proxies to fill up the number of
thirty. This impudent and false assertion did gain credit with the Privy
Council, who found that the two old Counselors ought to have been called to
an extraordinary Election, being upon the place; and that no Proxies should
have been chosen for them, unless they had refused when called; and that any
Election without their being called, was informal and irregular; and therefore
ordained the Magistrates and Council to begin a formal Election de novo.

Sir Archibald and his faction having the advantage of this unexpected
Interlocutor, they knew their impudent assertion would not abide a second view;
and therefore did peremptorly resolve to precipitat an Election before the next
diet of Privy Council, and when they were met, to begin this new and regular
Election, the first step was still to choose the Proxies, for filling up the
Council of thirty; and then they considering that the Penalty of transgressing
the Set, is Infamy and Incapacity, they durst not adventure to admit these old
Counselors, as having any proper right to sit, and Vote with them in the
Election of the other Proxies; but rather choosed to throw off the Mask, and
own to the World, how impudently they had averred a falsehood at the Council
Bar, as if any old Counselors had a proper right to concur with the ordinary
Council in electing of Proxies; and a Quorum of the ordinary Council of them
present, did Elect Proxies so fill up the Council of thirty, in the very same
way and manner as the former Proxies had been Elected, without admitting these
old Counselors; So that if the first Election of Proxies was void, the second
Election was much more so, being after the Act of Council, founded upon their
own assertion, and being contrary to, and inconsistent with both; and if the
first Election of Proxies was regular and formal, as truly it was, there was no
place for a second Election of Proxies.

This being an Important Article, which is the foundation of the present
Magistracy, and all the Illegalities that followed; The Pursuers make use of no
other probation, than the Town Council Books produced, wherein is recorded the
Information exhibited to the Duke of Hamiltoun, with the Answers and Act of
Privy Council, annulling the former Election of Proxies, all in the Sederunt
the 5 th of June 1691 and upon the 6 th of June, there is marked a Sederunt of
the ordinary Council, not comprehending these old Counselors; and in the same
Sederunt, the said James Baillie and Patrick Johnston, who were pretended to
have a proper Right to join with the ordinary Council, and have a Vote in the
Election of Proxies, are Elected Proxies in place of two old Counselors,
which proves the point as perfectly as any thing imaginable can be.

It is answered, 1. That it appears by the Council Books produced, that James
Baillie and Patrick Johnston, were present in the Council of thirty, at the
Leeting, and in the Council or thirty eight, at the Election of Sir Archibald
Muir, and whether they be marked present as Counselors, or as Proxies, is but
a mere niceity, which the Clerk may not have regarded in the marking of the
Council Books; and it is of no moment, or importance, whether they were there
as Counselors, or as Proxies, seeing they were present; neither can every
small error or omission be sufficient to annul an Election, which would lessen
the authority of Magistrates.

2. The Election 1691. cannot be quarrelled after so long time, because there
has interveened two Elections; So that the Magistrates then Elected, have
enjoyed the full time of their Offices, and have now fallen out by course, and
by such a consequence, the Pursuers might run back to quarrel Elections at any
time within the prescription of forty years.

It was Replied, The Council Books do clearly prove, that the procedor at Sir
Archibalds Election, was unsuitable to what he had asserted, and contrary to
the Act of Privy Council: And seeing the Law has fixed certain Rules in
Election, for no other end, but to prevent Faction in, and inhauncing of the
Magistracy; These Rules ought to have been precisely performed, especially when
there was so equal a Justle, that a Grain weight was sufficient to cast the
Balance; And Sir Archibald thought it no Triffle, to assert to the Privy
Council, that old Counselors, who ought to have been called to the Leeting,
were neglected; but when that falsehood did gain credit, and served his turn, he
pleads its now become but a Triffle, though upon that Triffle his Magistracy is
founded; but under his favor, if he has either asserted a Falsehood to the
Privy Council; or if his assertion were true, and yet he had neglected to
perform, what both the Privy Council and the Set did require; he and all who
p^omoted that Election, ought to be most severely and examplarly punished.

2. Whereas it is pretended, that it is the same thing, whether they be marked
present as Counselors or Proxies. The Defenders are in a wilful mistake, for
the whole intrigue of an Election, is to gain the plurality of those who have
right to Elect the Proxies; and therefore Sir Archibald plead before the Privy
Council, that these old Counselors had right to be Electors of the Proxies;
and the Election was not annulled, because they were not Elected Proxies, but
because they were not called to the Election of Proxies, and they were not so
called at the 2 d Election, more than at the first.

3. Whereas it is pretended, That the marking of these as Proxies, may be a
mistake of the Clerk. It is answered, (may be) is no Defense, but truly it is
impossible to be so; for immediately after the Act of Privy Council is Recorded
upon the fifth, the Sederunt of the sixth of June begins, which contains all
the Members of Council that were then present: Thereafter follows the Acts of
that Council; and one of the Acts thereof was, that they Elected James Baillie
and Patrick Johnston to be Proxies, and for a further evidence that it would
not possibly be a mistake, the same Sederunt contains a protestation engrossed,
taken against the Council for the time, because they had walked downright
contrary to the Act of Privy Council in that particular, even before the
Election of Magistrates; so they could not pretend ignorance.

To the 2 d, That the Magistrates Elected in June 1691, are now gone out by
course before they were quarrelled; and by that preparative, an Election might
be called in question at any time within prescription.

It is Replied, The Pursuers do not conclude the annulling of that Election
1691. But do libel these Violations and Invasions upon the Set, as Crimes
punishable in Sir Archibald, and these who were accessory to that illegal
Procedor, and to satisfy the Privy Council that this Magistracy has its
foundation upon a Falsehood, and that it has been continued by a tract of
practices, illegal and unjust, that therefore the last Election should only be
annulled, and that these of the former Council who had no accession to the
foresaid Violations, may proceed to a new and formal Election.

The next Point insisted on, was the Precipitation of the first Election, the
Act of Council being of the 4. of June without calling or hearing the first
Proxies who were legally Elected, the ordinary Council fell to be upon Friday
the 5. of June, and the Town Council having continued till after one a clock,
the Praeses and a number with him having withdrawn, the youngest Baillie did
take upon him to preside, and did call an extraordinary Council upon Saturnday
the sixth, where Proxies were Elected to fill up the Council of 30, which could
not be found out in all Edinburgh, without calling the Towns Servants and
Pensioners, who by the 22. Act of the meeting of Estates, were excluded from
Voting in the Election by the Pole, and even these could not be had without
Threats and Promises, and another extraordinary Diet was called upon Monday,
without the Warrant of the first Magistrate for the time, and at that Diet Sir
Archibald was both Leeted and Elected Provost, whereas the Set appoints the
Leeting to be in one day, and the Election in another, pages 15 and 16. and all
this was necessary, because both Council and Session were to sit the day
following, which would have stopped their Procedure.

It was Answered, the Privy Council having appointed a Provost to be Elected,
it was their duty to proceed with all convenient Diligence, and tho the eldest
Baillie did withdraw, he could not dissolve the Council without their consent,
and any Magistrate may call a Council, and a Quorum being met, they may proceed.
2. There is no Law or Custom excluding Towns Pensioners from Voting, and these
who are aimed at, being persons who have been in the chief Magistracy, they are
yet capable of the same Offices, much more to be Proxies, and the Act of the
meeting of Estates relates only to that particular Article. 3. The Leeting and
Election of the whole Magistrates at Michaelmass does require two Dyets, but the
Election of a single Magistrate at an extraordinary Diet does not require the
same, and the Defenders deny any Threats or Promises?

It was Replied, that the three eldest Baillies having withdrawn after one a
clock, and after the Council was adjourned to the next ordinary Diet, it was a
Presumption without precedent, that the youngest should not only take upon him
to act as Praeses at that Diet, but also to call an extraordinary Council the
next day, it being the constant rule of all Judicatures that none can call an
extraordinary meeting, except the Praeses or principal Member upon the place,
especially in matters of the greatest Moment and Importance. 2. The meeting of
Estates having excluded Towns Pensioners and Servants from Voting by the Pole,
it was incongruous and illegal that such should be admitted as Members in a
Council of 30. and the calling of them, had a tacit Insinuation of Threatening,
in case Sir Archibalds Election had proceeded without them, so that they were
neither at freedom to stay away, nor at freedom to Vote when they came, least
they should lose their Pensions, without which severals of them could not
subsist, and there were more direct Threatenings used against others to force
them in, and all this practiced, notwithstanding of Protestations taken, which
are also recorded in the Sederant of the 6 of June. 3. The Leeting and Election
in one day, was unwarrantable, and what the Set does appoint (...) is to be
observed at every extraordinary Election, unless there could be some important
Reason of Disparity, otherways all that is appointed by the Set, might be
neglected at an extraordinary Election upon that Pretense, for the Set supposes
the ordinary time of Election, and by that reasoning, the Defenders might
pretend that there were no need for 30. or 38. persons, for the Leeting and
Election of a single Magistrate, and there is nothing more suitable than that
the Leeting and Election should be at different Dyets, because after the Leets
are completed the Trades who (...) of 30. are bound to retire, and meet with
the eight extraordinary Deacons in the Magdalen Chapel before the Election,
and it were very incongruous that the Magistrates and Merchant Council, should
continue to sit in Council, when they could Act nothing till the Trades did
return.

And as to the Instances of the Leeting and Election of Sir Thomas Kennedy and
Sir Magnus Prince in one day, that can be no precedent, because they were named
by the Kings Letter, and there was only the shadow, but not the substance of a
free Election.

The next point insisted in was, that the Set page 10, provides that none be
upon the Council above two years together, except they be Office-men, or by
virtue of their Office be upon the Coucil, and by the Set page 9, Tit. Council.
It is clear that none are Reckoned Office-men but the seven Magistrates, and the
rest of the 25 being 18 Persons are only Counselors, and by the Set page 8.
Tradesmen are not Capable to be Magistrates or Office-men, yet George Stirling
has been upon the Council ever since the Popular Election, albeit Instruments
were taken against him at Michailmass 1691 that he could not be continued: And
the like at Michaelmass 1692. And he was so far convinced of it, that he
acknowledged in face of Council the continuing of him was contrary to the Set,
yet the was persuaded to make bold with it. In like manner William Menzies has
been above two years upon the Council without Office, and these were active
Instruments in the last Election, who ought not at all to have been Members or
concerned in it.

It was answered, the Set prohibiting any to be above two years upon the
Council, contains a quality, viz, except they be Office-men, or by virtue of
their Office on the Council, and George Stirling and William Menzies are both
in the case of that exception, for neither of them were evere above two years
together upon the Council in the same Capacity. For Deacon Stirling was first a
Trades Counselor, then two years an ordinary Deacon, and then a Trades
Counselor, and now is continued upon the Council. And in like manner William
Menzies, was first Treasurer, and then old Treasurer, afterward old Baillie,
and lastly old Dean of Gild; And so changed Offices yearly. 2. Custom has
cleared this, for William Hamilton Tailyor continued Eight years on the
Council, by changing his Character from Deacon to Trades-Counsel^or: And
Alexander Reid Goldsmiths was continued in the same way upon the Council Seven
years; And the Pursuers mistake is in this: that they do not cansider a Deacon
as an Office, whereas ordinary Deacons are certainly by their Office upon the
Council, and so George Stirling falls under the exception of the Set.

It was Replied that the Defenders gave so much Proof of their Ingenuity in the
former Pleading anent the Odd Vote, that the Pursuer cannot be afraid that the
privy Coucil will be easily Imposed upon, to take their Commentare upon the Set
as good Corn, and what is now pretended, is just as False and absured as the
Old Assertion of the Rights of old Counselors to Vote at extraordinary
Elections; And this Commentare upon the Set would utterly enervat and overturn
the whole Design of it, which is to Exclude the possibility of Inhancing
Magistracy, for at this Rate; The Bulk of the Council might continued for life
by changing Characters once in Two years: and the thereby be absolutely Master
of Elections, and the Exception would be just als large as the Rule.

2 As this consequence were most absurd, so the Commentare destroys the Text,
for neither of the the two Defenders fall under the Exception of Persons that
may be continued above Two years, and it is absolutely false that either of
them are Office-Men, or upon the Council by Virtue of their Office.

For clearing of this Important point, the meaning of the word Office-Men, is
expressed Page 9. Title Council, bearing that the Council does consist of 18.
Persons, beside the Office-Men to wit Provost, Bailies, Dean of Guild and
Treasurer, who are the seven Magistrates: so that Office-Men and Magistrates are
the same thing, and the seven Magstrats with the 18. Counselors make the
Number of 25; And it is a mighty measure of considence to pretend that an
ordinary Deacon, or an old Baillie, or old Dean of Guild, is an Office-Man or
more than a Counselor, seeing this is expressly contrair to the said Page 9.
Title Council, which does not only express the Number of the Council, but set
down the Persons that make up that Number of 18. viz. Old Provost, four old
Baillies, old Dean of Guild and Theasurer, and three Merchants mo, with eight
Crafts-men, whereof six Deacons and two other Crafts-men, commonly called
Tradesmen counselors; And the Pursuer desires to know if either o^ the two
Complained upon, were in other Capacity than these, that are contained in the
enumeration of the Council, except the time that William Minzies was Theasurer,
which the Pursuers do not reckon or Complain on.

3. Whereas it is pretended, that at the least, the two Defenders, by virtue of
their Office, were upon the Council, and so they fall under the latter part of
the Exception. It is answered, this is another quibble in the vain hopes that
the Set will be mistaken; and though that one mistake should overthrow the
whole intent of it, the Defenders make no matter. But for clearing the meaning
of that part of the Exception; The import of these words, (or by virtue of
their Office be upon the Council) is such as are upon the Council without
Election, and that is the seven old Magistrates, for these who are Magistrates
this year, are old Magistrates the next year of course, by their Office without
Election, as appears by the Set, page 9. and more fully by the two year Act
subjoined to the Set, page 4. which is annually confirmed by Oath, and there is
no other can enter into, or remain upon the Council without Election, or by
virtue of their Office, except the old Magistrates allanerly: And whereas it is
pretended, that William Meinzies was an old Magistrate, and George Stirling as
an ordinar Deacon was upon the Council. It was answered, none of them were upon
the Council by virtue of their Office, but by Election; for albeit the present
Magistrates of this year, continue upon the Council the next year without
Election; yet if any of them be advanced to a higher Office, or die, or demit,
in that case, there is a vacancy of an old Magistrates place, which must be
supplied by Election, as in this case William Meinzies was advanced to be old
Baillie, on the decease of Thomas VVyllie; and although Thomas would have been
old Baillie of course by his Office; yet William Menzies came there by
Election, and cannot by changing his Character be perptuat in the Council by
several Elections; In like manner it is a rare pretense, that George Stirling
by his Office of ordinary Deacon is upon the Council, for it is Council that
Elects him an ordinary Deacon, and he is not an ordinary Deacon without
Election; But the Trades do make choice of fourteen Deacons: And out of these,
the Council does choice six ordinary Deacons, and the Councils choice has this
restriction by the Set, that they cannot by Election continue any Person above
two years a single Counselor, but if a Counselor be advanced to the
Magistracy which a Crafts-man cannot, he may be advanced the third year, and
may a fourth year be an old Magistrate, and so may advance to a higher degree of
the Magistracy, till at last he go out. And whereas several Precedents are
condescended upon, which are alleged to Introduce a Custom of continuing
Persons longer than two years upon the Council. It is answered, the Examples
are only two, not sufficient to Introduce a Custom, and a practice contrair to
the Set, can be no Rule to overturn what is clearly provided by it, and it
cannot be condescended upon, that ever Protestations were taken against these
Persons, or that their continuing was approven by any Judicature, and it is not
every Violation of the Set, that draws Persons to a public Complaint against a
Magistracy, it is true some Magistrates may have transgressed against it in one
particular, and some in another: But this Magistracy has trampled upon, and
invaded it on all corners, and the Meeting of Estates having a special regard
to the Imposing of Magistrates by an undue Election, did state that as an
Article in the claim of Right to be contrair to Law, and did once appoint
Popular Elections that Magistracy might ever proceed by a legal and due
Election in time coming. So that no Precedent before the Poll, can be sustained
against the Constitution of the City.

Another notable Violation of the Set was at the last two Elections, in so far
as the Set appoints 30 persons to be present at Leeting, and expresses the
different and distinct Capacities of each of these 30 persons, pages 14, and
15. and appoints the said 30 persons, with eight Craftsmen more, to be present
at the Election; yet Deacon Carse and Deacon Stirling were elected, each in two
distinct Capacities, the one an extraordinary Deavon and Trades-counsellor, and
the other, to wit, Deacon Stirling an old Counselor, and a new Counselor at
the same time; and because the Set provides 30, and 38 to be present at Leeting
and Election respective, therefore two Proxies were chosen, one for Deacon
Carse, and another for George Stirling, though they were both personally
present.

It was Answered, There is nothing in the Set to hinder any person to be
elected in two several Capacities, and particularly to hinder an extraordinary
Deacon to be a Trades-counsellor, or a Trades-counsellor one year to be
continued another, and that does not abridge the number of these who Leet and
Elect, because Proxies are chosen to make up that number.

It was Replied, This is also altogether against the Set, for it does not only
determine the number of persons, but likewise does express their several
Capacities, and if one might supply two Capacities, the number of the Council
might be abridged to the one half; as for example, if George Stirling being a
Trades-counsellor the last, might also be continued this, by the same reason
the other Trades-counsellor might be continued, and likewise the three
Merchant-counsellors, and so 5 of the old Council would be also 5 of the new,
notwithstanding the Set, page 15 provides that the new Council of 18 persons,
and the old Council of 12 shall meet for the making of Leets, and by this means
the old Council, will be reduced to seven persons, so that it is clear that the
Set does provide the 12 and 18 to be different and distinct persons to prevent
Packing, and whereas it is pretended, that 5 Proxies may be chosen to supply
the place of the old Trade or Merchant Counselors, it is answered, that does
not at all take off the Inconvenience, for by the Set the full number are once
to be chosen of distinct several persons, and the absence of any Party is to be
supplied by Proxies, but that there should be a want in the Constitution, and
in place of 38 there should be only 33, or a smaller number elected upon the
Council, that would entirely enervat the Set. 2. The supplying these wanting
persons by Proxies, does not at all answer the design of the Set; for these who
have the Plurality of the ordinary Council, can choose Proxies as they please,
with prospect to the particular design in hand, and so are absolutely Masters
of any Election, and if this were once allowed, a factious Party would always
abridge the number, that they might fill them up, upon a particular prospect;
and the gaining of one Vote, is most ordinarily to gain all the Election, and
one Vote of the Trades is worth two of the Merchants, because the Trades being
incapable of Magistracy, they are ordinarily invidious and jealous of inhauncing
the Government, and with great difficulty can they be pacqued, and therefore
the Set allows them a greater Interest at Election than at any other time, they
begin ordinarily less than the third, and at the Election they are 18 of 38, and
by immemorial custom they do absolutely rule and influence Elections by the
Magdalen-Chappel, for they are allowed to meet separatly there and to Vote upon
the Leets of every Magistrate, and who ever has the plurality of Votes, the
smaller part by immemorial custom does join with the greater, whereby they have
18 uniform Votes at the Election, and by gaining two of the Merchant-Council,
they have the Plurality, so that if a pacquing Magistracy should be allowed to
abridge the number of Trades, till the Election did occur, the Merchants in the
ordinary Council, (who are easily swayed by advancement into the Magistracy)
and who have the greatest influence in it, would choose Proxies for Trades one
or more for the purpose, and it would be no difficulty to gain the plurality of
the Trades in the Chapel, and thereby to carry the whole Election.

And as to the Alledgance that the like has been practiced before, There is
only a single Case instanced at the time when Elections were not free, which
can make no Rule.

Constant Custom has prevailed to give the Magdalen Chapel the overruling
power of Elections, wherein no great Inconveniency has ever been found, but at
the last Election the major part being against Sir John Hall, seven of 18 that
were for him, did combine, and enter into a written Engagement that they should
adhere to him, which is a Practice without precedent contrary to Law, and
publict Utility, tending only to Faction, and this point being simply denied,
it is proven by the Oaths of the Subscribers, all of them having acknowledged
the Signing of a Paper, predetermining them as to the Election.

The Set also appoints, page 16. that the Council of 30 should solemnly protest
before God, that they shall choose without Fead, Favor or Collusion, and the
secret Practices for carrying on this Election being known, it was required
that every Member should be appointed to protest in the Terms of the Set, which
was absolutely refused, and Instruments taken thereupon, and it is false which
is pretended, that ever Baillie Blackwood did acquiesce, else the Instrument
would not have been insert.

The Proxies not having answered expectation at the last Election, they were
removed by a Vote of Council, and tho the eight extraordinary Deacons were
present, yet they were not admitted to Vote either, whether they should be
removed, or who should be chosen in their places, because none of them were for
the present design.

It was answered. 1. Proxies have only a precarious Right, and being chosen
only for a particular effect, they might be removed and new ones chosen at
every Diet. 2. The extraordinary Deacons had no Interest to Vote anent the
Proxies, because they have only Right to Vote in the Election.

It was Replied. 1. It is true Proxies are only chosen to a special effect but
that effect is all that relates to the Election, and they have as good right to
act and vote in relation to it, as any other in the Council, it is true they
are but Proxies for absent persons, and if the persons whom they represent
should appear at the Diet they are elected or any other, they had no more
Interest, but in absence of these for whom they are Proxies, they cannot be
removed, and they never were removed in any case. 2. The Set appoints 30
persons for Leeting, and the Title Election, page 16. does provide that the
said 30 persons with 8 extraordinary Deaons shall Elect, so the same 30 who
have Right to Leet, are also to Elect, and cannot be removed, and it is without
all precedent to remove Proxies once chosen, and in this case the Proxies upon
the first Election, had already attended two Dyets, and were cited to attend
the third at the Election, tho they were removed when they came. 3. The Set,
page 17. appointing the 8 extraordinary Deacons to be present at the Election,
they are a part of the Council that day, and nothing can be Voted in that
Council, whereof they are a part, without allowing them a Vote, yet they were
not suffered to Vote anent the Proxies, and if they had they would have
retained them.

The Set does also provide that none shall be advanced to the Magistracy,
unless they have been one year or two upon the Council before, yet Patrick
Johnston was Elected a Baillie at the Election 1691, and James Bowden at the
last Election, tho neither of them was ever a year upon the Council.

And whereas it was pretended, that annus ceptus procompleto habetur.

It is answered, the Set bears, they shall be a year or two, which must at
least import that they have been one entire year upon the Council.

And seeing the Pursuers have only raised this Complaint as faithful Burgesses,
for the Preservation of the Fundamental Laws and Constitutions of the City,
without any by end or project of advancing any of themselves into the
Magistracy, but that there may be a free Election of such persons as may be
acceptable to the people, and such as may be most fit for supporting the
Interest and Government of the Church and State as they are by Law established,
and that all of the Pursuers did very early evidence their Loyalty and
Affection to both, and particularly when this Nation was threatened with a most
unnatural Invasion, they are humbly Confident that the Lords of their Majesty's
Privy Council will be careful to preserve the Privileges and Constitutions of
this Metropolitan City, and punish the persons Guilty of, and Accessory to the
foresaid Violations and Invasions upon the Set and Decree Arbitral, and annul
the last illegal and informal Election, and Authorize the Magistrates and
Council, in Office before Michaelmass last, to begin a new and formal Election,
excluding always these who have been Accessory to the foresaid Invasions, viz.
Sir John Hall, Sir Archibald Muir, William Menzies, George Stirling, Patrick
Haliburton, and Patrick Johnstoun, and the ordinary Deacons who have been
accessory to the Combination.


