A DECLARATION AND PROLCAMATION OF The Deputy-General of Ireland, Concerning
The present hand of God in the Visitation OF THE PLAGUE; And for the Exercise
of Fasting and Prayer in relation thereunto.

Printed at Cork in the Year of our Lord, 1650.

Reprinted at London by John Field.

IRELAND,
IT has pleased the Lord our God, now a long while to stretch forth his heavy
hand over this Nation in general, and the Inhabitants thereof, in those capital
Judgments of the Sword and Pestilence (with somewhat of Famine also in many
places;) and especially by that Plague of Pestilence (as with his own more
immediate hand) to sweep away, in a manner, whole Towns and Cities, and lay
waste almost whole Countries, and to spread the contagion throughout into all
parts (as sadly is to be seen at this day) And that eminent hand of his (which
of late was so heavy only, or chiefly, upon the Enemies of his and his Peoples
Cause, and upon others the Natives of the Land, with distinguishing Mercy, and
forbearance toward those his poor creatures that serve him in that Cause) has
of late been extended to the taking away of many of them also, and not Soldiers
only, but many Officers (and more of them, in proportion, then of the other)
as also many other English Protestant people, both of the ancient Inhabitants,
and such as have more lately come over to us; and of all these, not only the
common sort, but many even of those that have more eminently professed his
fear, and diverse such as we have cause to esteem his own people, dear and
precious in his sight, so as that former discriminating Mercy of his, seems now
to be turned into a general displeasure, and universal Indignation: And his
destroying Angel (striking here and there round about us) seems to come near to
us, to the Doors, and even into the Houses or Tents of us that yet survive,
even of those that are esteemed best amongst us. And thus those, whom he has
so wonderfully preserved and provided for in times and places of greatest
hazard and scarcity, and owned both here and in England, in doing great things
for them and by them, as yet he cease not to do ( which I desire we and all
his people may ever acknowledge to his praise, and that his and our Enemies
might to their conviction) Though he yet delivers them not over into the hands
of men, but rather makes them still more and more Masters over their Enemies,
and those that hate them, yet (as in some other kinds both of Diseases and
Hardships, wherewith he has formerly afflicted us, so in this now) he is
pleased to chastise with his own hand, and taking away many (whether in
Judgment for their own and our sins or unworthiness, or in Mercy, as from the
evil to come) does every way threaten and warn those of us that remain, and
calls upon all men every where to repent, and not to think that those he has
thought fittest to take away, were greater sinners then our selves, but all of
us to search our hearts, and try our ways, and turn unto himself, that he may
heal us, and have mercy upon us. Now though none of the works of our God are
without their grounds or ends, or without their speakings and teachings
intended to the Sons of men, and especially to those whom he has given eyes to
see: And though in these cases of Judgments, no men (no not the most
sanctified amongst us) need to seek far for causes more then sufficient of his
just displeasure against them (further then Mercy through our Mediator Christ
Jesus, and Faith in given him, turns it into Free Grace and favor) yet such
extraordinary dispensations, being not without their extraordinary grounds and
ends, It is the duty of all, and must needs be the desire and practice of the
Faithful (through the grace and wisdom given them) to search in themselves, and
humbly to seek from the Lord, that they may understand what those are, that in
such dealings of his he would have them especially take notice of. And though
such as have interest in the sure and everlasting Covenant of Mercy, need not,
and so (so far as it is sealed unto them) they do not or ought not fear that
God has, or ever will break that Covenant, or take away those everlasting
Mercies of his in Christ Jesus toward them, yet even such (considering how
they through the flesh do unworthily abuse that Mercy, and all the gracious
fruits thereof, and do many other ways provoke him) ought more then others (as
kindly children toward such a Father) to be jealous of his just displeasure,
and tenderly sensible of, and affected with any significations thereof, and
most sollicitously to search and seek out (that they may be kindly humbled
for, and in future avoid) the occasions thereof in themselves: And considering
that in those things which concern our Temporary being, and the comfort or
discomfort thereof (wherein he has foretold he would correct even the seed of
David (his chosen and anointed one) when they offend, notwithstanding his sure
Covenant for everlasting mercies, which he would not break or take away) He
does not vainly afflict nor grieve the children of men; and then especially not
those he has adopted for his own, but does it for some ends of good toward
them (as for reproving, or restraining, for awakening, or quickening, for
humbling, teaching or instructing, for purging or purifying, for trying or
perfecting of them, etc. as he finds they need) and of glory to himself in and
from them, they ought not to be regardless and unsensible of, but carefully to
observe each motion of his hand, and pointing of his finger, and to watch,
study, and humbly to seek, that they may find out his mind and meaning in
all, and especially in such signal dispensations of his toward them, as these
are, and may obtain the fruit to themselves, and render to him the glory he
intends them for.

Having therefore (upon the aforesaid eminent occasion, given to my self and
others in this Nation) some sense and consideration (through Grace) in my own
heart concerning these things, and much more then I have the time or faculty to
bring forth in suitable expressions, I thought good to commend the same to
others, and provoke them to a further sense and consideration of them, and to a
diligent practice suitable thereunto, leaving and recommending them to be
further improved and heightened, both in my self and others, through the working
of the same Spirit of Grace in Christ Jesus, by which alone, any such sense is
wrought in me: And considering, that as the people of God ought to be sensible
of, and duly affected with all the Judgments of God in the world (even against
wicked men, and their enemies, so as to give glory to God in them (which
worldly men themselves will not) to pray and intercede for Mercy and
forbearance toward them (so far as may stand with his honor and good pleasure)
and to be humbled under the consideration of their own equal unworthiness and
ill-deserving (further then as infinite Mercy passes by, or Grace makes a
difference) and to take warning, and be bettered in themselves by such
examples) so much more ought they, many other ways, to be affected, when they
see God smite their fellows (those that are dear to him as themselves) and so,
or otherwise, striking at or near themselves (which should, amongst other
effects, awaken and stir us up to consider what, and how great those evils must
be, that so provoke or engage God to seem (as it were, for the time) to act
against the glory of his Mercy and Truth, to those that profess and trust his
Name, for the necessary vindication of his Justice, and greater glory of his
Mercy at the last) And that when his mighty hand is so eminently lifted up, as
he expects and requires all the children of men should be humbled under it, and
his own especially; so it becomes those that are so indeed, to express and
declare it, both before Him, and his Angels, and Men, in all the ways he has
required or declared his acceptance of, and to take shame to themselves, and
witness to his Righteous Judgments, and implore his mercy and forbearance; I
do therefore commend unto all that have any thing of true Christianity in them,
within this Dominion, the frequent exercise of Prayer with Fasting (such as is
without Superstition) and (suitable to the Faith, Simplicity, Truth and Purity
of the Gospel) during the time of this our Calamity, with humble
Acknowledgements and Confessions before God (to our shame and his glory) and
fervent Intercessions (as the Spirit of Christ shall enable) in behalf of the
many places and people of this Land, now so sadly visited and afflicted
therewith; especially of Dublin, Wexford, Ross, Kilkenny, Carrick, Clonmel and
Youghall, and the several parts of the Army throughout our Quarters, in Garrison
or Field, especially in Leinster and Munster, That God would stay that his
afflicting hand, and spare his poor people ( especially those that serve and
truly seek him in this Country and Cause) that he would show us wherein we
have especially offended, or do displease him; what his mind and meaning is
toward us; what he would have us learn by these his loud and dreadful
speakings, and (especially) what our carriage and dealings should have been,
and what he would have it be, toward the generality of the people, and our
Enemies here, whether in respect of Justice (for innonocent Blood) or of more
moderation and mercy toward any; and that he would guide us in his way, to do
according to his own mind therein; bow and bend our hearts to conform unto,
and faithfully to follow and pursue what he shall teach us to be his mind and
will in all things; and give out a true Spirit of Humiliation for, and
universal Reformation of those many evils that abound amongst us, and a
faithful zeal for it (especially in us the Officers toward those under our
charge) and this as in respect of all evils, so especially of those that are
most crying and prevailing (as Swearing, Blaspheming, Drunkenness, Plundring,
Exaction and Cruelty toward people in protection (where any opportunity with
hope of privacy is found) cursed Covetousness, and Self-seeking in general (the
root of many other Evils) and neglect of God, his ways and worship) that he
would every way enlarge his Spirit upon his poor Servants here, and advance the
truth and power of Godliness more amongst us, make us a people fit for him to
own, use and bless yet further in his Work, for good in the world, and not
only to destroy, and be destroyed; and would so take off his afflicting hand
from us, and restore health and safety to us, and soundness within our Tents
and Dwellings, and turn our now required Mourning into Praises; and also in
behalf of the poor deluded Popish people of this Nation (captivated and kept in
miserable darkness and bondage by their seducing Priests and Leaders) and,
amongst them, even for our very Enemies, that all of them (so far as may stand
with the good pleasure of God, and with the glory and Righteousness of his
Works and Judgments in the world) may at length be made sensible of the great
weight of so much crying innocent Blood, whereof (as principals or
participants) they generally stand guilty; of their malice and cruelty (so far
as they find power and opportunity) and of their continued abominable
Treachery toward all that concur not with them in their own Superstitions,
Idolatry and affected Ignorance, or indeed that worship not the Beast as they
do: And also of the eminent and glorious hand of God, exalted so conspicuously
and constantly every where against them, for these and the many other
Iniquities and Abominations abounding amongst them; so as from Conviction
thereof, they may take shame and confusion to themselves and their Idols, and
give glory to the living God; and (if possible) the wrath of God may be
appeased toward them, and not utterly destroy them and their Nation; and that
those of them who are capable of his eternal Mercies, may be truly and
spiritually humbled under his mighty hand, taken off from the foundations of
any Self-or-Creature-confidence, and brought to see, and find the pure and
free mercies of God in Jesus Christ; and, for that purpose, may have their eyes
opened, and hearts enlarged to discern and embrace the true light and freedom
of the Gospel, and be converted from their carnal conceptions to a spiritual
reception thereof, and from their vain Idols to the living God; and in order
thereunto (if the Lord have any purpose of a Church or People to himself to be
called out amongst them) we may, through his Grace, be made instruments
thereof, as well as of subduing their outward man; and (however) may so walk
toward them and amongst them, both in word and life, as not to give them
occasion of further offense, or stumbling at the Gospel we profess, or cause it
to be the worse thought or spoken of amongst them.

And the same exercise of Fasting and Prayer, which I thus recommend for
frequent use to those within this Nation (now more immediately concerned in the
occasion of it) I do earnestly desire may be used for the same purposes and in
the same behalfs (as God shall give freedom and opportunity) by other
Christians of the Reformed Religion in other places (who shall take notice
hereof, and whose hearts God shall touch with a fellow-feeling of our
condition; to whom I desire our Judgments and our Shame may be as notorious, to
the glory of God, as our Mercies and Successes) and particularly by the Saints
and Churches of Jesus Christ, and those especially of the Army in our native
Land (our Brethren by double and treble relation;) And, for those within this
Dominion (that all, who have interest at the Throne of Grace, may at once meet
there with their joint cries) I have thought fit (in the Place I stand in here)
to Appoint, and do hereby Appoint accordingly, the first, second and third
Tuesdays in the ensuing Month of August, to be kept and observed as times
especially set apart for Public Humiliation with Fasting and Prayer, upon the
occasions, and for the ends and purposes before expressed: On the first whereof
to begin the same at the Headquarters or Camp, and at Clonmel, Youghal, Cork,
and other Garrisons and places to which notice hereof shall come before; and the
second and third to be observed both at the same, and all other places (as
notice hereof shall be further spread:) On which days at the several places as
aforesaid respectively, I require all Officers (both Military and Civil, for
those under their respective Charges) carefully to see to it, that there be a
general abstinence, so far as comeliness and necessity will permit, from all
worldly labors, bodily food, and other the outward comforts of this life
(whereof our unprofitableness and iniquities, and particularly our usual excess
in them, and over-valuing, or other abuse of them, render us most unworthy) as
also from all sports and recreations; And likewise to take notice of, and
punish (by Imprisonment, or other fitting Penalties proportionably portionably
to the Offenses) not only such as shall contemptuously do to the contrary
hereof, but also any such as shall be found (from Idleness, or from contempt or
slighting of Religion, or of the hand of God in his present dispensations) to
neglect the joining with others in Prayer and Religious Exercise, to the
purposes aforesaid, in one place and Society or other (not according to the
Popish way:) And I exhort all true Professors of the Reformed Religion, in the
fear and dread of God, for the love of Jesus Christ, and from the bowels of
Charity, and fellow-feeling of each others Miseries, to be seriously
affectionate in this Exercise; and that in their Addresses to the Throne of
Grace for the aforesaid concernments of their own, they be mindeful also of the
Troubles and Temptations of their Brethren, wherewith they are conflicting
(though in differing kinds) in other Nations, and especially in England and
Scotland; where (besides many other both Iniquities and Judgments) that most
sad and abhorred evil is now more then ever to be found, and further to be
feared, That Brethren, professing, and in each party some (as there is reason to
believe) really having the same Faith, and hope of the Gospel, and the same
Cause of Common Concernment (against the world of enemies to Christ, his Spirit
and Kingdom, that thirst and watch to destroy both parties) yet (either from
offense and weakness, or peevishness, or from worldly interest) not only have
been and are loaded and wounded (the one part by the other) with foul and
hateful reproaches (to the dishonor and scandal of the Gospel, and the
rejoicing and advantage of those their Enemies) and provoked one at the other,
and one of them to take the interest and assistance of the said Enemies,
against the other, and to execute (the one upon the other) that destruction, by
those Enemies designed against both; which sad spectacle (most grievous to
every true Christian heart) as it calls for deepest Humiliation on both parts (
especially on that whence the cause has been most given, or the offense with
least cause and most impatience taken) so it requires most earnest Prayer and
Intercession to our God and Father of those that are faithful on either part
(which I desire accordingly in these our Exercises may be used) that, for the
Merits and Mediation, and by the Power and Spirit of his Son Christ Jesus (our
Lord, Head, and eldest Brother, the great Reconciler and Peacemaker betwixt God
and Man, and amongst men, his Members, each with other) and from his Fatherly
bowels and pity toward his weak and froward children, he would now in the
extremity of time appear, and mercifully interpose and bring forth some
expedient (when men can or will find none) to avoid and hinder (if it be his
will) this hateful and dreadful evil and mischief; and for that purpose would
put forth and enlarge, in all that are his children in both Nations, that sweet
Spirit of Peace and Love (as well as Righteousness and Judgment) which is his
Sons; to convince and reprove every one of them for their several offenses and
evils, that any way occasion this or lead to it; and to overpower and work them
unto a disposition of giving and receiving satisfaction, and of bearing and
forbearing toward each other (and that especially in the stronger toward the
weak) and every one (as far as they have been faulty givers, or impatiently and
unjustly takers of the offense) to take shame to themselves, and give glory to
God; and that so he would pardon the sin, take away the offenses, and heal the
breaches betwixt his people, and discover the hypocrisy, and defeat the
designs of those his enemies (that watch the advantage for the ruin of them
all, and to raise thereupon their own corrupt interests against Godliness and
Honesty) that none that have interest in Jesus Christ, may further be drawn
into, or proceed in any Engagements to the destruction of their Brethren, the
opposing of his Spiritual Kingdom and work in the world, or the partaking with
those parties and powers that are enemies thereunto: But (if it be his good
pleasure, and he see it conducing to the glory of his work at last, That there
should be any such Engagement, even to Blood and further War) That then
(pardoning the weaknesses and failings) he would still witness to the integrity
and simplicity of those his poor Servants in this same old Cause of His, who
have (through his Grace) followed him therein, according to their light, with
faithfulness, to the original Grounds, substance, and principal ends thereof,
with least mixture of their own, or other worldly corrupt interests, in the
prosecution of it, and with truest desires and endeavors for the suppressing or
restraining of the Common Enemies thereof, for the Deliverance, Protection and
Advancement of those that love and fear the Lord, and wait for his appearance;
and in the mean time, for preserving amongst all such the unity of faith in the
bond of peace and love: And that if he shall yet see it good to complete, or
prosecute any further the outward Victories of his people, against their
outward Enemies and Oppressors in the world, he would glorify the Power and
Virtue of the Spirit of his Son in them, now at last, in giving them (through
it) to overcome spiritually the Temptations of prosperity, and of the good
things of the world, as hitherto it has been, by their overcoming all Trials
and Sufferings in the evils thereof.

Now lastly, for the better and speedier communication of what is herein
required or desired, I do hereby further Appoint the same to be Printed and
Published.

Given at the Leaguer before Waterford, July 30. 1650. H: IRETON, Deputy
General.

FINIS.

