TWO LETTERS SENT From the Lord INCHIQUEEN, Unto the SPEAKER of the Honorable
House of COMMONS.

Concerning two great Victories obtained over the REBELS in IRELAND.

With an Order from the House, that Letters of Thanks should be returned unto
the LORD INCHIQUEEN.

Die Martis, 18 Maii, 1647.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That these Letters of the Lord
INCHIQUEEN'S be forthwith printed and published.

Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.



London, Printed for John Wright, at the Kings Head in the Old Bailey. 1647.

Mr. Speaker,
ON Frday last Dromannagh was surrendered into my hands, having first made a
small breach in their Outwork, and falling on with some men; upon that the
rebels retreated into the Castle, which indeed was a place that might have held
out a long time: but having gained the Town-wall, and drawn up our Ordnance
against it, the rogues took quarter for life and wearing apparel only, and
left all things else, which were not valuable, they having long expected a
siege: so as the best booty there was 4 barrels of powder, with a proportion of
match, a small piece of Ordnance, a Murderer, 2 sling-pieces, and 100 Arms (but
the guard were not above 60 men at most). From thence I sent away the Horse
instantly to face Cappoquin, and just as they drew up before the town, there
was a supply of powder and match coming, with three Troops of Horse, and a
Regiment of Foot, who presently retreated with all the have they could to
Clomnell in sight of our Horse; so as when I came with the rest of the Army to
beleager the place; they condescended at the first summons to treat, and (as
afterward appeared for want of Ammunition) to give up the place upon the
enclosed Articles: Just as the town was given up to me, I had advertisment of
the landing of Col. Temple, with upwards of 300 Horse; whereupon I caused the
Army to be brought into Cappoquin; and the adjacent villages, where they might
have some shelter from the weather, which has been very foul, I repaired unto
Cork, to take order for fitting the new armed forces to come unto the Army,
intending with them to sit down before Dungarvan; and for that purpose I am
fain first to lead away the Army, with all things they are able to carry with
them, and having fixed them to bring back the oxen and draught horses to draw
the pieces of battery, all the oxen I have being able to draw no more then two
of them at a time. And although I may happen by this means in two or three
days to get the Ordnance from Cappoquin, to Dungarven, which is but 7 miles;
yet I assure you it will be impossible to draw them to any other place till we
have draught-horses and carriages, the want whereof does exceedingly obstruct
the carrying on of the Service. Upon the first news of Col. Temple his coming,
I was in great fear that the men come with him would be unwilling to come
abroad, because I had then no money left, but what was that day to be issued to
the Army in the field, who were paid partly in money, and partly in provision;
so as I had no shift, but to put the Army off two or three days for the money,
and to give so much of that (as I found requisite) to furnish out Colonel
Temples men; who had not been here 24 hours, when there arrived Richard Smith
with the Robert and John of London with 1400 barrels of pease, and 700 barrels
of wheat; and the next morning after I came to Cork, Capt. Swanly the Admiral
of these Seas arrived with 5000 l. in money, 140 horse, and 100 foot; so as now
we are in probability absolutely masters of the field: And I doubt not, if our
sins do not render us yet unfit for such mercies, that by the latter end of
this Summer all this Province will be reduced; which will be much the better
and sooner done, if the Parliament be pleased to send a Committee hither, as I
have continually desired, that may be constantly at Cork, to take care of
providing for the Army and Garrisons, necessaries for the Artillery, improving
of the revenue, and such things as cannot be in any measure well done in my
absence, except I have a Committee to assist; and that they may have power for
issuing of moneys, and may see that the things the Army now wants may be
brought seasonably to us: which being my duty to represent to that honorable
Assembly, I have here enclosed sent a List thereof, and if they please to
transmit them unto us, I doubt not but we shall easily remove all the
difficulties that the Rebels can interpose between us and the accomplishing of
those expectations that may be entertained by the State, in recompense of that
charge and trouble they have undergone for the re-establishing of the English
Interest, and the truly reformed Religion in this Province; whereunto there
shall be no endeavor wanting that lies in the power of

Your humble Servant, INC.
Cork, 4. May, 1647.
Master Speaker,
THe wind has stayed my other Letters till now that the Town and Castle of
Dungarvan is surrendered unto me; before which I have lain since Monday last,
being the 3 of this instant. And although I played upon it 4 days successively
with 4 Pieces of Battery, yet was not the place made any way assaultable
thereby, nor indeed much the worse; all the prejudice we did them being the
beating down a Flanker upon the Town-wall, which was lyned with earth, 14 foot
high: And as we find that if they within had not wanted things necessary for
defense thereof, it might have held out a long time; so we perceive that after
the gaining of the Town, the Castle might in like manner have proved
defensible: Yet we conceiving them not to be of that strength, had resolved to
give that place no quarter, being it had put us to so much trouble, lest the
giving Conditions to such, might be an encouragement to other places to hold
out, in expectation of like Conditions at last. But the want of Carriages had
almost starved us, being unable to fetch our provisions 7 miles by any other
means, the winds hindering it to come by Sea (as was designed) then sending
the men to fetch them: which being of dangerous consequence, lying near an
enemy, we durst not do for 3 days together, whereon the Soldiers wanted bread,
and had but very little flesh; insomuch as many fell sick, and all grew faint;
so as indeed we thought it a very great blessing to have the Town and Castle so
surrendered to us upon the enclosed Conditions; although we now find they were
in very ill condition to hold out longer, their Ammunition of all sorts being
almost spent; whereof they had a good supply coming by Sea from Waterford; but
I gave order to Captain Plunket's Frigot to come and lie in this Harbor, to
prevent any relief that way; and she happened to arrive (as also Captain
Willoughby in the Nonsuch) before this Boat of Ammunition, which came within
sight of them along the Coast, but presently thereupon returned.

This City of Waterford, which is now one of the richest in this Kingdom, as
also the City of Cashel, and Town of Clomnel, are each of them in great fear of
our approach, and does slight all ditches and places of shelter near the Towns:
But as I did in my last mention, so I do now by experience find, that I cannot
make an Attempt upon any Town, until we be enabled to march with a Train;
neither indeed can we put Garrisons into any more places, until we have more
men: So as I must now apply my self altogether to the destroying of the Rebels
Quarters, if they do not fight with us, as I believe they will not: for I find
by a Spy that is come to me last night from Waterford, that they can raise
neither Money or Provision as yet, to keep an Army together; that therefore
their General Glamorgun dares not come to a Rendezvous amongst them; that they
have great divisions among themselves, which also keep them from uniting; that
many of their Officers and Soldiers are going away with the French and Spanish
Agents from Waterford, which I shall give the Fleet notice of; That Ammunition
is scarce amongst them, whereof the greatest plenty is at Waterford, where the
Council pay 2 s. per pound for it; That my Lord of Muskerry is now in that
City, being employed thither by the Supreme Council, to borrow money of the
Citizens to pay their Army; for the maintenance whereof, they have imposed a
Tax of the fourth part of every man's revenue, and a tenth part of personal
estates in all the Irish Quarters: That it is there reported, that Catherlogh
was taken by Pr^ston on the 5 of this instant; but no certainty thereof: And
that there is not yet above 1500 of the Rebels Forces together in any one
place. Another Spy came unto me last night from Fetherd, who confirms that the
Rebels are full of Divisions, and cannot raise means for their Army, which
therefore they cannot bring together: So as there is nothing but the defects in
our Army, that hinders us (with Gods leave) to do what we would in the Rebels
Quarters. And though it be now only Carriages and Draught horses that are
wanting to carry on the Service; yet if Supplies of Moneys or Provisions do not
arrive before the 10 of June, all that is now here will no longer contribute to
our subsistence, with all the addition that our Contribution can make to it.
But we will endeavor to do what we can to live upon the enemy; wherein we hope
for a blessing; not doubting but that Providence which has hitherto sustained
us, will enable us, either by that or some other means, to subsist, till
Supplies from thence shall arrive to us.

Sir, I have been prolix; but it is to give you an account of what I hold my
duty to inform that Honorable Assembly of, unto whom I desire to discharge all
the parts thereof that lie in the power of

Dungarvan, May 10 1647. SIR, your most humble servant, INC.

Die Martis, 18 Maii, 1647.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That a Letter of thanks be
written to the Lord INCHIQUEEN, and that it be referred to the Committee for
the Affairs of IRELAND at Derby-House to prepare this Letter.

Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

FINIS.

