A Brief RELATION OF THE Surprise of the FORTS OF WEYMOUTH, The SIEGE of
MELCOMBE, The Recovery of the FORTS, And Raising of the SIEGE.

By P. J. Minister to the Garrison.

London, Printed for Luke Fawn, at the Parrot in Paul's Churchyard. 1644.

A Brief Relation.
SUch has been the goodness of God to us, that it is pity it should pass
without a memorial, and record; and the rather that others may not only
bless God with us, but may be encouraged to a future dependency on the same
power that saved us, if they shall fall into the like distress. We desire not
to detract any thing from the many acts of divine power and goodness, whereby
God has manifested himself in other places; but certainly there were not since
these wars begun, a people more strangely saved by the Lord.

In the beginning of February, we were in as sweet a quiet and security, as any
Garrison in the Kingdom; no enemy near us, but one at Portland, and that not
very considerable, being but about three or four hundred men. It pleased God,
that on a sudden, our Forts and quiet were lost, one of the Forts commanded
the Harbor, the other the Town. Some of the Townsmen having a long time been
hatching a conspiracy with Sir Lewis Dives, and the Portlanders, now brought
their designs to execution.

On Sabbath day, the ninth of February, about midnight, they did lead our
enemies by such secret ways, that they were upon our Sentinels suddenly, and
undiscovered, and entered the Forts without any thing worthy the name of
resistance; and now a late Alarm was given by the Drums, and the shouts of our
Enemies. We finding such dangerous guests possessed of those places (which above
a half years pain and swear, had indevoured to make our security) resolved upon
a sudden assault, which we attempted, but were repulsed with the loss of the
lives of some men, and the blood of more, though not many. Major Sydenham the
Governors Brother (whose memory may not be buried with him) here received a
mortal wound, of which he died the day following; his death was no small joy
to our enemies, to whom he was a perpetual vexation and terror, and no small
grief to us, who had our eyes too much upon him; also Captain Salanova was
wounded, and Captain Allen, with some others.

In the morning following, we saw little but discomforts, our own Guns, Powder,
Shot, Forts, Gunners, and in a manner, every thing but our God, against us. In
this condition (when some of our friends deserted as lost men, and our enemies
looked upon as conquered) some of us made it a ground of our Belief, That God
would be our Savior, because he had taken other saviors from us. We had not
so much as one Ship left us, but what lay under the command of our enemies.

About Noon, Sir Lewis Dives (who was expected sooner, and as some say, should
at the same hour, have fallen upon Melcomb) came up with Horse and Foot to aid
the Popish Knight Sir Walter Hastings, in keeping what villainy and treachery he
had gained from us, and to see if they could gain what was yet left us.

In the Evening we left Weymouth, which we could not any longer make good, and
betaking our selves to Melcomb, drew the Bridge, which lies betwixt the Towns.
This place of Melcomb, our enemies tamely yielded as untenable; and we had
scarce bestowed a Fortnights work on it since we possessed this Garrison, yet God
made it tenable, and so our adversaries found it. All this day they spent their
great and small shot lavishly upon us, from the Forts, and some of their
Gunners engaged themselves to level us with the ground; but the Weapons formed
against us, did not prosper: For our Houses stood, and little of our blood was
spilt. After they saw the multitude, as of great Bullets, and Iron Bars, hot
and cold, sent against us, did us not the mischief they intended, they abated
somewhat of their successelesse fury. Our Horse sallied out some times, and
fetched us in some Provisions and prisoners.

On Tuesday, Captain Martin came in the Ship, called the Providence, from Pool;
the fight of any friend was an encouragement, and he was the welcomer, because
he brought along about fourscore of our men who were upon service abroad, at
the time of the surprise, and might not well adventure by the Land passage to
us.

On Wednesday, came the Admiral into the Road, Captain Batten and another of
the Parliaments Ships, to whose helpfulnesse, both in easing us of our
Prisoners, of which, we had above 200, and ayding of us with near 200 men, we
must acknowledge our selves very much indebted. It was a merciful providence
of God, that the Wind served at that time to bring them hither.

On Thursday our enemies began to fire us; and by small Iron Sluggs heated in a
Forge, which they shot out of their Muskets, set fire on a Thatcht-House, over
against the Chappell-Fort; from whence they shot about the House continually,
to hinder us from quenching the flames, but without the least hurt to any man.
This fire was soon put out, it only consumed two Houses, blessed be God: Upon
this we fell (though unwillingly) to the like course, and fired a house in the
Chappell-Fort; but being little delighted with such sad spectacles, we sent to
the enemy, that there might be no more such work on either side; they sent us
word, They scorned to Parley with us, and would do what they pleased.

The day after, they fired again on the other side the Town, over against the
North-point Fort, yet that also we quenched without the loss of one drop of
blood. Upon this, we fired seven or eight of the Houses in Weymouth; and whiles
they endeavored to rescue their Houses from the flames, one was shot dead that
betrayed us, and two others were wounded; After this there was no more burning
on either side.

On Saturday came to us our friend, Lieutenant Colonel Haynes, with about 100.
Horse, which was an addition to our strength and courage.

The next Morning, the Governor (whose valor and unwearied industry, we have
cause bless God for) went with Lieutenant Colonel Haynes. and all the Horse,
and opportunely met with a Troop of the enemies Horse (near Rodipole) routed
them, took 45 prisoners, about 60 Horse, slew 7. or 8. of them; took a Captain,
and a Cornet: And this was done without the loss of one man, Major Brown, and
the Governors Brother being only slightly wounded. The Governor and some of
our party, chased the little remnant of them that escaped up to the Gates of
Weymouth: Hereupon, somewhat of the insolency of our enemies was abated, so
that we might exchange prisoners, and have a reputation with them.

In the beginning of the second week of our trouble, our enemies lying at some
further distance then formerly, we had the opportunity to go abroad with the
Horse, to fetch in Provisions. We brought in 900 Sheep, and took a Captain, who
expected not to find our walk so large as we made it, and stumbled upon our
men, thinking them to be of his own party. In both Towns there was every day a
new expense of shot and blood on both sides; but considering the many
advantages they had continually upon us, it did daily cause in us an
admiration, that our loss should be so little. Every night we were molested
with the loud blasphemies, and revilings of our enemies; but the worse we
found them, the greater was our hope of deliverance from them.

About the end of this week, came down the Lord Goring from Salisbury; and on
the Sabbath Day, all day faced us with his Horse and Foot. No summons came from
any of them, whether from a despair of any inclination in us to surrender, or
from what other cause it might proceed we know not.

This night they made a Work at the North end of the Town, which when the
Governor discovered on Monday morning, he resolved to take out a party of Foot
and Horse, and to see if they might be removed to a further distance from us;
but before they could be got together, our great shot killed some of them, and
the rest did not stay; so that we with case, took all their working-tools and
the work, with a few Horse; their Body of Horse standing on a Rising ground,
not far off, and looking on.

On Tuesday morning, we went out with our Horse and some Foot, and met with a
party of their Horse, going with some Provisions to Weymouth; we beat them from
their Carriages, brought some of them into Melcomb, and had pursued them, had
not another party been too near our Rear. We burnt a House at Radipole, a mile
from the Town, where we suspected they would lodge some Musketeers, which
might have done us no small hurt.

Those in Weymouth seeing their Horse worsted, and flying before us, hasted out
a hundred Foot for their relief; the Governor being then in the field with the
Horse, and having intelligence of the motion of their Foot out of Weymouth,
resolved to fall over the Bridge, upon the Town, and to attempt the recovery of
the Chappel-Fort; which suddenly drawing out several Squadrons out of every
Company, he effected. Major Wilson and Captain Langford, led on the party; the
enemy not discovering our men, till they were upon the outworks, ran into the
Chapel, and after a shot or two, cried quarter. Thus had we now again regained
the command of the Town of Weymouth; took in the Fort and Town above 100
prisoners, one Lieutenant Colonel, one Major, three Captains, besides other
Officers; we took about 40 Load of Provisions of all sorts, which they had
brought in the Lords day before; we slew here, their Marshall, and Philip Ash,
the fourth of the confedrates, who had conspired our ruin, which received his
reward; besides three or four other men. At this time our Provisions for Horse,
were almost exhausted, so that if God had not supplied us out of our enemies
store, we had been driven to great extremities.

This invaluable mercy, was the first step to our recovery: Our enemy could not
now harbor so near us as before, nor relieve their friends in the North-point
so easily, being to pass by us; besides, this Fort overlooking Melcomb, did us
far more mischief then the North-point. We relieved here some honest men that
were their prisoners, which made it more a mercy, and took some of the
profidious Townsmen, who after taking the Covenant with us, were got into Arms
against us. Amongst other Pillage in the Town of Weymouth, we took Captain
Kaines a Papist, his Port-mantle, wherein we had a parcel of Holy-Beads, a
Commission for a Ship to play the Pyrat with at Sea, which lay blank at
Dunkirk, till by Master Henry Jermins Letters (which we have also) he had his
name put in. Our enemies upon this loss, began to think of packing up, but Sir
Lewis was loath to leave us so; and therefore importunes the Lord Goring (who
for ought we can hear, had no great stomach to the business) to try an
on-slaught upon us.

On Thursday, they marched with their Horse, Foot, and Carriages, from
Dorchester, toward us; but do so guard all ways, that no intelligence must
come near us.

Here fell in another strange providence of God for us. One of our men who had
been taken prisoner, two or three days before (though very strictly watched)
broke from them, and got safe to our Horse then in the field; by him we had
notice of all their intendments; whereupon we put our selves into the most
prepared posture we could, to receive them. We quit the West-guard of Weymouth,
and made a Barricado below in the street beneath the Chappel-Fort, planted a
Gun there, and ordered all the other Guards, so as might serve best for the
repulse of them that were coming against us. About one or two of the clock the
night, (it being light) on they come, the most considerable part of them on the
West Side, where entering the work (which we quit) so easily, they thought all
their own, and gave a loud hoop (which ended in heavy groans with some of them
not long after.) They had not come in a Body far down the street, but their
presumption was confuted, and they wished themselves further off: A long time
shot was going on both sides; but at last seeing they got nothing but wounds,
by staying, they began to run away, and be quiet, leaving five dead men in the
streets: One Lieutenant, so wounded, that he could not get off, and some common
soldiers. The people saw them carry away some of their Gallants, and since
that, they buried some they carried away at Dorchester, and other places. On
the other side from the North-point, the Irish Rebels; and others of their
fraternity sell on, and the Barricado made that way, lying below the Houses
under the Hill, the enemy broke in within the Barricado through the Houses, and
put our men to a somewhat disorderly retreat thence; but they fell back to a
second Barricado, where a Gun was planted, which they had been in a way to
desert too, but that the Governor came seasonably in, and commanded them to
make it good; so they fired the Gun upon the enemy, whereupon they fled back
and were followed by a party, taken off from the main Guard, to the further
Barricado formerly quitted. Here we wounded another of them that betrayed us,
who died of his wound a day or two after. The Governors Horse was here shot in
the Head. Those on the North end of the Town, did only lie behind a bank,
firing at a distance, and came not up, yet left some of their blood behind
them. So after about two hours fight, they very silently stole away, that we
might not fall upon their Rear. They retreated to Wike, about a mile from the
Town, and having stayed a while to use some Surgery about their wounds, and
to take their friends out of our Forts a long with them; at last they marched
away, cursing and swearing. We were struck with much wonder, to see them leave
our Forts, and could not study the meaning of it: But away they went, and left
us our Holds and Guns, not past three or four of them spikt; our Corn stacks
unburnt, our Ships unspoiled, and departed with as little mischief doing, as if
they had been our veriest friends. Oh that we could praise the Lord, for his
goodness, and for his wonderful Works, that he does for the children of men.
Had we enjoyed our old quiet, we had not seen so much of God as now we have;
and many of us would not for the world have wanted the experiences we have now
gained.

We have not lost since our assault upon the Chappel-Fort, any Officer, not so
much as a Corporal, and not above 20 men; our enemies report their loss of
men, one way and another, taken, slain, and wounded, 4 or 500. men.

Thus God relieved us without the help of an Army, and therefore we desire he
may have the greater glory. Since we have been repossessest of our own, we have
examined the Survivers of them that were Agents in the contrivement of our
destruction; and upon Saturday, March the first, Captain Cade, an Alderman of
the Town, Thomas Samwayes a Tailor, John Mils, Walter Bond, were tried by a
Council of War, and sentenced to be hanged: A fitter reward for their Fact,
then the 500 pound, one of them confesses, Sir Lewis was to give them. Cade and
Mils, and an Irish Rebel, were hanged at the North-point on Monday morning, the
other two be reprieved to make a further discovery of their partners. There be
not many of the villains left, but their sin has found them out.

We have ground to hope for a Discovery of the rest. We hope this place shall
be so weeded of such inhabitants, that we shall not come under the like
dangers. We desire other places, and amongst them, the great City of the
Kingdom, may learn by us to take heed how they keep false men, and malignant
spirits amongst them, who do but wait when they may be employed upon the like
Designs.

The God that has delivered many other places of late, and now us, still turn
these men's counsels into foolishness, and disappoint the devices of the
Crafty, so that their hands may not bring about their enterprises. We desire
our friends may not look upon any valor or activity of ours, as our
deliverers; but merely upon that God who gave us whatever courage or success
we had: To whom, and not to us, be glory for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

