To his Grace, his Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Right Honourahle the
Estates of Parliament, The Lord of Innes younger as deriving Right to the
Wadset Lands underwriten from his Father Sir James Innes of that Ilk, and with
Concourse of hissaid Father.
Humbly shows,
THat by Contract of Marriage in the year 1639, betwixt James Lord Drummond Son
to the Earl of Pearth, and Lady Anna Gordon Daughter to George Marquess of
Huntly, the said Marquess of Huntly and George Lord Gordon, and James Viscount
of Abo^ne his two Sons as Principals, and Archibald then Earl, and afterward
Marquess of Argyle, and David Earl of Southesk, James then Lord Ogilvie,
afterward Earl of Airlie, James Lord Kintyre, and Sir Robert Innes of that Ilk
Cautioners, became Bound and Obliged Conjunctly and Severally, to Pay to the
said Earl of Pearth the Sum of 30000 lib. Scots, in name of Tocher, with the
said Lady and Daughter of Huntly, with Annualrent and Expense as the said
Contract bears, which Sum of 30000 lib. and Contract abovementioned, the Earl
of Pearth in the year 1652, Assigned in favors of Sir John Drummond his second
Son, who thereupon (getting Payment of the Half of the said Principal Sum and
bygone Annualrents thereof, from the said Sir Robert Innes one of the
Cautioners abovenamed) transfers 15000 lib. of the said principale Sum, with
4812 lib. of bygone Annualrents, and 2000 lib. of Expenses, and Annualrent of
the said 15000 lib^ thereafter in favors of Sir Robert Innes younger of that
Ilk, and that in sua far as might be Extended against the said Principals, and
the said Marquess of Argyle, and the Earl of Airlie two of the Cautioners,
whereupon the said Marquess of Argyle and Sir Robert Innes enter into an
Contract on the 11th of September 1655. whereby Sir Robert on the one part
transfers and dispones the foresaid Sum of 15000 lib. Principal and Annualrent,
and Expenses in favors of the said Marquess of Argyle, and that in so far as
might be Extended against the Heirs and Successors of the said Marquess of
Huntly and his Sons, and the Earl of Airlie one of the said Cautioners: But
Declaring the said Marquess of Argyle, the Earl of Southesk, and Sir Robert
Innes elder Free and Liberate. And on the other part, the said Marquess of
Argyle granted a Wadset to the said Sir Robert Innes elder, of certain Parts
and Portions of the Lordship of Enzie, called Upper and Nether Dalachies,
Auchinreath, Tannachie, Tynnet, with the Miln thereof, and haill Pertinents of
the said Lands, Redeemable always upon payment of 20000 lib. Money foresaid.
And upon this Contract and Precept of Seasin thereins contained, the said Sir
Robert Innes was Infest; and thereafter getting Possession did by himself and
his Succeessors continue therein till the year 1662, that the Duke of Gordon
getting the Gift of the Marquess of Argyls Forefaulture, in so far as concerns
the Estate of Huntly, did by the force of the said Forefaulture; and of the
Marquess his retoured quinquennial Possession dispossess the said Sir Robert.
By all which it is manifest, that the foresaid Debt of ^0000 lib. due to Sir
Robert, was Originally a Debt of the Family of Huntly: And that the Security of
the said Wadset upon the said Lordship of Enzie was most justly given out of
the Estate of Huntly for the equivalent Sum actually and really paid by Sir
Robert for the foresaid Marquess of Huntly as his Daughters Portions; so that
in all equity and Honor, the foresaid Estate of Huntly, and the Descendents
of the said Marquess of Huntly, who enjoy the same ought still to be liable.
And I your Petitioner, as deriving Right from the said Sir Robert, have all
reason to prosecute my own Right and Payment, by all ways and means that Law
allows: But so it is, that when the said Marquess of Argyle was Forefaulted,
the Creditors of Argyle and Huntly did most justly protest that the foresaid
Sentence and Doom of Forefaulter with all that thereon Ensued, should not be
prejudicial to their respective Debts and Securities; Likeas, it is manifest,
that by the Act Salvo. past in the same Parliament wherein the said Marquess of
Argyle was Forefaulted, the Interest of private Parties was sufficiently
reserved and secured; By virtue of which Protestation and Salvo. I have no
doubt good right to Defend my self against the said Sentence of Forefaulture;
as also, to Quarrel and Impugn the same in sua far as it may be prejudicial to
my said Debt, and Wadset, upon all the Grounds and Reasons which your Lordships
shall think fit to allow: And therefore seeing his Majesty and the Estates of
Parliament are the undoubted sovereign Judges to overruled and determine this
matter, in all difficulties that may occur; and that the justice and equity of
my Cause and Claim is most evident, and both requires and deserves a
Parliamentary Remedy. I do in all humility represent to your Lordships, 1.
That the foresaid Sentence and Doom of Forfaulter cannot prejudge my foresaid
Wadset Right, but that the same ought to be maintained by your Lordships,
whether the foresaid Sentence stand valid or not, because the foresaid Sentence
and Doom of Forfaulter was pronounced against the said Marquess of Argyle, in
the Parliament 1661, in which there was thereafter past the Act Salvo jure, and
also Protestations by the Creditors of the Marquess of Argyle, that they be not
prejudged by any Sentence given against them, were admitted and marked and
Recorded in the Table of the unprinted Acts of that Parliament: and it^ est
that by the Act 33 past in the Parliament 1644, It was expressly Declared and
Statute, that Sentences and Dooms of Forfaulter should not prejudge the Rights
and Securities of the lawful Creditors of the Persons Forfaulted, but that the
same notwithstanding of the said Sentences should stand good and valid; and
albeit that the foresaid Parliament and all the Acts thereof; were by an Act of
the said Parliament 1661, Rescinded and Annulled, yet in the same Act
resciss^^^^ not only full assurance and (...) tie is granted to all persons
that acted in or by ve^^^^^^ and said^ rescinded Parliaments, but it is
expressly Declared, that all lawful Rights and S^^^^^ties past in these
Parliaments, or by virtue thereof in favors of any Particular person, for
their civil and private Interests, shall stand good and valid until the same be
otherwise in that Parliament determined; whereby your Lordships may clearlie
perceive that by virtue of the Act Salvo, and the foresaid protestations, with
the foresaid Reservation and Declaration in favors of private parties and
their Rights, my said Right of Wadset stands unprejudged and valid,
notwithstanding of the said Sentence and Doom of Forfaulter; and that the same
ought to be so Declared. And 2. That the said Doom and Sentence of Forfaulter
pronounced against the said Marquess of Argyle, nor any thing that has ensued
upon it, can no ways prejudge me; because the said Sentence is in effect no
Sentence, but manifestly null and void, being wholly destitute of all lawful
ground or warrant, as is most obvious and evident by inspection of the process,
and whole pieces and grounds of the same lying in the Records; upon which it
may be said in general, that never was there any process or Sentence of
Forfaulter carried on or Transacted in the manner, there being in effect no
lawful and subscribed Warrant for any Step thereof, either as to the finding of
the relevancie or sustaining the probation or pronouncing the Doom; so that it
is doubtful, if there was so much as an subscribed Warrant to put the Marquess
to Death, unless it be found in the Registers of the Town of Edinburgh; but to
give your Lordships a more particular view of the Nullities of that process and
Sentence, I shall not trouble your Lordships with all the Nullities that might
be condescended on to this purpose, but only with the four ensuing which are
unquestionably relevant and undenyablie evident from the process it self. As 1,
No execution against Witnesses, so that they are all spontaneous, which in Law
is a manifest Nullitie. 2. No Indictment subscribed by his Majesty's Advocat,
nor no Interloquitor signed finding the Indictment relevant. 3. There are
Letters produced for probation, but it is neither proven that they were written
by the Marquess, nor is the same acknowledged* by any Writ under his hand. And
4. No Vote of Parliament finding either proven or guilty.
By all which it is manifest, that the foresaid Sentence is null and void, and
can never prejudge your Lord Petitioner in his just Right of Wadset flowing
from the said Marquess of Argyle, upon the Lands and others aforesaid, which
was (...) proper Estate first of the Marquess of Huntly, and then of the
Marquess. of Argyle, and which Wadset was granted for the Marquess of Huntly
his proper onerous and most favorable Debt: Nor can it be objected that by the
35. Act of the Part. 8. Ja. 6. It is statute that no Process of Forefaulture
shall be reduced for any nullity of Process, while first the Crime be remitted,
or the Party acquit thereof. Because 1. If it be thought needful, it would be
very easy to purge the Marquess of Argyle effectually, and to acquit him of
all the Crimes then objected and laid to his Charge. 2. Because the foresaid
Act does only relate to the Crimes of Treason, and Laese-majesty, notoriously
committed against the King and his Estate, which can never be thought to be the
Marquess qf Argyl's case. And 3. Because this present application, is not only
made to His Majesty and the Estates of Parliament, who can Soveraignly judge
upon the said Act, but is also made in behalf of your Petitioner a third Party,
for preservation of his private Right, and not in behalf of the Marquess of
Argyle or his Memory, who was the person Forefaulted; so that this present
application is no ways prohibited by the said Act: Seeing then that I have laid
before your Lordships the justice of my most favorable Debt, together with the
undoubted Interest I have to clear my said Wadset-Right of any prejudice that
may arise thereto from the foresaid Sentence and Doom of Forefaulture, and have
just reason to have the same declared by His Majesty and the Estates of
Parliament, that the said Sentence of Forefaulture, nor any Gift or Infeftment,
or other thing whatsomever ensuing thereupon shall never be made use of, or
admitted in Judgment against me.


May it therefore please your Grace, and the right honorable the Estates of
Parliament, to grant to me Warrant for citing George Duke of Gordon Donator to
the foresaid Forefaulture, and present possessor of the foresaid Lordship of
Enzie; As also His Majesty's Officers of State, and all others that may be
concerned or have Interest in the said matter, in due Form, and at the places
needful, to compear before this high Court of Parliament at Edinburgh, upon the
(...) Day of (...) Bringing with him the foresaid Sentence of Forefaulture, and
all that has ensued upon it in his Favors, and to hear and see it found and
declared, that the foresaid Sentence and Doom of Forefaulture, with all that
has followed or may follow thereon, can no ways prejudge my foresaid
Wadset-Right* nor any Action or Execution competent to me upon the same, and
that it shall never be made use of, or admitted against me and my said
Wadset-Right, in Judgment, or outwith the same, either as to bygones, or in
time-coming, but that my foresaid Right of Wadset was and is, and stands good,
as to all Intents and Purposes; notwithstanding of the foresaid Sentence of
Forefaulture, or any thing following thereon* and as if the samen had never
been. As also to Summond the Clerk-Register and other Clerks of Parliament, and
Keepers of the Records thereof, to produce the said Process of Forefaulture,
and hail Grounds Minutes, and Warrands thereof before your Grace and Lordships,
for verification of the Premises, as likeways to Summond Witnesses, etc. and
for all Cost, Skaith and Damage, in the common Form, According to Justice, and
your Grace and Lordships Answer.


