THE GREAT Case of Conscience OPENED IN THE Particular unfolding, and
Examination of those two difficult Texts, in Mat. 5.33, 34. and Jam. 5.12.
about the Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of SWEARING: WHEREIN The evidence of
Scripture Light, as laid down in the Old and New Testament, in variety of Cases
and Examples (not hitherto insisted on) are succinctly and clearly Stated; AND
Usefully Accommodated and Suited to the present State and Condition of many
Suffering Christians.

By Jeremiah Ives.

LONDON, Printed by S. D. for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle near
Temple Bar, 1660.

THE GREAT CASE OF CONSCIENCE OPENED, etc.
READER,
THere are two Rocks that proves as perilous to Christians, as Scilla and
Caribdis to Sailers (viz.) Ignorance and Scandal; that who so escapes the one
usually suffers rack upon the other; sad experience witneseth that very few
have drove a trade for heaven, but at one time or other have suffered loss in
their Spiritual Estate, by reason of their Ignorance, which has made them cry
down that for herisie at one time, which they have embraced for verity at
another: And if through grace they have been delivered from the perils on this
hand, how are they prejudiced on the other? resusing, the lawful use of sacred
things, by reason of the profane abuse and Scandal that some have brought upon
them. Hence it is, that many conscientious people do refuse to take any oath,
since the Name of God has been much profaned thereby; in so much that because
of oaths the land mourns. And others (no less conscientious then the former)
refuse to take any oath because they are persuaded that no oaths ought to be
taken in Gospel times: My business therefore in this discourse, is not to prove
whether a man may lawfully take this or that particular oath: To that I shall
answer with the Apostle in another case; Let every man be persuaded in his own
mind, because every man must give an account for himself to God. That then
which I shall undertake to prove, is that some oaths are lawful in the times of
the Gospel; the which if the Lord enable me to make full proof of: To the
information of those who are dissatisfied, I hope they will with the more ease
escape that other Rock (viz.) the Scandal that may accrue thereby; And if I do
prove that Assertory and promisary oaths are both lawful and useful, I have the
prise I run for, and let God have the glory; And that I may so do, I shall
propound this Method. First, I shall show, what Sacred Oaths are. Secondly, to
what end they were taken. Thirdly, whether those two Texts, Mat. 5.34. and
James 5.12. do forbid the use of all oaths in the time of the Gospel.

As concerning the first question (viz.) What a Sacred Oath is, the Scripture
will resolve us, Number. 30.2. that it is a bond by which a man binds his soul to
the speaking of that, which is in it self true, or the doing of that which is
in it self lawful, unto which the living and true God is called to witness. Of
Sacred Oaths, there were two sorts under the Law (viz.) Commanded and
voluntary; that some were commanded, See Exo. 22.11. An Oath of the Lord, shall
be between themselves, etc. Deuteronomy. 6.3. and 10.20. Thou shall fear the Lord thy
God, and swear by his Name. Jer. 4.2. Thou shall swear the Lord lives in
Truth, in Righteousness, and in Judgment.

And as some oaths were commanded, so some were voluntary, as appears by the
forementioned Scripture, Number. 30.2. IF a man vow a vow, or swear an oath, to
bind his soul with a bond, he shall not break his word, he shall do according
to all that proceeds out of his mouth. Which plainly shows, that a man
might have chosen whether he would have bound himself by an oath or no, but if
he did; then, he was to perform all that proceeded out of his mouth: So that he
that swore being commanded, and he that swore voluntarily, were both under a
Sacred and religious tie.

Now there were three ways, by which a man bound his soul by an oath. First, when
he swears by the Lord pronouncing the matter of the oath with his own lips,
Lev. 5.4. This was called amongst the Jews an oath of pronounciation: the like
manner of swearing, we read of 1 Kings 1.29. David swore by the Lord, saying,
that Solomon his Son should reign after him.

Secondly, as a man is sworn when he pronounces the oath himself, so he may be
as solemnly sworn when he is adjured by another; for to Adjure in plain English
is to charge one to swear, or to exact an oath: And therefore where we read
Math. 26.63. that the High Priest Adjured Christ by the living God, Beza more
plainly reads it; that the High Priest charged him to swear by the living God,
if he were the Christ the Son of God; and so we read, Levit. 5.1. If a soul
sin, and he hear the voice of swearing, or (as Mr. Ainsworth reads it) the
Voice of Adjuration, and is a witness whether he has seen or known of it, if
he do not utter it, he shall bear his iniquity. So that it seems a man was
under an oath, if he uttered a matter being adjured thereto by the living God,
and was guilty of sin, if he heard the Voice of Adjuration, and could witness
and did not. Mr. Ainsworth, upon Levit. 5.1. Out of the Hebrew Cannons, makes
it appear, that whether a man swore by his own mouth, or was adjured by the
mouth of another, and he Answer Amen, or speak a word of like meaning; as if he
say yea, or I am bound, or I take upon me this oath; he is asworn man for any
matter, whether he swear or be adjured by Gods Proper Name, or any of his
Titles: like unto this, was that oath or adjuration, which the King exacted of
the Prophet Micah 1 King. 22.16, 17. And the King said, how often shall I
adjure thee, that thou tell me nothing, but that which is true in the Name of
the Lord? Now the Prophet in answering to this voice of swearing, and telling
the King that he saw all Israel scattered upon the Mountains like Sheep without
a Shepherd; Was as solemnly under the oath, as if he had sworn by the living
God, with his own mouth.

I could wish that this were seriously considered by those that make conscience
of oaths; what if one should adjure them by the living God to speak, if they
know such a man, or will do such a thing; and they should but say, yea, or nay;
they would think (and I am persuaded many do think) this is not swearing, which
(by the Scriptures) is as solemn swearing, as if they had uttered the oath with
their own mouth: an oath like this is used in our Common Law, where the witness
is charged by the help of God, to speak the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth; touching the difference between Party and Party: now his laying
his hand upon the book and kissing it, is no more then showing his consent to
the oath, as if he had said, yea, or I will speak the whole truth: by this he
was as firmly bound by an oath as if he uttered the matter, with his own mouth;
and therefore if the Judge after the consent to the oath, do ask a question of
the party sworn, an he do but answer, and give in his testimony in naked
assertions, without saying, I swear by the Lord, or by the oath I have taken,
or the like, his bare answering to the question, is as much as if he had
pronounced a oath, with the highest asseverations that could be thought on; and
this kind of swearing agrees with that which was commanded under the Law, as
appears by the forementioned Text, Levit. 5.1.

The third way by which a man becomes bound, by an oath; is no less sacred,
though somewhat differing from the former; and that is called an oath of
cursing; an example of this we have in Numb. 5.19. When a woman was questioned
whether she had known any other man besides her Husband; the Text says, that
she was to clear her self by an Oath of cursing, or execration; this was done
two ways.

First, when one was adjured by a curse, and he answered amen, or so be it,
then he was bound by an Oath; this is manifest from the forecited Text, Numb.
5.19. the Text says, that the Priest charged the Woman with an Oath of
cursing, and her saying amen, or so be it, was as much as if she had uttered
all the words of the curse with her own mouth; and if she were guilty of the
fact, she was to be an Oath of cursing among her People, ver. 21. As much as if
he should have said, if any Woman shall be suspected of the like fault for time
to come, she shall clear her self by this Oath of cursing, and say, the Lord
make me like that Woman whose thigh did rot, and whose belly did swell, if I am
guilty of this crime: to this agrees, Jer. 29.22. and Isa. 65.15. And you
(says the Lord) shall leave your name for a curse to my chosen, or as some
read an Oath of cursing, as much as if the Lord should say, my judgments shall
be so heavy upon the wicked, that when ever my chosen shall confirm the truth
of what they speak or promise, they shall remember the name of wicked men, and
revive their memory for an Oath of cursing, and say, the Lord make us as those
wicked men, who cried for sorrow of heart, and howled for vexation of Spirit;
if we are guilty of the suspected crime, or if we do not perform that which we
have promised, or the like, otherwise than so, the Name of wicked men after
that judgment is executed upon them, could not be a curse to the righteous:
Such kind of Oaths we read of, Judge. 17.2. And Micah said to his Mother, the
eleven hundred shekles of silver that were taken from thee, about which thou
cursedst, and spakest also in mine ears, behold the silver is with me, I took
it; and his Mother said, blessed be thou of the Lord my Son; this was no other
but charging by an Oath of cursing or adjuration, to tell what became of the
silver; like to this is that saying of Solomon, Prove. 29.24. He that is partner
with a thief, hates his own Soul, he hears cursing and bewrays it not; as
much as if he had said, he is not only a partaker in the theft, but is guilty
of the sin mentioned in Levit. 5.1. in as much as he hears the voice of
cursing, or the voice of the Oath, charging him to bewray the thief, but does
not: Another example of this kind, we have Josh. 6.26. Joshua adjured them, or
(as we may read) he exacted an Oath of cursing) saying, cursed be the man that
rises up and builds the City Jerico; their consent herein bound them by an
Oath of cursing, not to build it; as much as if they had pronounced it with
their own mouth: and 1 Samuel 14.4. Saul adjured the People by a curse not to
eat, there consent herein bound them, as if they had sworn: the like we have
Neh. 5.13. when Nehemiah took an Oath of the People (which was an Oath of
cursing) saying, when he shook his lap, so God shake every man out of his house
and Labor, that performs not this promise, and all the People said Amen; and
in so answering, they bound themselves by an Oath of cursing.

This should admonish every man to have a care how they curse or wish unless it
be in a holy manner, to clear up the truth of any matter in question, lest
their names be remembered for an Oath of cursing to all posterity.

2. A second way by which a man binds himself by an Oath of cursing, is when he
utters the curse with his own mouth; an example we have of this in David, the
Text tells us, 2 Samuel 3.35. that David swore saying, when he wished that God
would do by him as by Abner, and much more if he eat bread till the Sun was
down: little do people think that this manner of speaking is an Oath, and such
an Oath that God expects the performance of.

I come now to the 2d. question (viz.) what is the end of sacred Oaths? but
before I answer, give me leave to revive the forementioned distinction, between
Oaths that were commanded, and Oaths that were voluntary, and the rather
because Oaths that were commanded, were ordinarily such as were made BY God to
men; and Oaths that were voluntary were made TO God, this distinction appears
plainly if we consider the example of Abraham's swearing his servant to him BY
the Lord, Genesis 23.4. and David swore TO Saul BY the Lord, 1 Samuel 21.22. and
Abraham swore BY the Lord TO Abimelech, Genesis 21.23. and the Spies swore BY the
Lord TO Rahab, Josh. 2.12. Now the end of such Oaths as men swore by God to one
another, was as the author to the Hebrews tells us, Heb. 6.16. to end al
strife, and to comfirm the truth of a matter in question; an example we have of
this, Exodus 22.11. If a man deliver to his neighbor an Ox, or an Ass, or a
Sheep, or any Beast to keep, and it die, or be hurt, or stolen away, no man
seeing it, then shall an Oath of the Lord be between them both, that he has
not put forth his hand to his neighbors goods, and the owner of it shall
accept thereof, and he shall not make it good: the like to this we have, 1
Kings 8.31, 32.

Again, another end of one man's Swearing to another, was to make good all
lawful Promises, which had proceeded out of his mouth; examples we have of this
kind, in the case of Abraham's swearing to Abimelech, and the spies swearing to
Rahab; and Jacobs Swearing of Esau, to make good the Bargain about his
Birthright, and Nehemiah Swearing the People to keep their Promise, Neh. 5.13.
Having spoken of the end of such Oaths as were commanded; I now come to speak
of the end of those Sacred Oaths that were voluntary; and they were to afflict
the Soul, by fasting or otherwise, see Number. 30.13. and these were called Oaths
to the Lord, Psalm. 132.1, 2, 3. Lord (says the Psalmist) remember David in
all his afflictions, how he Swore UNTO the Lord, and Vowed to the mighty God of
Jacob; surely I will not come into the Tabernacle of my House, nor clime up
into my Bed; I will not give sleep to mine Eyes, nor slumber to my Eye lids,
until I have found out a place for the Lord, an Habitation for the Mighty God
of Jacob; like to this was that Vow of Hannah's, 1 Samuel 1.11. That if the Lord
would give her a Son, she vowed to give him UNTO the Lord; Now the end of these
Oaths, were to bind them to perform to the Lord, those voluntary Services
which they were not bound to by Law; to this agrees that forecited Text, Number.
30.1. If a man Vow a Vow, or Swear an Oath UNTO the Lord, he shall not break
his word, he shall do according to all that proceeds out of his Mouth; and to
these kind of Oaths Christ alludeth, when he says, Mat. 5.33. Ye have heard
that it has been said to them of old time, thou shall not for-swear thy self,
but shall perform TO THE LORD thy Oaths.

So then we see, that the end of voluntary Oaths, were to bind the Soul to the
Lord, to perform to him some great piece of voluntary Service and Self-denial,
which they were not bound to by any law, had they not bound themselves by an
Oath.

I now come to the last Question, (viz.) Whether those two Texts, Mat. 5.34.
and James 5.12. Do forbid all manner of Swearing in Gospel times; I shall first
speak to that in Mat. 5.34. Where Christ says, Swear not at all, etc.

To this I Answer, first Negatively, that this Text cannot be understood to
forbid the use of all such Swearing, as was commanded under the Law; my Reasons
are,

First, Because some such Swearing was used by Christ himself, Mat. 26.63.
Christ being before the Counsel, was examined by the Priest, but (the Text
says) Jesus held his Peace; then the High Priest adjured him by the Living
God, or (as it is in plain English) he charged him to Swear by the Living God,
to tell him, Whether he was the Christ, the Son of God; to which Adjuration
Jesus Answers, Thou have said, or I am; for so it is, Mark 14.62. Now to Answer
to a Matter, when one is Adjured by the Living God, though it were but yea or
Amen, was one manner of Swearing that was frequently used under the Law, as I
have already shown, from Levit. 5.1.1 Kin. 22.16, 17. Number. 5.19. Judge. 17.2.
Neh. 5.13.

Secondly, This Text cannot be understood to take away the use of all such
Swearing, that was commanded under the Law, because those commandments
contained in Ordinances, were not taken away till the death of the Testator,
Ephesians. 2.15. and those Ordinances that were contrary to us, were not taken
away, till Christ nailed them to his Cross, Colos. 2.14. Therefore those
Commandments of the Law, which accomodated Humane Affairs, and respected
Morals, of which this of Swearing, to end strife, was none of the least, could
not be taken away before Christ dyed; therefore all such Oaths as were
commanded under the Law, are not forbid by that Text, Mat. 5.34.

Thirdly, Neither this Text, Mat. 5. nor that in James 5. forbideth the use of
all such Swearing as was commanded under the Law, because the Prophets
prophecy, that some such Swearing shall be used in the times of the New
Testament, Esaias 65.16. He that shall bless himself in the Earth, shall bless
himself in the God of Truth; And he that swears in the Earth, shall swear by
the God of Truth, because the former Troubles are forgotten, and because they
are hidden from mine eyes; Here is a Prophecy, that foretells that some
swearing shall be lawful in those times that are to come, after the Ascension
of Christ, and the death of the Apostle James; Then he that swears, shall swear
by the God of Truth, THEN, when, when the former troubles are forgot; When
shall that be? the 17. verse resolves us, It shall be, When the New Heavens and
New Earth are Created, and the former Heaven and Earth is forgotten; So that
here is a Concatination of Divine Truths, men shall swear by the God of Truth,
because their former troubles are forgotten, their former troubles shall be
forgotten, because the former Heaven and Earth shall be forgotten; FOR (says
the Lord) I will creare New Heavens, and a New Earth, and the former shall not
be remembered; That this Prophecy respected the times of the New Testament, let
Peter Witness, 2 Pet. 3.13. Nevertheless, we according to his promise, look
for New Heavens, and a New Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness; So that
these Scriptures foretell, that though under the former Heavens, and upon the
former Earth, men swore by false Gods; yet in the times of the New Heaven and
New Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness, men shall swear by the God of
Righteousness.

Again that Text, Psalm. 15.4. is by many understood, to respect the time of
the New Testament; and if so, then one of the great quallifications that is
required of those, that shall dwell in Gods Holy Hill, is, that they shall
swear to their own hurt, and change not; And Isa. 45.23. God Swears, That to
Him, every Knee shall bow, and every Tongue shall swear; and because sacred
swearing by God, is a confessing of him; The Apostle translates, every Tongue
shall confess, Romans 14.11. plainly expounding the Prophecy, to relate to New
Testament times.

Fourthly, Those Texts cannot be understood to forbid all such swearing that
was commanded under the Law, because some such Swearing, not only Jesus Christ
as I have said, but the Apostle Paul did both practice and enjoin; that he
practiced some such swearing, see 1 Kings 1.29. David swore, AS the Lord lives
that has redeemed my Soul out of distress, etc. Solomon, thy Son shall Reign
after me; this was under the Old Testament, to confirm a promise; and under the
New Testament, the Apostle uses the same form of swearing, to confirm what he
said to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 11.19. AS the Truth of Christ is in me, no man
shall stop me of this boasting, in the Regions of Achaia.

Again, under the old Testament, they Swore by calling God to Witness (or
record) to the Truth of what they said, Judge. 11.10. And the Elder of Gilead
said to Jephtha, the Lord be Witness between us, if we do not according to thy
Words, Jer. 42.5. The Lord be a True and Faithful Wintnesse between us, if we
do not even according to all things, for the which, the Lord thy God shall send
thee to us; like to this we have the Aposle speaking in the New Testament, Romans
1.9. For God is my Witness, -- that without ceasing I have remembrance of you
in my Prayers, Phil. 1.8. God is my Record, how greatly I long after you all,
in the Bowels of Jesus Christ, and 2 Cor. 1.23. Moreover, I call God to Record
upon my Soul, etc. If calling God to Witness to what we say, be not swearing,
I consess I am ignorant what swearing is; but if it be, then it was not only
used under the Old, but under the New Testament.

Again, under the Old Testament they swore, BY the Lord, or BEFORE God, (as I
have already instanced) to confirm a Matter in question, this was practiced
under the New Testament, Romans 9.1. The Apostle to affirm the reality of his
affections, in order to the Salvation of the Jews his Countrymen, swears by
Christ, for so Beza reads it, Veritatem Dico PER Christum, I speak the truth BY
CHRIST: But it is of the same force, if we Read, I speak the truth in Christ, I
lie not, my Conscience bears me Witness in the Holy Ghost; for if any one
should confirm the truth of what he speaks after this race, what did he less
then swearing? however, it was more then yea and nay.

Another instance we have of this kind, in Gal. 1.20. The things which I Write
unto you, behold, BEFORE GOD I lie not: And as they practiced swearing upon
solemn occasions, so they did exact it in the like Cases upon others; for to
adjure (as I have said) is to exact an Oath, or to charge one to swear; Now we
read 2 Timothy 4.1. that Paul charged Timothy BEFORE GOD, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, and 1 These. 5.27. I charge thee BY THE LORD, that this Epistle be read
to all the Holy Brethren; Beza reads it, Adjuro vos per Dominum, I charge thee
to Swear by the Lord, etc. to this agrees that of the High Priest, who (as we
read it) adjured Christ; but in Beza's English Bible, it is, he charged him to
swear; Now if all swearing were forbid by those two forecited Texts, the
Apostle Paul would neither have done it himself, nor charged others so to do,
both in things Assertory and Promisary, as the forementioned Scriptures proves
he did.

To these Texts, some have had the confidence to give this Answer, for want of
a better, That the Apostle did evil in swearing; but to those that arreign this
great Apostle for evil, I do think it no great presumption to arreign them for
ignorance, for he that will swear (our Proverb says) will lie, the meaning is,
that he that will swear wickedly and contrary to Gods Law, will lie also; Now
if this be the case of the Apostle, that he sinned in swearing; What ground
have we to believe the truth of what he swore?

Fifthly, my fifth and last Reason, why these Texts cannot forbid all such
Swearing as was used under the Law, is, because there is as much reason for the
use of some Oaths now as ever there was; is there not as much need of
testifying the truth by Oaths, and confirming our Promises by Oaths, now as
ever for the ending of strife among men; I do not mean common profane
swearing, but such as is Sacred and Solemn; for proof of this, I shall refer
the Reader to Heb. 6.16. For men verily swear by the greater, and an Oath for
confirmation, is to them an end of all strife.

Having proved that all swearing is not forbid under the New Testament; it
necessarily follows, that those General terms [swear not at all] do admit of
an exception; And least this should seem strange, let me produce some
Scriptures for example, where universal Prohibitions are taken with
Restrictions, Exodus 20.10. The seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord, in it
thou shall do no manner of work, etc. And yet Christ says, Mat. 12.5. The
Priests Profaned the Sabbath, and were blameless; and Number. 28.9. On the
Sabbath Day, they were to offer two Lambs of a year old, without shot, and two
tenth deals of fine flower for a meat offering mingled with oil, and the drink
offering thereof.

So that this Prohibition, from all manner of work, respects only all manner of
Servile work in their ordinary callings, and not such work as tended to the
Worship of God, as the slaying the Sacrifice did; or to the preserving either
the life of man or beast, as appears by Christ's own Word, Luke 14.5. Which of
you, having an Ox or an Ass fallen into a Pit, will not streightway pull him
out on the Sabbath Day? it seems the Jews understood that text, Thou shall do
no manner of work upon the Sabbath, as some men unsterstand the text, that
says, Swear not at all; for the Jews understood that the text forbid all
working, though it tended to save life; So it appears, Luke 13.14. They said to
the People, There are six Days, in which men ought to work, in them come and
be healed, and not on the Sabbath Day.

Another example we have of this kind, Mat. 23.9. Call no man your Father upon
Earth; does not this Text as much forbid calling any one upon Earth Father
(though he be never so lawfully so) as the other Text does forbid all swearing
though never so lawful, and Luke 6.30. Give to every man that asks, and of
him that takes away thy goods ask them not again. And Mat. 5.44. Christ says,
give to EVERY man that asks of thee, and from HIM (or from any body) that
would borrow of thee, TURN THOU NOT AWAY; does not other Scriptures and common
reason inform us, that these general terms must be restrained, or else if we
should give to every one that asks, and turn away from none that would
borrow, we should not only maintain men in Idleness, which is a sin, but we
should soon turn our selves out of doors, and be reduced to a morcel of bread;
now I would appeal to the consciences of all unprejudiced men, whether Christ
in his Sermon, Mat. 5.42. does not as firmly forbid our turning away from any
one that would borrow of us, as he does forbid all swearing in the same Sermon,
when he says, Swear not at all; and if so, why should any be offended for
putting a restriction upon the one Text, when it is no more than what
themselves are willing to put upon the other; since (as I have said) there is
as good Scripture and reason for the restraining those general terms, Swear not
at all, as there is for the restraining those other words of Christ, give to
every one that asks, and if any body ask of thee, turn thou not away; and if
any body take away thy goods ask them not again.

Having proved that those two Texts, Mat. 5. and James 5. do not forbid all
such swearing as was commanded under the Law; my last business is to show what
swearing is forbidden in those two Scriptures.

First, then all swearing in our common Communication is forbidden, and that
appears by these words; but let your COMMUNICATION, be yea yea, and nay nay;
but to this it is objected, that James forbids all manner of swearing, when
he says neither by Heaven nor Earth, nor any other Oath; I answer, so did God
borbid all manner of working on the Sabbath, which was to be understood of
ordinary and common work as I have already proved; in like manner does our
Savior and the Apostle forbid all common swearing in our ordinary
conversations, and not solemn and sacred swearing. But it is further objected,
that such swearing was always forbid, even under the Law, and that Christ
seems to forbid somewhat that was not forbid before. To this I answer, that
those words; but I say unto you, etc. do not imply that there was any thing in
his precepts, or sayings that was not in the Law, but rather somewhat that he
would reinforce from the Law, which by reason of their false glosses upon it,
had no force upon their lives; as for instance, the Law said they should not
kill, but Christ says, that they should not hate their Brother without a
cause, so said the Law also, Levit. 19.17. the Law said, they should love their
Neighbor and hate their Enemy, (which was understood of those Nations, that
God charged them to have no Friendship with) but Christ bids them love their
Enemies; which the Law also, bid them except in the case before excepted, for
this see, Exodus 23.4. if thou meet thine Enemies Ox or Ass going astray, thou
shall bring him to him again, and Prove. 24.17. and Prove. 25.21. if thy Enemy
hunger, feed him; now this was the false gloss because the Law said, that when
God gave them rest from all their Enemies, they should not forget Amaleck, but
put out the remembrance of him, Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19. and that they should have no
Friendship with that People; hereupon they concluded contrary to the words of
the Law, that they might hate any Person that was their private Enemy, and
avenge themselves upon him; and so because the Law said an eye for an eye, and
a tooth for a tooth, therefore they would avenge themselves and be their own
Judge and executioner; hereupon Christ bids them not to avenge themselves, this
was also forbid under the Law, Levit. 19.18. thou shall not avenge; so the Law
said they should not commit adultery, but Christ said, he that looked upon a
Woman to lust after her, had committed adultery with her in his heart; now
looking upon a Woman to lust after her, was always a sin, Prove. 6.25. And so
because the Law said they should not forswear themselves, they mattered not,
though they swore upon every trivial and slight occasion, so as they did not
forswear, they thought they were not too blame.

To this false gloss of their Christ opposes, when he says, but I say, swear
not at all.

Secondly, Christ opposes his speech to another custom of theirs, which was,
that because the Scripture said, they should not forswear their selves, but
perform to the Lord their Oaths; therefore they did not matter what they swore
by, so they perform the things they promised; therefore Christ forbids their
swearing any Oath, either by Heaven or Earth, or the Temple, or Jerusalem or by
their Head; but would it not be I logical to conclude from hence, that
therefore we must not swear by the Lord in things lawful: so that by this Text,
and that in James we are forbid to swear by any Oath, that we call any thing
below God or Jesus Christ to bear record to.

Thirdly, this Text does not only forbid all vain swearing in our
Communication, and all solemn swearing one to another by any thing below God,
but it also forbids all voluntary Oaths which they swore to perform to the
Lord, if they did not swear by the Lord, but by Heaven or Earth, or the like,
therefore Christ says it was said of old time, thou shall not forswear thy
self, but shall perform TO THE LORD thy Oaths; hereupon they thought if they
promised or dedicated any thing to a Religious use, or made any vow to the
Lord, if they swore by a Creature, that they would perform what they vowed,
they thought they had answered the Law; that this was a custom, see Mat.
23.16, 18. whosoever swore by the Gold of the Temple, was a debtor, that is, he
was bound with a bond to perform what he had promised; so if he swore by the
offering he was guilty, that is, guilt was upon him if he did not pay; this
further appears, Mark 7. if they said to their Father or Mother Corban, that is
to say a gift, they were free from relieving their Father or Mother though they
were in want; if they could but tell their Parents, they were bound by an Oath
to give such a thing to God. By all which we see, that Christ does not oppose
the lawful use of oaths that was commanded by the Law, but their depraved sense
which they had put upon the Law, not only in swearing, but in other things
also; this Answer will serve to that Text, James 5. for since as I have said,
it cannot forbid all such Oaths as were commanded, it must forbid such Oaths as
were sinful and unlawful even under the Law; only let me add a word or two
touching this Text, and the persons to whom it was writ; if we look in the
first Chapter, we shall find the Epistle is writ to the 12 Tribes scatered
abroad, now in this 5. Chapter, the Apostle for the better supporting of them
in this afflicted and scattered condition, tells them what they should do, and
what they should not do; that which they should do in affliction, is to take
the Prophets for an example of suffering affliction, and patience, and that
they would remember the patience of Job, ver. 10.11.

Secondly, that they would consider the honor that men have that endure
affliction with patience; behold we count them happy that endure, ver. 11.

Thirdly, that they would consider that the Lord is pitiful, and merciful, and
will not (as if he should say) suffer us to be tempted above what we are able
to bear; having told them what they should do, he now comes in the next verse
to tell them what they should not do; but above all things my Brethren, swear
not; for it was very usual for them to make passionate Oaths in afflictions.
For this see, Psalm 132.1, 2, 3. Lord (says the Psalmist) remember David in
all his Afflictions, how he swore to the Lord and vowed to the mighty God of
Jacob, saying, I will not enter into the Tabernacle of my House, nor clime up
to my bed, nor suffer my eyes to sleep, nor my eye lids to slumber, till I have
found out a place, for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob: now
God had said, that David should never build him an House; all such kind of
Oaths made passionately to God in affliction, seems here to be forbid among
others, that I have before made mention of, because he has no sooner said;
above all things swear not, but in the next words he immediately subjoyns, that
if any be afflicted they should pray. Having shown what sacred Oaths are, and
to what end they were taken: And that neither Christ nor James can be
understood to forbid all swearing; I shall conclude with this exhortation, but
let every man take heed how he swears, for the Lord will not hold him
guiltless that takes his name in vain, Exodus 20.7. but will be a swift witness
against all that swear falsely, Mal. 3.5.

FINIS.

