A true Relation of a great VICTORY OBTAINED By the Forces under the Command of
the Lord Inchiquine in Munster in IRELAND, against the Rebels under the Command
of the Lord Taaff, November. 13. 1647.

Sent in a LETTER from the Lord Inchiquine, to the Honorable William Lenthal
Esquire Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons.

Together With An ORDER of the Commons assembled in Parliament, for public
Thanks to be given for the same to Almighty God, in all Churches and Chapels
in the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Letter be forthwith
Printed and Published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
Nov. 30. 1647.

Die Lunae: 29 NOVEMBER. 1647.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That on the next Lords day
being the Fifth day of December, public Thanks be given to Almighty God by
the respective Ministers within the Cities of London and Westminster, and
Liberties and parts adjacent within the late Lines of Communication, For his
great Blessings upon the Parliament Forces in Munster in Ireland under the
Command of the Lord Inchiquine, against a Force of the Rebels under the Command
of the Lord Taaff, obtained the Thirteenth of this present November, 1647. And
that on the next Lords day come fortnight the Nineteenth day of December,
public Thanks be likewise given in all the Churches and Chapels of England
and Dominion of Wales, by the respective Ministers thereof, for the same
Blessing upon the said Forces: It is further Ordered That upon the said
respective Lords days of the Fifth and Nineteenth of December there be a
Collection in the said Churches and Chapels, for Relief of the poor English
Protestants driven out of Ireland; and that the Moneys that shall now be
collected, be added to the sum formerly collected upon a late Ordinance of
Parliament, which directs a Collection for Relief of such poor English
Protestants; and that the said Moneys now to be collected, by paid in the same
manner to the same Treasurers appointed in that Ordinance, and be disposed by
order of the same Committee. It is further Ordered, That the Lord Major do give
timely notice of this Order for a Thanksgiving on the next Lords day, to all
the Ministers within the Cities of London and Westminster, and late Lines of
Communication: And the respective Knights of the Shires, and Burgesses of the
several Cities and places, are required to send Copies of this Order to the
several Counties, Cities and places; and the Ministers in the several places
are required to move and stir up the people to a cheerful contribution in
acknowledgement of their Thankfulness for this great and seasonable Blessing.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

To the Honorable, VV: Lenthal Esquire Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons.
Mr. SPEAKER,
UPon the twelfth of this instant I marched from Moyallo to meet the Rebels
army, who that morning marched from Kintuirk toward me, with Twelve hundred
horse and Seven thousand foot, but they gave themselves out to be Two thousand
horse and Nine thousand foot; and both armies came in view one of another about
one in the afternoon, ours being Twelve hundred horse and near Four thousand
foot: Whereupon they instantly took a Hill of strength and advantage, and drew
up, which being two miles distant from us, we had not daylight enough to
attempt any thing upon them, and therefore lodged our men in a convenient place
about a mile from them, from whence we might observe that we could not charge
them where they were, but upon disadvantage; and being doubtful that they might
stand a while the next morning upon that ground, in expectation that we would
come up to them, I writ the enclosed Letter to the Lord Taaff, to invite him to
fight upon a fair plain, that lay between both armies, and would be indifferent
to both sides: To which he gave o other answer, but by word of mouth to my
Trumpeter, That he was not so little a Soldier, as to forgo any advantage of
ground he could gain: And I do now find that there is a prophecy that Mac
Donogh should spill much English blood upon Knocknass, which heretofore has
been the name of that hill, and my Lord Taaff conceiving himself to be that Mac
Donogh, in regard the estate of Mac Donogh in Conaught was made the reward of
his Grandfathers service against the Rebels the last Wars (which is now his) he
would not be drawn from the Hill, to which therefore we did advance; and
finding (that, as they were drawn up, we should not only have lost the
advantage of the wind and sun, but have been also forced to charge upon much
disadvantage to our horse, if we had gone on directly on their front; we drew
to the right hand of them and found a piece of ground within a convenient
distance, to play with Ordnance upon their Right wing, where I caused two
pieces to play, to the intent that I might discompose the form they were in;
and in the mean time I directed the drawing of our men to the ditch at the foot
of their Hill, that they might be ready to fall on, whilst they should be
removing from their ground.

But after two shot was made (one whereof slew a Trumpeter of theirs) they
perceiving that the Ordnance would force them from that ground, presently came
on down the hill to meet our men, and at the same instant that we brake their
main Body, and left Wing, they brake a part of our left Wing of Horse, being
the middle Division of three that were on that side; the other two routed those
that charged them, and following the execution, discerned not the advantage
gained by the Rebels upon those close by them, where Col: Purcel with his
Horse, and Sir Alexander mac Donnel, whom they call Collae Kittagh, with his
Red-shanks, slew Sir William Bridges; and Col: Gray then had the execution of
our Forlorn-hope of Foot, under the command of Lieutenant Col: Crisp, who was
taken prisoner, and Major Brown, who was slain with about Forty of their men
that were drawn thither to secure the Ordnance which Sir Alexander mac Donnel
possessed a while (as also our Baggage) until I happened to look back that way
(and perceiving them chasing our men) I commanded two Divisions of Horse, who
were the Reserve of the right Wing, to charge them, which was exceedingly well
performed, and Sir Alexander and his Lieut: Col: slain, with most of all his
Red-shanks, of whom I believe there was not above a fourth part that escaped.
This Fight began a little before two in the Afternoon; the dispute lasted not
above half a quarter of an hour, but the execution ended not in that day: for
though we were killing till night, as fast as we could, yet we found Two or
three hundred the next day in the Woods, as we were viewing the bodies, but
could not possibly get any exact account of the number slain; for after I had
an account of more then 2000. that the pursuing parties slew in their several
walks, I was informed of many hundreds that were slain in diverse other places,
so as our men believe there were not less then Five thousand slain; but I do
not think it possible there should be above Three thousand, because the dispute
lasted not at all; and that exeept the three Regiments of Foot that came on
with Sir Alexander mac Donnel, the rest made the best use they could of their
heels, to the Woods and Bogs toward Kintuirk, New market and Lyfcarrol: yet we
cut off Two hundred of their Horse, and killed many of their Horsemen. We took
four Wagons full of Ammunition, but have not yet taken up their arms, whereof I
am most confident that they have left us near Six thousand in the field, which
is so much the more considerable a loss, because scarcity of arms amongst them
is very great, as appears by some of their Letters, which does discover all the
secrecy of that party and their designs. Wherefore I thought it my duty to
present them to your Lordships, etc.

I am told by a Gentleman we have taken, that if my Lord Taaff do not make an
escape, That their Supreme Council will undoubtedly take away his life, having
knowledge of his design against them, which they were first occasioned to grow
jealous of by the information he gave them of my offering, and his rejecting a
Cessation, which he labored to possess them with, whilst he sought to gain one
from me, to the end he might destroy them, and bring the sole Power into his
own hand; which when they began to apprehend, they employed Bealing one of
their Council to discourse with my Lord, about the reasons of his rejecting a
Cessation, who discovered that there was no such thing: Whereupon the Supreme
Council (seeming not to take notice of Taaffs designs) pretended a necessity to
have Owen Row engage with Col: Munck and Col: Jones, and that all would be at
stake, and that therefore Four hundred of Taaffs horse must instantly march to
his assistance, which they sent him Orders for, but were not obeyed: On the
other side, in stead of injoyning Owen Roe to fight, they expressly forbid it
him, and then resolved to let Col: Munck and Col: Jones take any place, or
destroy any country, rather then they would engage his army, until they had
established their own Power in the Assembly, by the countenance of it. Again,
they sent for my Brother, to whom, by the advice of the Council of War, I gave
liberty unto to go upon his word, to get off that Estate he had in their
Quarters, being never to be released; and they earnestly pressed him to labor
with me to treat with them about a Cessation, making demonstration of great
advantages that I should have by it; but for no other purpose, then to discern
whether I were at all inclinable to it, being afraid of nothing more, because
Taaffs Army would then be at liberty to countenance their Faction in the
Assembly; wherefore they send Letters upon Letters to him, to do some
considerable Service upon us, upbraiding him with the vast expense and idleness
of his Army, which they use means to have written unto him by diverse private
hands, insomuch that my Lord Taaff was fain, for the vindication of his Honor,
to decline his Oracle, my Lord Digbies Advice, who forbade him to engage upon
any terms against us, lest it should overthrow all his other Designs. Sir, thus
it has pleased the Lord to make our enemies grind themselves to powder,
whilst both aim at the Power to destroy us; and now, whereas we were the other
day ready to perish by our wants, we have now liberty to disperse our selves in
the Rebels quarters, and take what they afford, whither we have marched with
hungry bellies, the Common Soldier having spent all his provision Twenty four
hours before we sought, and neither Officer or Soldier having one bit of bread,
or any other victual, but what Oatmeal and flesh we got in our marches:
Wherefore I am now forced to invite the Country to come in under contribution,
that I may prosecute this Victory, and at least keep the Rebels from recruiting
their Army, if I do not reduce some of their chief Garrisons, which I design, in
case I can get this Country to bring me in provision, whilst I lie before
fore them: And thought this Design may be too difficult to effect this
unseasonable time of the year, yet if I did not invite the Inhabitants to stay
at their habitations, and make provision for us, I could not possibly get one
days victual; so as I should be forced to return home, and leave the Country,
neither made useles to them by destruction, nor useful to us by present
Supportation, or future Contribution, which we hope to force from them by this
means in some considerable measure, and yet protect them no longer, then the
season of the year would of it self prove a sufficient Fortification against
us: If I could discern any other that might better conduce to the advantage of
your Service, I should thereunto apply the endeavors of, Sir,

Gurtnectuberid, 18. Nov. 1647. Your humble Servant, Inchiquine.


My LORD,
Here is a very fair piece of ground betwixt your Lordships Army and ours, on
this side the Brook, whither, if you please to advance, we will do the like. We
do not so much doubt the gallantry of your Resolution, as to think you will not
come, but do give you this notice, to the end you may see we do stand upon no
advantage of ground, and are willing to dispute our quarrel upon indifferent
terms, being confident that the justness of our Cause will be this day made
manifest by the Lord, and that your Lordships judgment will be rectified,
concerning

Garriduff, 13 Nov. 1647. Your Lordships humble Servant.

FINIS.

