A SERMON Preached at DORCHESTER In the County of DORCET, AT THE PROCLAIMING OF
HIS SACRED MAJESTY CHARLES THE II.

May 15. 1660.

By Gilbert Ironsyde Batchelour of Divinity, and Minister of Stepleton in the
said County.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavell at the Staggs head in S. Paul's Churchyard,
1660.

To the Right worshipful the Knights and Gentry, etc. of the County of Dorset,
that came with Loyal bearts to Proclaim his Sacred Majesty at Dorchester. May
15. 1660.
Right Worshipful.
BEauty consists more in proportion of parts then in the exquisitnesse of
Complexion; for whatsoever this be, if the other be wanting, it begets a
deformity. And was it not so in your late meeting about the greatest affair
that ever this County or Nation had, the Proclaiming of the Kings Majesty? I
must needs acknowledge, and record it for your Honor, that you did it with all
Alacrity, Solemnity, and Loyalty; yet an ill choice was made of your Preacher
(an intigrall part of that Service) an old man, much decayed in Strength, Lungs,
Parts, plundered of Abilities as well as Books, by the Discouragements and
Distractions of our late Confusions, and this was not so handsome; I have but a
few things to say for him, besides that he was of their own appointing, that
there was a kind of proportion even in this disproportion, I mean as to the
work in some sort to which he was to speak; for concerning this Origens
observation is good, Deus vult ex locustis vincere Gigantes, God will by
grassehoppers overcome Giants, as we see at this day, and as for him, David's
words are verified, Ex ore infantium fundasti robur, God can perfect praise out
of the Mouth of a weak instrument: Besides when Abraham entertained the Angels,
Senex currit, Vxor festinat, Puer accellerat, nullus piger est in to^^ familia;
The Servant made haste, the Wife bestird her self, and the old man ran too as
fast as he could, It Is the same Fathers observation. It was so when we received
our gracious Sovereign, as an Angel of God sent from heaven, in that blessed
Proclamation, Nullus piger in tota familia, Every man acted his part with the
best of his abil ties; the Sheriff proclaimed, the Gentry attended, the Country
waited, the young men displayed their banners, the whole Town triumphed, Men
Women and Children acclaimed, and the old man your Preacher did run too as fast
as he could; and though he fetched not with Abraham a fatling from the herd, yet
with Mary be brought his young Pigeons, and his Turtle, as much Affectionate
Zeal and Loyalty as the best. And now if you ask why I present it to you the
second time in this dress, being so lean, Answerable to the time I had, I
shall not make use of that old Gentleman Usher, or Trapanner to the
Print-house, Importunity, not to be resisted, though this also might be
pretended, (the more I pity their Judgments) the true reason is that the
loudness of my Voice might be supplied by the loudness of the Press; and
that those that could be but spectators, for the Noise, Crowd, and my Defects,
may now be readers of the Sermon if they please; and thereby both retain and
renew within themselves the solemnity of that day never to be forgotten. And
upon this account, craving your pardons, and praying for your happiness, from
under our most Wise God, and our most Gracious and Dread Sovereign, whom God
preserve, be pleased to accept the services of,

Gentlemen, Yours most Affectionately Devoted, G. J.

PSALM. 85.8. I will hearken what God the Lord will say; for he will speak
peace to his people, and to his Saints: but let them not turn again to folly.


WHen our blessed Lord went from Bethphage to Jerusalem, they that went before,
and they that followed, and the very children in the Temple, cried, Hosanna to
the son of David, Blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord, Mat. 21.8,
9, 15. This Hosanna is a long prayer in a short word, comprehending much matter
in a few syllables, Ne sibi blandiantur verbosi oratores, (as Mr. Calvin speaks
on another place;) God is not always best pleased when we make him the longest
Orations. You may read if you please this long-short prayer (for so I may call
it) in Psalm. 118.25. O Lord, I pray thee save now; O Lord, send now prosperity.
Blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord.

Some will tell you that this 118. Psalm was penned by David for the use of the
people, when he returned victorious from the Philistines; but give me leave to
say, when he returned from his long banishment from being hunted by Saul
(another Nimrod) as a partridge upon the mountains; when the people had
proclaimed him in Hebron, and Samuels unction had taken full effect, as in 2 Samuel 5. This appears to me by the precedent verses, The stone which the
builders refused (Saul and his counsel, which should have been builders, but
were indeed destroyers) is become the head in the Corner, the chief pillar and
support both of Church and State. This was the Lords doing, and it was
mavelous in our eyes; this is the day which the Lord has made, let us
rejoice and be glad in it. It is therefore you see a Psalm of prayers and
praises; and this Hosanna is a great acclamation containing both, even the same
which they commonly used at all their Kings Inaugurations. When Saul was
presented by Samuel with a See ye not him whom the Lord has chosen? All the
people shouted and said, God save the King, 1 Samuel 10.24. and when Zadock had
anointed Solomon, they blew the Trumpet, and all the people said, God save King
Solomon, 1 King. 1.39. It is so here; these people look upon Christ as the King
of Israel, therefore cry Hosanna to the son of David.

There is yet more in this Hosanna, and it lies Emphatically in this particle
of the present tense, Now, O Lord, I pray thee, save now; O Lord, send now
prosperity. This Now refers to what was past, as much as to say, we have
hitherto been oppressed by Saul and his Agents, commonly styled the violent and
the cruel man; but now we have a King of another nature, of a better temper,
therefore Save now O Lord, O Lord, send now prosperity. Besides those that
hitherto we have had come in their own names, Saul was a proud usurper, David
the true proprietor, and that by Gods own donation, which is here called his
name. Blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord.

And how well does all this suit with our present occasion? Is not our David
returned from his long exile and banishment? Have not our Tribes proclaimed him
in Hebron? No longer hunted by any Nimrod we know? Is not this long refused
stone become the head of our corner? Is not this the Lords only doing? and is
it not mavelous in our eyes, and in the eyes of all the world? It Is surely
the day which God alone has made, no flesh can claim it, we have great cause
to rejoice and be glad in it; for we have hitherto been harrowed by proud,
ambitious, usu^ping Tyrants, this was their name. But now the Lord has sent us
a King in his own name; a name written in the Law of Nature, the Law of
Nations, the Law of the Land. Therefore let Zadock anoint him, let them blow
the Trumpet, and let all the people cry Hosanna, God save the King; Blessed be
he that thus comes in the name of the Lord.

I hope it is not with us as with those people when they cried their Hosanna's,
for the Text tells us that the Priests and Scribes were so displeased, and some
of the Pharisees (never behind Priests and Scribes in this kind) said, Master
rebuke thy Disciples, Luke 19 39. I hope there be no such Malignant spirits
amongst us, if there be (and it is possible there may be,) for God never did a
work so glorious against which some men's hearts were not imbittered, and their
tongues viperous; not the Creation, witness the Manichees; not the
Incarnation, witness the Marcionites; not the Redemption, witness the
Socinians; not his Grace, witness the Pelagians; nor his wonderful works of
Providence, witness our Modern Stotcks, Ranters, and Atheists: it may
therefore be so here. But if there be, their answer lies ready in the Text; I
tell you if these should hold their peace, the stones would cry; God would
rather give mouths and tongues to the very stones, then lose the praise of so
glorious a work, or (which is not impertinent,) were men's hearts flints or
Adamants, such a mercy as the Son of David has in it heat enough to melt them.

Honored and Beloved, I appeal to the conscience of all Mankind, whether this
our mercy has not in it very much of a melting quality, unless it meet with
hearts harder then the upper and nether millstone. To see a King, such a King,
so miraculously delivered, preserved, restored, even by an outstretched arm
from heaven; To see a Languishing State revived, a dying Church quickened; To
see Factions, Schisms, Sects, Heresies, Profaneness, Irreligion, Atheism, and
(which is yet worse) Satanicall delusions, Fanatic phrensies, that dark and
thick cloud ascending from the bottomless pit which has been spread over us
these many years, so suddenly to vanish and disappear. And in the room of those
ugly Fiends, the choice blessings of God, like so many glorious Angels, Peace
and Settlement, Trade and Commerce, Government and Religion, Laws and Liberties
to be re-established; To see all these cast upon us with the light of Gods
pleased countenance in a general conjunction, if not concurrence. without the
least drop of the blood of revenge; as if Esays prophesy were visibly
fulfilled, the wolf to lie down with the Lamb, the Leopard with the Kid, and
none to destroy in all the holy mountain. And that which heightens all the
rest, to see that God has vouchsafed to such an unworthy people once more a
King, and such a King as may seem to secure all other his favors, a King of the
ancient extract from his Royal Progenitors, to prevent future usurpations; a
King born in our Nation, and therefore sure must love the Nation; a King so
eminent in his person, more then eminent for his most excellent endowments; a
King whom God himself has bred and tutored in the school of foreign
experience, without the least taint of their religion, or vices; An excellent
school for a King, and in his own house a school of afflictions, the best
school any Prince can be brought up in: in a parallel to both these I think no
History can afford. Is not all this enough to melt us into Hosannas, that have
not put off humanity, and in the room thereof taken the Wolf or Tiger?
Therefore if there be any that is otherwise minded, whether Priest, Seribe or
Pharisee, Papist, Jesuit or Sectarie, God I hope shall reveal it to him also
in due time; But if any be obstinate, let him be obstinate still. In the mean
time let us do our duties, and to this purpose let me beg your patience; I
shall not abuse it I hope with any long or impertinent discourse upon the words
of the Text, I will hearken, etc.

This Psalm is prophetical, and the spirit of prophecy sees as God himself
sees, future events in their present existencies. When Alexander the Great died
in Babylon (according to the prediction of the Solar and Lunar trees in India)
he divided his Empire amongst his Commanders, says the Historian, 1 Mac. 1. by
this means Syria came to Antiochus Epiphanes, v. 10.

Syria was ever an ill neighbor to Judea, and Antiochus was one of the worst
that ever had Syria; no marvel then if there were great lamentation in Israel,
v. 25. for he not only invades the Land, but also proudly enters the Sanctuary,
robs it of all its glorious furniture, takes away the golden Altar, the
Candlestick, the Table, the golden basins, all the gold and silver jewels and
treasure he could find, v. 21, 22. He that begins will sacrilege will easily
swallow blood; so did Antiochus, he murdered many a man, says the Text, v. 25.
He that will not stick at Sacrilege and blood will make little of rapine,
oppression, persecution, and a wicked toleration of all religions; no more did
Antiochus, v. 41, 42. till all the house of Israel was covered with confusion,
says the Author. This Epiphonema, this Tyranny was very great upon the people
of Israel. Credibile est, It is very credible, says a good interpreter, that
our Prophet in this Psalm speaks of the condition of the Jews under this
Antiochus: and first he tells what this poor people did in the time of their
great disconsolation; as chickens when the Kite hovers over them fly to the
wings of the Dam, so these hope to be safe under the feathers of the Almighty:
this was always their manner when they were afflicted, they sought him, and
sought him early; this also the Prophet fore-sees, for he gives us a copy of
their prayer, nay he pens it for them in readiness against the time should
come. This is usual with Gods Spirit, to provide his people of set forms for
particular occasions many years before they happen. Moses, Esaias, David, Solomon
did so, and our blessed Savior has given us a most comprehensive form which
may serve all our occasions to the worlds end: So far is Gods spirit from
branding set forms with lazy services. This prayer therefore must needs be
excellent for the Authors sake, and for its own too. For in it they, First,
thankfully acknowledge the goodness of God to their predecessors; he had been
formerly favorable to their Land, he had brought again the captivity of Jacob,
he had forgiven their sins, covered, or buried their iniquitte, and so
withdrawn his wrath, v. 1, 2, 3. Then they supplicate for themselves, Turn us,
O God; which is not meant of their persons by repentance, but of their present
condition from misery, and therefore they add, O God of our salvation, and
release thine anger toward us. According to which the Latin does well render
it, Restitue nos, restore us, v. 4. Lastly, they add a most powerful motive
after a most patheticall manner, Will thou be angry with us for ever? will thou
prolong thy wrath from one generation to another? will thou not turn again and
quicken us, that thy people may rejoice in thee? These be no saucy
expostulations; as if they would either direct God what to do, or chide him
because he does it not; but are vigorous exercises of their strong faith upon
Gods nature and properties. Respicit procul dubio, says a good Interpreter;
Questionless the Prophet had an eye to Gods own description of himself, The
Lord, the Lord, gracious and merciful, slow to anger, abundant in goodness
and mercy: Exodus 34 6. this was done in private only to Moses, yet by way of
Proclamation, as the Text tells us, that all the world might take notice of it.
And having thus taught them to pray, he teaches them in the next place a
farther duty, which is to wait upon the Lord for a return. Here he changes the
person, it was us before, in the plural, it is I now, in the singular: and the
reason is, because this prayer was to be their public or Common Prayer as we
call it, (for such the Church of God have had in all ages.) But this waiting on
God afterward is a personal grace, by every one singly to be acted. Therefore
having taught them what to do in common, he now shows them what in particular;
first what in public, then what in private, even to expect Gods answer to the
public: and sure Common Prayers thus used would prove the best prayers in the
world. And in this our Prophets direction we have these three plain points.

First, 1.
their waiting upon God for his answer, in these words, I will hearken what God
the Lord will say.

Secondly, 2.
the great confidence and assurance they have of a gracious return, in these
words, for he will speak peace to his people, and to his Saints.

Thirdly, 3.
what God expects from his people whom he has thus answered, in these words,
But let them not turn again to folly.

Of these very briefly, plainly, and in order.

And in this their attending on God, we may observe in what manner they do it,
which is with a settled, constant, persevering, watchful patience; all wrapped
up in the Metaphor of harkening, I will hearken.

We have also their disregarding of all other sayings, which doubtless were
many upon such a case; some you must think vented the bitterness of their
spirits in railing at Antiochus; some reviled his Army and instruments, some
even cursed those that being Jews yet fell off to Antiochus and his party; some
lamented even to despair, hopeless to see it otherwise; and some again
triumphed at it, So, so would we have it: but says the Prophet, I will hearken
to none of these sayings, but only to what God the Lord will say. We have
likewise the two strong supporters of this their attendance, Faith on the one
side, and Hope on the other, much like Aaron and Hur staying up Moses hands in
the Mount: Faith grounded on Gods power, he is able to do it as being God;
Hope upon Gods immutability, never failing his people as Jehovah: They expect,
and thus expect. Should I gather up all that might fall from this plentiful
Table, how many baskets full might I have? but neither my leisure nor yours
will bear it. I will therefore give you but one short rule, which may perhaps
take in much of all the rest.

That our prayers should not be ended when we have made them: we should not do
when we speak unto God as we usually do when God speaks unto us; when God
speaks unto us, as soon as the Preacher has done the Sermon is ended with us,
for we never think more upon what was spoken: it is so I fear with most men in
their prayers; when they have done speaking unto God all is ended with them:
And the reason is, because indeed they are no better then Papists in their
Prayers, they make it their opus operatum, their work, task, performance,
exercises, to improve their fancies and expressions; as if God had delegated
his grace to the work of so often, so long. I beseech you do not the Papists
the same, when they number their devotion by their beads? Be not deceived, it
is no paradox to say our prayers are but begun when they are ended, for our
hearts that sent them out, must follow them to hearken how they speed at the
throne of grace. When a Merchant has shipped his goods for foreign parts, he
hearkens day and night, inquires of every vessel that arrives, looks for a
packet by every post. By our prayers we do trade and traffic, hold commerce
and correspondency with heaven; Have we not also a factor in those parts, a
skillful, careful, faithful factor there, even the Angel of the Covenant with
his golden censer, even our Lord Jesus, to receive and improve our interests by
his continual mediation? Have we not also a promise, Ask, and you shall have,
seek, and you shall find, knock, and it shall be opened unto you? We cannot
therefore fail of returns, if we expect and require them.

Some perhaps will say, I have looked long, but never the near; I have prayed
and prayed whole hours by the Clock, the whole Systeme of Divinity at a time,
but never had answer.

Consider, was not the fault thine own? perhaps the goods were shipped in an old,
rotten, worm-eaten, leaking vessel; if so, no marvel if all be lost. Our
hearts are the vessel, are they not old, made of the old man, eaten through
with the old Leaven of malice and wickedness, corruptions and lusts? if so,
look for nothing. Believe not me; but the blind man in the Gospel; We know,
says he, that God hears not sinners: Verbum est caeci nondum illuminati;
They be words of a blind man yet blind, says S. Austin, and true too if
rightly understood; for this blind man means, that God hears not impenitent
sinners, sinners that have so espoused their sins as never to be divorced from
them: This he might see by the Prophets spectacle, When you spread out your
hands I will hide mine eyes, when you make many prayers I will not hear. Here
is frequency, many prayers; here is fervency, spread out your hands. God will
not see the one, nor hear the other; the ship was rotten, your hands are full
of blood, injustice, oppression; if their hands, their hearts much more.

Or went it not out with too much sail, over-blown with pride, ostentation,
vainglory, as the Pharisees was, when in the Temple, Gods immediate presence,
he scornfully over-lookt the poor Publican, perhaps because he had but little
to say, but much in little, God be merciful to me a sinner? We must know that
it is the humble-spirited prayer that pierces heaven, God resists the proud,
and dispenses his favors to the humble and meek. Or was not the weather ill,
the waves went high, the tempest, as it is said of Jonas his ship, made her
sides to crack? for our hearts are apt to double with God, we dare not trust
him, being, as the Apostle expresses it, double-minded; and then mark what
follows, Let not such a man think he shall receive any thing of the Lord, 1
Jam. 7. As soon as Peter began to doubt, he began to sink. Or were not our
prayers such as were prohibited in the Court of Heaven, wicked and ungodly
desires? these may have returns I grant, but with vengeance, not mercy. Or did
not the end blast the work? we desire to have good things, but to spend upon
our lusts; then we may ask and not have, says the Apostle: Nay, were we not
our selves our own enemies, we should seek to God only for God, else we set our
selves in his room, and will God answer Idols? Or even those good things asked
for good ends, yet hurtful for us; and should a father that loves us give
stones instead of Bread, a Scorpion instead of fish? Negat propitius quod dat
iratus, God is many times more gracious in denying then granting: it were no
heresy to say that because we are too well, like those disciples that knew not
what they asked, we are bound to bless God more for his denyings then for his
givings. Or perhaps we may have returns and not know it; is it not usual with
Merchants to send for one Commodity and receive another? their Factor who lives
upon the place best knows what will be for their profit; but who is our Agent
in heaven will always send us what is best for us. Or want we not a sufficient
measure of patience? a surly Suitor looks presently to be dispatched, and
therefore is many times last served, to teach him more civility. I think I may
truly say we are commonly more rude with God then we are with men, I am sure it
was so in Malachi his time, (go offer it now to thy Prince) and why not in this
unnurtured, barbarous, and presuming Age? Lastly, God may perhaps deny us for
our selves, as he did David the building of the Temple, reserving the honor of
that work for his Son Solomon. If therefore we would have returns, let our
hearts be sound in themselves, disengaged from our most beloved sins; let them
be sincerely upright with God, not starting aside like broken and deceitful
bows: let both the Request and Ends be answerable to him to whom they are sent;
Ad Deos non nisi casta, said the Heathen, holy prayers should be directed to a
holy God. It is therefore a good distinction of Aquinas, with which I will shut
up this point, the same prayer may be good and bad, such as God will hear, and
such as he will refuse; it may be good for the Petitions, Expressions,
Delivery, but bad for the man's sake that sends it; a Wicked man, nay the worst
Hypocrite may speak a good prayer, but Impius non potest pieorare, he can never
make a good prayer, that is, pray as he ought to pray. Thus we must hearken for
returns, and how God gives them is the next thing which the Text shows us, what
God the Lord does say. God the Lord speaks unto us now only by a double Voice;
for that Filia vocis, as its called, Gods immediate commerce as with Adam and
Abraham is long since silent, he speaks now, I mean as to men's prayers, by his
Word and by his Providence; he speaks by his Word in precepts, promises,
Threatenings; by his providence in Events and Successes: Dei dicere est Dei
facere, Gods speaking is Gods working; these two seem many times to us mortals
to speak contrary things, instance in Ahabs case, a day of humiliation is
proclaimed, fasting and prayer enjoined, for the discovery of a blasphemous
execution of Justice; if you hearken what God the Lord will say by his Word, he
forbids Hypocrisy, Covetousness, Subordination, Oppression; if you will
hearken what God the Lord will say by his Providence, Naboth must be murdered,
his vineyard seized: has his Providence answered against his Word? nothing
less, it only suffered the Event, for the further hardening of Ahabs heart and
the hastening of his destruction. Therefore when the Voice of the Word approves
our prayer on the one side, and the Voice of his Providence gives success on
the other side, then God the Lord has said; else the Turk may say, I have
prayed against the Christians, and the Pope may say, I have prayed against the
Protestants and cursed them too, may not both cry out, what successes! do you
not here what God the Lord has said? Nay the Legion of Devils might boast of
Christ's favor, because upon request they entered into the swine, and choked
them in the deep.

This point (Honored and Beloved) fathers it self too well upon us of this
Nation; we have had many days of solemn Humiliation and Thanksgiving, and have
been thought to have prospered even beyond our own present desires; but we
never I believe considered whether Gods Voice in his Word, and his Voice in his
Works went together; yet it was easily discerned, for did we not fast to strife
and debate, to say no worse? did we not fast to smite with the fist? that is
too soft a smiting; I am loath to name the Acts of Wickedness: and when we gave
thanks, was it not for Rapine, Violence, the shedding of innocent Blood, and
other horrid consequences of War against our neighbour-Nations, nay our own
people? we should have hearkened to the voice of Gods Word, forbidding our
Barbarous Inhumanity, Even the selling the Righteous for silver, and the poor
for shoes, Amos 2.6, 8. and not have hardened our hearts from the Voice of his
providence: take it for a Rule, When the voice of the Word speaks one thing,
and the voice of successes seems to speak another, look upon it either as a
Temptation or a Judgment, even a leading to a reprobate sense, it is always so
when God grants wicked men the wicked desires of their wicked Hearts.

Not to trouble you much, it has been a long time a praying time, the Court of
Heaven has been solicited this many years pro and con, with much Preaching,
Fasting, and Crying to; and now let the world judge whose prayers have been
heard. Can it be denied that God did hear and grant the prayers, sighs and
groans, hae sunt ipsissimae sanctorum Orationes, of the now instrument of his
glory, and his peoples good, with all them that mourned in secret with him,
even when he seemed to others to be most deaf unto them? and did he not reject
all their Anti-suitors, even then when they thought and proclaimed to the world
that they had been heard because of their successes? And the reason is evident,
for were not their prayers contrary to the voice of the Word, to oppress the
Fatherless and the Widow, a man and his house, to subvert right, and pervert
Justice, and rather to Sacrifice whole kingdoms then their own Ambition and
Lust? and were not those others according to the Voice of the Word, that the
yoke of every oppressor may be broken, that God would judge the world in
Righteousness, and at last require the blood of his Servants? So that put the
Voice of God speaking in his Word, and the Voice of Success (as we see at this
day) together, they make a full Answer from God the Lord out of heaven; and
when God speaks so plainly, so distinctly, so with an Echo, Voice answering
Voice, can men or angels forbear their Hosannahs, Blessed be he that comes in
the name of the Lord? When we thus hearken what God the Lord will say, we need
not fear, for he will, certainly he will speak peace unto his people; the next
thing in the Text.

Peace in this place is the prosperous settlement of that Nation, and therefore
we are to understand his Pople, not by way of distinction and separation, but
the whole visible State and Church of the Jews: For that which is added, (and
to his Saints) is only expository, for what are his People but his Saints? and
what are his Saints but his People? it is an Hebraism worth observing,
affirming that to be which ought to be; to these he will speak Peace, therefore
they wanted it for the present; he will speak Peace, therefore they shall not
ever be without it; and he it is that will speak Peace, and therefore it can
come from no other hand; and he will when it is best for them. The people of
God do sometimes want Peace. The Moon has her Wanes and Eclipses as well as
her Light and Glory; and Ecclesia habet sua tempora, she is like the Pole Star,
Semper versatur; nunqua^^ mergitur, she is sometimes aloft, and anon you would
think her falling into the Sea. In me, says our Savior, you shall have Peace,
but in the World tribulation: What Peace had Israel in Egypt for near 200.
years together, or in Babylon for 70. years? what Peace had the Primitive
Christians in their 10. Persecutions near 400. years, and what our English
Professors in those Marian days? I am sure our Jerusalem complains, that the
plowers made long furrows upon her back, more then once or twice, yea many
times, Psalm. 129. and we our selves have lived to see, and feel, and smart
under this Truth, conviction strong enough against Academicks and Scepticks
themselves. And indeed, it is Gods wisdom to have it so, thereby to pluck his
peoples Lips from the teats of this Earth: the Nurse puts Wormwood or some
sharper thing to her Nipples to wean her child; and God does imbitter our
sweets, and blast our blessings, to take off our Affections from the things
below, the better to fit us to walk with him, and have our converse in Heaven;
for the want of Peace is the Mother of holy Wisdom, when we are quiet and at
ease we are like the prodigal having his portion, minding nothing but
traveling as far as we can from our Father into strange Countries, with
Harlots and Riotous living; but the want of Peace, the sound of the Drum and
Trumpet, the neighing and prancings of the mighty ones make us return to our
selves, and think of home. Outward Peace also begets a kind of Spiritual
lazynesse; and we say to our selves with him in the Parable, Soul, eat and be
merry, take thy ease; but when Peace is gone, this lazy humor is gone, and we
set our selves to work again. In a calm at Sea, the Mariners lie ilde upon the
decks: but when a storm is up, they also are up and are doing, some tend the
Anchor, some guide the Ship, some dress the Sails, some pull the Ropes, and
some stand at the pump; it is so with our Graces, in the time of Peace scarce
one stirs, but when Peace is gone, every one is summoned to his duty, Faith
must steer, Hope must be the Anchor, Charity must dress the Sails, Patience
must pull the Ropes, and Repentance stand at the Pump. Besides, we are apt to
abuse Peace when we have long had it more then any other blessing whatsoever:
We may truly invert the Apostles words, and say, where (this grace) does
abound, there sin does abound, even Sodoms sins, Pride, Fulness of bread,
Idleness, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Uncharitableness, Lukewarmness,
Prophaseness; I cannot say they are the Effects of Peace, no more then the
weeds in the Garden are the Effects of the Suns shining. No, they are the
spurious brats of our own corrupt hearts, yet we know they are the companions
and attendants of a long Peace, whereas Wars, Persecutions, Afflictions are
Gods weeding knifes, to cut off these Evils even by the Roots; thefore says
David, it was good for me to be afflicted, he means chiefly by the Wars made
upon him by Saul and his Son Absalom, the Cross of Christ says a Father, was
Currus Triumphalis, his Triumphant Chariot; so in its kind is the Cross of his
Children, even Gods fiery Chariot in which he sets them to triumph over their
spiritual Enemies, and so to ascend to his Throne of Glory: and if so, it is
not only Gods wisdom, but his infinite Goodness and Mercy, that his people
have not always Peace. I remember St. Austin against Parmenion the Donatist,
has this distinction, Est charitas severitatis, and charitas mansuetudinis;
but is it not a distinction without a difference, or is not Gods severity also
many times his greatest Mercy? Believe it, God is often more merciful in
taking away, then in giving Peace unto his people: methinks Job is at a stand
for which to bless him most, when he says, The Lord has given, and the Lord
has taken away, Blessed be the name of the Lord; either he makes them equal,
or prefers the taking away before the giving.

Consider this all ye that have suffered even Jobs taking away, Murmur not
against it, make Gods uses of it, let it weane you from the world which
vanishes away, let it lift you up to a more heavenly mindedness, learn holy
wisdom from it, for it is Gods school, shake off spiritual slothfulness, or
melancholy, as Divines call it, and abandon your former abusings of this mercy;
thus let me advise you to kiss Gods rod, then who can tell whether the latter
end of Job may not be more blessed then the beginning? for this we know, that
though Gods people have not always peace, yet they shall not always want it, as
long as they are his people, till the Bill of divorce be issued out, and
Loammi, not my people, be pronounced upon them, which perhaps is the case of
the Jews to this day, Whose desolation must be until the consummation, Dan. 9.
as also of these poor people in America.

For God loves not the rod as it is a rod, it is opus alienum, a strange work to
him, as Esaias calls it; it is mercy that pleases him, and pleases him better,
as says the Prophet Micah, Therefore though heaviness be for a night, yet joy
comes in the morning; the sufferings of Gods people may be great, but
momentary, for he is not willing they should be discouraged: It was a shrewd
question of the Devil, Does Job serve God for naught? take away thy hedge: this
taking away the hedge did fright Job from God, yet it did not stagger and amaze
him; therefore though the rod of the ungodly may fall upon the lot of the
righteous, it shall not ever rest there, but at last be cast into the fire.
Else what an heartning would it be to the wicked, and how would they blaspheme?
when their enemies that ruled over them made them to howl, says the Prophet,
His name was continually every day blasphemed, Esaias 52.5. Every day and every
day continually they did blaspheme, what! even his holy name, his omnipotency,
as God his faithfulness as Jehovah: see how effectually this works upon the
Lord, v. 6. Therefore my people shall know (experimentally know) my name, that
I am he that does speak. Behold it is 1. He will speak peace, but when? There
be two Adverbs which I had almost said are Antichristian when they interpose in
holy things, the one is the Quomodo dubitantis, an How of doubting; the other a
Quando murmurantis, the When of repining; the one is destructive of our faith,
as in the Noble man, 2 King. 7.7. as long as Nicodemus kept himself to his
Quomodo istud? he could could not enter into the kingdom of God: the other is
destructive to our hope, as in Jehoram, Should I attend any longer on the Lord?
the Quomodo has almost spoiled us of all our Religion; for how many nice and
needless, and therefore fruitless controversies has it raised? We agree upon
Gods decrees, but whether they be supralapsarian or sublapsarian, absolute or
conditional, we defy one another as heretics: that Christ is in the Sacrament
all agree; but whether Con, or Sub, or Tran. or after Mr. Calvin's modo
ineffabili, (which sure must needs be best) the world will never agree: That
Christ gave Peter the keys no man denies; but whether as he was an Apostle, or
as a Pastor, or as a Believer, we most eagerly dispute. So for the Quando, it
eats even into the marrow of the souls of Gods best people many times in their
distresses; Why art thou cast down, O my soul? says David; why art thou so
disquicted within me? Not so much his sufferings as the Quando of his release
tormented him: This cast down his soul, this disquieted his heart within him,
for hope that is deferred (longer then we would or expect,) makes the heart
sick, Prove. 13.12. Take heed therefore of the curiosity of the Quomodo, if you
would preserve your faith; of the intemperance of the Quando, of you would not
be sick at heart. I beseech you observe how sweetly our Savior chides his
beloved disciples for this Quando, Master, say they, will thou at this time
restore the kingdom to Israel? they had long dreamed of an earthly kingdom,
much as our Chiliasts do of their fist Monarchy; a carnal phancie too. They
thought long to sit one at his right hand, the other at his left, to be great
and glorious princes, to Lord it over the Chief Priests and Elders, the Roman
governor, the Emperor himself; for spiritual pride is more boundless then
carnal, therefore, Master will thou at this time restore the kingdom unto
Israel? they name Israel, but they mean themselves: but says Christ, What have
you to do to ask such questions? possess your souls in patience, it is not for
you to know times and seasons, the Father has reserved them in his own hands;
Answer enough to satisfy the most impatient spirit; Consider the Fathers
Sovereignty, it is his Prerogative to appoint the Quando, and his appointments
the Scripture calls the fulness of time; Israel shall come out of Egypt the
self same day that he had determined, he sets the very hour; my hour is not yet
come, says our Savior: Gods set times are his decreed times, and his decrees
are secret to us; we can only say, that as he will have mercy on whom he will,
so when he will; for peace is a creature of his own making, I create peace: and
according to this rule Dei, Deo, it is fit he should dispose of his own. Then
consider the Wisdom of the Father, and Wisdom is most seen in the
seasonablenesse of her Words and Actions, it makes them like Apples of Gold in
Pictures of Silver, its the the very salt that gives them savor, he will
therefore speak peace to his people, when it is most seasonable. Lastly,
consider, that as this Father is the most wise, so our most gracious God, and
therefore he will speak peace to his people, when it is best for them.

I will hold you no longer in the generals of this Quando, I will descend to
particulars; Gods seasons to speak peace are chiefly three: First, when we
cannot help our selves to peace, when we have tried our Strength, our Wisdom,
our All, and nothing can do, then God will do; when the children are come to
the birth, and there is no strength to bring forth; when the Mariners in a
Tempest have tug'd and tired themselves, even at their Wits ends, then he
delivered them out of their distress, Psalm. 107. God of all things loves to
take his people off from themselves, that no flesh, not the most Sanctified
flesh, might glory in his presence; if this were well considered, we would
cease to eclipse the glory of our present peace by attributing it, as many do
in parties, to our selves, with not you, but we, is ours, not yours; foolish
people! he is neither yours, nor yours, but only Gods, Qui facit mirabilia
solus, who alone without our help does such wonders for his people; be as
zealous as you will for the King, as the Cities of Greece were for their Homer,
but let it be the Zeal of Love, not Envy, of Union, not Faction, lest you break
all in pieces. Secondly, Gods time for peace is when he has well prepared his
people to receive it; all the ways of the Lord must be prepared, to make a more
easy passage for his work: that of the Son of Syrac, Wisd. 8.1. may go for
Canonical Scripture, Gods wisdom reaches from one end to another mightily,
and sweetly does she order all things, her strength is seen in the work, her
sweetness in the foregoing preparations; it is so in the invisible peace, for
it does not break in suddenly, abruptly, irresistibly into man's heart, as a
strong man armed, it did not so in S. Paul's conversion, which looks most like
it, there was first a Light, then a Striking to the ground, then a Reproving
voice from heaven, to work off by degrees the innate and adnate resistibility,
at last he was sent to Ananias, and so Saul became a Paul. It is so when God
gives outward peace to his people, he works it Fortiter, but withal Suaviter,
sweetly preparing their hearts and conditions before he gives it; all their
high imaginations, their wellings of pride and animosities must come down, the
strong holds of their carnal confidence must be demolished, their Emulations,
Hatred, Uncharitableness, Revenge, Bloud-thirstiness, must be much abated, and
as so many Thorns and Briars which will choke this good seed of peace must be
rooted out, at least in some good measure, before God will sow it amongst them.
When men begin suits at Law they set out with high resolutions, but when tired
with long journeys, dishonored with servile attendances; when Lawyers have
sucked them on the one side, and perhaps Judges have been bribed on both sides,
then they will come to a parley, and though with some reluctance, embrace peace
with both their arms; it is so in all wars, specially civil broiles, this
therefore is Gods time. Lastly, it is his time when people will best receive
it, and best use it. They will best receive it when they will be most thankful
for it, and most glorify the giver, else peace is not given, but lost, as
pearls cast before swine. God loves his pearls, and this of peace the most
inestimable jewel of the lower world; better then so, as in receiving, so in
using. When God sees we will abuse his mercies, it is a mercy to keep his
mercies from us. We abuse them when we turn them against the giver, making them
isntrumental to our own lusts; but when there is any hope we will use them as
we ought, God is more ready to give then we to receive. I trust as God has
fitted and prepared us for our peace, so he will also enable us both to receive
and continue it amongst us; and this calls me to the last part of the Text
without any further application, the point being so appliable of it self,
especially in this auditory, in which every one of us is concerned: follow me
therefore, I beseech you, to the conclusion, But let them not turn again to
folly.

Sin and Folly, the fool and sinner are such common Synonyma's in Scripture,
that being in haste, and tender of your patience, I may well be spared the
quotations. Many have spoken of the sinfullness of sin, and they have done
well, few of the folly of sin; yet perhaps this is the more necessary Doctrine,
and more instrumental to the conversion of a sinner. For tell a natural man
what grievous abominations his sins are, alas, the point is too high for him,
or he has wit and fancy at will to plead for his beloveds: But tell him that
his sins make him a fool, unman him, so that now he does but insanire cum
ratione, he has but reason enough to make himself a mad man, this will awaken
him, because you deal with him upon his own principles. It were therefore worth
the while to show a sinner his folly, I mean the impenitent constant customer
to Satan and his own lusts, otherwise Stultorum omnia sunt plena, we are all
fools, for folly is bound up in the hearts of all the Children of Adam: But for
the sins of weakness, and quotidiana incursionis, the daily inrodes of
frailties, if detested and resisted, they are not properly ours, though always
with us and within us; they be those other sinners that be the fools. I will
give you but some few hints, which might occasion a larger Treatise.

A fool is a simple ignorant Creature, he has but very little of the Light
that enlightens every man that comes into the world; and Aristotle, a Heathen,
could say, that Omnis peccans est ignorans, every evil doer is ignorant, I am
sure the Apostle says, that his foolish heart is darkened, and which is more,
that he is stark blinded by the god of this World.

A fool is not only void of knowledge, but withal incapable of any; put him to
School, let him converse with knowing men, except you can new make his soul, or
new mould his brains, the fool will be a fool still: O ye fools when will ye
be wise? The Interrogation implies a Negation, as much as never. The
Emblematist tells you, that if you put an Ass amongst generous Horses, that he
may learn to neigh as those Horses do, yet an Ass will bray as an Ass, as
long as he is an Ass; and who can infuse goodness into a wicked heart? nothing
but a new Creation can do it; it is that which Solomon teaches in the 22. Pro.
17. Though thou should bray a fool in a mortar with a pestle as Wheat, yet
will not his foolishness depart from him: pound Wheat in a mortar with the
heaviest pestle, you shall never separate the bran from the flowr; its the
search must do it. Its so with a wicked fool; nothing but the finest sercte of
Gods grace and Spirit can separate his folly from his soul. A Fool cannot make
a good election of things set before him, any toy shall be preferred before
that which is of excellent worth, and the greatest concerment; for a Fools head
is a heap of fancies: No more can our spiritual fool discern things that
differ, he will always be speaking evil of good, and good of evil; set
before him, as Moses and the Prophets use to do, life and death, which do ye
think he will choose? Solomon tells you that the heart of a fool is in his left
hand, Eccles. 10.2. he had rather be standing on the left hand with the goats,
then on the right hand with Gods sheep. Fools notwithstanding are wilful in
their choice, til they have wearied themselves with their bables, you shall not
persuade them out of them: and are not wicked men as wilful in their follies?
neither parents, nor wife, nor children, nor friends, nor Sermons shall reform
them, but he that is filthy will be filthy still. Much like the obstinate Jew,
though he lay in a Jakes, yet none must help him out, because it was his
Sabbath: and our wicked fool, though he wallow like the sow in the mire of his
sensuality, none must help him out, because it is his Sabbath, his delight, he
has set up his rest there. Though a fool be thus obstinate, yet you may easily
cheat him of any good thing he has, to his very clothes: Such easy fools are
wicked men, they have most cheatable souls, pliable to any temptation, to any
lust.

A Fool is a very contemptible creature, he makes sport to the very children in
the streets; and our spiritual fool is the very offscouring of all things,
scorned even by those that are as bad as himself; its no news to hear one
Drunkard upbrayd another with Drunken fool, or one unclean person to make
himself merry with another uncleanness. Put a fool into an Office, or Honor,
what a ridiculous monster does he appear? As snow in summer, and rain in
harvest, so honor is not seemly for a fool, Prove. 26.1. Perhaps by this
similitude of snow, Solomon alludes to the white garments which Princes and men
of honor use to wear, compared to the snow in Salmon, Psalm. 68. or to the
fading, melting nature of all earthly glory: be it so or so, Honor is not fit
for a fool; nay its not only his own, but the places punishment where he is.
Snow in Summer, and Rain in Harvest are seldom blessings; it is so with the
wicked and ungodly, when they rule, its not only the shame, but the punishment
of a people.

Lastly, the Rod and House of Correction are commonly the Fools portion; and
what is the lot of our sinful fool but a rod, but a rod to some purpose? it
has but four twigs, but they be smart ones, Indignation, Wrath, Tribulation,
Anguish; and a house of correction too to some purpose, even that Brdewell or
Beidlam of hell, with the Devil and his Angels.

And now give me leave to speak freely unto you, Honored and Beloved. We of
this Nation have a long time been simple, sinful, wicked fools. Those that
have calculated will tell you that the year 41. was to be Annus universalis
insania; the first year of the universal madness of Christendom. I am sure
then we began to plot contrive, and act our follies with an high hand, to break
through all Laws both of God and Man, with the unjust Judge, neither fearing
the one nor reverencing the other; nothing could restrain us, no not oaths
themselves; then began Perjury to be the great sin, which all our nice and
new-minted glosses will I fear never be able either to heal or plaster. We
were also obstinate in our follies, nothing could take us off, not the voice of
Gods word, not the persuasions of the wisest men, not the cries of the people,
nor the clamours of our own consciences. We were highly pleased with our wicked
Chymera's, they were our Sabbaths, we had set up our rest in them. Let me add,
what cheatable fools we have been, I do not mean of our Estates, though this
be true, but of those precious Gems, Laws, Liberties, Religion, Christianity,
Humanity it self; such gross fools have we been, and therefore God has justly
sent us to the house of correction of these late wars and oppressions; till now
at last of his own free mercy and most infinite goodness, he has released us,
yet upon bail, even the caution of the Text, But let them not, etc. It is both
a caution and a threatening, and it looks more like a threatening then a caution,
for it is a But with an Aposiopesis, Let them not. If they do -- The folly that
is here spoken of is national, not personal; for when do we read that private
men did draw down public judgments upon a nation, except that nation made them
its own by law or connivance? God will spare great wicked places for a few
righteous, therefore he will not destroy great countries for a few wicked
sinners. Briefly, the sins of the Jews that brought this fury of Antiochus upon
them, may be reduced to these two heads. First, the Tabernacle of David was let
fall to the ground. Secondly, the public worship and government of the Church,
was quite changed from what God had established, the Priesthood was taken from
the Tribe of Levi, as the Scepter was departed from the Tribe of Judah: they
might be necessitated perhaps to this latter, by the rising and breaking of the
Grecian Monarchy, but the former must needs be from their own pride, faction
and emulation, and this brought in Antiochus.

We have seen their follies, and in them we may see our own, which sure in
general was great and manifold, of the Court, City, Clergy, Country; we were
generally a people laden with iniquity, yet he that drunk deepest of the Cup,
was, I think, the most innocent person. Should I rake into the sink of all our
follies, I should present you with a tedious and offensive inventory, less
pertinent to my Pattern and Text: I will therefore keep close to both, and only
say, as it was with them, so it was with us: The Scepter was departed from
Judah, and the Priesthood from the Tribe of Levi; Every one that could, made
himself a King, and every one that would, made himself a Priest. The Roman
Legendaries tell us of Pope Innocent the third, who in a Vision saw the two lay
Mendicant Preaching Friars, Dominick, and Francis upholding his Latterane; and
our laygifted Brethren that did but think themselves so, or had the boldness
to say they were so, made our Church a Babell, and upheld our confusion: by
this I see two men running in opposition one from another, may meet at a point
in the Antipodes, Non est Sacri alicujus Ordinis pradicare Evangelium. It
belongs not to men in holy Orders to preach the Gospel, say some Papists, and
the worst of Papists, the Canonists, and Non est Sacri alitujus Ordinis; It
belongs not to men in Holy Oders (Such are Antichristian and Baals Priests) to
preach the Gospel, say some Protestants, but the worst of Protestants, the
Sectaries; therefore as it was with them, so you see it was with us, and then
came in Antiochus; in a word, those two Staves which God had Erected among
them, for his own Glory, and their Protection, the Staff of Beauty, and the
Staff of Bands were broken, as it was with them, so it was with us, and then
came in Antiochus.

Bands I am sure were broken by Faction and Schism, Brotherly union in matters
of Gods Service was quite gone, for there arose a generation of men, skillful
to speak E^^^ of Good, that blanded whatever pleased them not, (though never so
lawful) for Superstitious and Idolatrous; little remembering that to condemn
for such, which indeed is (...) such, is to make our selves Superstitious and
Idolatrous.

Beauty was also broken, our government was shivered to pieces, we disliked
what was present, and therefore made long Preparations, and strong Combinations
for a Change, and a Change we must have; though by an honest Rebellion, which
was the contradiction, To this purpose two things must be done, the one taught
by Machiavel to bespatter our Governors, even to the slandering of the
Footsteps of the Lords Anointed; the other was the Devils Sophistry, Liberty of
Conscience must be pretended from all humane Laws: but who knows not that
though humane Laws do not bind the Conscience, yet the Conscience is bound to
humane Laws; for he that has said by S. James, There is but one Law giver,
has likewise said by S. Paul, You must be subject not only for fear, but for
Conscience sake: Had humane Laws bound the Conscience, the one could not have
said, There is but one Law giver; and had not the Conscience been bound to
humane Laws, the other could not have said, Not only for fear but for
Conscience sake. Lastly, all this was fallaciously colored over with the
glorious Titles of Gods cause, and the Gospels purity. Our case you see was
well like theirs, our Pride as great, our Emulation and heart-burnings greater,
our Dissimulation both with God and Man greatest of all, and why might, not
Antiochus come in? These you will say were Clergy sins, but those of the
Layety were not inferior, nay the very same; But what do I? I promised not to
rake into the sink of these Follies, and surely I have gone no further then of
necessity I must, to the satisfying of the Text, and my own duty; for had I not
showed our Follies, how could I have forewarned you, not to turn again unto
them?

To return again unto our Follies, when we have not only seen them, but so
lately and deeply smarted for them, is the greatest Folly in the World: Every
child that has been burnt will dread the fire, should not men do so? the
reason of the difference is, the child continually sees the fire, and remembers
its burning, but we forget the Judgments of God as soon as they are removed
out of our sight; O Remember, remember that Gods quiver is full of deadly
Arrows, though these be gone, he has heavier Judgments in store for us; if
forgetting what is past, we return again to our former Follies, Christ you know
told him so in the Gospel; go sin no more lest a worse thing fall unto thee,
sin no more, not Absolutely, but Relatively; the same which now thou have
sinned; the sin of Unthankfulness to him that so graciously had forgiven thee:
Briefly, therefore, the Folly of returning again appears in these two things.
First, in the guilt contracted, for if you believe the Schools, and you may,
for its grounded on these words of Christ; a returning to sin past over and
forgiven, puts new life into that very sin, and makes us doubly guilty in the
sight of God, at least unto Temporal Judgments. Secondly, in the difficulty of
a second pardon to be obtained, (for that such cannot be forgiven is the
Novatian Error,) because by such returnings our minds are more darkened, the
light of Gods grace is more diminished, the will is more depraved, the heart
more hardened, the conscience nearer to be defiled and seared; such returnings
must needs grieve Gods spirit, and if the greater care be not had, quench it:
Therefore though God can easily forgive our greatest Follies, yet not our
returnings again unto them. It is storied of a Grandee in Rome, that he
barbarously slew his Servant even in the presence of the Emperor whom he
entertained at a Feast, because he threw down unawares a Cubbord of his curious
Glasses; it seems he esteemed more of his fine Glasses then of the precious
blood of a man: Our National Follies which you have heard were like curious
newfangled glasses, but will you esteem these glasses more then the blood of
men, of a Nation, of your own souls? Let me beseech you, as many as be
well-wishers to our peace, and this present solemnity, in Gods name and the
Kings, in the name of the Church and State, for your own sakes, your wives and
children, and your native Countries sake, turn not again to your former
follies, but lay aside all faction, dis-affection, all emulation and
animosities, all envy, hatred, malice, uncharitableness, with all our former
ungodly courses, else I must tell you, you have no part in the business and
blessing of this day. Think not that our present peace is a new Patent for
future wickedness, or that if we can upbrayd some, insult over others, and
drink the Kings Health, till with it our own sickness, that we are the Kings
best friends, and most faithful Subjects: No, we are his greatest enemies,
such as do (what in us lies) betray both him and our selves to our former
miseries; and so I have done.

Nor can I conclude with a better Prayer then that of the first Text, which is
both a Text and a Prayer: We pray thee save now O Lord, O Lord send now
prosperity: Blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord. Long may the
King live, Long may He reign, Long may He be a Father to the State, a Nursing
Father to the Church. Let all his enemies, O Lord, be confounded, but upon
himself let his Crown flourish, to the joy of his people, and to the glory of
his God, and let all the people say, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

