A Letter from Pope Innocent the XII. to the Emperor, wherein He Endeavors to
persuade Him to a Peace; With His Imperial Majesty's answer. To which is
subjoyned the Resolutions of the Confederates in the present Conjuncture.
Done out of French.
MOST Beloved Son in Jesus Christ; We great you with Health and our Apostolical
Benediction. When from this sublime post, exalted almost to Heaven, in which,
as unworthy as we were of it, we are placed, We cast our eyes upon so many
faithful People that are committed to Our Pastoral care; We are almost ready to
expire with the excessive Grief and Melancholy we are affected with, at the
view of all those great calamities, to which they are exposed by this cruel
War, which at present afflicts almost all Christendom. And therefore being
deeply concerned at the great and piercing clamours of so many Persons thereby
exposed to Destruction; And being so very well assured of your Majesty's pious
inclinations, and of the great desire you have, to promote the advantage of the
Christian Commonwealth, We have resolved to employ with your Majesty, the same
Prayer we continually without ceasing address to the Fathers of Mercies, That
it would please him to dissipate those dreadful Storms from whence so many
Evils proceed, and to make them give place to a succeeding Calm of Peace so
much desired.

We hope, that taking into your Consideration, the greatness of our Sorrow, and
having a careful regard to the Miseries of so many poor People, and the dying
groans of those that are daily slain in the War, you will be the more confirmed
in the Inclination you have for Peace, and that you will labor to augment it. And
certainly when you shall have made a serious Reflection upon the ungovernable
Licenciousness of Soldiers, and upon the contempt that sort of Men have for
Sacred things, and upon the loss of so many Souls as we have just occasion to
fear, Considerations which wound us to the heart with grief, We cannot doubt;
but suffering your self to be swayed by the motion of your natural Piety, you
will readily form a Design for the procuring the repose of so many ruined
People, the Reestablishment of God's Service, and the Salvation of Souls: Most
sure it is you can in no juster or fitter manner acknowledge those benefits,
which the Author of all Good has so abundantly bestowed upon Your Majesty's
Sacred Person, than by reestablishing the Heritage which the Lord Jesus Christ
left by his Testament, to his Church, before he ascended into Heaven.

Wherefore employ your whole endeavors as far as in you lies, Most Beloved Son
in Jesus Christ, toward the easing of the Christian Commonwealth from those
miseries with which it is now afflicted; And propose for your aim, the Glory
which they shall receive; who by procuring the Peace of that Commonwealth,
shall benefit it with an unexpressible felicity, and the Applauses of the
People thereby Resetled, who will never cease to proclaim the just praises of
the Authors of their tranquillity.

As for Us, We will put in practice all that we can think of to facilitate to
Your Majesty, and to all the rest of the Christian Princes, the means of
putting in execution a Work so useful and so advantageous.

In this Expectation, We most heartily give you our Apostolical Benediction, as
in assured earnest of our good will.

Given at Rome, at the Church of St. Marie Major, under the Seal of the Fisher,
the 8 of December. 1691. and in the first year of our Pontificat. MARIUS SPINOLA.


The Emperors Answer to the Pope.
Most Holy Father,
YOUR Holinesses Letter dated the 8th, of last Month, has sufficiently informed
us of the cruel disturbances you are affected with, at the view of those many
Evils which the Christian People is overwhelmed with by the War at present
enkindled almost every where, and of your Holinesses care to moderate and calm
the animosities raging between the several Irritated Princes, and to dispose
them to Peace and Concord. And indeed the calamities which the Christian
Commonwealth suffers by this War so unjustly enterprised, together with those
it is farther threatened with thereby, no less afflict Us than they do your
Holiness.

But our comfort is, That God and our Conscience bear Us Witness, that the
fault cannot be imputed to Us, since We took not up Arms, but when there was a
necessity so to do, for the Defense of the Empire, and of the People committed
to our Protection, against those who attacked them. The most inward thoughts of
our Heart are so well known to your Holiness, by the long acquaintance and
converse you have had formerly with Us, That you will easily believe, there
could happen nothing more displeasing to Us, than to see the Love We naturally
are biased with for the Peace, and tranquillity of the Public, to be
continually disobliged, and forcibly turned toward the contrary extrem, by
fresh injuries daily perpetrated against Us, and above all things, by the
Ambition and Malicious envy of France.

For the Respect which is universally granted to be due to the Public Faith,
and to Solemn Treaties, has not hitherto been of any force to bridle that Crown
from violating them as often as they have been Sworn to. And to pass under
silence several other things, the Christian World with sighs beholds, and
posterity with horror will hear related, that it has been possible for a King
most Christian, to fix upon a resolution to stop the Rapid Course of our
Victories over the Infidels, to break those Bands of Amity We had but a little
before renewed with him, and to make a fresh War upon Us, just at the moment
when trusting in the Faith of those Treaties so lately made with him, We lived
in all manner of security, and to fill all Places with Murders, Rapines, and
Burnings, before he was pleased to inform Us for what Reason he Renewed the
War, and what just pretense We had given him for it. Certainly it must needs
have been done upon this principle, That it was much more eligible to trample
under foot all things both Divine and Humane, than for France to have lost the
oppornity to extend her Limits to the Rhine-ward, and to leave to Us and the
rest of Christendom, the leisure necessary successfully to finish the War with
the Turks, and to secure our Frontiers on that side.

And therefore the August Dignity with which We are invested, obliged Us to
make the best Alliances We could, to defend our selves and People against the
Arms of the most Christian King, and at the same time against the Enemies of
the Christian Name, Who by a shameful union Act in consort against Us. It Is
true the principal Condition of the Alliance by which we are engaged to our
Confederates, is, That We shall not have power to hearken to any separate
Treaty of Peace, without first consulting of it conjointly with them, but as we
can very well answer for them, that they no less desire than We, to see Peace
Reestablished in the Christian World, by the Reinforcement of the Articles of
Pacification concluded at the Pyrenean and Westphalian Treaties, which have
been violated by France. It will be necessary above all things, for your
Holiness to employ all your best offices and that with the utmost efficacy you
can, to induce the King of France to restore things to the State required by
the Articles of those two Treaties, as he himself testifies to be inclined to
do.

If Your Holiness can obtain from that Prince a thing so just, We will not be
wanting on our side, to use our utmost endeavors, that the Pious Intentions of
your Holiness for the good of Christendom, and the offer of your Paternal care
and good offices for the advancement of Peace, which are to Us most acceptable,
may be embraced by our Allies, and produce their desired effect. This is what
We thought our duty to Answer to your Holinesses Letter, which was so pleasing
to Us, and which We have accordingly done, with all due Respect to Your
Holiness; Whom We pray God long to preserve both for the good of the Church in
General, and Our own in Particular.

At Vienna, the 20th of Janu. 1692.

The Resolution taken by the Confederate Princes, and other Allied Powers, in
Relation to France.
HAVING Resolved to make this Year, a Descent into France, that by so attacking
Our Common Enemy where Our efforts may be most sensibly felt, We may the more
easily Reduce him to Reason: In order thereunto, We first, all Solemnly Swear,
and Protest before God, That We will make no Peace with Lewis the Fourteenth,
but upon the conditions Stipulated by the Articles of the Pyrenean, and
West-phalian Treaties which have been violated by France, and upon those other
agrements which We have hereunto Subjoyned, which though they be partly the
Fundamental Rights of the French Nation, and partly privileges confirmed by
the most solemn Edicts, have been with no less violence and injustice infringed.

I. Till the General Estates of the Kingdom be restored to their Ancient
Liberties, Power, and Share in the Legislative and suprem Power; and till both
the Clergy, Nobility, and Third Estate be Reinstated in all their former Legal
privileges; And till there be good provision made, that all Kings of France in
time to come, shall be obliged to convoke the said Estates, when they shall
need money for any Public concerns, and shall have no power, in any manner, or
upon any pretense whatsoever, to raise any Taxes, ^o any sort of Imposts
without their Consent.

II. Till the several Courts of Parliament in the Kingdom be reinstated into
that sufficient and Legal authority with which they were primarily invested,
That so without being awed by any check from an arbitrary Power, or being
obstructed by the corruptions ordinarily arising from undue and illegal
promotions to those high Posts of Judicature, they may be both able, and well
inclined to do justice indifferently to all Parties.

III. Till all the Cities of the Kingdom be restored to their old Charters and
Privileges, and to the Revenues assigned for their support and the Public
good of their several Corporations which have been so Inhumanly, and unjustly
Ravished from Them.

IV. Till all those Swarms of Caterpillars of Monopolists, pernicious
Publicans, and Farmers of the Royal Revenues, and other oppressed undertakers
be Removed, and all the illegal and new invented Charges and Taxes be taken
off, as in particular, the Irregular Lodging and Quartering both of Courtiers
and Soldiers, the exactions for Winter Quarters, the salaries of Governors, and
Multitude of Sham Debts and private businesses of the Crown, unnecessarily and
without authority charged upon particular Persons, Towns, or Cities, and which
enter not into the State or Accounts of the public Revenues; of Extraodinary
excises upon Wine, Cider, and other Liquors, the Gabelle upon Corn, and Flour,
upon Hoofed Beasts, and Salt, the unreasonable and unexampled imposts upon the
Marks of Paper, Money, and all Utensils, or Movables made of Metal, upon Hats,
Silk-stockings, Wools, and Woollen Manufactures, Shoes, Slipers, Wooden Shoes,
all sorts of Linen, and Perriwigs; as also upon Tobacco, Coffee, Tea,
Chocolate, etc. upon all Manufactures of Silk, and upon all the Estates and
Goods of Noble or Geutlemen every five Years, the Tax of the Frank Fifs, and
several other oppressive exactions upon the Buyers and Sellers, or Morgagers of
Lands, Houses, etc. and upon the Officers of the Courts of Judicature, and of
the Treasury and Exchequer; of the Injurious, and Arbetrary Retrenchment of
Wages, Raising or Lowering the value, and debasing the purity of Money and Coin,
and unjust Reunion to the Crown Lands, and possessions long enjoyed by great
and deserving Families, upon Dispotical pretenses, and besides an infinite many
other new and unheard of exactions; of the strange impositions upon Marriages,
Christnings, Buryings, and Bastards, etc. and to conclude all in a Word: Till
the Revenues of the Crown be Fixed, and Reduced within such certain and
moderate Bounds as shall seem most Requisite to the wisdom of the General
Estates when Convened; and good provision be made that no succeeding French
Monarchs shall ever pass those bounds.

V. Till he has Rendered to all the Protestants of his Kingdoms the Estates,
Effects, and Liberties they were seized of by virtue of the Edict of Nants, and
all other privileges they enjoyed thereby according to the true meaning, and
to the full extent of the said Edict: And till for their future security both
in their Civil, and Religious Rights and Capacities, according to the meaning
of the said Edict, the said French King shall have delivered some sufficient
cautionary Towns to be held and fortified by those Protestant Allies that shall
be made Guardians, or Conservatours of the Treaty to be agreed upon

VI. And Lastly We Declare, as in the sight of God, That in these our just
attempts, We are not actuated by any hatred or animosity against the French
Nation, nor by any ambitious designs to Conquer or Seize on any of the Ancient
and Lawful Dominions of France, or to dismember that Moarchy of any of the
Provinces justly belonging to it, but that Our ultimate aim is only to repress
that exorbitant Power whereby that Crown has been enabled hitherto to oppress
its own Subjects, and Threaten the Liberty of all Europe besides; And that We
advance toward the Fronteers of France. with as hearty an intention to Rright
the Wrongs of its Subjects, as those of Our own people, esteeming the
reestablishment of their just and ancient Liberties, to be the best Bulwark of
Our own, against Our and their Common Oppressor; And that therefore; We do
friendly and heartily invite them to come in to Us, and to join their Arms and
other assistance with Us, toward their Deliverance, assuring them We will
treat them as Our best friends, and will take care to preserve their Persons,
Towns, Lands, and all that shall concern them as if they were our own; But at
the same time We have thought fit also to Declare to all that shall not comply
with Our invitations, and assistances intended for their Common good, That We
shall Distinguish them for Enemies of their Country, and of all sort of
Christianity, and Humanity, and as Barbarous wretches that have abetted, and
approved all the persecutions, Burnings, Desolations, and other vexations which
have been committed by those of their Nation both within and without France,
and shall make them feel without mercy those pains which their inhumane
Contrymen have made so many thousands of miserable people suffer.

And We have thought fit to make Public this our Declaration, that all the
World might know the sincerity of our Resolutions, and particularly those of
the French Nation, which groan under the intolerable oppression of the present
Government there, and who with the loss of their Liberty, have redoubled their
desires of Recovering it again, that they may be informed to whom, and with
what confidence and assurance, they may apply themselves, in this great
opportunity offered them by the Just and Almighty God, to Regain their ancient
freedom and privileges which have been so long, and so cruelly extorted and
detained from them.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by H. Hills, in Blackfriars.


