Instructions for the Commissioners of the Militia for the County of (...)
concerning giving License to some of the Scottish Nation to remain in England.
Whereas by a late Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act to prohibit all
Commerce and Traffic between England and Scotland, and Enjoining the
Departure of Scots out of this Comwonwealth, herewith sent, all those of the
Scottish Nation are forbidden to continue in England, under the penalties
therein expressed, unless permitted so to do by the Parliament or Council of
State, as by the said Act appears: And whereas there may be diverse of that
Nation now in England, that are of good and peaceable Behavior, and from whom
there is no cause to fear that evil which the said Act intends to prevent, yet
will be by the said Act in danger to be proceeded against as is thereby
directed: And for that it would be a great trouble to the Council, and a charge
to the persons, to make their personal Application to the Council from all
parts of the Commonwealth; The Council, in pursuance of the Power given unto
them, have thought fit to commit unto your care, the permitting of such of the
Scottish Nation to continue here, (...) under the following Qualifications:

ALl such as having Families, do exercise any Trade or Manufacture, or that are
Servants or Apprentices, and have resided in England before and ever since the
Scottish Invasion in the year 1648, and have not been, nor are Delinquents, or
under Sequestration by any Act or Ordinance of Parliament, nor Soldiers of
Fortune, nor have manifested their disaffection to the Parliament and present
Government.

You are hereby authorized to give License to these to stay in England (if they
desire it of you) for so long only as until the Parliament or Council of State
shall give Order to the contrary: The Names of which persons, with their
Dwelling, are to be Entered into a Book by you to be provided for that purpose.

The persons thus to be Licensed by you, are to take and Subscribe the
Engagement appointed by Authority of Parliament; and also shall before some of
you who are Justices of the Peace, enter into Recognizance Custodibus
Libertatis, etc. in some convenient Sum not under Two hundred pounds, and so
upward, according to the quality of the persons, which is left to your
judgment; conditioned, That they shall act nothing to the prejudice of this
Commonwealth and present Government: And shall (within such time after Summon
left at their houses, as you shall judge sufficient for their journey,
according to the distance of their dwelling hence, which we leave to you to
determine and express) make their appearance before the Parliament or the
Council of State, as they shall be by the said Summons appointed; Their
Subscriptions of the Engagement, and Recognizances, you shall cause to be
Registered as aforesaid.

You shall cause enquiry to be made after such of the Scottish Nation as shall
continue in your County, and are not qualified as abovesaid, and that have not
your License thereupon, and cause them to be prosecuted and proceeded against
according to the said Act.

You are before the First of October, to certify to us all your proceedings
upon these Instructions, The Names of the persons Licensed, with their
Subscriptions and Recognizances: And if you meet with any particular case that
is not clearly enough provided for by the said Act or these Instructions,
worthy of consideration, You are to signify the same to us for further
direction.

Signed in the Name, and by Order of the Council of State Appointed by
Authority of Parliament,


