AN ACT Concerning FINES in the County Palatine of TIPPERARY.

W R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE IE MEIN TIENDRAI

DVBLIN, Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
on Ormonde-Key, 1695.

An Act Concerning Fines in the County Palatine of Tipperary. CHAP. XX.
WHEREAS it is for the Common Good and Advantage of the Public, that the
Estates of Purchasers for Valuable Considerations should be Secured unto them,
toward which nothing has conduced more then Fines Levied in Due Form of Law.
And whereas some doubt may arise concerning the Validity of Fines Levied in the
Country Palatine Court of Tipperary, according to the Custom and Usage thereof,
whereby the Estates of several of His Majesty's Subjects who have been, and may
hereafter be. Purchasers of Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, being within
the Jurisdiction of the said Palatinate, may to their great prejudice be called
in Question. For Remedy whereof,

Be it Enacted, by Your Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Assent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled,
and by the Authority of the same, That all and singular the Fines heretofore
Levied in the Court of the said County Palatine, shall be of the same Force and
Efficacy in Law as Fines with Proclamations Levied before His Majesty's
Justices of the Common Pleas in this Kingdom, and that all and singular Fines,
which at any time hereafter shall be Levied or acknowledged in any Term before
the Judge or Judges in the said County Palatine of Tipperary, for the time
being, of any Lands, Tenements, or other Hereditaments, Lying, or being within
the said County Palatine, which shall be openly Read and Proclaimed in the open
Court, in the presence of the Judge or Judges, in the Term held for the said
Palatinate, being the same Term that the same shall fortune to be Engrossed;
And also that shall be openly Read and Proclaimed in the presence of the Judge
or Judges of the said County Palatine of Tipperary, or one of them, for the
time being, at Two Terms that shall be holden in the said County Palatine of
Tipperary, before the Judge or Judges of the same, or one of them next after
the Levying and Engrossing of such said Fine, shall be of like, and of the same
Force, Strength, and Effect in the Law, to all Intents, Constructions and
Purposes, as Fines being duly Levied with Proclamations before the King's
Judges of his Common Pleas at Dublin, be, or ought to be.

FINIS.

