AN ACT For Keeping and Celebrating the Twenty third of October AS AN
ANNIVERSARY THANKSGIVING IN THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND.

Together with A FORM OF DIVINE SERVICE, To be used there on the same Day.

THese are to give notice, That the Protestants of Ireland, at present in and
about the City of London, intend to meet (at the Church of St. Mary le Bow)
upon Wednesday the Twenty third day of this Instant October, at Ten of the
Clock in the Morning, in pursuance of an Act of Parliament in that Kingdom, to
give Thanks to Almighty God for the Deliverance from the Bloody Massacre and
Rebellion begun by the Irish Papists the Twenty third day of October, 1641.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavell at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1689.

An ACT for Keeping and Celebrating the Twenty third of October, as an
Anniversary THANKSGIVING in this Kingdom.
WHereas many malignant and rebellious Papists and Jesuits, Friars, Seminary
Priests, and other Superstitious Orders of the Popish pretended Clergy, most
disloyally, treacherously, and wickedly conspired to surprise His Majesty's
Castle of Dublin, His Majesty's Principal Fort of this Kingdom of Ireland, the
City of Dublin, and all other Cities and Fortifications of this Realm, and that
all the Protestants and English throughout the whole Kingdom, that would not
join with them, should be cut off; and finally, by a general Rebellion to
deprive our late Sovereign Lord of ever Blessed Memory, King Charles the First,
of this His Ancient and Rightful Crown and Sovereignty of this Kingdom, and to
possess themselves thereof: All which was by the said Conspirators plotted and
intended to be acted on the Twenty third of October, in the Year of our Lord
God 1641. A Conspiracy so generally inhumane, barbarous, and cruel, as the like
was never before heard of in any Age or Kingdom; and if it had taken effect in
that fullness which was intended by the Conspirators, it had occasioned the
utter Ruin of this whole Kingdom, and the Government thereof: And however it
pleased Almighty God, in his unsearchable Wisdom and Justice, as a just
Punishment, and deserved Correction unto his People for their Sins, and the
Sins of this Kingdom, to permit then and afterward the effecting of a great
part of that Destruction complotted by those wicked Conspirators, whereby many
thousand British and Protestants have been massacred, many thousands of others
of them have been afflicted and tormented with the most exquisite Torments that
Malice could suggest; and all Men's Estates, as well those whom they barbarously
murdered, as all other Good Subjects, were wasted, ruined, and destroyed: Yet
as his Divine Majesty has in all Ages shown his Power and Mercy, in the
miraculous and gracious deliverance of his Church, and in the Protection of
Religious Kings and States; so even in the midst of his Justice, he was
graciously pleased to extend Mercy to His Majesty and to this His Kingdom, and
good Subjects therein, not only in mercifully discovering to the then Lords
Justices, by one Owen O Connelly, a mere Irishman, but trained up in the
Protestant Religion, who out of a sense of his Duty and Loyalty to His Majesty,
and for the preservation of his good People, and as an Effect of that Religion
he was trained up in, revealed that hideous and bloody Treason, not many Hours
before the appointed time for the execution thereof; but also in preserving the
said Castle and City of Dublin, and some other Cities, Towns, and Castles in
the Kingdom, from the bloody Hands of the barbarous Conspirators, as also in
thereby rendering deliverance of the Lives of the said Lords Justices and
Council, and of all the British and Protestants in Dublin, and in the said
other Cities, Towns, and Castles preserved, and of sundry other British and
Protestants, fallen into the Hands of those rebellious Conspirators, and
likewise in sending us Succors out of England hither, by the Piety, Care, and
Wisdom of our late Sovereign Lord King Charles the First, whereby, with God's
Blessing, the good Subjects of this Kingdom have hitherto continued safe under
His mighty Protection, notwithstanding the unexampled Rage and implacable
Malice of those merciless Rebels. Wherefore as we do most humbly and justly
acknowledge God's Justice in our deserved Punishments in those Calamities,
which from the Counsels and Actions of those Conspirators, and their Adherents
have fallen upon us in this Kingdom in general; so we do in like manner
acknowledge, that even in exercising of that his Justice, he remembered Mercy
also, and magnified his Mercies to us, in those great Blessings which we humbly
confess to have proceeded merely from his infinite Goodness and Mercy; and
therefore to his most holy Name we do ascribe all Honor, Glory, and Praise;
and to the end this unfeigned Thankfulness may never be forgotten, but may be
had in a perpetual remembrance, that all Ages to come may yield Praises to his
Divine Majesty for the same, and have in Memory that joyful Day of Deliverance;
Be it therefore Enacted by the King's most Excellent Majesty, with the Assent
of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, and by Authority of the same, That the Twenty third day of October
shall be kept and celebrated as an Anniversary Holiday in this Kingdom for
ever; and that all Persons do at that Day forbear all Bodily Labor, and the
Exercise of their Trades; and that all and singular Ministers in every
Cathedral and Parish Church, or other usual Place for Common Prayer within this
Realm of Ireland, shall always upon the Twenty third Day of October say
Morning-Prayer, and give Thanks to Almighty God for that most happy and
miraculous Deliverance and Preservation, far above the Expectations of those
wretched Conspirators; and that all and every Person and Persons inhabiting
within this Realm of Ireland, shall yearly upon the Twenty third of October
diligently and faithfully resort to the Parish Church or Chapel accustomed, or
to some usual Church or Chapel where the said Morning-Prayer, Preaching, or
other Service of God shall be used, and then and there abide orderly and
soberly during the time of the said Prayers, Preaching, or other Service of God
there to be used and ministered. And because all and every Person may be put in
mind of his Duty, and be then the better prepared to the said Holy Service, Be
it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Minister shall give warning
to his Parishioners publicly in the Church, at Morning-Prayer, the Lord's Day
next before every such Twenty third of October, for the due Observation of the
said Day; and that after Morning-Prayer or Preaching upon every such Twenty
third of October, they read publicly, distinctly, and plainly this present Act.

A Form of Divine Service to be used October 23. appointed by Act of Parliament
Anno Regni Car. 2.14. die 27 Sept. 1662. to be Kept and Celebrated as an
Anniversary Thanksgiving in this Kingdom of Ireland.
THe heginning of the Service to be according to the Form of the Common Prayer:
Then Proper Psalms, as 3, 9, 12, 46, 144. Proper Lessons; for the first, 2 Chronicles. 13. or Jer. 30. For the second Lesson, Mat. 9. or Acts 5. or Acts 23.
And after the Collect for the Sunday, this following Collect.


ALmighty God and heavenly Father, who out of thy most wise and watchful
Providence, and tender Mercies toward us thine unworthy Servants, have been
pleased, as at all other times, so on this day, to prevent the extreme malice,
mischievous imagination, and bloody intention of our Enemies, die revealing so
wonderfully and opportunely their Rebellion, and cruel Enterprises, plotted
against our dread Sovereign Lord the King, and the whole State of this Realm,
for the Subversion of this Government, and the utter Extirpation of the Truth
of thy Gospel; and pure Religion professed amongst us. We most humbly praise
and magnify thy glorious Name for thine infinite Goodness in this our
mavelous Deliverance. We confess it was thy mercy, thy mercy alone (most
merciful Father) that we were not consumed. And therefore not unto us, not unto
us, O Lord, but unto thy Name be ascribed all honor and glory, in all Churches
of the Saints, throughaut all Generations. For thou, Lord, did discover unto
thy Servants the snares of Death; thou did break them, and we were delivered.
Be thou still our mighty Protector, and scatter our Enemies that delight in
Blood; infatuate their Counsels, enfeeble their Strength, put Fear in their
Hearts, and accomplish this thy Mercy in our safety and future deliverance. And
to that end, strengthen the Hands of our gracious King, the Lord Lieutenant,
the Nobility, and Magistrates of the Land, with Judgment, Justice, and Power to
restrain such workers of Iniquity, who pretend Religion and practice Rebellion,
and devour thine Inheritance. This, Lord, we crave at thy merciful hands,
together with the continuance of thy powerful Protection over our dread
Sovereign, the whole Church, and these Realms, and the speedy Conversion of all
our Enemies, and that for thy dear Son's sake, Jesus Christ, our only Mediator
and Advecate. Amen.

After the Litany, this Prayer for the Second Collect.
O Eternal God, in whom we live, move, and have our Being, and by whom alone we
are protected in all our Dangers and Distresses; we thy People, and Sheep of
thy Pasture, do acknowledge our selves above all others infinitely bounden unto
thy heaven^^ Majesty, for thy many unspeakable Benefits daily conferred and
heapen upon us; especially for the enlightening us with thy heavenly Truth, and
planting thy Gospel amongst us; for placing over us a most gracious King, a
faithful Professor and Defender of the same, a wise and vigilant Lieutenant.
And as at this time especially we praise thee for the discovery and prevention
of the bloody and treacherous Designs of the Enemies of thy Truth and People:
We laud and magnify thy glorious Name for these thy Mercies, and will ever
show forth thy Praise from Generation to Generation: For it was thy Goodness
alone that we were not delivered over for a Prey unto their Teeth. Thy
Prudence, not our Foresight; thy Love, not our Merit, that we appear this day
before thee, that the Enemy did not triumph in our utter Destruction, nor root
up the Vine which thy Right hand had planted. O Lord God of Hosts, look down
from Heaven, and behold, and visit this thy Vine; water it with thy Blessing,
and make it to fill the Land, to the astonishment of our Enemies, but unto the
joy of all that wish well unto our Sion: So will we not go back from thee, but
will serve thee in fear and holiness all the days of our lives, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Third Collect after the Litany.
O Most gracious Lord God, we of this Nation, whom thou did snatch as a Brand
out of the Fire of the late horrid Massacre, we this day assembled before thee,
do with shame and sorrow acknowledge and confess, That our Sins had most justly
provoked thee to wrath, when thou did suffer those Men of Blood to make their
Sword fat with the Slaughter of so many thousand Innocents. And we may as
justly fear, that our not being made better by thy former Judgments, thou
may be compelled to make thy Sword sharper, and return upon us in greater
fury, because our Sins are greater, more bold, more provoking: in particular,
our neglect and contempt of thy sacred Ordinances, our vain and false swearing
(for which the Land mourns) our unchristian Incharitableness, and shameful
Intemperance, our Sacrilege, and Covetousness, Hypocrisy, Slandering, and deep
Security in the midst of all our Sins and Dangers. These, together with a
glorying in our Impieties, might in justice have brought upon us a sudden and
horrible Destruction. But, contrary to the method of thy Proceedings against
others, thou have spared us, thereby woing us to return unto thee by unfeigned
Repentance. Thou have magnified thy Mercy toward us, that we may magnify
thee, as we do this day, this memorable day, O Lord, for thy Patience and
Long-suffering, notwithstanding all our Provocations: We repent, O pardon; we
return, O vouchsafe to receive us, and enable us to walk worthy of thy great
past Deliverance, by a more strict and holy future Obedience, for the Merits of
Jesus Christ, our only Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

At the Second Service, this Fourth Collect to be said after the Collect for
the King.
MOst merciful and bountiful Lord God, seeing thou have been graciously pleased
to preserve thy most unworthy People from total Desolation, and daily to follow
us with the Blessng of Peace and good Government: make us therefore, O Lord, in
all thankfulness to be obedient to thy Will in all things; to be faithful and
constant in our Duty to the King, and to all that are in Authority under him;
to be sincere in thy Worship, zealous of Good works, of one Faith, and one
Mind, studying to be quiet, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another,
even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us: so that when every one in his
several place shall labor to advance the good both of Church and State, and by
a through Reformation of our Lives, shall become a People whom thou may take
delight to bless; then thy Judgments which we have deserved, and therefore
fear, may be averted, and our sinful Souls saved in the day of the Lord Jesus:
Then with one heart and voice we may all praise thee in thy Church, and always
sing joyfully, that thy Loving Kindness is ever more and more toward us, and
the Truth of the Lord endures for ever. These Mercies we most unworthy to ask,
humbly beseech thee to grant, for the benefit of this Church and Nation, and
glory of thy Name, through Jesus Christ our only Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

For the Epistle, Mehem. 4. from ver. 7. to ver. 16. or 2 Cor. 1. from ver. 3.
to ver. 11.

For the Gospel, Mat. 14. from ver. 23. to ver. 34. or Mat. 15. from ver. 1. to
ver. 13. or Mat. 5. from ver. 1. to ver. 14.

And then proceed as in the Book of Common Prayer.

FINIS.

