AN ACT For Banishing all PAPISTS Exercising any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
AND ALL REGULARS OF THE Popish Clergy Out of this KINGDOM.

royal blazon or coat of arms W R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIE MEIN TIENDRAI

DVBLIN: Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
on Cork-Hill, near Copper-Alley. MDCXCVII.

An ACT for Banishing all Papists exercising any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
and all Regulars of the Popish Clergy out of this Kingdom.
CHAP. XXVI.
WHEREAS, it is Notoriously known, That the late Rebellions in this Kingdom
have been Contrived, Promoted and Carried on by Popish Archbishops, Bishops,
Jesuits, and other Ecclesiastical Persons of the Romish Clergy. And forasmuch
as the Peace and Public Safety of this Kingdom is in Danger, by the great
number of the said Archbishops, Bishops, Jesuits, Friars, and other Regular
Romish Clergy, now residing here, and settling in Fraternities and Societies,
contrary to Law, and to the great Impoverishing of many of His Majesty's
Subjects of this Kingdom, who are forc d to maintain and support them; which
said Romish Clergy do, not only endeavor to withdraw His Majesty's Subjects
from their Obedience, but do daily stir up, and move Sedition, and Rebellion,
to the great hazard of the Ruin and Desolation of this Kingdom. For the
prevention of all which Mischiefs, His Majesty is Graciously Pleased that it be
Enacted.

And be it Enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the same, That all Popish
Archbishops, Bishops, Vicars-General, Deans, Jesuits, Monks, Friars, and all
other Regular Popish Clergy, and all Papists exercising any Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, shall depart out of this Kingdom before the First day of May,
which shall be in the Year of Our Lord, One thousand, Six hundred, Ninety
eight: And if any of the said Ecclesiastical Persons, shall be at any time
after the said First day of May, within this Kingdom, they, and every of them
shall suffer Imprisonment, and remain in Prison, without Bail or Mainprize,
till he or they shall be Transported beyond Seas, out of His Majesty's
Dominions, wherever His Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, or the Chief Governor
or Governors of this Kingdom, for the time being, shall think fit: And if any
person so Transported, shall return again into this Kingdom, they, and every of
them, shall be Guilty of High Treason; and every person so Offending, shall for
his Offense, be adjudged a Traitor, and shall suffer, lose and forfeit as in
Case of High Treason.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every such
Popish Archbishops, Bishops, Deane, Vicars-General, Jesuits, Friars, and all
other Popish Regular Clergy in this Kingdom, shall before the said First day of
May, repair to the City of Dublin, Cork, Kingsale, Youghal, Waterford, Wexford,
Gallway, or Carrickfergus, and there remain, until there shall be Convenience
of Shipping, for their Transportation into some Parts beyond Seas, and out of
His Majesty's Dominions, every of them on their first coming into any of the
said Cities and Towns, giving in their Names to the Mayor, or other Chief
Magistrate, who is hereby required to Register the same, and return an Account
thereof to the Clerk of the Council, within Ten days; and that the said Mayor,
or other Chief Magistrate of each Town, and also the Collector and Surveyor of
the Port, shall give their best Assistance in Transporting every such Popish
Archbishop, Bishop, and other Popish Regular Clergyman.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the
Twenty ninth day of December, which shall be in the Year of Our Lord God, One
thousand, Six hundred, and Ninety seven, no Popish Archbishop, Bishop,
Vicar General, Deane, nor any other Papist exercising any Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, not Established by the Laws of this Kingdom, Jesuit, or Friar
shall come into this Kingdom, from any parts beyond the Seas, on pain of Twelve
Months Imprisonment, and then to be Transported in manner aforesaid: And if any
such Romish Ecclesiastical Person, so Transported, shall again return into this
Kingdom, he and they so offending, shall be guilty of High Treason, and Suffer
accordingly.

And be it further Enacted, That any person that shall from and after the said
First day of May, knowingly harbor, relieve, conceal, or entertain any such
Popish Archbishop, Bishop, Vicar General, Deane, Jesuit, Friar, or any other
Papist exercising any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, not Established by the Laws
of this Kingdom, or any Regular Popish Clergyman, hereby required to depart
out of this Kingdom, in manner aforesaid, or that from and after the said
Twenty ninth day of December, One thousand, Six hundred, Ninety seven, shall
come into this Kingdom, contrary to the Tenor of this Act, shall for the First
Offense, forfeit the Sum of Twenty pounds; for the Second Offense, double the
said Sum, to be Levied in manner herein-after expressed: And if he shall
Offend the Third time, to forfeit all his Lands and Tenements of Freehold or
Inheritance, during his Life, and also all his Goods and Chattels; One Moiety
whereof to His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, the other Moiety, to such
Person as shall Inform, so as such Moiety do not exceed the Sum of One Hundred
pounds, and the Surpluss of what shall remain to His Majesty, His Heirs and
Successors, the said Forfeiture for such third Offense, to be Recovered by
Bill, Plaint, Information, or Action for Debt, in any His Majesty's Courts of
Record at Dublin, or at the Assizes in the respective Counties.

And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That upon Information on Oath,
to any Justice of Peace in his respective County, against any Person or
Persons, that shall knowingly Entertain, Succor, Relieve or Conceal any such
Popish Archbishop, Bishop, Jesuit, Friar, or other Ecclesiastical Popish
Person, contrary to the purport and meaning of this Act; the said Justice of
the Peace, shall immediately Issue a Summons in Writing under his Hand, thereby
requiring the Person and Persons so Informed against, at a certain Day and
Place within the said County, where such Offense shall be Committed, to appear
before him, and some other Justice of the Peace of the said County, to Answer
the said Matter laid to his, or their Charge; at which time and place the said
Justices shall in presence of the Person or Persons Accused, or in Case of his
or their Neglect to appear, being duly Summoned proceed to the Examination of
the said Matter; and if it shall appear to them, on Evidence upon Oath, that
the Person or Persons so Complained of are Guilty, the said Justices shall by
Warrant under their Hands and Seals, Levy the aforesaid Forfeitures of Twenty
pounds for the first Offense, and Forty pounds for the second Offense, of the
Goods and Chattels of the Person or Persons Offending, by Distress, Sale, or
otherwise, and dispose of one Moiety of such Forfeitures to the Informer or
Informers, and the other Moiety to the Treasurer of the County, where such
Offense shall be Committed, for the Use of the County; and for Default thereof,
to Committ the Person Offending to the County Goal, there to remain without
Bail or Mainprize, until he or they shall pay the said Forfeitures and
Penalties.

And be it further Enacted, That no Person whatsoever shall from, and after the
said Twenty Ninth Day of December, Bury and Dead in any suppressed Monastery,
Abbey, or Convent, that is not made use of, for Celebrating Divine Service,
according to the Liturgy of the Church of Ireland, by the Law Established, or
within the Precincts thereof, upon Pain of Forfeiting the Sum of Ten pounds;
which said Sum of Ten pounds shall, and may be Recovered from any Person or
Persons, that shall be present at such Burial, and Offending contrary to the
Tenor of this Act; which said Forfeitures, all and every Justices of the Peace,
in his, and their respective Counties, are hereby Authorized, to Hear and
Determine in manner as herein before is mentioned and declared; one Moiety of
which said last Forfeiture for Burying contrary to this Act, shall be by such
Justice given unto the Informer, and the other Moiety to the Minister and
Churchwardens of the Parish, where any such Offenses shall be Committed, to be
disposed of for the Use of the Parish.

Provided always, that if any Person or Persons shall think him, or themselves
agrieved, by the Judgment and Determination of such Two Justices of the Peace,
that the Person and Persons so agrieved, may Appeal from their Judgment and
Determination, to the next Judges of Assize, or to the Justices of Peace, at
the next General Quarter Sessions, who are hereby Empowered to Examine the said
Matter, and give such Relief therein, as to them shall seem meet.

And it is further Enacted that all and every Justice of the Peace, shall from
time to time Issue their Warrants for Apprehending, and Committal of all Popish
Archbishops, Bishops, Jesuits, Friars and other Popish Ecclesiastical persons
whatsoever that shall remain or Continue in this Kingdom, contrary to the Tenor
and meaning of this Act: And for Suppressing all Monasteries, Frieries,
Nunneries, or other Popish Fraternities or Societies.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every the
Justices of the Peace in this Kingdom, shall give an account in Writing, of
their proceedings in Execution of this Statute, at the next General
Quarter Sessions for the County, in which he shall Dwell, which shall be at
such Quarter Sessions Entered and Registered.

And be it further Enacted, That if any Justice of the Peace, Mayor, or other
Officer shall neglect doing their Duty in Execution of this present Act, every
such Justice of the Peace, Mayor, and other Officer, shall for every such
neglect, forfeit the Sum of One Hundred Pounds, to be Recovered by Action of
Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information, wherein no Protection, Essoyn, or Wager of
Law shall be allowed of, nor but one Imparlance; one Moiety thereof to the
King's Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, the other Moiety to the Informer, or
Person that shall Sue for the same, and be Disabled from serving as a Justice
of Peace, during his Life.

FINIS.

