A TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE WHOLE PROCEEDINGS OF THE PARLIAMENT IN IRELAND,
BEGINNING March 25, 1689, and ending the 29th of June following; with the
Establishment of their Forces there.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Clavell, at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MDCLXXXIX.

THE JOURNAL OF THE PARLIAMENT IN IRELAND, etc.
MARCH 25. 1689.
A Proclamation issued out for a Parliament to be held in Dublin, May 7. no
Popish Bishops summoned.

May 7. Parliament met in the Inns: Some Lords introduced; Bishop of Mead and
Cork amongst the rest; the King enters with Robes and Crown; makes a Speech:
Chancellor bids the Commons choose a Speaker; they go to their House, and having
chosen Sir Richard Nagle, present him within half an hour; he is accepted;
House adjourns till Ten in the Morning: two Lords called by Writ Chancellor,
Lord (...) Nugent, Lord Riverstown.

May 8. Bishop of Story introduced. Address of Thanks to the King, and
Abhorrence voted. A Committee appointed to draw it up. A Message to the Commons
for their concurrence.

The King comes into the House, appoints Four in the Afternoon for both Houses
to attend him with it: A Bill brought into the House by C. J. Nugent, and read
twice, Rege present. Containing a Recognition of the King's Title, and an
Abhorrence of the P. of O's Usurpation, and of the defection of the English;
ordered after to be ingrolsed: Committees of Grievances and Petitions
appointed: House adjourned till Friday morning.

May 10. King comes into the House, and stays there all the Session: Bill of
Recognition, etc. read the third time; sent down to the Commons by two Judges,
who report the delivery of it: A Bill brought in by C. J. Nugent for
encouraging Trade, by inviting Strangers into the Kingdom, taking only the Oath
of Fidelity, read once. The King directs the House in the Methods of
proceeding; adjourned to Ten next day: At Four afternoon Committee of Petitions
and Trade sat; a Petition preferred by Nangle against Gerard Borre, Esquire for
Perquisites of the Clerk of Parliament; Borre ordered to appear Monday
following at Four in the Afternoon.

May 11. Bishop of Limerick introduced: House ordered to attend the King in
their Robes, which they did: The Orders of the House read: Bill for Trade read
the second time, and committed: Bill of Recognition brought into the House from
the Commons; at Eleven the King comes, to the House in his Robes, and passes
the Bill; the King goes out. It Is disputed, whether the Session was not
discontinued by passing the Bill; moved to refer it to the Judges by the Bishop
of Mead; overruled, and resolved in the Negative. Adjourned till Monday.

May 13. A Bill brought into the House by C. J. Nugent for altering the Act of
Settlement, read once, and motion made for the second reading; but rejected.
The King present at Four in the Afternoon; the Committee of Petitions and
Privileges sat; Borres Answer put in, and Nangle ordered to reply. Lord
Brittas's Petition concerning his Arrest 18 years ago, read; Affidavit ordered
to be made, and on the Affidavit the Party to be committed to the Black Rod.

May 14. The Peers names called; License of absence granted, and Proxies
admitted: Two Bills brought up by the Commons, and read once; one for recalling
all Grants of Civil Offices from the King, during Life or Good behavior:
Another against Writs of Error, and Appeal into England; and that an Act of
Parliament in England shall not bind Ireland. King present all the while.

May 15. Earl of Westmeath introduced Bill for vacating Offices, etc. read
second time, and committed; Speaker quits the Chair: Chief Justice Nugent
called up by the King to be Chairman; the Bishop of Mead against it for two
Reasons; 1st, Because able Officers might be turned out without fault. 2d, It
was unjust to turn men out of Freehold without trial or compensation; the Lord
Chancellor for it, because to the King's prejudice to grant them: the House
reassumed, and the Bill read a third time; at every Sentence the Clerk stopped,
and the Speaker asks the House, Shall it pass without amendment? It was put to
the vote; all consent but the Bishop of Mead, who desired to protest, but was
denied, because he offered it too late; viz. after the Votes were past; King
present all along.

May 16. Chapter Just. Nugent reports the Alterations made in the Bill of Trade:
The Bill against Writs of Error, etc. read the Second time, and committed:
Speaker quits his place; Chief Justice Nugent assumes it: Bishop of Mead
argues against it, because against his Oath of Supremacy to the King; because
prejudicial to the King and Kingdom; robbing the King of his Prerogative, and
the Subject of the Liberty of appealing to the King in person: He desires a
Clause in the latter end for saving all Writs of Error, and Appeals now
depending in England: The Lord Chancellor for the Bill, argues from the Ease
and Benefit of the Subject. The House reassumed the Bill, read seriatim, as the
other before; after that, put to the vote; all consent: The King present at all
the Debates. A Bill read once, making it Treason to bring in Counterfeit
Foreign Coin into the Kingdom; referred to the Committee. A Petition preferred
about Butter-Casks, and referred. At Four in the Afternoon the Committee sits,
and refers the Bill about Money to the Judges; and that about Casks to the
Committee of Trade.

May 17. The Bill about Trade read twice, and passed nemine contradicente: Lord
Primate's Summons and Proxy granted to the Bishop of Mead, read and allowed:
objected, That the Proxy should be introduced, not allowed, because the Primate
did not appear; but it was carried in the Negative, and presidents were cited
for it.

May 18. Journals of the last day read: A Petition for the relief of some poor
Prisoners, read, and referred to the Committee.

May 20. Journals of the House read; Lord Dillon introduced.

May 21. Earl of Barrymore's Proxy granted to the Lord Granard, allowed, but
not read: Lord Dunsany's Proxy allowed.

May 22. Lord Trimnestown, and Lord Kilmahar introduced. Motion made by Bishop
of Mead against the Sheriffs of Dublin for quartering an Officer upon him;
Ordered, That no Peer should be quartered on; and that the Sheriff should be
committed to the Black Rod. The Bill for repealing the Acts of Settlement
brought up from the Commons by Coll. Macharty, and lodged in the House.

Observe, That nothing was done in the House for four days before, because the
King waited for this Bill from the Commons; and that the King sent frequently
for it; the Black Rod having called to the House of Commons six or seven times
this very day to send it up, the Lords House and King spent the time in
Discourses and News.

May 23. Journals of last day read. The Bill from the Commons lodged yesterday,
read this day once: Motion made to have it read again in the Afternoon, but
rejected: Bishop of Mead moves, That the Lords Bill might have Precedence of
it in reading, or at least, that both might be committed: The first rejected,
the latter granted: The Commons Bill ordered to be read next morning.

May 24. Col. Macarty made Baron, Moun Cassan introduced. The Commons Bill of
Repeal read again, and committed to the whole House; moved the Lords Bill of
Repeal might be read and committed; but denied. Several Petitions read, put in
by Persons concerned under the Acts; all referred, except Capt. Kelly's.

May 25. Bill about counterfeit Foreign Coin amended, and read the Third time:
Controversy between Trimnestown and Dunsany about Precedencies, Reported by
the Committee, adjudged to Trimnestown, because it was so in 1634; with a
saving to Dunsany, if he can show a better Right. Several Petitions read,
preferred by Persons concerned under the Acts of Settlement and Explanation,
and by others for Remainders: One by Lord Clan Meleera, to be relieved against
the Sale of his Estate to Sir Patrick Trant.

May 27. Several Petitions read, and Counsel on them heard at the Lords Bar;
viz. Lord Galways, Mathews, Lord Kingstown's Brothers, Sir Henry Bingham's
Brother's; the Scope of them all was, To have savings for their Remainders, and
consideration for their Improvements; referred all to the Committee of
Petitions.

May 28. Several Petitions read, relating to the Act of Settlement; Bill of
Repeal read the second time; the House Adjourned during Pleasure, and Resolved
into a Grand Committee; the Bill of Repeal read by Paragraphs; some Objections
made, which occasioned some Alterations. Motion made for Adjourning till
Thursday, because Wednesday was a Holiday; the King asked, What Holiday?
Answered, The Restoration of his Brother and Himself, etc. he replied, The
fitter to Restore those Loyal Catholic Gentlemen that had suffered with him,
and been kept unjustly out of their Estates; the Motion rejected.

May 29. Petitions read, and referred to the Committee; the House Resolved into
a Grand Committee; the rest of the Bill read by Paragraphs; Objections made;
some overruled, others thought reasonable; King offers a new Preamble to the
Bill, instead of that which was sent up from the Commons House; Assented to it.
Judge Daly impeached by the Commons; at four in the Afternoon Committee of
Petitions sits; Chief Justice Keating's Petition read; Lord Forbes's and Lord
Galway's adjourned to the 31st, because the 30th was a Popish Holiday.

May 31. Judge Daly's Petition read and granted; Scope of it for time to answer
the Commons Impeachments, and to have a Copy of it: Lord Galway's heard at the
Bar about his Ladies Remainder in Lord Lanesborough's Estate; Proviso granted
for it: Lord Riverstown reports the Alterations made in the Bill of Repeal by
the Committee, which were all consented to.

June 1. John Brown's Petition read and argued at the Bar; the Chairman
Reports the Alterations and Additions made to the Bill of Repeal; which are
approved: Judge Daly's Petition, desiring a further day for an answer, read and
granted. Mrs. Walls Bill against her husband read once.

June 3. Petitions read, and referred to the Committee: Lord Galway's Council
heard at the Bar, concerning his Ladies Remainder, and Arrears due to the Heirs
of Vlick, E. of Clanricard: Lord Riverstown Reports from the Committee several
Alterations and Provisoes to be inserted in the Bill of Repeal; which were each
twice read. Sir William Talbot came up with a Message from the Commons, which
imported their earnest Request to the Lords, to pass the Bill with all the
expedition they could, because the Heart and Courage of the whole Nation were
bound up in it.

June 4. Journals read: Petition from the Bishop of Cork for relief for Arrears
of Rents: A Bill for Mrs. Wall against her Husband, read the second time: Lord
Riverstown Reports new Alterations, new Provisoes in the Bill of Repeal; the
new ones read twice; the whole Bill, with all its Alterations and Provisoes,
read; after reading, the Bishop of Mead speaks against it, Lord Chancellor and
Riverstown for it; the Bishops desire leave to enter their Protest, and four of
the Temporal Lords, which were all the Protestants in the House. Mem. That the
King said, That they must not enter their Protestation, but only their Dissent;
for Protestation came in in Rebellious Times, and that they should not give the
Reasons of their Protestation.

June 5. The Bishops Protestation. We the Lords Spiritual in Parliament
Assembled, which Names are hereafter subscribed, having for diverse reasons,
then humbly offered to the House of Lords, dissented from passing the Bill into
a Law, sent up to this Honorable House from the House of Commons, Intitulled,
An Act repealing the Acts of Settlement and Explanation, etc. And having
obtained leave from the House of Lords to enter our Dissent against the said
Bill, do accordingly subscribe our Dissent from the said Bill.

This was brought in Parchment to the Clerk of the Parliament the next morning
before the House sat, and signed, Mead, Ossery, Cork, Limerick; the like
Protestation in Parchment signed per Granard, Long ford, Rosse, Howth.

I, Anthony, Bishop of Mead, being constituted and allowed Proxy for the most
Reverend Father in God Mich. Lord Archbishop of Armagh, do, in his name and
behalf, dissent from the said Bill. Mich. Armagh.

The like signed by Ossory, as Waterford's Proxy.

Journals of the House read: Lord Clanmalieras's Case against Sir Patrick Trant
heard at the Bar, and adjudged against: The Lord Mountgarret petitions the
House that Sir John Ivory may commit no waste on his Estate; a general Order
made against it. Committees of Trade, Privileges and Petitions revived: A
Committee appointed for Mrs Wall's Bill.

June 6. Journals read; Officers of the House petition about introduction Fees,
read, and referred to the Committee: George Kellya, Constable, ordered to be
committed for his insolence to Lord Longford.

June 7. Journals read: Message from the Commons for a Conference about
Exceptions to the alterations made in the Bill of Repeal; four Lords appointed
to meet them immediately in the Chamber over the Lords House; the Lords ordered
only to hear their Objections, and report them, which they did accordingly. The
Order against waste and spoiling Improvements, read, and approved: Lord
Riverstown moves, that Constables and Sheriffs might have power to commit the
Possessor that made any waste; Judges Opinions asked, all against it, and the
House agrees with them.

June 8. The House of Commons desire to withdraw their Impeachment against
Judge Daly, having accepted his Submission, which was granted: A present
Conference desired by the Lords upon the subject of the Last Conference,
wherein the Lords of the Committee report what they agree, and what they insist
on, together with the Reasons why they insist on them.

June 10. Journals of the last day read: A Petition of Bridges read, concerning
his being turned out of possession by the Proprietor; the House would do
nothing in it; the rest of the Morning spent in discourse.

June 11. A Free Conference between the two Houses concerning the Bill of
Repeal; the Commons insist on two things; 1st, That the present Possessors may
have time to remove till May next: 2dly, That all Remainders may be forfeited,
and vested in the King; Journals read.

THE JOURNALS OF THE HOUSE of LORDS.
JUNE 12. 1689.
JOurnals Read. Lords of the Committee report the Conference Yesterday to the
House. Commons Reasons debated, and upon the whole, the Lords agree with them
to the first, and the Commons condescend in the business of Remainders.

June 13. C. J. Nugent Reports to the House from the Committee of Petitions
several things. The Bill for adding and diminishing the Duties on Foreign
Commodities, and alterations in it read twice. A Bill for Liberty of Conscience
brought up from the Commons and read once.

June 14. The Journals Read. Speaker moves that the Bill for Liberty of
Conscience may be laid aside for some time, and that the House would dispatch,
for the King must send away his Officers. The Bill for adding and diminishing
Duties on Foreign Commodities sent up to the House without Alteration; the
meaning of this Bill is to enable the King to enhance or diminish Duties on
such Commodities as he thinks fit: At the same time three more Bills were sent
up, one for taking off incapacities from the Irish Natives; another for
Repealing the Provision for Ministers in Corporate Towns; the third for
Regulating the Tithing Table of Vlster: each of these read twice, and
committed. In the Afternoon the Committee sits and reads the Bill against the
Provision of Ministers and agrees to it; the B. of Mead, B. Cork, B. Limerich,
and E. Longford dissent.

June 15. Journals read. Bill for taking off incapacities from Natives, read
twice, and passed nemine contradicente: the meaning of this Bill is, that some
Statutes disabled Natives to be Lords-Justices, Schoolmasters, etc. which is
now repealed.

June 17. Bill of Repeal with all its Additions and Alterations sent up,
Engrossed from the Commons, and read thrice; Question put, Consent or not, B.
of Mead, Cork, Ossory, and E. Longford dissent. Petitions read, and a Bill
brought in by Talbot concerning his Rent for the Watercourse, read twice and
committed. A new Bill for Liberty of Conscience offered to the House by C. J.
Nugent, read once, and committed, the King saying that the first Bill for
Liberty of Conscience was more severe against the Church of England than he
intended. After the House rose, the King comes to the B. of Mead, and tells
him that he did not like the Commons Bill against Liberty of Conscience, that
it diminisht his Prerogative, and designed to make him break his word with our
Church, that he intended not to take down the Acts of Uniformity, nor destroy
our Religion, but only to take away the Penalties that were against Liberty.
The bottom of this Intreague was from C. J. Herb. who plainly foresaw, that
this would absolutely lose the King all his Protestant Friends in England, as
being directly contrary to all his Promises, and upon this account engaged the
French Ambassador to be against it, or else it had certainly past. But the
work is done effectually by other Bills, and the Act of Uniformity, will stand
like the Edict of Nants, till there be no occasion for it. At 4 in the
Afternoon the Committee meets and considers the Bill for Liberty of Conscience,
and the Tithing Table of Vlster, and makes Alterations in them.

June 18. Four Bills sent up from the Commons, one for inviting Foreigners to
trade here, sent up with alterations, upon which a present Conference is
desired by the Lords; they insist on this clause, and the Subjects of the most
Christian King; Lords against these words, because they were to the prejudice
of the French King. 2 d. A Bill for the disposing of Intestates Goods. 2 d. For
the continuing a former Statute made for preventing Delays and Executions, and
Writs of Error. 4th. For taking away the benefit of Clergy for two years; each
of these Bills read once, and ordered to be read again next Morning. The Clergy
of Dublins Petition read. The new Bill for Liberty of Conscience framed in the
Lord's House, read twice with its amendments, and ordered to be Engrossed. At
Four in the Afternoon the Committee meets about Mrs. Walls business, and hears
the Proofs for her Marriage. A Bill brought in by C. J. Nugent against keeping
October. 23.

June 19. Journals read, Clergy of Dublin about their Provision heard at the
Bar; Conference with the House of Commons ordered on it, but after altered. A
Bill for Subsidies brought up by the Commons, read thrice and passed; it grants
the King 20000 l. per Month, for 13 Months to be paid by Tenants, and allowed
by Landlords out of their Rents. The new Bill for Liberty of Conscience,
together with their own sent to the Commons. Committee sits about Walls
business.

June 20. Clergy of Dublin considered, and the Bill read twice and passed. Four
Bishops dissent, and six Lords, some of them Papists. Three Bills read twice,
and passed nemine contradicente, (viz.) 1st, For Martial Law; 2 d, For
Preventing Delays in Executions; 3 d, For taking away the Benefit of Clergy for
two Years. The Bill for Repealing the 23 d of October read twice, and passed
nemine contradicente, except B. of Mead. The Bill about Intestates Goods read,
and committed. In the Afternoon the Committee sits about Walls business, and
the Bill of Intestates Goods. A Bill passed in the morning for regulating the
Tithing Table of Vlster; all the Bishops dissent from it, and pray leave to
enter their dissent to that, and the Bill repealing the Provision for Ministers
in Cities, which was granted, and the next morning they bring in their dissent
to the Clerk in Writing. After the House was Adjourned, the Bishop of Mead
asks his Majesty whether the Clause in the Bills, (viz.) By and with the advice
and consent of the Lords Spiritual, should not be expunged, where the Bishops
did not consent, the King says no, for they were only to enter their Dissent,
but the style of the Bills must not be altered.

Minutes of the HOUSE of COMMONS.
JUNE 21. 1689.
AN Act for Repealing the 23d of October 41, sent to us by the Lords, read and
passed; and the Bill for Liberty of Conscience engrossed and read, as it came
from the Lords, which is quite different from the Bill sent up to them; move to
throw it out, it being a different Bill from what first passed the House, and
therefore ought to be laid aside, but not being seconded, it was passed, and
these two Bills, together with a Bill against Parrol Wills, etc. and a Bill to
repeal the Unions of Parishes, etc. A Bill for R. C. to pay their Tithes to
their own Clergy. A Bill for Encouraging of Trades etc. were sent up to the
Lords by Mr. Stafford, and a Committee of several of the House went up with
them.

The Report read for repealing Poinings Statutes, and told us the King would
have a Clause, that he and his Heirs should have the Bill first agreed to by
him and his Council before they should pass the Commons, and its ordered to be
recommitted, and the House inclined to be as free as the Parliaments of
England. Several private Petitions read and referred, and told us the King
would pass the Royal Assent to the Bill of Repeal to morrow.

June 22. Mr. Poolwhiles Petition read, to be reprised for a Debt, pretended he
had Outlawed one, and gotten a Custodium, whose Estate was to be given to the
old Propriator, and desired a particular Clause for his Case; after Argument,
put to the Vote and carried he should be reprized. After which, it was moved
that all Cases of the like nature should be reprisable, and the Speaker made
answer, it was a Motion of Vexation; to which the Party answered, it was but
common justice, but none seconding the said Motion, it fell. The House was sent
for by the Black Rod, the King and Lords being in their Robes, the Speaker
attended, and made a Speech, in which he declared what Act they desired his
Majesty to pass, to wit, An Act of Supply for 260000 l. to be raised in 13
Months. An Act to repeal the Act of Settlement and Explanation, etc. And an Act
of Liberty of Conscience, with Eight several other Acts; to which the King
answered, Le Roy le voilt, and so they passed. After the Commons reassumed
their House, a Speech was made in behalf of the Speaker, to be considered for
his Service; and also one for the Lord Mont Cassel, and a Committee appointed
to consider and report the same.

June 25. This day moved, that my Lord Mount Cassel, and Lord Chancellor, Lord
Chief Baron, and Sir William Talbot with others, should be provided for as
Meriting Persons, and Voted that none but the Speaker and Officers of the House
should be considered as such.

The List of the People to be attainted, read for Linster, moved in the behalf
of John Weaver, that he should not be Attainted. Colonel Barret desired that
those Members that moved for such ill men should be turned out of the House,
but checked by the Speaker. This day Sir John Temple made a Capital-man in the
List of Attainders.

June 26. This day the List of Attainders was read for the County and City of
Dublin, and Sir Joshua Allen to be attainted, and Sir Henry Bond and Sir
Patrick Trent Examined about him. Coffee appears at the Summons of Mr. Talbot,
and ordered to appear to morrow. Sir Thomas Southwell and others attainted by
Jury, are to be attainted by name in the List.

June 27. This day the report about the Bill for giving Absenters Goods to the
King, read twice, and moved that it was unreasonable to give his Majesty's
Commissioners of the Revenue a power to seize any ones Person for having
Absenters Goods, against whom no other Evidence was given than a single Oath;
but not being seconded, was ordered to be engrossed, and said by the Speaker it
was only for delay. 'Twas moved likewise by Mr. L. that my Lord Mount Cassel
should have the thanks of the House, and Addressed for to the King for his
Service, and after great Debate, laid aside, least it should lessen D. T's. for
whom the House had done the like before, after which they went on the List of
Attainders.

June 28. An Act about the City matters sent us by the Lords. An Act to enforce
Martial Law amongst Soldiers, sent us by the Lords; and likewise an account
that they agreed with us in two other Acts; we sent them concerning disuniting
of Unions, after the List of Attainders read for Munster and some part of
Connaght.

June 29. The Bill about the City Water read, the House not being in number
Forty Five. The Bill about Absenters Goods Engrossed and Read, and moved to be
cast out, and seconded; the Speaker violently opposed it, but past after the
List for Vlster read of Attainders.

FINIS.
ESTABLISHMENT MAY, 1689.
d. p. diem p. men's. Men 6 -- 16 3 -- 1 Troop of Granadeers contains 50 6 -- 16
3 -- 7 Regiments of Horse contain 2750 5 -- 13 1 -- 7 Regiments of Dragoons
contain 3800 The Royal Reg. contains 22 Comp. 90 in each Comp. 1980 4 -- 10 --
42 Reg. of Foot, 13 Comp. 62 men each 33852 Total 42432

Deductions
3 d. per Pound for the Hospital, from all Soldiers and Officers. 1 d. per diem
for the Clothes, for Shoes, and for Clothes: Foot. 1 per diem from Dragoons,
for Furniture, for Horses: Dragoons. 1 p. diem from Troopers, to the Captain
for Furniture, 1 d. for the Clerk. Horse.
HORSE. 7 Reg.
Duke of Tyrconnel. Lord Galmoy. Coll. Sarsfield. Coll. Southerland. Lord
Abercorne. Coll. H. Luttrel. Coll. Parker.
DRAGOONS. 7 Reg.
Lord Dungan. Sir Neil O Neil. Coll. Dan. O Brien. Coll. Nich. Purcell. Coll.
Clifford. Sir James Cotter. Coll. Simon Luttrel.
FOOT 42 Regiments.
Col. John Hamilton Ramsey. Earl of Clancarty. Col. Ant. Hamilton Earl of
Clanricard Earl of Antrim. Lord Gormanstown. Lord Clare. Lord Galloway. Lord
Slane. Lord Lowth. Lord Duleek, Monsieur Boislon. Sir Val. Brown. Sir John
Fitzgerald. Sir Maur. Euslaw. Col. Will. Nugent. Col. H. Dillon. Col. John
Grace. Col. Rich. Butler. Col. Edw. Butler. Col. Walter Butler. Col. John
Bourk. Col. Char. Moore, Col. Corn. O Neil. Col. Cavenagh. Col. Gordon O Neil.
Col. Nich. Brown. Sir Mich. Creagh. Col. Brien Mac Maghon. Col. Tool. Col.
Oxbrough. Col. Maccarty Moor. Col. Barret. Col. Farrel. Col. Bagnall. Lord
Bagnall. Lord Tyrone. Col. Cha. O Brien. Lord Iveagh. Col. O Donavan. Col. Dom.
Brown.
A Letter from DVBLIN, June the 12th, 1689.
I For some particular reasons, resolved not to write to you any more,
especially being uncertain whether you received my former, or if you did,
whether they were of any use; but the particular reason of my not writing,
being partly ceased, I consider it is no great matter if I lose my pains. I
hope to send you an Abstract of what has been done in the House of Lords and
Commons, having a promise of such an Account from those that know them. We have
had three Expresses from England; John Brown the Lawyer came over about a
Fortnight ago from Millford, and landed at Waterford; Sir J -- C -- 's Son came
in a Wherry, and landed about Wickloe, but that which was most material, was
from the Lord M. by some Quakers that came last Week hither in a Wherry; some
the like went yesterday back to you, we have several Expresses sent over to you
that way; and a strict Imbargo, least any should follow and discover them. You
must not expect the secret of their Messages from me, only it is reported, that
John Brown brought no Letters with him, but come over with a design to save
his Iron-works from the new Proprietors: I hear that upon his Petition to the
Parliament, the Possession is secured to him by a Proviso, he paying Rent: He
reports that England is unanimous, and that we must expect an Invasion by the
next Easterly Wind: The Quakers and Crosby talk likewise of an Invasion, but
represent the People of England as dissatisfied. I find there is still an
expectation and dependence on Scotland, though not so strong as at first: we talk
very confidently of a Fleet and fifteen Thousand Fusileers from France; the
French Fleet to consist of eighty Men of War: I verily believe, there is
something in it, without some such Aid, Ireland does appear but an easy
Conquest which is not the French Interest. The misery of this Town is very
great, some being little better than Dragoon'd by the Quartering of Soldiers;
some have ten, some twelve, some twenty or thirty quartered on them; and yet I
cannot find, that besides what came in to day, there were above three thousand
and odd Men in Town; but the reason is plain, each man has many Quarters, and
some Captains make thirty or forty Shillings a Week by them; they come in by
twelve, one, or two of the Clock by night, to demand Quarters, and turn people
out of their Beds, beat, wound, and sometimes rob them: There are two or three
hundred Priests in Town, and they are quartered likewise as the Soldiers; and
so are generally Noblemen and Gentlemen, with their Retinue, though not actually
in the Army. I have sent you the new Establishment of the Forces, only I think
four Regiments of Horse, and some of Dragoons are not yet raised. I hear all
those People called Rapperees, or Half-Pike-men, are to be mustered and armed;
Commissions are signing for all that can bear Arms in the Kingdom. Duke of
Tyrconnel disbanded 2000 a few Weeks ago, which are all entertained again, or
at least as many as will come in; but we are most strangly uncertain in all our
Counsels, which is visible not only in this, but in every thing else: One day
the Camp near Dublin is to go on, and they work close at it, then it is
intermitted and laid aside: one day we are to go into England, and send a
Declaration before us, and to be restored; another day we are frightened with a
ramour of an Army landing out of England; to drive us out of all; yet the King
seems very well contented, and pleasant, he sleeps, eats, and is in better
health than usual. Tuesday the 4th instant, we had an Alarm that Derry was
burnt with Bombs, that the King's Army had taken it, and put all in it to the
Sword; Nugent of Carlandstown brought this News into the House of Commons, just
when they were putting to the Vote, whether they should prosecute the
Impeachment against Judge Dally; some think Nugent being his Friend, did it
designedly; the News was received with loud Huzza's, and in that good and jolly
humor they acquitted the Judge: But our Friday's Express brought us another
account, which was, That the King's Forces had endeavored to regain the
Wind-Mill-hill, out of which they had been beaten by the Sally when Ramsey the
King's General was killed, but that they were beaten off with great loss; this
was on Tuesday, and by computation, about the same time the Huzza was made in
the House of Commons. Col Dorrington and Col. Nugent, two of the briskest
Officers of the King's Army, are desperately wounded, if not dead. It Is
reported, that seven Field. Officers were killed or taken, and about thirty
other Officers. We have no certain account of the Soldiers, the best account
says, three hundred fell: It Is said they run away, and left their Officers in
the lurch. I am promised a List of the Officers that were killed: It is said
that there are not above five thousand in the King's Camp at Derry,
notwithstanding all that have gone down, a great many having run away as soon
as they had loaded themselves with Plunder, and above two thousand sand being
killed or dead since their first going down; they shake and tremble so when
they come to Charge, that they cannot fire; they that have March locks cannot
be brought by any means to Discipline, or to use them aright; this I have from
a good hand. We bear that some English Ships are in the Lough of Derry, a Boom
with Trees and Masts is made cross the River at Culmore Fort, to hinder any
Succors, that a Ship who attempted to get up is stranded. I believe their
greatest want in Derry is Firing, and Coals will be a very precious Commodity
with them; and I believe in a little while they will want. Clothes for wearing,
and Drink. They talk if old Sir Charles Coot were alive, and had but a thousand
Horse, to the Foot that are in the Town, he would not fail to fight the King's
Army in the Field. About the beginning of this Month, a Party of Horse and Foot
from Enniskilling, made an Inroad into the County of Cavan, they drove all the
Cattle of the County, they did not spare Protestants who were under Protection,
only such as would go with them, they helped away with their Bag and Baggage,
those that would not go, were forced to part with all to them; which they said
they did, least the King's Forces should make a Prey of them: they took all
Provision, Horses, and Arms they could meet with; they disarmed some of the
King's Forces that lay at Belturbeit, Bally-Carrig, and elsewhere; they burnt
only such places as were of strength, and capable of being garrisoned; they
killed none; they came as far as Finagh and Virginia, which you will find in the
Mapps: The Party is said to have been two Thousand; we were alarmed at this
here, and General Monsieur Rosen went down to Trim with four Fieldpieces, and
several Regiments, amongst the rest the Lord-Mayor's of Dublin, who led his men
himself; twelve Regiments I hear were designed; I hear the Bullets both for the
Fieldpieces and Muskets were found to have been too big; which made General
Rosen storm horribly: Since the Defeat at Derry, I hear he and the Forces
designed for Enniskilling, are commanded to Derry; two of the Field-Peices are
come back. General Hamilton is suspected and railed at by the Commonalty; but I
do not believe that there is any ground for it, or that the King does entertain
any thoughts of it. It is reported from good hands, that the People of
Enniskilling have made up their Horse near 1500, and their Foot near 6000; a
Party so considerable, that it is feared, England may think it self concerned
to save them by hastening their Invasion, if they intend any. There are many
Discontents among the Roman Catholics about the Acts of Settlement, and the
French, for the Natives look very suspiciously on them, and many do publicly
say, that they are sold to the French; at least, that Cautionary Towns are to
be given them. If an Army should Invade us before these Discontents are
quieted, it is to be feared, that they would soon gain the Submission of a
considerable Party of the Roman Catholics upon good terms; and perhaps if
their help were accepted, would join to drive out the French: but England is so
exceedingly slow, that it is believed they will lose the hearts of all, and
even such as wish it well, will not think it safe to depend on it. It Is
observed, that putting French Officers in the place of the Irish who raised the
Men, causes great discontents, many of the common Soldiers run away from their
Colors upon it. Several Protestant Gentlemen in the North had Commissions from
the P. and have fairly run away with them into England, or come to Dublin upon
Protection or pardon; but the Country People have chosen Commanders for
themselves into Trorps and Companies: of this sort are generally those in Derry
and Enniskilling; they all exspect to be continued in the Commissions they have
given themselves, when any Army comes out of England: and the hope of this,
it is believed makes them obstinate to all offers from the King; They say, the
Gentlemen that left them, deserve no countenance at all, but rather, that some
part of their Estates that went away, should be given as a Reward to such as
staid and defended them. June the 13th, to day the House of Commons agreed to
the Amendments made by the House of Iords, to the Bill of Repeal, so that
affair is over, and wants only the Royal Assent. An Express came in from Cavan,
which gives us this account: That General Rosen had ordered the Sherriff of
that County to make a kind of a Magazine of Corn and other Provisions, in the
Town of Cavan, to supply the King's Army in their March to Enniskilling, and
had appointed two Companies to guard it, and that a Party from Enniskilling had
surpised the Guards, and taken it: Enniskilling People are certainly there,
but whether they took the Men, is a doubt, but the Provision is certainly
taken. It is said there is now in Dublin nine Regiments of Foot, and eight more
are expected; many of them are raw, and never handled Arms; there are about two
Troops of Horse, I cannot learn whose Regiments they are: You may wonder I cannot
give an exact account of what men are in Dublin, but the reason is, their
frequent removals, sometimes in one day three Regiments will come to Town, and
two go out; sometimes those that are expected in Town will be countermanded
within six or seven Miles; they often come in and go out by night, and every
thing is so changed and hudled, that it is impossible to give any good account.
We do not confide much in these men, though the whole seventeen Regiments
expected were with us, because they are very raw and undisciplined. There is a
general Press for all Horses, without exception of Papists, who had favor
before, but there must be no distinction, the occasion being very urgent; for
the King is said not to have above a 1000 good Horse in all the Army, most of
which are in the North. The miserable usage in the Country is unspeakable, and
every day like to be worse and worse; many allege, that the Rapperees have
secret Orders to fall a new on the Protestants that have any thing left; the
ground of this may be their pretending such an Order, for they commonly pretend
an order for any Mischief they have a mind to: You have had my sense of this
matter before; Cork is most vilely abused by their M. Governor Boysloe. The
Bill for Liberty of Conscience is come to the House of Lords; it repeals every
Statute made in favor of the Protestant religion, and if Lawyers may be
believed, it settles Popery as legally as it was in H. 7th's time: You may
guess from the enclosed Brief, what Authority Roman Catholic Bishops will claim
over Protestants. The Commissioners have seized all Goods of Absenters, and are
actually disposing of them: It is reported, that they are about procuring an
Act of Parliament to put Penalties and Oaths upon the Concealers of any of
them, and to Indemnifie themselves for their Proceeding hitherto; which the
Protestants reckon Plundering, and say is against all Law: The same
Commissioners set Leases of all Absenters Estates, though no legal Inquisition is
yet past on them; some say that they set even Estates of such as are in the
Kingdom, upon presumption that they will find some way or other to entitle the
King to them: one way is, to get two or three named Commissioners, who slip
into some blind Alehouse, and privately find a Title for the King, by
returning, that the Possessors are absent or Rebels, though they live then upon
the Lands, or are in the Courts of Dublin, and all this without any Summons to
the Parties concerned, or Possessors, or Oaths of Jurors; all this is said, and
further, that several of those have come to inform the Commissioners how they
have been abused, but cannot yet get admittance, the Commissioners are so busy
setting Leases. The Bishop of Corke's Case, which you will find in the Votes,
and wherein the Parliament refused him Redress, was this: Several of his
Tenants owed him arrears of Rent, the King seized upon their Goods because they
were absent; he desires to be paid his Arrears out of the Goods found on the
Lands, which he desired leave to Distrain on; but he was told, he must Sue the
Tenants on the Covenants of their Ledses, and recover his Rent as he could This
is like to be a President, and no Creditor, Landlord, or Mortgagee, whose
Tenant is absent, is like to get any thing, because the King has seized the
Goods and Lands which were his Security. I hear likewise where the Landlords
are absent, Lessees are disturbed and left to seek Redress from their absent
Landlords. The Commons. Quarrel to Judge Dally, for which they impeached him,
was, upon some private Discourse he had with Sir Alick Bourk, and some other
Gentlemen, in which he disapproved of the Commons Proceedings and said they
were a kind of Massanello's Assembly, and that it could not be expected that
men from whom the King took Estates, would fight for him or to this effect.

FINIS.

