AN ACT For settling the SUBSIDY OF POUNDAGE, And Granting A SUBSIDY OF TUNNAGE.

And other Sums of Money, UNTO His Royal Majesty, His Heirs and Successors: The
same to be paid upon MERCHANDISES Imported and Exported into or out of the
Kingdom of Ireland, according to a Book of Rates hereunto annexed.

Dublin, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, for Samuel Dancer Bookseller in Castle-street, 1669.

AN ACT For settling the Subsidy of Poundage, and granting a Subsidy of
Tunnage, and other sums of Money unto his Royal Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors: the same to be paid upon Merchandises Imported and Exported into or
out of the Kingdom of IRELAND, according to a BOOK OF RATES hereunto annexed.
FOrasmuch as by the Laws of this Realm, Our Sovereign Lord the King and his
Heirs are to have, receive and leavy one subsidy of Poundage, (that is to say)
of all and every twenty shillings worth of all manner of Merchandises and Wares
brought into this Realm of Ireland, by any person or persons to be sold within
the said Realm, Twelve pence of lawful money of England, and likewise to have,
leavy and receive for every twenty shillings worth of Merchandises and Wares,
after the price that they be bought within this Realm, and to be carried out of
the same, to be sold by any manner of person or persons beyond the seas, twelve
Pence, (Wine and Oil only excepted.) And forasmuch as the prizes of all such
Merchandises and Wares brought in, and sold, and bought, and carried out, are
uncertain, and the duties therefore or subsidy of Poundage of the same not
possibly to be had received and leavied in so regular a way as the nature of
such an Affair does require, unless some certain and set Rates be conceived by
which the said Duties and subsidy may be paid:

We the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, with the Commons of your Majesty's Realm
of Ireland, in this present Parliament assembled, upon due and mature
consideration had of the present state and condition of the Trade of this your
Realm, and of the Nature, Quality, and several Uses of the Goods and
Merchandises Imported and Exported, and of the most orderly and regular manner
of leavying the said subsidy upon the Goods and Merchandises aforesaid, Do
therefore most humbly beseech your Majesty, that it may be Enacted; And be it
Enacted by your most Excellent Majesty, by the advice of the Lords spiritual
and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the
same, that the Rates mentioned and expressed in one book of Rates hereunto
annexed, Entitled, The Rates of Merchandises, (That is to say,) The Subsidy of
Poundage, and the Subsidy of Tunnage, as they are Rated and agreed on by the
Parliament of Ireland, set down and expressed in this Book, to be paid
according to the Tenor of the Act of Poundage and Tunnage, to the use of his
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors for ever; shall be the Rates according to
which, all Goods and Merchandises of every Merchant, natural born subject,
Denizens and Aliens to be brought into all or any part of this Realm, or
carried out of the same of the value of every twenty shillings of the same
Goods and Merchandises according to the several and particular rates and values
of the same Goods and Merchandises, as they are particularly and respectively
rated and valued in the forementioned book, shall pay twelve pence English
money; and that the said book of Rates together with certain Rules, Orders, and
Directions thereunto annexed, Entitled, Certain Rules, Orders, Directions and
Allowances for the advancement of Trade, and the encouragement of Merchants, as
also for the regulating as well of the Merchants in making of due Entries, and
just payment of their customs, as of the Officers in all Ports of this Realm in
the receipts of their several Fees, and in the faithful management of their
Duties and Trusts; And every Article, Clause, Sentence and Rule in the
beforementioned book of Rates, and certain Rules, Orders and Directions
aforesaid, shall from and after the first day of December, One thousand six
hundred sixty one, be and remain as effectual to all intents and purposes as
aforesaid, as if the same had been particularly included in the body of this
present Act; And for the better guarding and defending of the Seas against all
persons intending, or that may intend the disturbance of the intercourse of the
Trade of this Your Majesty's Realm, and for the better defraying the necessary
expenses thereof, which otherwise cannot be effected without great charge. And
for increase and augmentation of Your Majesty's Revenue, be it further Enacted
by the Authority aforesaid, that your Majesty, your Heirs and Successors shall
have, leavy and receive for ever, from and after the said first day of
December, One thousand six hundred sixty and one, one subsidy more of Poundage,
(that is to say) of every twenty shillings value of any of the native
Commodities of this Realm, or Manufacture wrought of any such Commodities to be
carried out of this Realm by every Merchant, stranger, or other Alien,
according to the value thereof in the aforesaid book of Rates expressed, twelve
pence of like English money, over and above the twelve pence aforesaid; and
also one subsidy called Tunnage, (that is to say) Every Tun of Wine of the
growth of France or of any the Dominions of the French King, or Crown of
France, that shall come or be brought into the Port of Dublin, and the members
thereof, and into all and every the other Ports and places of this Realm, by
Your Majesty's natural born Subjects of this Realm, or any other Your Majesty's
Dominions, the sum of three pounds and ten shillings of lawful money of
England, and by strangers and Aliens the sum of Four Pounds Thirteen shillings
and Four Pence, of like money; and of every But or Pipe of Muscadine,
Malmeseis, Cutes, Tents, Allicants, bastardsacks, Canaries Malligoes, Maderaes,
and all other Wines whatsoever, commonly called sweet Wines of the growth of
the Levant, Spain, Portugal, or of any of the Islands or Dominions to them, or
any of them belonging, or elsewhere, that shall come and be brought into the
Port of Dublin, or members thereof, and into all and every the other Ports and
places of this Realm, by any natural born subject as aforesaid, the sum of two
pounds and ten shillings of like money of England, and by strangers and aliens
the sum of three pounds six shillings and eight pence; of every Awme containing
forty two Gallons of Rhenish wine, of the growth of Germany, that shall come
and be brought into this your Majesty's Realm, by your natural born subjects as
aforesaid, the sum of fifteen shillings of like money; and by straingers and
aliens twenty shillings; of every Tun of Rape and Linseed-Oyles, containing two
hundred fifty two Gallons, that shall come and be brought into the Port of
Dublin, or any of the Ports of this Realm, by any natural born subject as
aforesaid, the sum of one pound ten shillings of like money, by strangers and
^liens the sum of one pound seventeen shillings and six pence of like money; of
every like Tun of Sevil, Majorca, Minorca, Apuglia, Province, or Portugal Oil,
that shall come or be brought in by any natural born Subject as aforesaid, the
sum of two pounds, and twelve shillings of like money: by strangers or Aliens
the sum of three pounds, five shillings of like money; of every like Tun of
Sallet-Oyl, brought in by any natural born Subject as aforesaid, the sum of
three pounds, and three shillings of like money; by strangers or Aliens the ^^m
of three pounds eighteen shillings and nine pence of like money; of every like
Tun of Trayn Oil, of Greenland, brought in by any natural born subject as
aforesaid, the sum of eight shillings of like money, by Strangers or Aliens the
sum of ten shillings of like money; of every like Tun of Trayn-Oyl of new found
land, brought in by any natural born subject, the sum of six shillings of like
money, by strangers or Aliens the sum of seven shillings and six pence of like
money, which several Rates of Tunnage and Poundage being the same which are
expressed in the book of Rates before mentioned, and no other, from and after
the sa^^ first day of December, one thousand six hundred sixty one, shall be
had, received, leavyed, and taken upon all Goods and M^^chandizes whatsoever,
Imported or Exporte^ into or out of any Port or place of thi^ Realm, and so
proportionably for a greate^ or lesser quantity of the same, any forme^ Laws,
Statutes, Vsages, or Customs t^ the contrary in any wise notwithstanding,
e^cepted always and foreprized prisage and butl^rage.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any
Goods (...) Merchandises aforesaid of any Merchan^^ being born Denizen of this
Realm of Ireland, or any other your Majesty's Do^^nions has been, or at any
time hereafter shall be taken by any Enemies, or Pirate^ upon the Sea, or
perish in any ship, (...) ships, that shall happen to be taken (...) perished,
whereof the subsidies and oth^^ Duties are, or shall be duly paid, or agree^^
for, and that duly proved before the Lord Treasurer of Ireland, or the chief
Baron (...) your Majesty's Court of Exchequer for the time being, by the
examination of the sa^^^ ^erchants, if they be alive, or of their executors, or
Administrators if they be dead, (...) by two credible witnesses at the least
born, or other reasonable witness and ^roof sworn, then the same Merchant, or
Merchants his or their Executors, or Administrators, shall and may, newly ship
in ^e same Port, where the Goods and Merchandises aforesaid were, or shall be
customed, so much other Goods and Merchandises, as the same Goods and
Merchandises so lost as aforesaid shall amount un^o, in custom, without paying
of any thing ^or the same, so as the same proof be re^orded, and allowed of, in
the Court of Exchequer, and certified unto the Collector of the Customs of the
Port, where the ^ame Goods and Merchandise are to be newly shipped without
custom as aforesaid. And whereas many great quantities of Goods and
Merchandises, are often times fraudulently concealed, to the great lessening,
^or diminution of your Majesty's Revenue, for prevention thereof; be it Enacted
by the Authority aforesaid, that no Owner, Master, skipper, Purser, or other
person taking charge of any Vessel, or of any Merchants Goods, shall receive or
take into any ship, Bottom, or Vessel whatsoever, any Goods, Wares, or
Merchandises, to be carried or transported, into any of the parts beyond the
seas, before he shall have signif^ed to the customer of the Port when he
ladeth, and other Officers there in the open Custom house (if any such be
there,) or elsewhere the said Officers, or their deputies or any of them be or
shall be usually resident that he intends to Lade, and to what place he
intends to pass, nor shall after his or their full lading, depart out of the
Port, Creek or place, where he shall so Lade, before he do in like manner
signify unto the ^ustomer and Officer as is aforesaid, of his Lading and what
Merchants, and other persons shall have Lading with him, or in his ship Vessel,
or Bottom, and further truly to answer to such questions as shall be
interrogated of him, or them by the customer or other Officers concerning such
Wares and Merchandises as he shall have Laden, being examined upon his or their
oath in the open custom-house or otherwise as is aforesaid, upon pain to
forfeit for every such default, or not truly advertising, nor answering to such
questions as shall be demanded of him, one hundred pounds of current money of
England before: said. That no owner, Master, skipper, Purser, or other person
taking charge of any ship, Vessel, or Bottom, wherein any Goods, Wares, or
Merchandises shall be Laden, or brought from any the parts beyond the seas,
shall discharge into any Lighter, Gabbard, Bottom, Boat, ship, or Vessel
whatsoever, and lay on land, or procure, or cause, or any ways permit, or
suffer to be discharged into any Lighter, Gabbard, bottom, boat, ship or Vessel
whatsoever, and to be laid on land out of such ship, bottom or Vessel, any
goods, wares, or Merchandises whatsoever, before such Owner, Master, skipper,
Purser or other person or persons, taking charge of the ship, bottom, or vessel
shall have first entered into a sufficient obligation in the law, in which he
shall be bound to the King with known able sureties, in such sum as the
Collector of the Port where he arrives shall judge meet, That the ship, or
Vessel by him brought in, shall not depart or sail away out of the said Port or
Harb our, without her being fully cleared and discharged by the Collector, or
searcher of the said Port, and shall likewise have delivered under his hand to
the Customer, or other Officer of the Port, Haven, or Creek where he arriveth,
one bill of the particulars and contents of the whole Lading of his or their
Ship, Bottom, or Vessel, with the names of the several Merchants, or Laders,
and the mark, packadge, or outward form of the Goods, and Merchandises laden,
and shall make declaration that he has not broken bulk since he came into the
Port, nor into any other Port of this Realm, otherwise then in the said bill
shall be expressed and shall have truly answered upon Oath unto such Questions
and Interrogatories touching, or concerning such Goods, Wares or Merchandises
as shall be then Laden in any such Ship, Vessel, or bottom as shall be to him
administered by such Customer, or other Officer openly in the custom-house, or
in such other places as aforesaid upon his or their oath, if he or they shall
be thereunto required, upon pain that every owner, Master, skipper, Purser, or
other person or persons as aforesaid, shall forfeit and loose for every such
default in not giving bond, truly advertising, nor answering as is aforesaid
One hundred pounds of like money;

That it shall not be lawful to or for any person or persons whatsoever to
lade, or put, or cause to be laden or put off or from any Wharf, Key, or other
place on the Land into any Lighter, Gabbard, bottom, boat, ship, or Vessel,
whatsoever to be transported into any place or places beyond the seas or to
take up, discharge or lie on Land, or cause, or procure to be taken up, or
discharged out of any Lighter, Gabbard, bottom, boat, ship, or Vessel
whatsoever (not being in leak or wrack) and laid on land any Goods, Ware, or
Merchandises whatsoever, brought from any parts beyond the seas but only in the
day light (that is to say) from the first of March unto the last of September
betwixt the sun rising and the sun setting, and from the last of September unto
the last of March between the hours of seven in the morning, and four in the
afternoon, and in and upon some such open Key, or Wharf, as the Lord
Lieutenant, Lord Deputy or other chief Governor and Governors and privy
Council of this Realm for the time being, shall therefore appoint within your
Majesty's Port of Dublin, and all other the Ports, Creeks, Havens, or Roads of
this Realm, where a customer Comptroler, and Searcher of such Ports Havens,
Creeks, or Roads and every of them or their Deputies have accustomably been
resident, or hereafter shall be resident upon pain of fo, feiture of all such
Goods, Wares, or Merchandises so Laden and discharged contrary to the meaning
of this present Act or the value thereof, That no manner of person or persons
shall receive or take into any ship vessel or bottom any Goods, Wares, or
Merchandises to be transported into any place beyond the seas, nor shall
discharge and lay on land out of his or their ship, Bottom or Vessel, (not
being in Leak or Wrack) any Goods, Wares, or merchandises, brought from any
parts beyond the seas in any other place or places, or at any other hour,
hours, or time then is before limited and appointed upon pain the owner, or
owners, master, or masters, or other person or persons taking charge of such
ship or Vessel in which such Goods, Wares, and merchandises shall be so
shipped, or out of which the same shall be unshipped, shall forfeit and loose
for every such offense, one hundred pounds of lawful money of England, and the
mate, Boatswain, or any of the mariners, committing such offense shall forfeit
treble the value of the subsidies or Customs of such Goods, Wares, and
merchandises, or imprisonment at the will and pleasure of the Chief Governor
or Governors of this Realm for the time being, or of the Barons of his
Majesty's Exchequer or any two of them; Provided such imprisonment do not
exceed the space of twelve months; That it shall and may be lawful to and for
the Commissioners, and the respective Customers and Collectors of the customs
for the time being, or their Deputy or Deputies, (for whom they will answer) by
his or their warrant, or warrants in writing upon the arrival of any Ship or
Vessel, with Goods, Wares, and merchandises from any the Ports beyond the Seas,
to secure or take out from any such ships or Vessels all Fine Goods and
merchandises of small bulk or packing as they or any of them may discover, or
have cause to suspect their being intended to be conveyed on shore without
payment of customs, Subsidies or other duties for the same; And the same to be
put into custody of the Warehouses of the respective Custom-houses there to
remain until the Duties for them respectively be paid, and if any ship or
Vessel importing any Goods, Wares, or merchandises, from any the parts beyond
the seas shall not fully unlade, discharge, or deliver all the Goods and
merchandises imported therein within eight and twenty days after the arrival
of such ship or Vessel (wind and weather permitting) in some Port or Haven of
this Realm, that then for preventing fraud or charge it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said Commissioners and respective customers and
Collectors of the customs, their Deputy or Deputies to unlade and take on shore
all the Goods, Wares, and merchandises which shall be found in such ship or
Vessel, and the same to secure in His Majesty's Ware houses of the respective
custom-houses or elsewhere, and the charge thereof to be born by the merchants,
Owners, or claimers thereof, at such moderate Rates as the said Commissioners
and respective customers and Collectors or their Deputies shall judge equal;
And in case any person or persons shall find himself agrieved touching the said
Rates, that they may appeal to the chief Governor or Governors of this
Kingdom for the time being, who are hereby empowered and enabled to determine
the same. And if any person or persons shall refuse to permit such fine goods,
or such other goods wares, or merchandises to be unladen, taken out and secured
as aforesaid he or they so refusing, shall upon proof thereof forfeit the sum
of one hundred pounds of like money of England; Provided always and be it
enacted by the authority aforesaid that if any goods, wares, or merchandises,
so unladen or laden out of any ship or Vessel shall afterward be purloyned,
imbeziled, wilfully spoiled, or impaired, that in such case, the Officer or
Ware-house-keeper under whose charge the said Goods, Wares, and merchandises
shall at such time be, shall make full and ample satisfaction to the owner or
claimer of the same, to be adjudged by the Barons of his Majesty's Exchequer or
any two of them. And the Commissioners of the customs are hereby required to
take good security of the officers employed in and about the premises, for the
faithful discharge of their respective trusts therein. That if any goods,
Wares, or other merchandises whereof the subsidies aforesaid, are or shall be
due, shall at any time be shipped or put into any Lighter, Gabbard, Wherry,
boat, bottom, or Vessel whatsoever, to the intent to be carried into any the
parts beyond the Seas, or else being brought from the parts beyond the Seas
into any Port, place, or Creek of this Realm, (except in cases of necessity
when such goods, or merchandises are in danger of perishing,) shall be
unshipped to be laid on Land without the knowledge, privity, and consent of the
Commissioners, or respective Customers, or Collectors of the customs for the
time being, or before due entry thereof be made, and the subsidies, Customs,
and other duties due or to be due for the same, not paid nor lawfully tendered
to the Collector thereof or his deputy with the consent and agreement of the
Comptroler and surveyor and any one of them at the least and warrant in due
form and manner past for the same, that then all the same Wares, Goods, and
merchandises whatsoever so shipped, transported and carried or unshipped and
landed as aforesaid, or the value thereof shall be forfeited.

That if any Goods, or merchandises, imported from beyond the seas, shall be
unshipped and put into any Lighter, Gabbard, Wherry, boat, or other Vessel
whatsoever, without the consent privity or allowance of the Commissioners, or
respective Customers, or Collectors of the customs their deputy or deputies
testified by a note under his or their hand or hands, that then every such
Lighter, Gabbard, Wherry, boar or other Vessel in which such Goods, and
merchandises shall be put, shall be forfeited and confiscated; That before and
during the unlading of any ships or Vessels after their arribal in any Port of
this Realm, the Commissioners and respective Customers and Collectors of the
Customs, shall and may, where and as often as they shall see cause, appoint one
or more Tide-wayters or Officers to go on board every such ship, or Vessel,
either from beyond the seas, or from any other part within this Realm, and
there to lie and remain on board until the Goods, and merchandises of such
ship or Vessel, shall be unladen or until they the said Wayters or Officers
shall be thence discharged;

And if any master, Owner, or other taking charge of any ship or Vessel, refuse
and will not suffer and permit, any such Waytor or Officer to come on board his
or their Vessel and there to remain as aforesaid, and if after the clearing of
any ship or Vessel by the Commissioners of the Customs Collectors or other
Officers respectively or the discharging of the Tide wayters or other Officers
from on board such ship or Vessel, there shall be found on board such Ship or
Vessel any Goods, Wares, or merchandises which have been concealed from the
knowledge of the Officer or Officers on board, and for which the custom,
subsidy, or other duties, due upon the importation thereof are unpaid; That
then and in every such case the Master, Owner, or other person, taking charge
of such ship, or Vessel, shall forfeit for every such offense, the sum of one
hundred pounds of like money of England.

That all and every Merchant, and Merchants, and any other person, or persons
whatsoever, entering any Goods, Wares, or merchandises, to be shipped, or
landed, shall make entry thereof particularly, and deliver a bill thereof at
large, under his hand, or the hand of his Assignee, for whom be shall be
responsible, and auswerable to the collector, expressing the name of the Ship,
and the Master, the burden, of whence, and from what place it was fraighted,
with the marks and numbers of the Fardles, bulks, and Packadge in the margent,
and the quantities and qualities, of all and every the goods, Wares, and
Merchandises that are therein contained, and so by him entered, upon pain that
every Merchant, or Merchants, and other person, or persons, not entering in such
form and manner, shall for every time forfeit ten pounds of like English money:
And if any Merchant or other person or persons, entering in manner as aforesaid,
shall make a short, or undue entry, of the quantity, or quality, of his or
their Goods, Wares, or Merchandises, every such Merchant, and other person,
shall forfeit and loose all such Goods, Wares, and merchandises, or the value
of them, which shall be so short, or unduely entered.

That no person, or persons, shall carry any Goods, Wares, or Commodities
prohibited, or whereof any the duties aforesaid are payable, to discharge the
same in any other Port, or place of this Realm, unless such person, or persons,
do before the shipping thereof, declare, and manifest to the Collector of the
customs, or their deputies, together weith the customer, or Comptroler, of the
said Port, where the same shall be shipped in the open Custom-house the nature,
length number, or other contents, or value of the said Goods, Wares, or
merchandises, and with the approbation of the Collector, or his Deputy, shall
also make and enter, into sufficient Obligation in the law in which he shall be
bound, to our Sovereign Lord the King, with sufficient sureties in such sum as
shall amount to the double value of such Goods, Wares, and merchandises so
declared and manifested, with condition that the same shall be discharged at
some lawful Yort, or place, within this Realm, and in no other Ports, or
Places whatsoever; which bonds the said Collectors of the Customs, or their
deputies respectively, are hereby required, and authorized to take accordingly,

And incase any of the said Goods, wares, or merchandises, shall be shipped, or
Laden, in any other ship, or Vessel, to be carried, or transported between
Port, and Port aforesaid, before such declaration be made, or security given as
aforesaid, that then all, and every the said Goods, Wares and merchandises, or
their value, shall be forfeited and lost and every person, or persons, that
shall ship such Goods, and be bound as aforesaid, shall within two months next
after the shipping thereof, ^ring, or cause to be brought, a true Certificate
under the hand and seal of Office of the Customers, or Collector, or
Collectors, and Comptrollers, or their Deputies of the said Port, Creek, or
place, where he or they, shall happen to discharge the same, testifying thar
the said Goods, Wares, and merchandises so shipped, and the true nature,
length, and number, or other contents, and value thereof, is there discharged
and landed, which Certificate the customer, and Comptroller of such Port, or
place where the said Goods, Wares or merchandises shall be discharged, shall
upon the discharge thereof, deliver to the party so discharging the same, or to
his Factor without delay: That every merchant which shall bring any manner of
Goods, Wares, or merchandises into any Port of this Realm, and there entering,
and paying the Customs, or Subsidy of the same, will afterward convey, or
carry away the same, or any part of the same from thence, into any other Port
of this Realm; That then the Owner of the said Goods, or merchandises, his
Factor, or Attorney, shall bring from the Collector, and Comptroller of the
Port where the said Goods, and merchandises shall be so entered, a Certificate
under the said Collector and Comptrollers seals, directed to the customer and
Comptroller of the Port, where the said Goods, and merchandises shall be
conveyed, or carried, specfying, or making mention, within the sa^^ Certificate
as well the quality, as the quan^tity of the weight, number, measure, of the
Goods, Wares, and merchandises so entre^ and that the same Certificate so made,
be d^livered to the said customer, Collector, an^ Comptroller, before the said
Goods be d^^ charged, That so they, or such as they shall appoint, may see, and
try whether the quality quantity, weight, number, or measure, of the same, do
agree with such Certificate, and if any Certificate shall not be duly made,
(...) form and manner, and specifying, or making mention, according as is
aforesaid, that the the said customer, or Comptroller, shall loo^ his or their
Office, and if any such Good^ Wares, or Merchandises, or any parcel the^ of be
discharged, and impacked, or put to sa^^ within any other Port, then within the
sam^^ where they shall be first Entered before t^^ said certificate shall be
delivered and t^^ Goods and merchandises seen as aforesaid the same shall be
forfeited, and confiscated.

That no person do take upon him to en^^ or do, or cause to be entered into the
book (...) any customer, or any other, or Officers (...) any Port within this
Realm, his, or their ^eputy, or Deputies any manner of goods, ^ares, or
Merchandises whatsoever, coming, brought from any parts veyond the Seas the
name or names, of any other person or ^^sons, then the very owner, or Owners,
^oprietor, or Proprietors, of the same ^oods, Wares, or Merchandises being not
^^uld, vargained, or contracted for, to, or ^ith any person or persons, before
such en^y, or before the arrival of such Goods, ^ares, or Merchandises, upon
pain of for^ture of the Goods, or value of the goods, which shall be entered
otherwise.

That for the better discovering of all pro^vited, and other Goods, and
Merchandi^s, fraudulently, or covertly brought in, and ^nded at unlawful
hours, and places, the ^ollector, Surbeyor, Searcher, Wayter or ^her persons
authorized, deputed, and ap^inted thereunto by the Commissioners of ^e Customs,
under their hands, and seals, (...) under the hands and seals of the major ^rt
of them, shall have power and authori^^, and are hereby empowered, and
authori^d, to go on board and enter into any Ship, ^oy, Bark, Bottom, Boat, or
other Vessel ^harsoever, as well by night as by day, ri^ng, lying, or being
within any the several Ports, Havens, Creeks, or other pla^^ within this Realm,
and likewise at (...) time of the day, to go, and enter into (...) or any of
the Cellars, Shops, Warehouse where they shall have just cause of suspici^^ to
see, surbey, and make search, for (...) prohibited Goods, Wares, and
Merchan^^zes, and likewise any goods, or Merchandises, either put on board any
ship or ^^sel, or taken out, or carried away, or int^ded to be carried away,
the customs, (...) subsidy for the same having not been ful^ satisfied and
paid, and the said Good^ wares, and Merchandises to seize, atta^^ and carry
away, secure, and put into (...) Majesty's warehouses at the Custom-house of
the respective Ports, there to remain (...) till they shall be discharged by
due cour^^ Law.

And be it further Enacted by the autho^^ty aforesaid, that all and every the
default^^ of such as shall attempt to do any thing (...) trary to the tenor of
this present Act, or^ the Rules, Orders, and directions before mentioned into
the book of Rates to be (...) nexed, or to any of the several Articles,
branches of the same, (except as herea^^ig excepted) shall be heard, inquired,
and (...) ^rmined by the Barons of his Majesty's (...) ourt of Exchequer, and
that the moiety, of ^e half part of all Fines, Penalties, or ^orfeitures shall
be and remain unto your ^ajesty, your Heirs, and Successors, and ^e other
morety, or half part to him or them, ^at shall seize, or sue for, or prosecute
the ^me by Action, Bill, Plaint, or Informa^on in the said Court of Exchequer
wherein (...) wager of Law, Protection, Essoyn, or over Dilatory Plea, shall be
allowed.

Provided always for the avoiding of frau^lent composition, that no Action,
Bill, ^aint, or Information aforesaid, be exhi^ted, or proceeded in, against
any Goods ^ares, or merchandises seized, until such ^sures, shall be
Registered, and entered with ^e Register, or Officer to be appointed for ^at
purpose in the Port of Dublin, and cer^fied by him, to be so entered, and
Registered, ^^d until such goods, wares, and merchan^zes be secured, or laid up
in His Majesty's Warehouse at the Custom-houses of the re^ective Ports as
aforesaid, and in case the Commissioners of the Customs shall be dissa^^sied,
or apprehend any neglect, or delay, in ^^y person, or persons, to sue for, or
prose^^te in any Action, Bill, Plaint, or Information as aforesaid, that it
shall and (...) be lawful to, and for the said Commissioners to appoint any
other person, or person whom they shall think sit to prosecure, whi^^ other
person, or persons, shall be and (...) hereby declared, to be true, proper and
lawful prosecutors, or seisers to all intents a^purposes whatsoever, and to
whom the mo^ty of the said seisures and forfeitures shall (...) due and
payable, and to no other, a^thing in this present Act, or any other Lak^
Statute, Usage, or custom, to the contra^ hereof notwithstanding. And whereas,
by (...) Act made in this Kingdom, in the eight a^ twentieth year of the Reign
of the la^^ Queen Elizabeth, it was Enacted as follows. Provided always, and
be it enacted by the said Authority, that the Lord Deputy or other Governor or
Governors of the Realm for the time, shall have yearly for the provision and
store of his House, of su^ Wines as shall be brought and conveyed b^^ way of
Merchandise into this Realm, the number of twenty Tuns free and discharge of
the Customs of Subsidy granted by the Act; And that the said Lord Deputy, (...)
other Governor or Governors of the Realm for the time being, shall also by
the said Authority, have full power to grant, ^imit, and appoint to every Peer
of this Realm, and to every of the Privy Council in the same, and the Queens
learned Council for the time being, at his or their discretion, from time to
time such portion and quantity of Wines to be free and discharged of and from
the said Customs and Subsidy, as he shall think to be meet and competent for
every of them after their degrees and callings to have, any thing in this Act
contained to the contrary notwithstanding. It is therefore hereby Enacted, that
the Lord Deputy, or other chief Governor or Governors of this Realm for the
time being, shall have yearly for their provision and store of his or their
Houses, of such Wines as shall be brought into this Realm the number of twenty
Luns, free and discharged of all Customs or Subsidies; And that the said Lord
Deputy, or other chief Governor or Governors of this Realm for the time
being, shall also by the said Authority, have full power to grant, limit, and
appoint unto every of the Privy Council, and to His Majesty's learned Council.
and Clerk of His Majesty's Privy Council of this Realm, at his or their
discretion, from time to time, such portion and quantity of wine to be free and
discharged of and from the said customs and substdy, as he or they sha^^ think
fit to be meet and competent for ever^ of them after their degrees and
qualities, an^thing in this Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also, that this Act, or any thin^ therein contained, shall not extend
to charge any person or persons with any penalty o^ forfeiture for or
concerning any matter o^ thing done contrary to the tenor of this Act or any
part thereof, unless the party or parties offending, shall be sued or
prosecuted for the same within twelve months after such matter or thing shall
be done and committed as aforesaid, any thing in this Act, or any other Law,
custom, or Usage whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding.

And because by experience it is found, that the hindering of merchants,
strangers, and others, from vending his or their goods, without offering them
first to some Burgess, or Freeman of such City, Corporation, or Town, where
such merchant, stranger, or other, do arrive with his or their goods, (commonly
known by the name of Lownvargain,) is very destructive to the Trade and
commerce of this Realm, and very pre^udicial to your Majesty's Revenue.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that from and after the
said first ^ay of December, one thousand six hundred sixty one, no such Town
bargain shall be required, nor any Merchant, or other, hindered or withheld
from disposing of his or their God's Wares, or Merchandises, without offering
them as aforesaid; but that all and every Merchant, stranger, or other,
importing any goads, wares, or Merchandises from beyond the Seas, and paying
all duties by law due and payable thereupon, shall and may from time to time,
and at all times at his and their will and pleasure, freely and without let,
molestation, or binderance, sell and dispose of his or their Goods, and
Merchandises, any Charter, Custom, Usage, Privilege or liberty of or unto any
City or Town Corporate at any time made, given, granted, to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding.

And forasmuch as several ancient duties under the name of Town and petty
customs, due and payable by Merchants strangers unto several Cities, and Towns
corporate of this your Majesty's Realm, have been, and are demanded, received,
and taken by their Farmors Deputies, or Officers, in a far greater quantity,
and proportion then is of right belonging, in respect the same have been, and
are required upon more Goods then are truly liable thereunto, and according to
the Kates after which the customs have been from time to time increased, and
paid unto your Majesty and your Royal Predecessors, which exceed far the
ancient Kates according to which such petty customs can be required, and taken.

Be it further Enacted, and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that from
henceforth no such petty customs be demanded, received or paid, for, or upon
any more, or other Commodities then were chargeable with the same by ancient
custom and prescription, and not according to the increase of his Majesty's
customs, by his Majesty's book of Rates nor for any Wares or Commodities, by
virtue of any grant but such as were charged at the time of the Grant made by
your Majesty's Royal predecessors of such petty customs, unto any city or Town
corporate, nor at any other, or greater Rate or Kates, then the same weneither
paid, or answered by the Merchants ^rangers at the time of the respective
granting of the same, or as the same were taken, in the fifteenth year of the
late King Henry the seventh, any grant, usage, or custom to the contrary
notwithstanding, upon pain that every person or persons demanding, or receiving
more, or greater petty customs, then as aforesaid, shall forfeit for every such
offense, double the value of what shall be exacted, or received upon more
commodities, or at greater ^ates then as aforesaid; saving unto Wentworth Earl
of Kildare, and the Heirs Males of the body of Gerald Fitz. Gerald Earl of
Kildare, all such Estate, Kight and Title of, in, and to the great and little
customs pounages subsidies, duties, together with the ^ocquet, and power of
constituting Officers hereunto belonging there, the Ports, and Harbors, of
Strangford, and A^dglass, in he county of Down, and Province of Ulster, no the
creeks and members thereunto apertaining, as they, or any of them can or may
^aim, or demand, by, or under any Letters Patents thereof made by King Henry
the ^^ght unto the said Gerald Fitz. Gerald Earl of Kildare, as fully and amply
as the ^ame was granted in and by such Letters Parents, any thing in this Act
to the contrary notwithstanding.

THE RATES OF MERCHANDISES:
That is to say, The Subsidy of Poundage, and the Subsidy of Tunnage, as they
are Rated and agreed upon by the Parliament of Ireland, set down and expressed
in this Book, to be paid according to the tenor of the Act of Poundage and
Tunnage, to the use of His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors for ever.

The RATES of MERCHANDISES: Rates Inwards.
A l. s. d. ADzes for Coopers the dozen 00 12 00 Aggers small as a bean the
hundred dozen 00 13 04 Aggets large, the piece 00 00 06 Alphabets the set
containing twenty four 00 05 00 Allom English the hundred weight, containing
one hundred and twelve pounds 00 10 00 Alphisti or Canary seeds the hundred
weight containing one hundred and twelve pound 03 15 00 Amber The pound 00 07
04 Amber The Mast containing two pound and a half 00 08 04 Amber Beads the
pound 01 00 00 Anchovis the little barrel 00 07 0^ Andirons Or Creepers of
Lattin the pound 00 01 00 Andirons Of Iron wrought in England the pair 00 10 00
Andlets o^ Mails the pound 00 03 0^ Anvils English the hundred containing one
hundred and twelve pound 00 08 00 Aneile of Barbary the pound 00 03 00 Annotto
the pound 00 01 00 Apples The Bushel 00 01 00 Apples The Barrel containing 3
Bnshels 00 03 0^ Aquavitae The Barrel 05 06 0^ Aquavitae The Hogshead 08 00 00
Argal white, or red, or powder, the hundred weight containing 112 pounds 01 03
04 Armor old the hundred weight containing one hundred and twelve pounds 01 00
0^ Arrows for Truncks the groce containing twelve dozen 00 06 0^ Ashes vocat
Potashes the barrel containing two hundred pound 02 10 0^ Ashes vocat Wood or
Soap-ashes the last coning twelve barrels 12 00 00 Aule blades the thousand
English 00 08 00 Aulgers English for Carpenters the groce 00 10 0^ Aulgers
Foreign for Carpenters the groce 01 00 00 Axes or Hatchets the dozen 00 06 08
B. Babies or Puppets for Children the groce containing twelve dozen 00 13 04
Babies Heads of Earth the dozen 00 10 00 Bacon of England or Wales the Flitch
00 10 00 Bacon of Westphalia and all Foreign, the hundred containing one
hundred and twelve pound 02 00 00 Balks Great, the hundred containing one
hundred and twenty balks 12 00 00 Balks Middle the hundred containing one
hundred and twenty balks 05 00 00 Balks Small, the hundred containing one
hundred and twenty balks 02 00 00 Bags with locks the dozen^ 02 08 00 Bags with
steel Rings without locks the dozen 01 12 00 Balances vocat, Gold Balances
the groce containing twelve dozen pair 04 00 00 Balances vocat, Ounce
Balances the groce containing twelve dozen pair 02 00 00 Balances vocat, The
Sort containing four dozen 02 13 04 Balls vocat. Tennis Balls the thousand 02
00 00 Balls vocat. Wash- Balls the groce containing twelve dozen 02 00 00
Bandaleers the hundred containing five score 00 16 08 Bandstrings the dozen
knots 00 10 00 Bands vocat. Flanders bands of Bonelace, the band 10 00 00 Bands
vocat. Cut work of Flanders, or any other country 02 00 00 Bankers of Verdures
the dozen pieces 04 00 00 Barbers Aprons, or checks, the piece not above ten
yards 00 13 0^ Barlings the hundred containing one hundred and twenty 01 13 0^
Barley the quarter containing eight Bushel 00 05 00 Barrillia or Sophora to
make glass the barrel containing two hundred weight 04 00 00 Basket Rods the
bundle 00 06 0^ Baskets vocat. Hand baskets or Sports the dozen 00 03 0^ Basins
of lattin the pound 00 01 0^ Basts or straw hats knotted the dozen 00 06 0^
Basts or straw hats plain the dozen 00 01 0^ Bast Roapes The Roap 00 00 0^ Bast
Roapes The bundle containing ten Roaps 00 05 0^ Bast Roapes The hundred weight
containing an hundred and twelve pounds 00 08 0^ Battery bashrons or kettles,
the hundred weight containing one hundred and twelve pounds 09 00 ^^ Bays of
Florence per yard 01 00 0^ Beads Of bone the great groce, containing twelve
groce 01 10 0^ Beads Of box, the great groce 01 10 0^ Beads Of corral, the
pound 01 00 0^ Beads Of crystal, the thousand 03 00 0^ Beads Of glass and wood
of all sorts, the great groce 00 10 0^ Beads Of Jasper, square, the hundred
stones 02 00 0^ Beaupers the piece containing twenty four or twenty five yards
01 05 00 Bells vocat. Hawks bells, French making, the dozen pair. 00 05 00
Bells vocat. Hawks bells, Noremborough making, the dozen pair 00 02 00 Bells
vocat. Horse bells the small groce containing twelve dozen 00 10 00 Bells
vocat. Dog bells the small groce, containing twelve dozen 00 01 04 Bells vocat.
Morris bells, the small groce, containing twelve dozen 00 10 00 Bells vocat.
Clapper bells, the pound 00 01 00 Bell mettle, the hundred weight containing
one hundred and twelve pounds 01 13 04 Bellows, the pair 00 02 00 Bits for
bridles the dozen 00 10 00 Bo^s for bridles the small groce, containing twelve
dozen 00 10 00 Blacking, Lampblack, the hundred weight, containing 112 pound 04
00 00 Blankets vocat. Paris Mantles colored, the Mantle 01 05 00 Blankets
vocat. Paris Mantles or (...) uncoloured, the Mantle 01 00 00 Boards vocat.
Barrel boards the hundred containing 120 00 05 00 Boards vocat. Clapboards the
hundred containing 120 00 15 0^ Boards vocat. Paste-boards for books the 1000
00 13 04 Boards vocat. Pipe boards or pipe holt the 100, containing 120 boards
01 00 00 Boards vocat. White boards for shoo-makers the board 00 01 00 Boards
vocat. Bodkins the small groce, containing twelve dozen 00 06 08 Borne spars
the hundred, containing one hundred and twenty 01 13 ^^ Borattoes or Bombizines
Narrow the single piece, not above fifteen yards 06 00 ^^ Borattoes or
Bombizines Broad, the single piece, not above fifteen yards 07 00 ^^ Borattoes
or Bombizines Of Silk, the yard 00 12 ^^ Books unbound The basket or maund,
containing eight bales or two Fats 08 00 ^^ Books unbound The Fat containing
half a maund 04 00 ^^ Botances, per piece 00 10 ^^ Bottles Of Earth, covered
with wicker, the dozen 00 03 ^^ Bottles Of glass, covered with wicker, the
dozen 00 13 ^^ Bottles Of glass with vices covered with leather, the dozen 03
0^ ^^ Bottles Of glass uncovered the dozen 00 03 ^^ Bottles Of Wood calling
sucking ^^^tles, the groce containing twelve dozen 00 10 ^^ (...) (...) (...)
Boxes vocat. Fire or Thinder-boxes, the groce containing twelve dozen boxes 00
13 ^^ Boxes vocat. Nest boxes the groce, containing twelve dozen 02 00 ^^ Boxes
vocat. Pepper boxes the groce containing twelve dozen 00 15 ^^ Boxes vocat,
Spice boxes, the dozen 00 04 00 Boxes vocat, Round boxes, or French boxes for
Marmelade or Jelly the dozen 00 03 00 Boxes vocat, Sand boxes the groce,
containing twelve dozen 00 13 04 Boxes vocat, Soap boxes the shock containing
threescore boxes 01 06 08 Boxes vocat, Touch boxes covered with leather the
dozen 00 02 00 Boxes vocat, Touch boxes covered with velvet the dozen 00 10 00
Boxes vocat, Touch boxes of Iron or other mettle guilt the dozen 00 13 04 Boxes
vocat, Tobacco boxes the groce containing twelve dozen 01 00 00 Bracelets or
^ecklaces Of glass, the small groce, containing twelve bundles or dickers 00 04
00 Bracelets or ^ecklaces Red the small groce containing twelve bundles or
dickers 00 04 00 Brass Laver cocks; the pound 00 01 04 Brass Piles weights the
pound 00 01 00 Brass Trumpets the dozen 00 12 00 Brass Lamps the dozen 00 10 00
Brick stones vocat The thousand brick stones 00 13 04 Brick stones vocat
Flanders Tyle to scour with the thousand 01 06 08 Brick stones vocat Gally
Tyles the foot 00 00 08 Brick stones vocat paving Tyles the thousand 02 00 00
Bridles the dozen 00 15 00 Broches of Lattin or Copper, the groce containing
twelve dozen 00 12 00 Brass, Scales and weights the dozen pair 00 03 04 Brushes
Brushes for hats and clothes the dozen 00 05 ^^ Brushes Beard brushes, the
groce containing twelve dozen 00 06 ^^ Brushes Of Heath, course, the dozen 00
03 ^^ Brushes Of Heath, fine, or head brushes the dozen 00 06 ^^ Brushes Of
Hair called head brushes the dozen 00 06 ^^ Brushes Of Heath, called rubbing
brushes the dozen 00 01 ^^ Brushes Of Hair, called comb brushes, the groce
containing twelve dozen 00 13 0^ Brushes Of Hair, vocat. Weavers brushes the
dozen 00 05 0^ Brushes Of Hair, vocat. rubbing brushes the dozen 00 01 0^
Brimstone the hundred weight, containing one hundred and twelve pounds 00 06 ^^
Bristles rough or undrest, the dozen pound 00 05 ^^ Bristles dressed, the dozen
pound 00 10 0^ Buckrams Of Germany or fine, per piece 00 10 ^^ Buckrams Of East
eountry the roll or half piece 00 05 ^^ Buckrams Of French making the dozen
pieces 02 10 ^^ Buckrams Vocat. Carrick buck rams the short piece 00 02 ^^
Buckles For girdles, the small groce containing twelve dozen 01 00 0^ Buckles
For girts the groce containing twelve dozen 00 07 0^ Buffines, Muccadoes and
Lyle-grograms. Narrow the single piece not above fifteen yards 00 03 00
Buffines, Muccadoes and Lyle-grograms. Broad the single piece, not above
fifteen yards 04 ^0 00 Bugasins, or colored buckrams the half piece 00 05 00
Bugles Great the pound 00 04 00 Bugles Small or seed bugle, the pound 00 06 08
Bugles Lace, the pound 00 08 00 Bullions for purses, the groce containing
twelve dozen 00 10 00 Bulrushes the load 01 00 00 Burrs for Millstones the
hundred containing five score 02 10 00 Buskins of Leather, the dozen pair 04 00
00 Bustians the single piece, not above fifteen yards 02 00 00 Butter The
barrel 01 00 00 Butter Of England, the hundred weight containing one hundred
and twelve pound 01 00 00 Button Of Bugle, Steel, Copper or Lattin, the great
groce, containing twelve small groce, every groce twelve dozen 01 06 08 Button
Of Crystal the dozen 00 04 00 Button Of glass the great groce containing
twelve small groce 00 13 04 Button Of thread the great groce containing twelve
small groce 00 10 00 Button Of silk the great groce containing twelve small
groce 01 00 00 Buttons Of fine Damask work the dozen 00 10 00 Buttons Of Bugle
the dozen 00 00 08 Buttons For Handkerchiefs the groce containing twelve dozen
02 00 00 Buttons Of Hair the groce containing twelve dozen 00 02 00 C. Cabinets
or Counters Small the piece 01 00 00 Cabinets or Counters Large the piece 02 00
00 Cables tarred or untarred, the hundred weight containing one hundred and
twelve pound 00 13 04 Cruel Ribband the dozen pieces, every piece containing
thirty six yards 01 10 00 Calve skins in the hair, the piece 00 01 08
Cambogium, vide Drugs Cameletto, half silk half hair, the yard foreign 01 00
00 Candles of Tallow the pound 00 00 06 Candle plates or Wallers of brass or
lattin the pound 00 01 04 Candlesticks Of brass or lattin the pound 00 01 08
Candlesticks Of Wyre the dozen 00 06 08 Candlewick the hundred weight
containing one hundred and twelve pounds 04 00 00 Canes or Reeds the thousand
02 10 00 Of Wood the dozen 00 04 00 The shock containing sixty Canes 01 00 00
Cant spars the hundred containing six score 01 13 04 Capels the pound 00 00 06
Captavens the hundred containing six score 03 13 04 Cap hooks or looks ends,
the groce containing twelve dozen 00 15 00 Caps vocat. Do^ble tufted or
cockared caps tle dozen 02 08 00 Caps vocat. For Children the dozen 01 00 00
Caps vocat. Night caps of Satin and Velvet, ^^e dozen 03 00 00 Caps vocat.
Night caps of silk knit, the dozen 04 00 00 Caps vocat. Night caps of Woolen
the dozen 01 00 00 Caps vocat. Night caps of Linen the dozen 00 08 00 Cards
vocat. Playing Cards, the groce containing twelve dozen pair 04 00 00 Cards
vocat. Wool Cards old, the dozen pair 00 06 00 Cards vocat. Wool Cards new, the
dozen pair 00 10 00 Carpets vocat. Of Tunny, the piece containing two yards and
a half 01 10 00 Carpets vocat. Of England or Scotland, the piece 00 13 04
Carpets vocat. Of Cornex, the carpet two yards and a half long 01 05 00 Carpets
vocat. Brunswick carpets stripped or unstript the piece 00 10 00 Carpets vocat.
China, of Cotton the piece 00 04 00 Carpets vocat. Gentish, the dozen 03 00 00
Carpets vocat. Turkey or Venice short, the piece 01 10 00 Carpets vocat. Turkey
or Venice long, containing four yards and upwards 08 00 00 Carpets vocat. Of
Persia the yard square, the yard 02 05 00 Carrells, the piece containing
fifteen yards 01 06 08 Cases for looking glasses guilt Of number three and four
the dozen 00 04 00 Cases for looking glasses guilt Of number five and si^ the
dozen 00 07 00 Cases for looking glasses guilt Of number seven and eight the
dozen 00 10 00 Cases for looking glasses guilt Of number nine and ten and
upwards the dozen 00 13 04 Cases for looking-glasses unguilt Of number three
and four the dozen 00 02 00 Cases for looking-glasses unguilt Of number five
and six the dozen ^^ 03 06 Cases for looking-glasses unguilt Of number seven
and eight the dozen 00 05 00 Cases for looking-glasses unguilt Of number nine
and ten the dozen 00 ^^ 08 Cases With wooden combs garnished the dozen 01 00 0^
Cases With small Ivory combs garnished the dozen 01 06 0^ Cases With middle
sort Ivory combs garnished the dozen 02 00 00 Cases With large Ivory combs
garnished the dozen 04 00 00 Cases For combs single the groce containing twelve
dozen 01 00 00 Cases For combs double, the groce containing twelve dozen 02 00
0^ Cases For Spectacles the groce guilt containing twelve dozen 01 06 ^^ Cases
For Spectacles the groce unguilt, containing twelve dozen 00 13 0^ Cases For
needles, or pin-cases, the groce containing 12 dozen 00 13 04 Cases For needles
French guilt the dozen 00 05 00 Caskets Of Iron small, the dozen 01 10 00
Caskets Of Iron, middle sort, the dozen 02 08 00 Caskets Of Iron, large, the
dozen 03 00 00 Caskets Of Steel, the dozen 06 00 00 Caveare, the hundred
weight, containing one hundred and twelve pounds 01 00 00 Caules of linen for
women the dozen 00 08 00 Caules of silk the dozen 01 06 08 Cisterns of Lattin
the pound 00 01 04 Chafindishes Of brass or lattin the pound 00 01 04
Chasindishes Of Iron the dozen 00 13 04 Chains For Keys or Purses fine the
dozen 00 08 00 Chains For Dogs, course, the dozen 00 03 04 Chairs of Wallnut
tree the piece 00 10 00 Chamlets Unwatered, or Mohair, the yard 00 03 00
Chamlets Watered the yard 00 05 00 Chamlets Half silk half hair the yard 00 10
00 Cheese the hundred weight, containing one hundred and twelve pounds 00 06 08
Cherries the hundred weight, containing one hundred and twelve pounds 01 00 00
Chess-boards the dozen 00 10 00 Chess-men the groce, containing 12 dozen 00 12
00 Chests Of Iron, small or middle sort, the piece 05 00 00 Chests Of Iron,
large, the piece 06 13 04 Chests Of Cypress wood the nest containing three
chests 01 10 00 Chests Of Spruce or Dansk the nest, containing three chests 01
10 00 Chests Painted the dozen 02 00 00 Chimney backs Small the piece 00 06 0^
Chimney backs Large the piece 00 13 0^ China pease the pound 00 03 04 Chizels
for Joyners the dozen 00 04 0^ Citterns the dozen 03 00 0^ Clapholt, or
Clapboards The small hundred containing six score boards 00 15 0^ Clapholt, or
Clapboards The Ring containing two small hundred 01 10 00 Clapholt, or
Clapboards The great hundred containing twenty four small hundred 18 00 0^
Clancords the pair 00 13 0^ Cloaks of felt the piece 02 00 0^ Cochaneil vocat.
Sylvester or campeache, cochaneil the Pound 00 01 0^ Cochaneil vocat. Of all
sorts of cochaneil except Sylvester or campeach cochaniel 00 06 0^ Coals the
tun 00 06 0^ Coffee the hundred weight containing one hundred and twelve pound
20 00 0^ Coffers covered with guilt leather, the dozen 02 00 0^ Coffers covered
with velvet, the dozen 04 00 0^ Coffers with Iron bars the nest containing
three coffers 01 12 0^ Coffers plain the nest containing three coffers 00 13 0^
Coffers painted the uest, containing three coffers 00 16 0^ Comashes out of
Turkey the piece 00 00 0^ Combs For Wool the pair, old or new 00 03 0^ Combs
Of bone the pound 00 04 0^ Combs Of box the groce containing twelve dozen 00 10
00 Combs vocat. light wood combs, the groce containing twelve dozen 00 06 08
Combs Of Horn for barbers the dozen 00 02 00 Combs Of Ivory the pound 00 10 00
Combs called horse combs the dozen 00 04 00 Comfits the pound 00 02 00
Compasses Of Iron for carpenters the dozen 00 02 00 Compasses Of brass the
dozen 00 04 00 Compasses For ships the dozen 00 07 06 Copper Br^cks or plates
round or square the hundred weight containing one hundred and twelve pound 00
10 00 Copper chains the chain 00 02 00 Copper Purles or plate, the mark 00 06
08 Copperas, the hundred weight, containing one hundred and twelve pounds 00 06
08 Cordage or roaps tarred or untarred, the hundred weight containing one
hundred and twelve pound 00 13 04 Corkacks of Iron the thousand 00 06 08
Corkacks of Steel the thousand 01 13 04 Cork For Shoomakers the dozen pieces 00
04 00 Cork Of all other sorts the hundred weight containing one hundred and
twelve pounds 00 16 08 Coverlets of Scotland, the piece 00 15 00 Counters of
Lattin the pound 00 01 00 Cruses of stone with covers, the hundred comaining
five score 01 06 08 Cushions the dozen 00 10 00 Cross bows Lathes, the pound 00
01 00 Cross bows Thread, the pound 00 00 0^ Cross bows Racks, the piece 00 10
0^ Cushion clothes Course, the dozen 02 10 0^ Cushion clothes Of Tapistry,
the dozen 04 10 0^ Cuttle bones the thousand 01 06 0^ Corn vocat. Wheat
imported, the quarter 00 06 0^ Corn vocat. Rye, the quarter 00 05 0^ Corn
vocat. Beans Barley Malt Oats The quarter 00 02 0^ D. Dagges with firelocks or
snaphances the piece 01 00 0^ Dagger Blades the dozen 01 06 0^ Dagger For
children the dozen 00 04 0^ Dagger Of bone for children the dozen 00 02 0^
Dagger Black with velvet sheaths the dozen 02 00 0^ Dagger Ouilt with velvet
sheaths the dozen 03 00 0^ Deals vocat. Mebro and Norway Deals, the hundred
containing six score 04 00 0^ Deals vocat. Burgendorp Deals, the hundred
containing six score 10 00 0^ Deals vocat. Spruce Deals the hundred containing
six score 12 00 0^ Desks Or stays for books the dozen 00 04 00 Desks For women
to work on, covered with woolen the piece 00 05 00 Desks For women covered with
velvet the piece 00 10 00 Dials of Wood the dozen 00 02 00 Dials of Bone the
dozen 00 08 00 Dimity the yard 00 02 00 Dogs of Earth the groce containing
twelve dozen 04 00 00 Dornix With Caddas the piece containing fifteen yards 01
10 00 Dornix With silk the piece containing fifteen yards 02 00 00 Dornix With
wool the piece containing fifteen yards 01 05 00 Dornix With thread the piece
containing fifteen yards 01 00 00 Dornix French making the ell 00 02 06 Dornix
French making the yard 00 02 00 Drapery Old Drapery the yard coming from
England 00 10 00 Drapery From any other parts the yard 08 10 00 Drapery New
Drapery, (viz.) Kersey, Sarges, all other stuffs of wool, or mixed with wool
from England 00 03 04 Drapery From any other parts the yard 02 05 00 Dudgeon
the hundred pieces containing five score 01 00 00 Durances or Duretty With
thread the yard 00 06 08 Durances or Duretty With silk the yard 00 10 00
Durretty the piece 01 00 00 Drugs ocat. Acacia the pound 00 04 00 Drugs ocat.
Acorns the pound 00 01 00 Drugs vocat. Adiantum album the pound 00 00 0^ Drugs
vocat. Adiantum nigrum the pound 00 00 0^ Drugs vocat. Agaricus or Agarick
trimmed or pared the pound 01 00 0^ Drugs vocat. Agaricus rough or untrimmed
the pound 00 05 0^ Drugs vocat. Agnus castus seeds the pound 00 01 0^ Drugs
vocat. Alkanet roots the pound 00 01 0^ Drugs vocat. Alchermes Syrup the pound
00 06 0^ Drugs vocat. Alchermes Confect. the ounce 00 04 0^ Drugs vocat. Aloes
Cicotrina the pound 00 05 0^ Drugs vocat. Aloes Epatica the pound 00 02 0^
Drugs vocat. Allom Romish or Roach, the hundred containing one hundred and
twelve pound 01 00 0^ Drugs vocat. Alu^^^n plume the pound 00 01 0^ Drugs
vocat. Ambergreece black or gray, the ounce Troy 03 00 0^ Drugs vocat. Ameos
seed the pound 00 00 0^ Drugs vocat. Ammomi seeds the pound 00 00 0^ Drugs
vocat. Anacardium the pound 00 03 0^ Drugs vocat. Angelica the pound 00 01 0^
Drugs vocat. Antimonium crudum the hundred weight, containing one hundred and
twelve pounds 01 00 0^ Drugs vocat. Argentum sublime or limum the pound, or
quicksilver 00 03 (...) Drugs vocat. Antimonium praeparatum, or Stibium the
pound 00 00 (...) Drugs vocat. Aristolochia longa and rotunda the pound 00 01
(...) Drugs vocat. Arsnick white or yellow, or rosalger the pound 00 00 (...)
Drugs vocat. Assarum roots the pound 00 01 (...) Drugs vocat. A palathus the
pound 00 01 (...) Drugs vocat. Assa Foetida the pound 00 01 02 Drugs vocat.
Almonds bitter, the hundred weight containing one hundred and twelve pounds 02
00 00 Drugs vocat. Balaustium the pound 00 02 06 Drugs vocat. Balsamum
artificial the pound 00 03 04 Drugs vocat. Bal^amum natural the pound 00 10 00
Drugs vocat. Bay berries the hundred and twelve pounds 00 13 04 Drugs vocat.
Barley huld, or French barley the hundred and 12 pound 01 00 00 Drugs vocat.
Bdellium the pound 00 02 06 Drugs vocat. Benalbum or rubrum the pound 00 02 00
Drugs vocat. Benjamin of all sorts the pound 00 05 00 Drugs vocat. Bezar stone
of the Eest Indies the ounce Troy 03 00 00 Drugs vocat. Bezar stone of the West
Indies the ounce Troy 00 10 00 Drugs vocat. Black lead the hundred and twelve
pounds 01 10 00 Drugs vocat. Blatta bizantia the pound 00 02 00 Drugs vocat.
Bolus communis, or Armoniacus the hundred weight, containing one hundred and
twelve pound 00 06 08 Drugs vocat. Bolus verus the pound, or fine bole 00 00 08
Drugs vocat. Borax in paste or unrefined, commonly called Tinckal the pound 00
03 04 Drugs vocat. Borax refined the pound 00 13 04 Drugs vocat. Bunkins,
holiwortles, or pistolochia the pound 00 02 06 Drugs vocat. Calamus the pound
00 00 08 Drugs vocat. Camphire refined the pound 00 05 00 Drugs vocat. Camphire
unrefined the pound 00 02 06 Drugs vocat. Cancri oculus the pound 00 04 00
Drugs vocat. Cantharides the pound 00 05 00 Drugs vocat. Caraway seeds the
hundred and twelve pound 01 04 00 Drugs vocat. Cardomomes the pound 00 03 00
Drugs vocat. Carpo Balsami the pound 00 04 0^ Drugs vocat. Carrabe or succinum
the pound 00 01 00 Drugs vocat. Carthamus seeds the pound 00 00 08 Drugs vocat.
Cassia fistula the pound of all sorts 00 01 0^ Drugs vocat. Cassia lignea the
pound 00 01 0^ Drugs vocat. Castoreum or Beaver cods the pound 00 10 00 Drugs
vocat. Cerussa the hundred and 12 pounds 00 10 00 Drugs vocat. China Roots the
pound 00 06 08 Drugs vocat. Ciceres white and red the pound 00 00 0^ Drugs
vocat. Ciperus longus and rotundus one hundred and 12 pounds 01 13 04 Drugs
vocat. Cyprus nuts the pound 00 00 08 Drugs vocat. Civet the ounce Troy 02 00
00 Drugs vocat. Cocculus Indiae the pound 00 02 00 Drugs vocat. Coloquintida,
the pound 00 02 00 Drugs vocat. Coral red or white in fragments for physical
use, the pound 00 03 0^ Drugs vocat. Coral whole the pound 01 00 0^ Drugs
vocat. Coriander seeds the hundred and twelve pound 01 00 00 Drugs vocat.
Cortex guaici the hundred and twelve pounds 03 00 0^ Drugs vocat. Cortex
caperum the pound 00 01 00 Drugs vocat. Cortex ta^^arisci the pound 00 00 0^
Drugs vocat. Cortex mandragorae the pound 00 02 0^ Drugs vocat. Coscus dulcis
and amarus the pound 00 01 08 Drugs vocat. Cubebs the pound 00 01 04 Drugs
vocat. Cummin seeds the hundred and twelve pound 01 13 04 Drugs vocat. Cuscuta
the pound 00 01 00 Drugs vocat. Cyclamen, or panis porcinus the pound 00 02 00
Drugs vocat. Citrago the pound 00 01 00 Drugs vocat. Cetrach the pound 00 01 00
Drugs vocat. Cinabrium or Vermilion the pound 00 02 06 Drugs vocat. Copperas
white the hundred and twelve pounds 02 00 00 Drugs vocat. Copperas blew of
Dansk or Hungary the hundred and twelve pounds 00 12 00 Drugs vocat. Cambogium
or Gutta Gambae the pound 00 03 04 Drugs vocat. Crystal in broken pieces for
phisical uses per pound 00 03 04 Drugs vocat. Carlina the pound 00 01 00 Drugs
vocat. Carolina the pound 00 00 04 Drugs vocat. Cortex winteranus the pound 00
00 08 Drugs vocat. Daucus creticus the pound 00 04 00 Drugs vocat. Diagredium
or Scammony the pound 01 00 00 Drugs vocat. Diptamus leaves the pound 00 01 00
Drugs vocat. Diptamus roots the pound 00 01 06 Drugs vocat. Doronicum the pound
00 02 06 Drugs vocat. Eleborus albus and niger the pound 00 00 08 Drugs vocat.
Epithemum the pound 00 01 00 Drugs vocat. Es ustum the pound 00 01 04 Drugs
vocat. Euphorbium the pound 00 00 08 Drugs vocat. Fennel seeds the pound 00 00
(...) Drugs vocat. Fenugreek the hundred and twelve pounds 00 15 (...) Drugs
vocat. Flory the pound 00 02 (...) Drugs vocat. Folium Indiae the pound 00 05
(...) Drugs vocat. Fox lungs the pound 00 03 (...) Drugs vocat. Frankincense of
France or Parrosin the hundred and twelve pounds 00 12 (...) Drugs vocat.
Galbanum the pound 00 01 (...) Drugs vocat. Galanga the pound 00 01 (...) Drugs
vocat. General the pound 00 01 (...) Drugs vocat. Gentiana the pound 00 00
(...) Drugs vocat. Ginny pepper the pound 00 01 (...) Drugs vocat. Grana Pinae
the pound 00 01 (...) Drugs vocat. Green Ginger the pound 00 02 (...) Drugs
vocat. Gum Animi the pound 00 01 (...) Drugs vocat. Gum Armoniack the pound 00
01 (...) Drugs vocat. Gum Carannae the pound 00 04 (...) Drugs vocat. Gum
Elemni the pound 00 00 (...) Drugs vocat. Gum Hederae the pound 00 04 (...)
Drugs vocat. Gum Lac the pound 00 01 (...) Drugs vocat. Gum Opopanax the pound
00 01 (...) Drugs vocat. Gum Saracol the pound 00 06 (...) Drugs vocat. Gum
Serapinum the pound, or Sagapenum 00 01 (...) Drugs vocat. Gum Taccamahaccae
the pound 00 04 (...) Drugs vocat. Gum Tragagant the pound 00 01 (...) Drugs
vocat. Grana Tinctorum 00 02 (...) Drugs vocat. Grains of Guiny, or French
grains the hundred and twelve pounds 01 10 (...) Drugs vocat. Gum Arabic, or
Gum Seneca the hundred and twelve pounds 01 10 (...) Drugs vocat. Gum Sandrake
or Gum Juniperi the hundred and twelve pound 01 08 00 Drugs vocat. Gum Guaiaci
the pound 00 05 00 Drugs vocat. Gum Caramen the pound 00 00 06 Drugs vocat.
Hermodactylus the pound 00 02 00 Drugs vocat. Hypocistis the pound 00 02 00
Drugs vocat. Horns of Hearts or Stags, the hundred 01 10 00 Drugs vocat. Incense
or O^^banum the hundred and twelve pound 05 00 00 Drugs vocat. Ireos the
hundred and twelve pounds 02 10 00 Drugs vocat. Ison glass the hundred and
twelve pounds 05 00 00 Drugs vocat. J^^^bes the pound 00 01 00 Drugs vocat.
Ja^^op the pound 00 04 00 Drugs vocat. Juniper berries the hundred and twelve
pounds 01 00 00 Drugs vocat. Labdannm or Lapodonum the pound 00 01 00 Drugs
vocat. Lapis Calaminaris the hundred and twelve pound 00 16 08 Drugs vocat.
Lapis Hematitis the pound 00 01 00 Drugs vocat. Lapis Judaicus the pound 00 01
00 Drugs vocat. Lapis Lazuli the pound 00 10 00 Drugs vocat. Lapis Tutiae the
pound 00 01 00 Drugs vocat. Leaves of Roses the pound 00 01 00 Drugs vocat.
Leaves of Violers or flowers the pound 00 00 08 Drugs vocat. Lyntiscus or
Xilobalsamum the pound 00 01 08 Drugs vocat. Lignum Aloes the pound 00 10 00
Drugs vocat. Lignum Asphaltum the pound 00 01 00 Drugs vocat. Lignum Rhodium
the 112 pound 00 10 00 Drugs vocat. Lignum vitae the hundred and twelve pound
00 10 ^^ Drugs vocat. Litharge of gold the hundred and twelve pounds 00 12 ^^
Drugs vocat. Litharge of silver the hundred and twelve pounds 00 10 ^^ Drugs
vocat. Locusts the pound 00 01 ^^ Drugs vocat. Lupines the hundred and 12
pounds 00 10 ^^ Drugs vocat. Lentils the pound 00 00 ^^ Drugs vocat. Lapis
contra yerva the ounce 00 05 ^^ Drugs vocat. Lignum Nephreticum the pound 00 04
^^ Drugs vocat. Madder Roots, or Rubia Tinctorum the pound 00 01 ^^ Drugs
vocat. Manna the pound 00 02 ^^ Drugs vocat. Marmalade the pound 00 01 ^^ Drugs
vocat. Mastick white the pound 00 03 ^^ Drugs vocat. Mastick red the pound 00
01 ^^ Drugs vocat. Mechoachan the pound 00 02 ^^ Drugs vocat. Mercury sublimate
the pound 00 03 ^^ Drugs vocat. Mercury precipitate the pound 00 06 ^^ Drugs
vocat. Mithridate Venetiae the pound 00 10 ^^ Drugs vocat. Millium solis the
pound 00 01 ^^ Drugs vocat. Mirabolanes dry the pound 00 01 ^^ Drugs vocat.
Mirabolanes condited the pound 00 01 ^^ Drugs vocat. Myrtle berries the pound
00 01 ^^ Drugs vocat. Mummia the pound 00 0^ ^^ Drugs vocat. Musk the ounce
Troy 02 00 ^^ Drugs vocat. Musk cods the dozen 02 00 ^^ Drugs vocat. Myrrh the
pound 00 03 ^^ Drugs vocat. Nigella the pound 00 00 ^^ Drugs vocat. Nitrum the
pound 00 02 ^^ Drugs vocat. Nutmegs condited the pound 00 04 ^^ Drugs vocat.
Nux de Benne the pound 00 01 ^^ Drugs vocat. Nux Cupressi the pound 00 00 ^^
Drugs vocat. Nux Indica the piece 00 00 06 Drugs vocat. Nux vomica the ponnd 00
00 08 Drugs vocat. Nardus Celtica or spica Romana the hundred and twelve pound
05 12 00 Drugs vocat. Nux Pini, or grana pini the pound 00 01 00 Drugs vocat.
Oblibanum or Incense the hundred and twelve pounds 05 00 00 Drugs vocat. Opium
the pound 00 10 00 Drugs vocat. Osippum Huerredum the pound 00 00 06 Drugs
vocat. Orcant or Almiet the pound 00 01 00 Drugs vocat. Orange flower Ointment
the pound 00 02 06 Drugs vocat. Orange flower Water the Gallon 00 05 00 Drugs
vocat. Origanum the pound 00 00 08 Drugs vocat. Ossa de cord Cervi the pound
02 00 00 Drugs vocat. Oil of Amber the pound 00 10 00 Drugs vocat. Oil of
Rosemary the pound 00 08 00 Drugs vocat. Oil de Bay the hundred and twelve
pounds 02 00 00 Drugs vocat. Oil of Mace or Nutmegs the pound 00 06 00 Drugs
vocat. Oil de Been the pound 00 06 08 Drugs vocat. Oil of spike the pound 00 01
08 Drugs vocat. Oil of Almonds the pound 00 01 00 Drugs vocat. Oil of Scorpions
the pound 00 02 08 Drugs vocat. Oleum Petrolium the pound 00 01 08 Drugs vocat.
Oleum Turpentine the pound 00 00 06 Drugs vocat. Orabus the pound 00 00 06
Drugs vocat. Orpment or Auripigmentum the hundred and twelve pounds 02 00 00
Drugs vocat. Panther the pound. 04 00 00 Drugs vocat. Panis Porcinus, vide
Ciclamen Drugs vocat. Pearl feeds the ounce Troy 00 03 04 Drugs vocat.
Pellitory the pound 00 00 06 Drugs vocat. Pepper long the pound 00 01 00 Drugs
vocat. Perrosen, vide Frankincense Drugs vocat. Piony seeds the pound 00 00 08
Drugs vocat. Pistachias or nux pistachia the pound 00 01 00 Drugs vocat. Pix
Burgundiae the hundred and twelve pounds 00 15 00 Drugs vocat. Polium Montanum
the pound 00 00 08 Drugs vocat. Polipodium the pound 00 00 04 Drugs vocat.
Pomegranate pills the hundred and twelve pounds 02 00 00 Drugs vocat. Poppy
seeds the pound 00 00 08 Drugs vocat. Precipitate, vide Mercury precipitate
Drugs vocat. Psyllium the pound 00 00 08 Drugs vocat. Prunellas or pruans of
Brunelia the pound 00 01 00 Drugs vocat. Quick silver, vide Argentum vivum
Drugs vocat. Rhaponticum the pound 00 13 04 Drugs vocat. Radix Esulae the pound
00 01 00 Drugs vocat. Red Lead the hundred and twelve pound 00 16 08 Drugs
vocat. Rhabarbarum or Rubarb the pound 01 00 00 Drugs vocat. Rosealger the
pound, vide Arsnick Drugs vocat. Rosset the pound 00 00 06 Drugs vocat. Radix
contra yerva the pound 00 03 04 Drugs vocat. Radix Scorcionera the pound 00 03
04 Drugs vocat. Radix peonae the pound 00 00 08 Drugs vocat. Sal Alcali the
pound 00 04 00 Drugs vocat. Sal Armoniacum the pound 00 01 0^ Drugs vocat. Sal
Gem the pound 00 00 0^ Drugs vocat. Sal Nitri the pound 00 01 06 Drugs vocat.
Sandracha or Gum Juniperi the hundred and twelve pounds 01 08 00 Drugs vocat.
Sandiver the hundred and twelve pounds 00 10 00 Drugs vocat. Sanguis Dracon's
the pound 00 03 04 Drugs vocat. Sarsaparilla the pound 00 03 04 Drugs vocat.
Sasafras wood or roots the hundred and twelve pounds 01 00 00 Drugs vocat.
Sanders white the pound 00 01 00 Drugs vocat. Sanders yellow the pound 00 02 00
Drugs vocat. Sanders red, alias stock the hundred and twelve pounds 04 00 00
Drugs vocat. S^amonium, vide Diagredium Drugs vocat. Scinous Marinus the piece
00 00 04 Drugs vocat. Scordium the pound 00 00 06 Drugs vocat. Scorpions the
piece 00 00 03 Drugs vocat. Sebestines the pound 00 01 00 Drugs vocat. Seeds
for Gardens, of all sorts the pound 00 00 08 Drugs vocat. Seler montanus the
pound 00 00 08 Drugs vocat. Semen Cucumeris, Cucurb, Citral, Melon. the pound
00 00 08 Drugs vocat. Sena the pound 00 02 06 Drugs vocat. Soldonella the pound
00 00 08 Drugs vocat. Sperma Ceti fine the pound 05 00 00 Drugs vocat. Sperma
Cetircourse, oiley, the hundred a^^ twelve pounds 04 00 00 Drugs vocat. Spica
Celtica, vide Nardus Cetica, or Spica Remana. Drugs vocat. Sanguis Hirci the
pound 00 01 00 Drugs vocat. Spikenard the pound 00 06 08 Drugs vocat. Spodium
the pound 00 01 06 Drugs vocat. Spunges the pound 00 03 04 Drugs vocat. Squilla
the hundred and twelve pound 01 05 00 Drugs vocat. Squinanthum the pound 00 03
04 Drugs vocat. Stechados the pound 00 00 10 Drugs vocat. Staphisager the
hundred and twelve pounds 02 00 00 Drugs vocat. Stibium, vide Antimonium
praeparatum Drugs vocat. Storax Calamita the pound 00 05 00 Drugs vocat. Storax
Liquida the pound 00 01 00 Drugs vocat. Succus Liquiritiae the pound 00 01 00
Drugs vocat. Sulphur vivum the pound 00 00 08 Drugs vocat. Talk white the pound
00 00 06 Drugs vocat. Talk green the pound 00 02 00 Drugs vocat. Tamarinds the
pound 00 00 10 Drugs vocat. Terra Lemnia the pound 00 05 00 Drugs vocat. Terra
Sigillata the pound 00 03 00 Drugs vocat. Thlaspii Semen the pound 00 01 00
Drugs vocat. Tornsall the pound 00 00 08 Drugs vocat. Trochisci de vipera the
ounce Troy 00 05 00 Drugs vocat. Treacle common the pound 00 02 00 Drugs vocat.
Treacle of Venice the pound 00 10 00 Drugs vocat. Turbith the pound 00 05 00
Drugs vocat. Turbith Phapsiae the pound 00 02 00 Drugs vocat. Turmerick the
pound 00 01 00 Drugs vocat. Turpentine of Venice, Scio or Cyprus, the pound 00
10 08 Drugs vocat. Turpentine common the hundred and twelve pounds 00 10 00
Drugs vocat. Verdigreece the pound 00 01 08 Drugs vocat. Vernish the hundred
and twelve pound 02 00 00 Drugs vocat. Vermilion, vide Cinabrum Drugs vocat.
Vitriolum Romanum the pound 00 01 00 Drugs vocat. Umber the hundred weight
containing one hundred and twelve pounds 01 00 00 Drugs vocat. Viscus Quercinus
the pound 00 04 00 Drugs vocat. White Lead the hundred and twelve pounds 01 00
00 Drugs vocat. Wormseeds the pound 00 03 04 Drugs vocat. Xylobalsamum, vide
Lentiscus Drugs vocat. Zedoaria the pound 00 03 04 E. Earlings the groce
containing twelve dozen 01 00 00 Ebony wood the hundred weight of one hundred
and twelve pounds 01 00 00 Elephants teeth, the hundred containing five score
06 13 04 Emery stones the hundred weight containing one hundred and twelve
pound 00 08 00 F. ^ans For corn the piece 00 06 08 ^ans Of paper, the dozen 00
06 08 ^ans For women and children of French ^^aking the dozen 02 00 00 Feathers
For Beds the hundred and twelve pound 02 00 00 Feathers Vocat. Estridge or
Ostridge feathers undrest the pound 01 00 00 Feather beds old or new, the piece
01 13 04 Felts for cloaks French making, three yards and an half long, one yard
and a half broad, the felt 04 00 00 Fiddles for children the dozen 00 03 04
Fire-shovels the dozen 00 13 04 Fire-shovel plares the hundred weight
containing one hundred and twelve pounds 00 13 04 Figureito the yard 00 08 04
Files the groce containing twelve dozen 01 00 00 Fish vocat, Codfish the barrel
01 00 00 Fish vocat, Codfish the Last containing twelve barrels 12 00 00 Fish
vocat, Codfish the hundred containing tix score 04 00 00 Fish vocat, Cods heads
the barrel 00 03 04 Fish vocat, Colefish the hundred containing fix score 01 00
00 Fish vocat, Eels vocat. Pimper Eels the barrel 01 00 0^ Fish vocat, Eels
vocat. Shaft, kine, or Dole Eels the barrel 01 10 0^ Fish vocat, Eels vocat.
Spruce Eels the barrel 02 00 0^ Fish vocat, Eels vocat. Stub Eels the barrel 02
06 0^ Fish vocat, Eels vocat. Quick Eels the ships lading 20 00 0^ Fish vocat,
Gull fish the barrel 00 16 0^ Fish vocat. Haddocks the barrel 00 06 08 Fish
vocat. Herrings White full or shotten the barrel 01 00 00 Fish vocat. Herrings
White fullor shotten the last containing twelve barrels 12 00 00 Fish vocat.
Herrings Red the cade containing five hundred 01 00 00 Fish vocat. Herrings Red
the last containing 20 cade 12 06 08 Fish vocat. Lampreys the piece 00 01 00
Fish vocat. Lings of all sorts the hundred containing six score 06 13 04 Fish
vocat. Newland Small the hundred containing six score 00 10 00 Fish vocat.
Newland Middle sort the hundred containing six score 01 00 00 Fish vocat.
Newland Fish great the hundred containing six score 01 10 00 Fish vocat. Salmon
The barrel 02 00 00 Fish vocat. Salmon Girls the barrel 00 15 00 Fish vocat.
Seal-fish, the fish 00 13 04 Fish vocat. Croplings The hundred containing six
score 00 13 04 Fish vocat. Croplings The last containing a thousand 06 13 04
Fish vocat. Lubfish The hundred containing fix score 01 06 08 Fish vocat.
Lubfish The last containing a thousand 13 06 08 Fish vocat. Titling The hundred
containing six score 00 06 08 Fish vocat. Titling The last containing a
thousand 03 06 08 Fish vocat. Whiting the barrel 00 10 00 Flasks Covered with
leather the dozen 00 05 00 Flasks Covered with velvet the dozen 02 00 00 Flasks
Of horn the dozen 00 06 08 Flax vocat. Spruce, Muscovy, and all other flax
undrest, the hundred and twelve pounds 01 00 00 Flax vocat. Dressed or wrought
flax the hundred and twelve pounds 10 00 00 Fleams to let blood the piece 00 00
02 Flocks the hundred weight, containing one hundred and twelve pounds 02 00 00
Flutes course, the groce containing twelve dozen 01 00 00 Freeze the yard 00 01
00 Frizado the piece, containing twenty four yards 08 00 00 Furrs cocat. Armins
the Timber containing forty skins 02 00 00 Furrs cocat. Badger skins the piece
00 02 00 Furrs cocat. Bear skins black or red the piece 01 00 00 Furrs cocat.
Bear skins white the piece 02 00 00 Furrs cocat. Beaver skins the whole pieee
00 05 00 Furrs cocat. Beaver wombs the piece 00 01 0^ Furrs cocat. Budge white
tawed the hundred containing five score skins 02 00 0^ Furrs cocat. Black tawed
the dozen skins 01 06 0^ Furrs cocat. Black untawed the hundred containing five
score skins 03 10 0^ Furrs cocat. Poules the Fur containing four panes 01 00 00
Furrs cocat. Navern the 100 legs, containing five score 00 08 04 Furrs cocat.
Rumney the hundred legs containing 5 score 00 06 08 Furrs cocat. Calaber
untawed the timber containing forty skins 00 06 08 Furrs cocat. Calaber tawed
the timber, containing 40 skins 00 08 00 Furrs cocat. Calaber seasoned the pane
01 00 00 Furrs cocat. Calaber stag the pane 00 12 06 Furrs cocat. Calaber
skins, the 100 containing five score 02 00 00 Furrs cocat. Cats Poules the 100
containing five score 01 00 00 Furrs cocat. Cats Poules the mantle 00 06 03
Furrs cocat. Dokerers the timber containing forty skins 00 13 04 Furrs cocat.
Fitches the timber containing forty skins 00 13 04 Furrs cocat. Fitches the
pane or mantle 00 12 06 Furrs cocat. Foxes The black Fox skin 10 00 00 Furrs
cocat. Foxes The ordinary skin 00 01 04 Furrs cocat. Foxes The pane or mantle
00 15 00 Furrs cocat. Foxes Wombs, Poules or pieces the pane 00 10 00 Furrs
vocat. Foyns Black the dozen 00 13 0^ Furrs vocat. Foyns Tails the pane or
mantle 00 12 0^ Furrs vocat. Foyns With Tails the piece 00 03 0^ Furrs vocat.
Foyns Without Tails the piece 00 04 0^ Furrs vocat. Foyns Raw the piece 00 01
0^ Furrs vocat. Foyns Pouts the 100 containing 5 score 01 06 0^ Furrs vocat.
Foyns Wombs seasoned the pain or mantle 01 06 0^ Furrs vocat. Foyns Wombs Stag
the pain or mantle 00 15 0^ Furrs vocat. Grayes Untawed the timber containing
40 skins 00 08 0^ Furrs vocat. Grayes Tawed the Timber containing forty skins
00 12 0^ Furrs vocat. Jennets Black raw the skin 00 12 0^ Furrs vocat. Jennets
Black seasoned the skin 00 16 0^ Furs called. Jennets Gray raw the skin 00 03
00 Furs called. Jennets Gray seasoned the skin 00 04 00 Furs called. Letwis
Tawed the Timber containing forty skins 00 08 04 Furs called. Letwis Untawed
the Timber, containing forty skins 00 06 00 Furs called. Leopards Skins the
piece 01 05 00 Furs called. Leopards Wombs the pain 05 00 00 Furs called.
Martrons The Timber containing 40 skins 10 00 00 Furs called. Martrons The pain
or mantle 09 00 00 Furs called. Martrons Pouts the pain or mantle 00 10 00 Furs
called. Martrons Gills the timber containing 40 skins 00 12 00 Furs called.
Martrons Tails the 100 containing 5 score 02 00 00 Furrs vocat. Miniver the
mantle 00 13 04 Furrs vocat. Minks Untawed the timber containing forty skins 03
00 00 Furrs vocat. Minks Tawed the timber containing 40 skins 04 00 00 Furrs
vocat. Minks Moule skins the dozen 00 00 06 Furrs vocat. Minks Otter the piece
00 05 00 Furrs vocat. Minks Ounce skins the piece 00 12 06 Furrs vocat. Minks
Sables of all sorts the timber containing forty skins 30 00 00 Furrs vocat.
Minks Weasel skins the dozen 00 00 0^ Furrs vocat. Wolfskins Tawed the piece 01
10 00 Furrs vocat. Wolfskins Untawed the p. 01 03 00 Furrs vocat. Wolfskins
Wolverings the piece 00 12 06 Fustians vocat. Janes, Millains, and Barmillian
English and the like English manufactures of third the whole piece 01 10 00
Fustians vocat. Amsterdam Holland, or dutch Fustians the piece containing two
half pieces of fifteen yards the half piece 06 00 00 Fustians vocat.
Barmillians the piece containing 2 half pieces 06 00 00 Fustians vocat. Cullen
Fustians the piece containing two half pieces 06 00 00 Fustians vocat. Holmes
and Bevernex Fustians, the piece containining 2 half pieces 06 00 00 Fustians
vocat. Holmes and Bevernex Fustians the piece containing two half pieces 02 14
00 Fustians vocat. Jean Fustians the piece containing 2 half pieces 02 05 00
Fustians vocat. Millain Fustians the piece containing two half pieces 06 00 00
Fustians vocat. Naples Fustians tripe or velure plain the half piece containing
fifteen yards and a half 06 00 00 Fustians vocat. Naples Fustians tripe or
velure plain, the piece containing seven yards 03 00 00 Fustians vocat. Naples
Fustians tripe or velure plain, the yard 00 08 0^ Fustians vocat. Naples
Fustians wrought vocat. Sparta Velvet the half piece containing seven yards and
a half 04 10 0^ Fustians vocat. Naples Fustians wrought or Sparta Velvet the
yard 00 12 0^ Fustians vocat. Osbrow or Augusta Fustians, the piece containing
two half pieces 03 00 0^ Fustians vocat. With silk the yard 00 06 0^ Fustians
vocat. Of weazel the piece containing two half pieces 06 00 0^ Fusses of cloves
the pound 00 02 0^ B. G. Gadza of all sorts, without Gold or Silver the yard 00
02 0^ Gadza stripped with Gold or Silver, the yard 00 05 0^ Galley dishes the
dozen 00 01 ^^ Garnets Small rough the pound 01 00 0^ Garnets Small or great
cut the pound 03 00 ^^ Gauntlets the pair 00 04 0^ Garters of silk, French
making the dozen pair 03 00 ^^ Galls the hundred weight, containing 112 pounds
01 00 00 Gimlets for Vintners the dozen 00 08 00 Girdles Of cruel the groce,
concontaining 12 dozen 01 06 08 Girdles Of Leather the groce containing 12
dozen 01 13 04 Girdles Of silk the dozen 01 00 00 Girdles Of Velvet the dozen
02 00 00 Girdles Of Woollen the dozen 00 16 00 Girdles Of counterfeit Gold and
Silver the dozen 00 10 00 Glasses for windows vocat. Burgundy white, the the
chest 02 10 00 Glasses for windows vocat. Burgundy colored the chest 03 10 00
Glasses for windows vocat. Normandy white, the case 01 00 00 Glasses for
windows vocat. Normandy colored the case 02 10 00 Glasses for windows vocat.
Rhenish the Way or Web containing sixty bunches 03 00 00 Glasses for windows
vocat. Muscovy Glass or Slade the pound 00 02 00 Drinking Glasses vocat Venice
drinking Glasses the dozen 00 12 0^ Drinking Glasses vocat Flanders drinking
glasthe hundred glasses 00 16 0^ Drinking Glasses vocat Scotch and French
drinking glasses the 100 containing five score 00 10 0^ Drinking Glasses vocat
Course drinking glasses the dozen 00 02 0^ Glasses vocat. Burning glasses the
dozen 00 02 0^ Glasses vocat. Balm glasses the groce comaining 12 dozen 00 05
0^ Glasses vocat. Vials the hundred containing five score 00 10 0^ Glasses
vocat. Water glasses the dozen 00 08 0^ Glasses vocat. Half penny glasses the
groce containing twelve dozen 00 08 0^ Glasses vocat. Penny ware the groce
containing 12 dozen 00 16 0^ Looking Glasses Of Steel small the dozen 00 13 0^
Looking Glasses Of Steel large 01 06 0^ Looking Glasses Of crystal small the
dozen under number six 01 10 0^ Looking Glasses Of crystal middle sort the
dozen, number six 03 00 00 Looking Glasses Of crystal small the dozen, number,
7, 8, 9, 10 06 00 0^ Looking Glasses Of crystal the dozen, number, 11 12, 45
00 00 Memorandum, That the said numbers are accounted as Inches. Hour Glasses
Of Flanders making, course the groce containing twelve ^^zen 02 00 00 Hour
Glasses Of Flanders making the dozen ^^^e 00 13 04 Hour Glasses Of Venice
making the doz. 02 00 00 Glass plates or fights for looking Glasses unfiled
Glass stone plate for Spectacle rough the dozen 00 13 04 Glass plates or fights
for looking Glasses unfiled Of crystal small under number six the dozen 01 00
00 Glass plates or fights for looking Glasses unfiled Of crystal number six
the dozen 02 00 00 Glass plates or fights for looking Glasses unfiled Of
crystal, number 7, 8, 9, 10, the doz. 04 00 00 Glass plates or fights for
looking Glasses unfiled Of crystal number 11, 12 the dozen 30 00 00 Glass
Pipes Small the pound 00 05 00 Glass Pipes Great the 100 weight containing 112
pounds 05 00 00 Glue the hundred weight, containing 112 pounds 01 00 00 Globes
Small the pair 01 00 0^ Globes Large the pair 02 00 0^ Gloves of all sorts the
dozen 01 00 00 Gold and Silver third right the pound, containing twelve ounces
Venice weight 02 00 0^ Gold foil the small groce containing 12 dozen 00 06 0^
Gold paper the small groce containing twelve dozen 00 13 0^ Grains French or
Guiny the pound 00 00 0^ Grains Or Scarlet powder the pound 00 06 0^ Grains of
Sevil in berries, or grains of Portugal or Rotta the pound 00 03 0^ Grindstones
the chalder 00 13 0^ Grocery Wares vocat. Almonds the hundred weight containing
112 pounds 03 00 0^ Grocery Wares vocat. Anniseeds the hundred weight
containing 112 pounds 03 00 0^ Grocery Wares vocat. Cloves the pound 00 08 0^
Grocery Wares vocat. Currants the 100 weight containing 112 pound 04 00 0^
Grocery Wares vocrt. Dates the 100 weight, containing 112 pounds 04 10 00
Grocery Wares vocrt. Ginger Of the East Indies the pound 00 03 00 Grocery Wares
vocrt. Ginger Of the West Indies the pound 00 01 04 Grocery Wares vocrt. Ginger
Of the English plantation the 112 pounds 01 00 00 Grocery Wares vocrt.
Liquorish the hundred weight, containing 112 pounds 01 10 00 Grocery Wares
vocrt. Mace the pound 00 15 00 Grocery Wares vocrt. Nutmegs the pound 00 06 00
Grocery Wares vocrt. Pepper the pound 00 02 00 Grocery Wares vocrt. Cinnamon the
pound 00 06 08 Grocery Wares vocrt. Raisons of all sorts, the hundred weight,
containing 112 pounds 02 03 04 Grocery Wares vocrt. Figs the hundred containing
112 pounds 01 00 00 Grocery Wares vocrt. Prunes the 100 weight, containing 112
pounds 00 12 00 Grocery Wares vocrt. Sugar Candy the 100 weight containing 112
pound 08 00 00 Grocery es war vocat. Sugar Candy white the hundred weight,
containing 112 lb. 12 00 00 Grocery es war vocat. Sugar White of the English
plantation, the 100 weight containing 112 pounds 05 00 00 Grocery es war vocat.
Sugar Muscovadoes the hundred weight con-112 pounds 01 10 00 Grocery es war
vocat. Sugar White Sugar foreign or imported from any foreign place, the 100
weight, containing 112 pounds 09 06 08 Grocery es war vocat. Sugar Refined
double or single in loaf made in England the 100 containing 112 pound 06 00 00
Groce^y ^ares ^ocat. Sugar Saint Thome and Panellis, the 100 weight containing
112 pounds 01 00 00 ^urkey Grograms the yard 00 03 09 Guns vocat. Calivers the
piece 00 15 00 Guns vocat. Muskets the piece 00 05 00 Gunpow^er vocat.
Serpentine the 100 weight containing 112 pounds 03 00 00 Gunpow^er vocat. Corn
powder the 100 weight, containing 112 pounds 05 00 00 H. ^al^erts Guilt the
piece 00 13 00 ^al^erts Unguilt the piece 00 03 04 ^am ^^ers With wooden
handles or without the dozen 00 04 00 ^am ^^ers Vocat. Horsemans Hammers the
dozen 00 13 04 ^andkerchiefs the dozen 03 00 00 ^arness Roses the thousand 00
01 00 ^arness vocat. Corselets complete the piece 01 00 00 ^arness vocat.
Curats the piece 00 12 06 Harness vocat. Morrians or head pieces graven the
piece 00 10 0^ Harness vocat. Morrians or head pieces plain the piece 00 05 0^
Harpstrings or catlings the groce, containing twelve dozen 00 05 0^ Hatbands
the groce containing twelve dozen 05 00 0^ Hats of beaver wool or hair the Hat
05 00 0^ All other Hats the piece 01 00 0^ Hawks Hoods the groce containing
twelve dozen 01 06 0^ Hair buttons for sieves the groce containing twelve dozen
00 10 0^ Hair vocat. Camels hair the pound 00 01 0^ Hair vocat. Elks hair for
Saddles the hundred weight containing 112 pounds 00 12 0^ Hair vocat. Goats
hair the hundred and twelve pounds 00 01 0^ Headings for Pipes, Hogsheads or
barrels the 100 containing 6 score 00 06 0^ Heath for brushes the 100 weight
contaihing 112 pounds 01 00 0^ Hemp vocat Hemp short dressed, the 100 weight
containing 112 pounds 06 00 0^ Hemp vocat. Cullen or steel Hemp, and all other
sorts of dressed Hemp, the hundred weight containing 112 pounds 10 00 00 Hemp
vocat. Spruce, Muscovia, and all other rough Hemp the 100 weight, containing
112 pounds 00 13 00 Hides vocat. Buff Hides, the hide 01 00 00 Hides vocat. Cow
hides of Barbary and Muscovia, the hide 00 05 00 Hides vocat. Cow or Horse
hides tanned, the piece 00 10 00 Hides vocat. Cow or horse hides in the hair
the piece 00 05 00 Hides vocat. India hides the piece 00 08 04 Hides vocat.
Losh hides the piece 00 05 00 Hides vocat. Red or M^^covia hides tanned,
colored or uncoloured, the hide 00 06 08 Hilts for Swords and Daggers the
dozen 02 00 00 Honey The barrel 02 00 00 Honey The tun 12 00 00 Hoops Of Iron
for Pipes or Hogsheads the hundred weight containing 112 pounds 01 06 08 Hoops
For Coopers the thousand 01 06 08 Hops Of all sorts, the hundred weight
containing 112 pounds 02 00 00 Horses and Mares, Geldings and Nags the piece 00
05 00 Hose of Cruel, vocat, Mantua Hose the pair 00 10 00 I. Jeat the pound 00
03 04 Jews Trumps the groce containing twelve dozen 00 10 00 Imperlings blew or
red the dozen 01 10 00 Ink for Printers the 100 weight, containing 112 pound 02
00 00 Ink horns The groce containing twelve dozen 03 00 00 Ink horns Of glass
the dozen 00 12 00 Inkle Unwrought the pound 00 02 06 Inkle Wrought the dozen
pound 06 00 00 Inkle Rowls the dozen pieces containing-thirty six yards the
piece 04 00 00 Indico of all sorts the pound 00 03 04 Indico dust the pound 00
01 08 Instruments for Barbers and Chi^urgians vocat. Bullet skrews the dozen 00
04 00 Instruments for Barbers and Chi^urgians vocat. Incision sheers the dozen
00 05 00 Instruments for Barbers and Chi^urgians vocat. Sets, the bundle
containing sixteen 00 02 00 Instruments for Barbers and Chi^urgians vocat.
Paces or Toothdrawers the dozen 00 05 00 Instruments for Barbers and
Chi^urgians vocat. Pullicanes the dozen 00 05 00 Instruments for Barbers and
Chi^urgians vocat. Trepanes the dozen 00 10 00 ^^on Amys, Spanish, Spruce, and
Swethish the Tun 24 00 00 ^^on Backs for Chimneys small the piece 00 06 08 ^^on
Backs for Chimneys large the piece 00 13 04 ^^on Bands for Kettles the 100
weight containing 112 pounds 02 00 00 ^^on Fire Irons the groce containing
twelve doz. 00 10 00 ^^on Hoops the 100 weight containing 112 pounds 01 06 08
Indico of the English plantation the pound 00 01 00 Iron Ore and Cinders the
tun 00 10 00 Juice of Lemmons the Pipe 04 00 00 Ivory the pound 00 10 00 K.
Keyknops the groce containing twelve dozen 01 00 00 Knives vocat. Almine,
Bohemia and all other course Knives the Dicker containing ten Knives 00 03 00
Knives vocat. Butchers Knives the dicker containing ten Knives 00 03 00 Knives
vocat. Carving Knives the dozen 03 00 00 Knives vocat. Cullen knives the groce
containing 12 dozen 08 00 00 Knives vocat. French Knives the bundle containing
12 dozen 04 00 00 Knives vocat. Glovers Knives, the bundle containing six
knives 01 10 00 Knives vocat. Pen Knives the groce containing 12 dozen 01 10 00
Knives vocat. Sker Knives the Dicker containing ten knives 00 03 00 Knives
vocat Stock Knives unguilt the dozen stocks 04 00 00 Knives vocat Stock Knives
guilt the dozen stocks 06 00 00 L. Lace vocat. Bone lace of third the dozen
yards. 02 00 00 Lace vocat. Brittin lace, the small containing twelve dozen
yards 03 00 00 Lace vocat. Cruel lace the small groce containing twelve dozen
04 00 00 Lace vocat. Of Gold or Silver, or silver and Gold, the pound Troy or
Venice weight 08 00 00 Lace vocat. Gold and Silver lace the ounce Troy 00 05 00
Lace vocat. Pomet lace the groce containing twelve dozen yards 01 00 00 Lace
vocat. Purle or Antlet lace of third, the groce containing twelve dozen 00 10
00 Lace vocat. Silk bone lace the lb. containing 16 ounces 10 00 00 Lace vocat
Silk lace of all other sorts the pound, containing sixteen ounces 05 00 00
Ladles vocat Melting ladles the hundred weight, containing 112 pounds 02 00 00
Lapis Magnata false the pound 00 03 00 Lattin vocat. Black Lattin the hundred
weight, containing 112 pounds 02 00 00 Lace vocat. Shaven Lattin the 100 weight
containing 112 pounds 02 10 00 Lead the tun containing 200 weight 06 00 00 Lead
Ore the Tun 04 00 00 Lemmons pickled the pipe 04 00 00 Lemmon water the Tun 10
13 04 Lemmon water the Gallon 00 00 11 Leather vocat. Bazil Leather the dozen
02 00 00 Leather vocat. Spanish, Turkey, East India or Cordavant the dozen
skins 05 00 00 Leather vocat. Spruce, Muscovia, or Dansk leather the dozen
skins 02 00 00 Leather vocat. Hangings guilt the piece 04 00 00 Leather vocat.
Leather for Masks the pound 00 06 08 Leaves of Gold, the 100 leaves containing
five score 00 05 00 Lures for hawks the piece 00 01 04 Lime for Dyers the
barrel 00 05 00 Lines of Hamborough for ships the piece 00 06 06 Linseed the
bushel 00 05 00 Linnes blew or red, the dozen 01 10 00 Linen vocat. Callicoes
fine or course the piece 00 12 00 Linen vocat. Cambricks The half piece
containing six else 01 05 00 Linen vocat. Cambricks The piece containing
thirteen else 02 10 00 Linen vocat. Cambricks The packet 02 10 00 Linen
vocat. Canvas vocat. Dutch barras and Hessens canvas, the 100 else containing
six score 03 10 00 Linen vocat. Canvas vocat. French and Normandy canvas, and
line narrow brown or white the hundred containing six score 06 10 00 Linen
vocat. Canvas vocat. Noyal canvas the hundred else containig one hundred and
twenty 08 00 00 Linen vocat. Canvas vocat White French or Normandy canvas
broad, the hundred else, containing 120 10 00 00 Linen vocat. Canvas vocat
French canvas and line broad for tabling, being an ell and half a quarter and
upwards, the the 100 else containing 120 15 00 00 Linen vocat. Canvas vocat
Packing canvas, guttings and Spruce canvas, the 100 else, contain, 120 03 00 00
Linen vocat. Canvas vocat Poledavies, spruce Elbing, or Quinsborow canvas, the
bolt containing twenty 8 else 00 18 00 Linen vocat. Canvas vocat Stripped or
tufted canvas with third, the piece contain-fifteen yards 00 18 00 Linen
vocat. Canvas vocat Stripped or tufted or quilted canvas with silk the piece
contain. 15 yards 01 10 00 Linen vocat. Canvas vocat. Stripped canvas with
copper, the piece containing fifteen yards 02 00 00 Linen vocat. Canvas vocat.
Vandalose or Vitry cancas the 100 else containing 120 06 00 00 Linen vocat.
Canvas vocat. Working canvas for cushions narrow the 100 else containing 120 03
00 00 Linen vocat. Canvas vocat. Working canvas broad, the 100 else containing
six score 05 00 00 Linen vocat. Damask Tabling of Holland making the yard 00
08 00 Linen vocat. Damask Towelling and Napkining of Holland making the yard
00 03 00 Linen vocat. Damask Tabling of Silesia making the yard 00 04 00
Linen vocat. Damask Towelling or napkining of Silesia the yard 00 01 04 Linen
vocat. Damask Tabling of Holland making the yard 00 05 00 Linen vocat. Damask
Towelling and napkining of Holland making the yard 00 01 0^ Linen vocat.
Diaper Napkins of Holland making the dozen 01 10 00 Linen vocat. Diaper Of
Silesia making tabling the yard 00 02 0^ Linen vocat. Diaper Towelling and
napkinning of Silesia making the yard 00 01 00 Linen vocat. Lawns The half
piece containing six else and a half 01 05 00 Linen vocat. Lawns The piece
containing thirteen else 02 10 00 Linen vocat. Lawns Calico Lawns the piece 01
00 00 Linen vocat. Lawns French Lawns the piece 01 05 00 Linen vocat. Lawns
Silesia Lawns the piece contain. between four and 8 yards 00 10 00 Linen
vocat. Flanders linen cloth Outnard And ^ll other sorts of Flanders white the
ell 00 03 06 Linen vocat. Flanders linen cloth Courtrey And ^ll other sorts
of Flanders white the ell 00 03 06 Linen vocat. Flanders linen cloth Gentish
And ^ll other sorts of Flanders white the ell 00 03 06 Linen vocat. Flanders
linen cloth Isinghams And ^ll other sorts of Flanders white the ell 00 03 06
Linen vocat. Flanders linen cloth Iper And ^ll other sorts of Flanders white
the ell 00 03 06 Linen vocat. Flanders linen cloth Outnal And ^ll other
sorts of Flanders white the ell 00 03 06 Linen vocat. Isinghams and Gentish
brown and all other brown linen the ell 00 02 06 Linen vocat. Bag Holland of
Holland mamaking the ell 00 06 08 Linen vocat. Holland Linneu Aetes cloth And
all other cloth of holland the el 00 03 04 Linen vocat. Holland Linneu Brabant
And all other cloth of holland the el 00 03 04 Linen vocat. Holland Linneu
Emden And all other cloth of holland the el 00 03 04 Linen vocat. Holland
Linneu Freeze And all other cloth of holland the el 00 03 04 Linen vocat.
Holland Linneu Gulick And all other cloth of holland the el 00 03 04 Linen
vocat. Holland Linneu Overissels And all other cloth of holland the el 00 03 04
Linen vocat. Holland Linneu Rowse And all other cloth of holland the el 00 03
04 Linen vocat. Holland Linneu Shephards And all other cloth of holland the el
00 03 04 Linen vocat. British the hundred else containing five score 06 00 00
Linen vocat. Cowsseld cloth or plats the ell 00 01 06 Linen vocat. Drilling
and pack-duck the 100 else containing 6 score 02 05 00 Linen vocat. Elbing or
Dansk cloth double ploy the ell 00 01 00 Linen vocat. Hamborough and Silesia
cloth broad, the hundred else containing 120 white or brown 07 00 00 Linen
vocat. Hamborough cloth narrow the 100 else contain 6 score 04 00 00 Linen
vocat. Hinderlands, Middlegood, Headlake and Muscovia linen narrow, the
hundred else containing six score 02 10 00 Linen vocat. Lockrams the piece
broad 10 00 00 Linen vocat. Lockrams the piece narrow 06 00 00 Linen vocat.
Minsters the Roll containing fifteen hundred else, at five score to the hundred
47 10 00 Linen vocat. Oxenbrigs, the Roll containing fifteen hundred else at
five score to the hundred 60 00 00 Linen vocat. Soultwich the hundred else
containing six score 04 00 00 Linen vocat. Polonia, Ulsters, Hannovers,
Lubeck, narrow Silesia, narrow Westphalia, narrow hatford, plain Napkining, and
all other narrow cloth of high Dutchland, and the east country white or
brown, and not otherwise rated the 100 else containing six score 05 00 00
Linen vocat. Strasborough, or Hamborough Linen the ell 00 03 00 ^^cks vocat.
Budget or hanging Locks small the groce containing twelve dozen 01 10 00 ^^cks
vocat. Hanging Locks large the groce contain. 12 dozen 03 00 00 ^^ckers or
Chapes for Daggers, ^^e groce containing 12 dozen. 00 13 04 ^^tes Collein
making, with cases the dozen 08 00 00 ^^tes Venice making with cases the dozen
24 00 00 ^^te^ings ^^cat. Catlings the groce, containing 12 dozen knots 00 02
08 ^^te^ings ^^cat. Minikins the groce containing 12 dozen knots 01 06 08 ^mus
the hundred weight, con^ning 112 pounds 01 00 00 M. ^^dder vocat. Crop madder
and all other bale madder, the hundred weight, containing 112 pounds 01 10 00
Madder vocat. Fat madder the hundred weight, containing 112 pounds 00 16 0^
Madder vocat. Mul-madder the hundred weight, containing 112 pounds 00 05 0^
Magnus the hundred weight containing 112 pounds 01 00 0^ Maps printed, the Ream
04 00 0^ Masks Of Velvet the dozen 03 00 0^ Masks Of Satin the dozen 02 00 0^
Masts For ships small the mast 00 03 0^ Masts Middle the mast 00 10 0^ Masts
Great the mast 01 00 0^ Match for Guns the pound 00 00 0^ Mats of Russia the
mat 00 00 0^ Malt and Barley (vide) Corn Meal of Wheat or Rye, the Last
containing twelve barrels 06 00 0^ Melasses of Rameals the Tun 06 00 0^
Meselanes the piece containing thirty yards 09 00 0^ The single piece
containing 14 yards of Silesia making 01 16 0^ Metheglin the Hogshead 02 00 0^
Mithridate the pound 01 00 0^ Moccado Ends the dozen pounds 03 00 0^ ^^orters
and Pestles of brass the lb. 00 01 04 ^^ustardseed the hundred weight
containing 112 pounds 00 10 00 ^^ittins of Wadmoll the dozen pair 00 09 00 N.
^^ils vocat. Chair nails the thousand 00 13 04 ^^ils vocat. Copper nails, Rose
nails and Sadlers nails the sum containing ten thousand 00 13 04 ^^ils vocat.
Head nails the barrel 08 00 00 ^^ils vocat. Harness nails, the sum containing
ten thousand 01 00 00 ^^ils vocat. Small nails, the half barrel 08 00 00 ^^ils
vocat. Spring nails, the sum containing 10 thousand 00 06 08 ^^pkins French
making the dozen 00 12 00 ^^ats ^ongues Of Russia the piece 00 00 02 ^^ats
^ongues The barrel 00 10 00 ^^ats ^ongues The dozen 00 02 06 ^^ckerchers of
Flanders making ^^e dozen 06 00 00 ^eedles The dozen thousand 02 10 00 ^eedles
Vocat Packneedles the thousand 00 10 00 ^eedles Vocat Sailneedles the 1000 00
05 00 Nutmegs pickled the piece 00 00 ^^ Nuts vocat. Small Nuts the barrel 00
10 ^^ Nuts vocat. Wall Nuts the barrel 00 06 ^^ O. Oakham the hundred weight,
containing 112 pounds 00 05 ^^ Oaker the barrel 01 06 ^^ Oar. vocat. Iron Oar
the Tun 00 10 ^^ Olives the Hogshead 08 00 ^^ Onions The barrel 00 03 ^^ Onions
The hundred bunches 00 16 ^^ Onions Seeds the 100 weight, containing 112 pounds
04 00 ^^ Orchal the hundred weight containing 112 pounds 01 10 0^ Oranges and
Lemmons the thousand 05 00 0^ Orsedew the dozen pounds 01 06 ^^ P Packthread in
skeins the 100 weight 03 00 0^ Packtbread vocat. Bottom thread the hundred
pounds 02 10 ^^ Pans vocat Dripping and Frying pans the hundred weight
containing 112 pounds 02 00 0^ Pans vocat Warming pans the dozen 03 00 0^ ^^per
vocat. Blew Paper the Ream 00 10 00 ^^per vocat. Brown Paper the bundle 00 03
00 ^^per vocat. Cap Paper the Ream 00 07 06 ^^per vocat. Demi Paper the Ream 00
12 00 ^^per vocat. Morlaix Paper the Ream 00 02 06 ^^per vocat. Ordinary
Printing and Copy Paper the Ream 00 02 00 ^^per vocat. Paper of Cane and Roan
ordinary the Ream 00 04 06 ^^per vocat. Painted Paper the Ream 00 13 04 ^^per
vocat. Pressing Paper the hundred leaves 00 13 04 ^^per vocat. Rochel Paper as
large as Demi Paper 00 09 00 ^^per vocat. Royal Paper the Ream 01 00 00
^^rchment the Roll 02 02 00 ^^st of Jean the pound 00 07 06 ^^ars or Apples
dried the barrel 00 10 00 ^^cers, the groce containing ^^elve dozen 02 00 00
^^ercer bits the groce containing ^^elve dozen 01 00 00 ^^^heads the piece 00
00 06 ^^kes Without heads the piece 00 03 06 ^^kes With heads the piece 00 04
06 ^^nes the dozen thousand 01 00 00 ^^cers or Plyers the dozen 00 03 04
Pintadoes or Callico Cupboard clothes the piece 02 00 00 Pipes or Hogshead or
barrel staves the hundred containing six score 00 06 0^ Pipes for Tabors the
dozen 04 00 00 Pipes for children the groce containing twelve dozen 00 08 00
Pitch vocat. Small band the last containing twelve barrels 02 00 00 Pitch
vocat. Great band the last containing twelve barrels 03 06 08 Plaster of
Paris, the mount, containing three thousand weight 02 00 00 Plain Irons the
dozen 00 02 00 Planks of Cedar the Foot 00 01 00 Planks of England the hundred
foot containing five score 00 12 06 Plates vocat. All Bullion either in coin,
bars or plates to be imported duty-free Plates vocat. Single white or black the
barrel containing 300 plates 02 00 00 Plates vocat. Double white or black the
barrel containing 300 plates 04 00 00 Plates vocat. Harness plates or Iron
doubles the plate 00 02 00 Plates vocat. Harness plates or Iron doubles the
bundle containing ten plates 01 00 00 Playing Tables of Wallnut tree the pair
00 06 08 Points Of thread, the great groce containing 12 small groce 01 00 00
Points Of capiton, the great groce containing twelve small groce 02 00 00
Points Of fine silk, the small groce cont. 12 dozen 01 10 00 Pomy of Pumice
stones the Tun 00 13 04 Pomegranats the thousand 02 00 00 Pots vocat. Of earth
or stone covered, the hundred containing five score 01 06 08 Pots vocat. Of
earth or stone uncovered, containing a gallon to every Cast, whether in one pot
or more 02 00 00 Pots vocat. Gally pots the hundred containing five score 02 00
00 Pots vocat. Melting pots for Goldsmiths the hundred 00 03 00 Pots vocat. All
pots and Kettles of Iron the dozen 06 00 00 Pullies vocat. Pullies of Iron, the
groce containing twelve dozen 05 00 00 Pullies vocat. Of brass the dozen 00 04
00 Pullies vocat. Of Wood, the groce containing 12 dozen 01 00 00 Punsons and
Gravers for goldsmiths the pound 00 01 00 Q. Quilts French making the dozen 04
16 00 Quilts Of Callico the piece 02 00 00 Quilts Of Satin or other silk the
p. 06 13 0^ Quinces the hundred 00 04 0^ R. Rackets the piece 00 00 00 Rape of
Grapes the Tun 03 00 00 Rapeseed the quarter 01 00 00 Rashes vocat Bridges or
Leyden Rashes the single piece containing 15 yards 04 00 00 Rashes vocat
Bridges or Leyden Rashes English the double piece containing thirty yards 03 00
00 Rashes vocat. Cloth Rashes English the piece 06 00 00 Ratles For children
the groce containing 12 dozen 01 00 00 Ratles With bells the dozen 00 04 00
Razers the Dicker containing ten 01 00 00 Recorders the Set or Case containing
sive Recorders 01 00 00 Ribbands of Silk, and all other ^ilken Manufacture, the
pound containing sixteen ounces 05 00 00 Ribband of Gold, Silver or both he
pound containing 16 ounces 08 00 00 Rice the hundred weight, containing 112
pounds 01 05 00 Rozin the hundred weight, containing 112 pounds 00 05 00 Rims
for sieves, the groce containing twelve dozen 00 06 00 Rugs of all sorts the
piece 01 00 00 Rings. vocat. For Keys the groce containing 12 dozen 00 09 00
Rings. vocat. For Curtains the pound 00 01 04 Rings. vocat. Of Wire the the
groce containing 12 dozen 00 04 04 Rings. vocat. Of brass copper, or St.
Martins guilt the groce containing 12 dozen 01 00 00 Rings. vocat. Small the
box containing two groce, twelve dozen to each groce 00 10 00 Rings vocat. Of
Hair the groce containing twelve dozen 00 03 00 S. Sackcloth The hundred else
containing six score 08 00 00 Sackcloth Of single threads, the piece cont. 15
yards 00 10 00 Sackcloth With white thread the yard 00 01 00 Sackcloth With silk
the yard 00 01 00 Saddles of steel the piece 01 00 00 Saffora (vide) Barilia
Safflore the hundred weight containing 112 pounds 04 00 00 Saffron the pound 01
10 00 Salt of all sorts, the bushel containing eight gallons 00 01 00
Saltpeter the hundred weight containing 112 pounds 02 00 00 Saws vocat.
Hand-saws the dozen 00 06 0^ Saws vocat. Tenant-saws the dozen 00 13 0^ Saws
vocat. Whip-saws, the piece 00 05 0^ Saws vocat. ^eg-saws, the piece 00 06 0^
Scamoty the yard 00 00 0^ Scamoty the piece cont. 13 yards 00 08 0^ Sciffers
the groce containing 12 dozen 01 13 0^ Sea-holly roots the 100 weight
containing one hundred and 12 pounds 01 00 00 Sea horse teeth the pound 00 05
00 Searge Of Athens the yard 00 02 00 Searge Of Florence the yard 01 00 00
Shears For shearmen the pair 01 00 00 Shears For shearmen old the pair 00 13 04
Shears For Glovers the pair 00 01 00 Shears For Seamsters the dozen 00 03 04
Shears Vocat. Forceps the groce cont. 12 dozen 00 13 04 Shears For Tailors the
dozen 00 16 00 Shubs of Calaber the piece or shub 02 00 06 Shumake the hundred
weight containing 112 pounds 00 13 04 Shruff or old brass the hundred weight
containing 112 pounds 03 00 00 ^yder and Perry the Tun 03 00 00 Silk vocat.
Bridges silk, the pound containing 16 ounces 02 00 00 Silk vocat. Ferret or
Floret silk the pound containing 16 ounces 01 00 00 Silk vocat. Fyllozell or
Paris silk the pound containing 16 ounces 00 15 00 Silk vocat. Granada. Silk
black the pound containing sixteen ounces 03 00 00 Silk vocat. Granada. Silk in
colors the lb. containing 16 ounces 04 00 00 Silk vocat. Naples silk in
colors the lb. containing 16 ounces 02 10 00 Silk vocat. Orgazine silk the
pound containing 16 ounces 00 16 08 Silk vocat. Pole or Spanish silk the pound
containing sixteen ounces 02 00 00 Silk vocat. Raw China silk the lb.
containing 24 ounces 01 00 00 Silk vocat. Raw Morea silk the lb. containing 24.
ounces 00 10 00 Silk vocat. Raw long silk of all sorts except China and Morea
the pound containing 24 ounces 00 10 00 Silk vocat. Raw short silk or Capiton
the pound containing 24 ounces 00 06 0^ Silk vocat. Satin silk, the pound
containing 16 ounces 02 00 00 Silk vocat. Sleave silk course the lb. containing
16 ounces 00 13 04 Silk vocat. Sleave silk fine, or Naples sleave the pound
containing 16 ounces 02 13 04 Silk vocat. Silk Nubs or Husks, the pound
containing 21 ounces 00 02 00 Silk vocat. Thrown silk the pound containing 16
ounces 01 13 04 Silk vocat. Thrown silk the pound dyed containing sixteen
ounces 02 10 00 Silk vocat. China Damask the yard 02 13 04 Cloth of Gold and
Silver plain the yard 04 00 00 Cloth of Gold and Silver wrought the yard 06 00
00 Cloth of Tissue the yard 10 00 00 All silks wrought, of the Fabric or
Manufactures of the East Indies, Italy or any parts or places whatsoever, the
pound weight containing 16 ounces 02 10 00 Skins vocat. Buck skins in the hair
the piece 00 02 06 Skins vocat. Dressed the skin 00 05 00 Skins vocat. Calve
skins Raw the dozen 00 06 08 Skins vocat. Calve skins Tanned 00 10 00 Skins
vocat. Cordavant of Scotland the dozen 01 06 08 Skins vocat. Dogfish skins for
Fletchers, the dozen 00 00 06 Skins vocat. Fox skins dressed, the dozen 00 16 00
Skins vocat. Gould skins, the skin 00 00 06 Skins vocat. Goat skins Of Barbary,
or the East-Country, in the hair the dozen skins 00 15 00 Skins vocat. Goat
skins Of England and Scotland in the hair, the dozen 00 06 08 Skins vocat. Goat
skins Tanned, the dozen 02 00 00 Skins vocat. Huss skins for Fletchers, the
skin 00 00 08 Skins vocat. Kid skins in the hair, the hundred containing five
sore 01 00 00 Skins vocat. Dressed, the hundred containing five score 02 00 00
Skins vocat. Portugal skins, the dozen 02 00 00 Skins vocat. Seal skins, the
skin 00 01 00 Skins vocat. Shamois skins, the dozen 01 06 08 Skins vocat. Sheep
skins in the wool, the skin 00 00 03 Skins vocat. Spanish Sevil or Cordovant
skins the dozen 05 00 00 Skins vocat. Spruce skins tawed the dozen 02 00 00
Skeets for whitsters, the skeet 00 01 00 Slip, the barrel 00 03 04 Smalts the
pound 00 01 06 Snuffers of all sorts, the dozen 00 06 08 Soap vocat. Castle or
Venice, the 100 weight containing 112 pounds 03 00 00 Soap vocat. Flemish, the
barrel 04 00 00 Spangles of Copper, the thousand 00 01 00 Spars small, the
hundred containing six score 01 00 00 Spectacles without cases, the groce
containing twelve dozen 01 00 00 Spirits perfectly made, the gallon 01 00 00
Spoons of Horns, the groce containing twelve dozen 00 16 00 Spunges, (vide)
Drugs Standishes Of wood the dozen 00 04 00 Standishes Of Brass the dozen 00 12
00 Standishes Covered with leather guilt the piece 00 06 08 Standishes Vocat.
pocket Standishes the dozen 00 02 00 Starch white the hundred weight containing
112 pounds 05 00 0^ Staves vocat. Barrel staves the 100 containing six score 00
03 00 Staves vocat. Firkin staves the hundred containing 6 score 00 02 00 Steel
of all sorts the 100 weight concaining 112 pounds 01 00 00 Stockins Of worsted
for men and women the pair 00 06 00 Stockins Of worsted for children the pair
00 03 04 Stockins Of woollen for men and women the pair 00 03 00 Stockins Of
woollen for children the pair 00 01 08 Stone birds or whistles, the groce
containing twelve dozen 00 04 00 Stockins of silk the pair 02 00 00 Stones
vocat. Blood stones the pound 00 10 00 Stones vocat. Cane stones the Tu^ 00 10
00 Stones vocat. Dog stones the last, containing 3 pair to the last 06 00 00
Stones vocat. Milstones the piece 03 06 08 Stones vocat. Quern stones large,
the last 03 00 00 Stones vocat. Quern stones small the last 01 10 00 Stones
vocat. Slick stones the 100 containing five score 00 10 00 Sturgeon The Firkin
01 10 00 Sturgeon The Cagg 00 15 00 Succard wet or dry the, pound 00 03 00
Sword blades Of Venice, Turkey or fine blades the dozen 01 10 00 Sword blades
Course of Flanders making the dozen 10 00 00 T. Table books Course the dozen 00
10 00 Table books Fine the dozen 01 00 00 Tables vocat. Playing Tables of
Wainscot, and all other sorts course the pair 00 05 00 Tacks of Iron the
thousand 00 00 08 Tennets of cruel the yard 00 06 00 Tapi^ry With hair the
Flemish ell 00 02 00 Tapi^ry With caddas the flemish ell 00 06 00 Tapi^ry With
silk the flemish ell 00 10 00 Tapi^ry With Gold or Silver the flemish ell 06 00
00 Tapi^ry With Wool the flemish ell 00 03 00 Tarras the barrel 00 05 00 Tar
Small band the Last containing 12 barrels 02 00 00 Tar Great band the Last
containing twelve barrels 03 06 00 Teazles the thousand 00 01 00 Thimbles the
thousand 03 00 00 Thread Bridges thread the dozen pound 02 05 00 Thread Crosbow
thread the hundred pound containing five score 03 06 08 Thread Lions or Paris
thread, the bale containing one hundred bolts 15 00 00 Thread Outnal thread the
dozen pound 03 00 00 Thread Piecing thread the dozen pound 04 00 00 Thread
Sisters thread the pound 00 15 00 Thread Whited brown the dozen pound 01 00 00
Thrums Of Linen or Fustian the pound 00 00 06 Thrums Of Woollen the pound 00 01
00 Tikes Brizel Tikes, and counterfeit Brizel the Tike 01 10 00 Tikes Turnal
Tikes, the Tike 01 10 00 Tiking of the East country, the yard 00 00 08 Tiks of
Stood the Tike 01 10 00 Tincal the pound, vide Drugs Tinfoyl, the groce
containing 12 dozen 00 03 04 Tinglass the hundred weight containing 112 pounds
03 00 00 Tinsel with Copper the yard 00 05 00 Tinsel with Right of Gold and
Silver the yard 00 10 00 Tinshore the groce containing 12 dozen 00 01 06
Tobacco Spainsh and Brazil Tobacco, or any not English plantation the pound 00
10 00 Tobacco Spanish or Brazil Tobacco in pudding or Roll the pound 00 10 00
Tobacco St. Christophers Barbados or any of the Carib Islands, virginia, or
summer Islands the pound 00 01 08 Tools vocat. ^arving Tools the groce
containing 12 dozen 01 00 00 Tow the hundred weight containing 112 pounds 00 10
00 Trayes of Wood, the shock containing sixty Trayes 01 00 00 Treacle Flanders
Treacle the barrel 04 00 00 Treacle Of Jean the pound 00 00 10 Trees of all
sorts free Trenchers White sort common the groce cont. 12 dozen 00 04 00
Trenchers Red or painted the groce containing 12 dozen 00 12 0^ Treen Nails the
thousand 00 10 0^ Treunels the thousand 00 10 00 Tweezers of France the dozen
03 00 00 Twine Of Hamborough the lb. 00 00 0^ Twine The hundred weight
containing 112 pounds 02 10 0^ Twift for Bandstrings the dozen knotsoo 00 10 0^
Tyn Of Cornwall and Devonshire unwrought, the hundred weight containing 112
pounds 02 00 0^ Tyn Wrought vocat. pewter, the 100 weight containing one
hundred and 12 pounds 04 00 0^ U. Vallances of Scotland the piece 00 08 0^
Verditer the hundred weight, containing 112 pounds 01 06 0^ Verders of Tapistry
with hair the flemish yard 00 02 0^ Vellum for Table-books the skin 00 10 0^
Vials the piece 00 13 0^ Vice Hasps the dozen 00 02 0^ Vinegar the tun 05 00 00
Vizards the dozen 01 00 04 W. Wadmol the yard 00 00 09 Wainscots the hundred
containing six score 10 00 00 Wax The hundred weight containing 112 pounds 02
00 00 Wax Vocat. Hard Wax the pound 00 03 04 Whalebone the hundred weight 00 10
00 Whetstones the hundred stones containing five score 00 15 00 Whipcord the
pound 00 00 08 Whistles, cocks or bellows the groce 01 04 00 Whistles, cocks or
birds of stone the small groce containing twelve dozen 00 04 00 Wormseed the
pound 00 03 00 Worsteads vocat. St. Omers, narrow or half Worftead the piece 01
00 00 Worsteads vocat. Russels Worstead or broad Worstead the piece 02 00 00
Wood vocat. Islands or green wood the tun containing twenty hundred weight 08
00 00 Wood vocat. Toulouse wood the 100 weight containing 112 pounds 01 13 04
Wood vocat Box Wood for combs the thousand pieces 01 13 0^ Wood vocat Brazil or
Farnambuck Wood, the 100 weight containing 112 pounds 01 00 00 Wood vocat
Braziletto or Jamaica Wood, the 100 weight containing 112 pounds 00 14 00 Wood
vocat Logwood the hundred weight containing 112 pounds 03 00 00 Wood vocat
Ebony Wood the hundred weight containing 112 pounds 02 00 00 Wood vocat Fustick
the hundred weight containing 112 pounds 00 05 0^ Wood vocat Lignum vitae (vide
Drugs) Wood vocat Red or Ginny Wood the Tun 30 00 00 Wood vocat Speckled Wood
the 100 weight containing 112 pounds 00 13 0^ Wood vocat Sweet Wood of West
India the hundred weight containing one hundred and twelve pounds 01 05 00 Wood
vocat Timber the tun or load 00 13 0^ Wool of all sorts to be imported free
Wrests for Virginals the groce containing twelve dozen 01 04 00 Wire vocat.
Dagger and quartern Wire the pound 00 03 04 Wire vocat. Iron Wire the hundred
weight containing one hundred and twelve pounds 02 10 00 Wire vocat. Lattin
Wire the hundred weight containing one hundred and twelve pounds 05 00 00 Wire
vocat. Steel Wire the pound 00 03 00 Wire vocat. Strasborough Wire the pound 00
03 04 Wire vocat. Virginal Wire the pound 00 05 00 Wines the Tun called Brandy
Wine 10 00 00 Y. Yarn vocat. Seal yarn the pound 00 00 06 Yarn vocat. Woollen
and Say yarn the hundred weight containing one hundred and twelve pounds 03 06
08 Yarn vocat. Cable yarn the hundred weight, containing one hundred and twelve
pounds 00 10 00 Yarn vocat. Cammel or Mohair yarn the pound 00 02 06 Yarn
vocat. Cotton yarn the pound 00 01 00 Yarn vocat. Grogram yarn the pound 00 03
00 Yarn vocat. Raw Linen yarn, Dutch or French the pound 00 01 00 Yarn vocat.
Spruce or Museovy yarn the hundred weight containing one hundred and 12 pounds
00 13 04 Yarn vocat. Scotch yarn the pound 00 01 00

The Subsidy of Tonnage upon all Wines and Oils, to be brought into the Port
of Dublin, and all other Ports of Ireland, and Dominions thereof.
FOr every Tun of Wine of the growth of France, or of any the Dominions of the
French King, or. Crown of France, that shall come or be brought into the Port
of Dublin, and the Members thereof, and in all and every the ports and places
of this Realm, by natural born Subjects of this Realm, or any other your
Majesty's Dominions, the sum of 03 10 0^ By Strangers and Aliens the sum of 04
13 0^ For every But or Pipe of Muscadine, Malmsies, Cutes, Tents, Allicants,
Bastard Sacks, Canaries, Malligoes, Maderaes, and all other Wines whatsoever,
commonly called Sweet Wines, of the growth of the Levant, Spain Portugal, or of
any the Islands or Dominions to them, or any of them belonging, or elsewhere,
that shall come and be brought into the port of Dublin, or Members thereof, and
into all and every the other ports and places of this Realm, by a natural born
Subject the sum of 02 10 ^^ By strangers and Aliens the sum of 03 06 08 For
every Awme, containing forty two Gallons of Rhenish Wine of the growth of
Germany, that shall come, and be brought into this Realm by Natural born
Subjects, the sum of 00 15 00 By strangers and aliens the sum of 01 00 00 For
every Tun of Rape and Linseed Oils containing two hundred fifty two Gallons
that shall come or be brought into the port of Dublin, or any the ports of this
Realm by Natural born Subjects, the sum of 01 10 00 By strangers and Aliens the
sum of 01 17 00 For every Tun of Sevil, Majorca, Minorca, Apuglia, Province, or
Portugal Oil, that shall come or be brought in by any Natural born subjects,
the sum of 02 12 00 By strangers and aliens the sum of 03 05 00 For every Tun
of faller Oil, brought in by any Natural born subject, the sum of 03 03 00 By
strangers and Aliens the sum of 03 18 00 For every Tun of Train Oil of
Greenland, brought in by any Natural born subject, the sum of 00 08 00 By
strangers and aliens the sum of 00 10 00 For every Tun of Train Oil of Newfound
land, brought in by any Natural born subject as aforesaid, the sum of 00 06 00
By strangers and aliens the sum of 00 07 00

THE RATES OF MERCHANDISES OUTWARD.
A. l. s. d. ALablaster the load 02 00 00 Alum the hundred weight containing
one hundred and twelve pounds 01 00 00 Anvils the hundred weight containing one
hundred and twelve pounds 00 10 00 Aqua-Vitae the Hogshead 02 00 00 Ashes of
Irish wood the last containing twelve barrels 01 13 04 B. B^^on the Flitch 00
02 06 Bags the dozen 00 06 08 Barrels of Birding pieces the Barrel 00 06 08
Beef the barrel 01 00 00 Beer the Tun 02 00 00 Beer-eger, the Tun 01 10 00
Bell-mettle the hundred weight containing one hundred and twelve pounds 04 00
00 Bellows the dozen 00 06 00 ^^irding pieces the piece 00 13 04 ^^irdlime the
hundred weight containing one hundred and twelve pounds 01 10 00 ^odies ^^cat.
Stiched bodies with silk the pair 00 03 04 ^odies ^^cat. Of Whalebone the pair
00 02 00 ^ones vocat. Ox bones the thousand 00 06 08 ^ooks printed, unbound or
bound, the hundred weight containing one hundred and twelve pounds 00 05 00
^^ass Manufacture the hundred weight, containing one hundred and twelve pounds
00 16 08 ^^idles the dozen 00 01 08 ^rushes of heath the dozen 00 10 00
^^ckweed the Quarter (vide) Corn. ^^tons of, Hair the small groce containing
twelve dozen 00 00 06 ^^^ter good or bad, the hundred weight ^ontaining one
hundred and twelve ^ounds 00 10 00 Boards vocat. Barrel boards or staves the
thousand containing ten hundred at six score to the 100 04 00 00 Boards vocat.
Board or stave for Hogsheads, the thousand containing ten 100, at six score to
the 100 06 00 00 Boards vocat. Boards or staves for pipes the thousand
containing ten hundred at six score to the 100 08 00 00 Boards vocat. Inch
Boards, the hundred foot containing six score to the hundred 00 06 08 Boards
vocat. Two Inch boards, the hundred foot containing six score to the hundred 00
13 0^ B. Calves skins, the dozen undrest or dressed not exceeding thirty six
pounds 00 12 0^ Candles the hundred weight containing one hundred (...) twelve
pounds 01 00 00 Canvas tufted, ^he piece containing thirty yards (vide Linen)
Canvas Irish making, the hundred el^s containing five score (vide Linen) 10 ^^
^^ Caps of Wool of all sorts the dozen 00 06 0^ Cards vocat. Stock Cards the
dozen 01 04 0^ Cards vocat. Tow Cards new, the dozen 00 05 00 Cards vocat.
Playing Cards the groce containing twelve dozen 00 05 00 Wool-cards vocat. New,
the dozen 00 10 00 Wool-cards vocat. Old, the dozen 00 06 00 Card boards the
small groce containing twelve dozen 01 00 00 ^^rpets, the piece 00 11 00
^^tlings or Hatmakers strings the groce containing twelve dozen 00 16 00 ^^eese
the hundred weight containing one hundred and twelve pounds 00 10 00 ^^oakbags
the dozen 00 15 00 ^ombs of Wood, Bone or Horn, or any other sort, (vide
Haberdashery) ^obweb Lawns the yard 00 00 08 ^omfits the pound (vide
Confectionary) ^oney Hair or Wool black or white, the pound 00 12 00 ^^pper
Manufactures of all sorts the hundred weight containing one hundred and twelve
pounds 00 16 08 ^ordage tarred or untarred, the hundred containing one hundred
and twelve pounds 00 10 00 ^overers Of Wool and Hair the piece 00 01 08
^overers Of Caddas the piece 00 01 03 ^urry combs (vide) Iron Wares ^^hions the
dozen 01 00 00 Cottons and plains of all sorts, the hundred goads 01 00 00 Corn
vocat, Barley the Quarter containing eight bushels 00 10 00 Corn vocat, Beans
the Quarter containing eight bushels 00 10 00 Corn vocat, Malt, the Quarter 00
10 00 Corn vocat, Oats, the Quarter 00 06 08 Corn vocat. Pease the Quarter 00
10 00 Corn vocat. Wheat the Quarter 01 00 00 Corn vocat. Rye the Quarter 00 10
00 Corn vocat. Buckwheat the Quarter 00 10 00 D. Darnix the yard 00 00 00
Darnix vocat. Coverlets the piece 00 03 00 Dice (vide) Haberdashers ware
Dimithy the yard 00 04 00 Dublets of Leather the piece (vide Garments) Dust of
Cloves, of Ginger, of Lignum vitae, of Mace, of Nutmeg, of Pepper, of all
Spices and the like, are Custom free, having paid at Importation. E. Emery
stones the hundred weight containing one hundred and twelve pounds 00 03 00
Brick and Tyles of all sorts the thousand 00 03 00 Allsorts of Earthen and
stone ware not rated, the hundred parcels 00 03 00 F. Fennel seeds the hundred
weight, containing one hundred and twelve pounds 01 10 00 Figurettoes with Silk
or Copper (vide silk) Figurettoes Narrow the piece 00 16 00 Figurettoes Broad
the piece 01 10 00 Fish vocat. Codfish the barrel 00 10 00 Fish vocat. Salmon
the Tun 08 00 00 Fish vocat. Hakefish the hundred containing fix score 00 03 04
Fish vocat. Eels the barrel 01 00 00 Fish vocat. Eels small the barrel 00 10 00
Fish vocat. Herrings full fish the barrel 00 13 04 Fish vocat. Herrings shotten
the barrel 00 10 00 Fish vocat. Pilchers the Tun 06 00 00 Fish vocat. Sprats
the Tun containing one thousand 00 10 00 Fitches, the timber containing forty
skins 01 13 04 Flannel the yard 4 perce half penny Flocks, the hundred weight
containing one hundred and twelve pounds 00 13 04 Freezes, the yard 00 00 03
Fustians of Irish making, of all sorts, to go out free G. Garments or wearing
apparel of all sorts, to go out free Garters of Worsted the groce containing
twelve dozen 00 02 06 Geldings or Nags, the piece, vide Horses. Girdles Of
leather for men, the groce containing twelve dozen 00 16 08 Girdles For
children the groce containing twelve dozen 00 10 00 Glass for Windows the Chest
00 10 00 Glasses to drink in, Bottles and all sorts of Glasses the hundred 00
03 04 Glue Irish, the hundred weight containing one hundred and twelve pounds
00 16 08 Gloves Plain of Sheep, Kid, or Lambs Leather the dozen pair 00 02 00
Gloves Fringed and stiched the dozen pair 00 03 04 Gloves Furred with Coney
wool the dozen pair 00 04 00 Gloves Of Buck Leather the dozen pain 01 00 00
Glass broken, the barrel 00 03 04 Glovers clipping, the Fat or Maund 02 00 00
Goose Quills the thousand 00 02 00 Gunpowder the hundred weight containing one
hundred and twelve poun! 0^ 00 00 Guts, vocat, Oxe-guts the barrel 01 00 00 H.
Haberdashery Wares vocat. Packthread, Inkle, Tape, Filliting, Buttons of all
sorts, Hooks and Eyes, and all other Haberdashery Irish making, not
particelarly rated by the 100 weight containing 100 pounds 01 00 00 Hair vocat.
Hearts hair the hundred weight containing one hundred and twelve pounds 01 12 00
Hair vocat. Horse hair the hundred weight containing one hundred and twelve
pounds 06 00 00 Hair vocat. Ox or Cow hair the hundred and twelve pounds 02 00
00 Hair vocat. Hair cloth the piece 00 13 04 Hearts Horn the hundred weight
containing one hundred and twelve pounds 01 10 00 Hatbands of Cruel the groce
containing twelve dozen 00 05 00 Hatches the dozen (vide) Iron Ware Hats vocat.
Beaver and Demi Gasters of Irish making the dozen 02 00 00 Hars vocat. Felts
and all other Hats the dozen 00 10 00 Hawks hoods the dozen 00 02 06 Hempseed
the quarter containing 8 bushels 02 00 00 Hides ranned or untanned the Hide
into England, or any other his Majesty's Dominions 00 06 00 unto any Foreign
part the Hide 00 10 00 Holsters the dozen pair 00 10 00 Hops the hundred
weight, containing one hundred and twelve pounds 01 10 00 Horns vocat. Blowing
Horns small, the dozen 00 04 00 Horns vocat. Of Bucks the hundred 00 04 00
Horns vocat. Inkhorns the dozen (vide) Haberdashery Wares Horns vocat. Horns
for Lanthorns the thouand Leaves 01 00 00 Horns vocat. Ox Horns the thousand
02 10 00 Horns vocat. Powder Horns the dozen 00 04 00 Horns vocat. Of Rams the
thousand 01 00 00 Horns vocat. Of Sheep the thousand 00 03 0^ Horns vocat.
Shooing horns the dozen 00 00 0^ Horns vocat. Stags horns the hundred 01 12 0^
Horns vocat. Tips of horns the thousand 00 15 0^ Horns vocat. Goats horns the
100 weight containing one hundred and twelve pounds 00 10 00 Horses vocat.
Stone horses, Geldings or Nags into England or Scotland or any other English
plantation the piece 02 00 00 Horses vocat. Into Foreign parts the piece 20 00
00 Horse Tails with hair, the hundred weight containing five score 01 10 00
Horse Collers the hundred containing, five score 02 00 00 Hoops for barrels the
thousand 00 13 00 Hogs alive the piece 00 01 00 I. Iewess, Precious stones and
Pearls free 00 10 00 Iron wrought, (viz.) Axes, Adzes, Bows A^mour, Bits,
Knives, Locks, fowling-pieces, Muskets, Pistols, Scissers, S^irrops, and all
Carpenters and Joyners Tools, Jaskwork, Clockwork, and all Ironmongers wares
perfectly manufactured, the hundred weight, containing 112 pounds 00 10 00 Iron
the Tun 06 13 00 Iron vocat. old Iron the Tun 06 13 00 Iron Ordinance, the
hundred weight containing one hundred and twelve pounds 01 00 00 K. Knives,
(vide) Iron Ware L. Lace of Gold and Silver, the pound 01 16 00 Lace of Velvet
the pound, (vide) silk Litharge of Lead the hundred weight, concontaining one
hundred and ^2 pounds 00 04 00 ^^om-work the yard 00 00 06 ^ime the chaldor 00
13 04 ^innen, (viz) all sorts of Cloth made of Hemp or Flax fine or course, of
Irish Manufacture the piece not exceeding 40 else 00 05 00 ^inseed the quarter
containing eight bushels 03 00 00 ^insey Woolsey (vide) Stuff ^innen shreds the
Maund or Fat 02 00 00 ^ists of Cloth the thousand yard 01 10 00 ^^ad cast
and uncast, the Fodder containing twenty hundred weight 20 00 00 ^^ad Ore, the
Tun 02 00 00 M. Mantling, the pack containing four hundred yards containing six
score to the hundred 06 00 00 ^antling of Freeze the yard 00 00 03 ^antles of
the best sort the piece 00 06 08 ^antles of the worst sort the piece 00 03 04
N, Nails of all sorts the hundred weight containing one hundred and twelve
pounds 00 05 ^^ Nuts small the barrel containing three bushels 00 06 ^^ O.
Oatmeal the barrel 00 06 ^^ Oil called Train Oil made in Ireland the tun 10 00
^^ Oysters the small barrel in pickle 00 01 ^^ Oker yellow or red, the hundred
weight containing one hundred and twelve pounds 01 00 ^^ Oxen, Cows or Steers
the head 01 00 ^^ P. Parchment the Roll 00 06 ^^ Past-boards, the groce
containing twelve dozen 00 12 ^^ Points of Leather, the small groce containing
twelve dozen 00 00 ^^ Pork the barrel 01 10 ^^ Purles of broad cloth, the
piece 00 00 ^^ R. Rape Cakes, the thousand 00 10 ^^ Rape-seed the Quarter,
containing eight bushels 03 00 ^^ Rugs vocat. Irish Rugs, the yard 00 00 04
Rugs vocat. Irish Rugs for beds, the Rug 00 06 08 Russeting for painters, the
hundred weight containing one hundred and twelve pounds 00 05 00 S. Sackcloth
to make Sacks, the bolt or piece (vide) linen ^affron the pound 01 10 00
Shreds and pieces of broad cloth, the pound 00 00 06 Shoes Old, the hundred
dozen pair 04 00 00 Shoes All new shoes, boots and slippers, the pound weight
00 00 06 Sheep, the score alive into England 02 10 00 ^kins of ^abbets or
Con^eys. Tawed or dyed into colors, the hundred containing one hundred and
twenty 01 00 00 ^kins of ^abbets or Con^eys. Gray Stag, the hundred containing
six score 00 10 00 ^kins of ^abbets or Con^eys. Gray seasoned, the hundred
containing six score 01 00 00 ^kins of ^abbets or Con^eys. Gray tawed, the
hundred containing six score 00 13 04 ^kins of ^abbets or Con^eys. Black with
silver hair or without, the hundred containing one hundred and twenty 01 06 08
Skins vocat. Kid skins dressed or undrest, the hundred containing six score 03 00
00 Skins of Otter Raw, the piece 00 01 00 Skins of Otter Tawed, the piece 00 01
04 Skins of Otter Wombs the Mantle 00 10 00 Skins vocat. Goat skins, the
hundred containing six score 10 00 00 Skins vocat. Stags skins the piece 00 10
00 Skins vocat. Deer skins the piece 00 05 00 Skins vocat. Martrons skins, the
piece 00 05 00 Skins vocat. Lambs skins dressed or undrest, the hundred
containing six score 00 16 08 Skins vocat. Sheep skins tawed with the Wool on,
the hundred containing six score 01 10 00 Skins vocat. Pelts dressed or undrest
without the wool, the hundred containing six score 01 00 00 Skins vocat. Sheep
skins with the wool, the hundred containing six score 20 00 00 Skins vocat.
Wolf skins, the piece 00 03 04 Skins vocat. Hare skins, the piece 00 00 03
Skins vocat. Cats skins, the hundred 01 06 08 Skins vocat. Fox skins, the piece
00 00 08 Skins vocat. Swans skins, the piece 00 02 06 Skins vocat. Dogs skins,
the dozen 00 02 06 Skins vocat. Wolf skins tawed, the piece 00 06 00 Skins
vocat. Badgers skins, the piece 00 01 00 Skins vocat. Squirril skins the
thousand 02 10 00 Soap Hard Irish making, the hundred containing one hundred
and twelve pounds 00 10 00 Soap The barrel 01 00 00 Starch, the hundred weight
containing one hundred and twelve pounds 00 13 04 Steel, the hundred weight
containing one hundred and twelve pounds 01 00 00 Stockins Irish, the dozen 00
02 06 Stockins Kersey long the pair 00 01 00 Stockins Kersey short, the dozen
pair 00 03 09 Stockins Leather, the dozen(vide) garments 00 00 00 Stockins
Woollen for children, the dozen 00 01 08 Stockins Worstead for Children, the
dozen 00 03 04 Stockins Woollen for men, the dozen 00 05 00 Stockins Worstead
for men, the dozen 00 12 06 Stockins Lower ends of worstead stockins, the dozen
00 06 08 Sugar of all sorts brought into this Kingdom, and after refined, and
after made into loaves, and exported by way of Merchandise, the hundred weight,
containing one hundred and twelve pounds 00 10 00 T. Tallow, the hundred weight
containing one hundred and twelve pounds 01 10 00 Tapistry or Darnix Hangings
of what sort soever, made in Ireland, whereof any part of Wool, the pound
weight 00 00 06 Thrums, the hundred pound containing five score 00 06 08
Tobacco pipes the small groce, containing twelve dozen 00 01 00 ^yn Unwrought,
the hundred weight, containing one hundred and 12 pounds 07 06 08 Tyn Wrought
(vocat.) the hundred weight, containing one hundred and twelve pounds 05 00 0^
U. Vinegar of Wine, the tun 02 06 0^ W. Wadmol, the yard 00 00 0^ Wax Irish The
hundred weight, containing one hundred and twelve pounds 04 00 0^ Hard wax, the
pound 00 02 0^ Weld, the hundred weight, containing one hundred and twelve
pounds 01 05 0^ Wine Lees, the But 01 00 0^ Woad, Irish the Tun 10 00 0^ Woad
nets. the hundred containing six score 00 10 0^ Wool Spanish, free Irish wool
into England, the Stone containing eighteen pounds 01 05 0^ Broad Woollen
c^oath, or old Drapery, the piece containing thirty six yards 03 06 0^ And so
proportionally for greater or lesser quantities Kersies, Searges, Says, and
other sorts of Stuffs (...) Draperies made in Ireland, the piece 00 15 0^ For
every pack of Linen yarn called Irish yarn, containing 400 weight, at six
score to the hundred 20 00 0^ Goods Inwards or Outward not rated, to pay five
pounds

And if there shall happen to be brought in or carried out of this Realm, any
Goods liable to the payment of Custom and Substdy, which either are not
mentioned in this Book, or are not now used to be brought in or carried out, or
by reason of the great diversity of the va^ue of some goods could not be rated,
That in such case, every customer or collector for the time being, shall levy
the said custom and subsidy of Poun^age, according to the true value and price
of such goods to be affirmed upon the Oath of the Merchant in the presence of
the customer, collector, comptroller and surveyor, or, any two ^f them.

Certain Rules, Orders, and Directions for the Advancement of Trade, and
encouragement of Merchants, as also for Regulating as well of the Merchants in
making of due Entries, and just payments of their customs: as of the Officers
in all the Ports of this Realm, in the Receipts of their several Fees, and in
the faithful management of their duties and trusts.
I. Every Merchant shall have free liverty to ^eak bulk in any Port allowed by
the Law, and to pay custom and Substdy for no more ^en he shall enter and land;
provided that he Master or purser of every ship, shall first ^ake declaration
upon Oath before any two ^incipal Officers of the Port of the true con^nt of
his ships lading and shall likewise ^^ter declare upon his Oath, before the
cu^mer, Collector, Comptroller, or Surveyor, (...) two of them, at the next
Port of this Realm where his ship shall arrive, the quantity and quality of
Goods landed at the other Port where bulk was first broken, and t^ whom they
did belong.

II. No Merchant, Native or Stranger, sha^ ship off the Goods of a Stranger in
the name of a Native, upon pain of forfeitu^ and loosing the Goods and
merchandises (...) entered, and all his Goods personal.

III. Every Merchant born out of the Dominions of his Majesty, and after made
Denizen shall pay the custom as before he was ma^^ Denizen, unless he do
inhabit and be constantly abiding or dwelling in some part o^ place of this
Realm: In that case, suc^ Merchant shall pay only as a natural bo^ Subject, and
not otherwise.

IV. All sugars, and other Foreign Good and Merchandises, (except Wines,
Lobas^co, wrought silks, Haberdashery, and asorts of Grocery Wares) first
Imported shall be again exported by any Mercha^ who is a subject of this Realm,
or any (...) there his Majesty's Dominions with twelve months, or strangers
within (...) months; And such merchant or merchants as shall export any such
Foreign Goods or merchandises (except before excepted,) shall have allowance,
and be repaid by the Officer which received the same, the one moiety of the
custom or subsidy which was paid at the first Importation of such Foreign
Goods and Merchandises, or any part thereof, and so as due proof be first made
by certificate from the Officers of their due entry and payment of the custom
and subsidy of all such Foreign Goods and Mercandizes Inwards, together with
the further Dath of the merchants Importing and Exporting the same, affirming
the truth thereof, and the name of his Majesty's searcher or under-searcher in
the Port of Dublin, and of the searcher of any other the Ports, testifying the
shipping thereof, to be Exported; after all which duly performed in manner
before expressed, the moiety of the substdy first paid Inwards, shall without
any delay or reward more then the duty set down in the Table of Fees, for the
certificate be repaid unto such merchant or merchants, who do export such Goods
and merchandises within one month after demand thereof.

V. If any Merchant having duly paid all duties Inwards for Foreign Goods,
and in regard of sales had, shall be enforced to keep the same or any part
thereof in his hands without alteration of the property after the space of a
year shall be elapsed; In this case he is to be permitted to ship the same out
for any the Ports beyond the seas, (if he so think fit) without payment, of any
subsidy for the same Outward, upon due proof that the same was duly Entered,
and subsidy paid Inwards.

VI. No Merchant or other person whatsoever, shall have any allowance, or
abatement of subsidy made him by bill of store or otherwise, for any sort of
Lobacco, under pretense of being corrupt or unmerchantable; but in case any
Merchant shall refuse to make Entry of such Lobacco, and to pay the full
subsidy of the same, the principal Officers of the Custom-house, or any two of
them, shall cause all such corrupt Lobacco to be publicly burnt, as not
wholesome for use, and the Owner thereof is to be discharged from paying any
subsidy for the same.

VII. Every Merchant bringing in any sorts of Mines into this Realm by way of
Merchandise, and making due Entries of the same in the Custom-house, shall be
allowed ten per centum for Leakage, to be taken or de^ucted not out of the
quantities of Wines, ^ut out of the moneys received for the sub^^dy; Provided
such Wines be not filled ^p on shipboard, and if so, no allowance ^hen to be
made at all for the same.

VIII. Every Merchant shall be allowed upon ^ll other Goods and Merchandises,
appointed to pay the subsidy of Poundage according to the rule of the before
going book of ^^ates to be Imported, five in the hundred ^f all the said
subsidies of Poundage so appointed to be paid.

IX. Every Hog head of Wine which shall be ^^un out, and not full seven inches
or above ^^st therein; And every but or Pipe not a^^e nine inches, shall be
accounted for outs, and the Merchant to pay no subsidy for the ^ame.

X. If any Wines shall prove corrupt, and unmerchantable and fit for nothing
but to distill into hot waters, then every owner of such Wines shall be abated
in the subsidy according to such his damages in those Wines by the discretion
of the Commissioners of the customs in the Port of Dublin, and of the
Collectors, and one other of the principal Officers in all others the out Ports.

XI. If any Goods or merchandises, except Lobacco, brought into this Kingdom,
shall receive any damage by salt water or otherwise, so that the Owner thereof
shall be prejudiced in the sale of such Goods, the Commissioners in the Port of
Dublin, and the principal Officers of the Customhouse in all other the Ports,
or any two of them, whereof the Collector for the time being to be one, shall
have power to choose two indifferent merchants experienced in the values of
such Goods, who upon visiting of the said Goods, shall certify and declare
upon their corporal Oaths first administered by the said Commissioners or
Officers what damage such Goods have received, and art lessened in their true
value, and according to such damage in relation to the Rates set on them in
the foregoing book of Rates, the said Officers are to make a proportiona^le
abatement unto the merchant or owner of the subsidy due for the same.

XII. All merchants transporting any sort of Moollen Cloth called old Drapery,
as al^^ Bays and Cottons, shall be allowed one (...) ten for a wrapper free of
custom or subfi^y.

XIII. Inasmuch as the natural situation of this ^ealm renders it sufficiently
convenient for be storing and laying up of Commodities and merchandise, brought
in with intent to ^e afterward carried out again for supply of foreign
markets, by which much benefit and advantage may arise to his Majesty and
People; The Lord Deputy therefore, or other chief Governor or Governors, and
^rivy Council of this Realm for the time ^cing, shall and may (as they in their
judgments shall see meet, and find most advanta^ous and beneficial to his
Majesty and this ^ingdom) appoint one certain Port in each ^rovince of this
Realm, to which all mer^^ants strangers, and their Factors, sending his or
their goods, with intent, and to the end and purpose aforesaid, may upon
reasonable composition or agreement to (...) agreed on by direction of the said
Lord ^^puty, or other chief Governor or Governors, and Privy Council as
aforesaid, a^^ payment thereof made unto the Collector^ Collectors of those
Ports, in lieu of a^^ Customs or Subsidies due and payable (...) this present
Act, there Land and lay the same up in his Majesty's Warehouse at the
Custom-house of those places, or such other Warehouses or places, and no
other, (...) shall be provided for that end and purpose (...) the Collector,
Customer and Searcher (...) those Ports, under whose joint custody the same are
to remain, until they be shipp^^ out again, which shall be done again without
payment of any duties Outward, or any thing more then a reasonable rate for
Warehouse room; but if any Merchan^^ Factor, or other bringing in or laying up
hi^ or their Goods by way of composition (...) not export, but otherwise
dispose of the same every such merchant factor or other shall before be or they
receive his (...) their Goods from the Warehouse or plac^ where they are laid
up, pay unto the Collector, not only so much as with his or their composition
moneys, shall complete the whole customs and subsidies of such Goods, but
likewise Interest at the Rate of ten pounds per cent. for so long time as the
payment of the full duties of those Goods had been forborne; and for prevention
of all Fraud and collusions, such Rules shall be observed by Merchants and
Officers respectively, as the Commissioners of the customs with the allowance
and approbation of the Lord Deputy, or other chief Governor or Governors, and
Privy Council shall from time to time find fit and necessary.

XIV. The Officers who sit above in the customhouse of the Port of Dublin,
shall attend the service of their several places from nine to twelve of the
clock in the forenoon, and one Officer, or one able Clerk shall attend with the
book in the afternoon, during such time as the Officers are appointed to wait
at the water side, for the better deciding of all controversies that may happen
concerning Merchants warrants; All other the Officers of the Out Ports shall
attend every day in the custom-house of every respective Port, for dispatch of
Merchants and ships between the hours of nine of the clock and twelve in the
morning, and two ^and four in the afternoon.

XV. The searcher, Surveyor, or other Officer attending in any Port or Creek,
shall give knowledge to the collector of the head port to which they belong,
with all convenient speed, of every ship that comes in or goes out at any
Lide by way of Merchandise, or with Goods from another Port by way of
certificate.

XVI. There shall be one shippers book Outward, and another Inwards, kept in
every custom-house, wherein every ship or Vessel going out or coming in by way
of Merchandise, or with commodities of this Kingdom to or from any other ports
by certificate, shall enter openly in the custom-house, the name of the ship
and of the Master, the burden, from whence, and to and from what place it is
fraighted, before he take in any Lading, or discharge any Goods, Wares, or
merchandises whatsoever.

XVII. The master or purser of every ship coming in by way of merchandise,
shall deliver under his hand, and upon his Oath before the Collector, or Cheque
one bill of the particulars and contents of the whole Lading of the ship, with
the names of the several Merchants, and the mark, pack or Outward form of the
goods and merchandises according to his knowledge, and shall also make
Declaration thereof upon Oath.

XVIII. Every Master of a ship that shall Lade any Goods or merchandises for
any parts beyond the Seas, shall enter his ship with the Collector, and Cheque
before he take in any Goods, and before his departure, shall give notice of his
whole Lading, with the Names of the Merchants that have Laden Goods in him, and
shall answer upon oath to such questions concerning the same, as shall be
demanded of him.

XIX. No entry nor agreement with any Merchant or others for customs or subsidy
shall be made by the Collector or others, nor any Coequet, Warrant, or
Certificate sealed or subscribed, but openly in the Custom-house.

XX. Every merchant making an entry of Goods, either Inwards or Outward, shall
be dispatched in such order as he comes, and if any Officer or his Clerk,
shall either for favor or reward, put any merchant or his servant duly
attending by his turn, or otherwise delay any person so duly attending and
making his Entries aforesaid, to draw any other reward or gratuity from him
then is limited in the Table of Fees hereafter following; If the Master,
Officer, or the Clerk be found faulty therein, they shall respectively upon
complaint to the said Commissioners, or chief Officers be publicly discharged
of their respective Employments, and not permitted to fit any more in the
custom-house.

XXI. Every merchant or other, that will transport any Goods by way of
merchandise for Foreign parts, shall make his entry particularly thereof, with
the Collector and Cheque, by a bill under his hand, or the hand of his
Assigns, with the name of the ship, the Master, the burden, of whence and to
what place it is fraighted, with the marks and number of the Packs, Cask,
Fardles, or other bulks, and the true quantity, and quality of the Goods
therein contained, which bill shall forthwith be entered in a book by the
Collector, and delivered to the Comptroller, to be entered by him likewise; And
to file and keep the bill of every ship together, as they shall be entered, and
the true value of the Goods and of the custom, subbdy, and duties thereupen
due, shall be likewise set s^rth and charged in the books at the one the
Merchant makes his entry.

XXII. All Goods and merchandise allowed for Store, Portage, or provision
Inwards or outward, shall be valued according to the book of Rates, although
the same neither does, nor shall pay any custom or subsidy, and shall be Entered
in books distinctly and apart by themselves.

XXIII. The searcher or surveyor shall have all Coequets, certificates and
warrants delivered unto him before the shipping or Landing of any Goods therein
contained, and at the time of the shipping or Landing thereof, shall have the
said coequets, certificates, and warrants with them that the Goods may be
thereby examined and tried, whether they agree in quantity and quality or no,
which if he neglect or fail to do, every such surveyor or searcher shall
forfeit his or their place.

XXIV. Every merchant shall have his particular cocquer and certificate by
himself, sealed and subscribed openly in the custom-house by the Collector and
Comptroller, bearing date the same day that he en^red his Goods.

XXV. All Entries Inwards or outward by license shall be endorsed upon each
particular License, with the name of the merchant, the date of the Cocquet, or
entry, and the particular quantities shipped or Landed by virtue there of,
shall be also set down and entered in the books to which they properly belong.

XXVI. All Merchandise customed outward, in any ship or Vessel, which for some
cause cannot be laden aboard the same ship, shall be appointed to another ship
by certificate openly sealed, subscribed, and delivered in the custom-house
upon the oaths of the Searchers, o^ Surbeyors, and of the Owners thereof,
openly taken that the said Goods did not pass according to former cocquet.

XXVII. Every merchant entering and merchandise Inwards, or taking up any Goods
by stop or Portage, shall make entry thereof particularly, and deliver a bill
thereof at large under his hand, or the hand of his Assignee to the Collector,
with the name of the ship, and of the master, the burden, of whence and from
what place it was fraighted, with the mark, and number of the Fardles, Bulk,
and Paccage, in the margent, and the true quantities and qualities of the Goods
therein contained, and the said Collector, shall with all convenient speed cast
up the value of the Goods and Merchandises therein, and the customs and
substdies thereupon due, and write it upon the said bill, with the number and
date of the bill, according to which it shall be presently entered in the book
Inwards, to be kept by the said Collector, and then by him delivered to the
Comptroller or Cherque, to be likewise entered, according to which bill another
being subscribed by the said Collector, comptroller, or Cheque, and numbered,
and dated as the former shall be to the Surveyor, Searcher, or Wayter, a
warrant to suffer the Wares and Merchandises therein contained, to be Landed
and discharged accordingly.

XXVIII. All manner of Goods, Wares, and Merchandises, of which any Merchant
shall make Oath he cannot perfectly Enter for want (...) bills of Lading,
advice, or some other ju^^ cause, shall be entered at sight and shall (...)
taken up by warrant (ad visum). dated the day of the entry thereof, subscribed
and delivered openly in the Custom-house to the searcher, or surveyor, who
shall see the same brought to the Custom-house Key, or Wha^^, and give
knowledge thereof to the said Officers; which officers shall suffer the said
Goods to be taken up in the presence of the surveyor, or searcher, and viewed
in some convenient place, and the owner thereof shall forthwith make an entry
thereof particularly under his hand, or the hand of his Assignee, with the
Collector and Comptroller, and thereupon a Warrant shall be made for clearing
and passing, of the said Wares as aforesaid accordingly.

XXIX. Every merchant taking up Goods at sight or otherwise, who shall permit,
or suffer his or their Goods to lie and remain in any the Warehouses of the
Custom-house for longer then the space of seven days without Entering or
clearing the same, shall for such time as they continue there longer, pay such
reasonable Rates for Warehouse room, as the Commissioners of the customs, or
the respective Collectors of the Ports shall judge meet to direct, the one half
thereof shall be to the use of his Majesty, and the other to the Warehouse
keeper, and to be paid defore the delivery of such Goods unto the merchant.

XXX. In the Port of Dublin, the Commissioners of the customs, and in every
other part where more then one, whether Searcher, Surbeyor, or Waiters are
appointed to attend there, the Collector shall nominate and direct under his
hand, which and how many of them shall take charge of every respective ship
going forth, or coming into the same Port to see the Goods and merchandises
therein cleared and discharged according to such Warrants as he or they shall
receive from the Collector and Comptroller, and every such Officer as shall
neglect or refuse upon notice given by the merchant, to attend the Lading or
unlading of any goods, shall forfeit for every default side pounds, the one
moiety to the King, and the other to the party agrieved, and suing for the same.

XXXI. Every Waiter or other Officer appointed to attend the Lading or Unlading
of goods, shall enter into a book, to be given him for that purpose by the
Commissioners or Collectors in the several Ports and in no other book, or Paper
whatsoever, the name of every ship, and master, unto the Lading or Vnlading
whereof he shall be appointed, and underneath each respective ship, or masters
name, either going out or coming in, shall enter the date of every Warrant,
cocquet, Transire, or certificate, according to the order of their dates, which
he shall receive for the shipping, or Landing any goods, together with the
quantities, qualities, numbers, weights, measures, and marks of all and every
the same goods or merchandises which shall be shipped or laid on shore upon any
such warrant, cocquet, Transire, or certificate, with the time when, and how
much at a time of the same was so landed or shipped off; which books shall be
quarterly, or as soon as filled, or written out, be delivered up to the
Commissioners, or the respective Collectors of the Ports or sooner, whenever
thereunto required; And every Officer that shall omit the doing hereof, or
enter the Goods shipped off, or landed in any other book or Papers, then the
book that shall be given them for the purpose aforesaid, to be discharged from
his or their Employment.

XXXII. Every Searcher or Surveyor shall enter into a book, to be by him
purposely kept for that purpose, the day of the going out and coming in of
every ship by way of merchandise, or by certificate from another Port, with the
name of the ship, and master, and the date of every man's Cocquet, Warrant, and
certificate.

XXXIII. No searcher or other Officer of the customhouse, having power to
search and visit any ship outward bound, shall without just and reasonable
ground, detain any such ship under color of searching the Goods Laden therein,
above one Tide after the said ship is fully Laden, and ready to set sail upon
pain of loss of the office of such offender, and rendering damage to the
Merchant and Owner of the ship, unless any occaston or delay happen by stress
of weather, or other Emergency.

XXIV. If any Wharsinger, Crane-keeper, searther, Lighter-man, Waiter, ^o other
Officer, do consent or know of any Goods shipped or landed without payment of
subsidy, or at an unlawful place, or at any unlawful time, and do not
disclose the same within one month after, shall forfeit one hundred pound, and
every Officer vestde to loose his or their place.

XXXV. Every Officer that makes any Cocquet, or Warrant, contrary or
disagreeing to the Entry of any Goods or Merchandises, shall loose his or their
place.

XXXVI. All Officers whom it concerns in their respective places shall be
diligent and careful to make stay, and seizure of Goods, Wares and
Merchandises that shall be brought in or carried out, or intended to be carried
out of this Realm, contrary to the Laws of the same.

XXXVII. All Goods and merchandises, that shall be seized, or stayed, shall
presently after such seizure, or stay be delivered into the charge of the
Warehouse-keeper at the customhouse of the Port, where such stay, or seisu^
shall be made there to remain until sufficient Warrant, and discharge shall be
brought for release and delivery thereof.

XXXVIII. That every Officer who shall make any ^^sure shall thereupon
forthwith acquaint the Commissioners of the customs there^^ith; And likewise
certify the same to the ^egister of seizures in the Port of Dublin for the
time being, together with the quantity, and quality of the Goods so seized, the
time when, the ground whereupon he seized the same, with such other
circumstan^es as are fit to be known for exhibiting Informations in the
Exchequer against the ^ame.

XXXIX. No Officer or other person shall make com^^tion or agreement for the
seizure, or forfei^ure of any Goods, without license out of the Court of
Exchequer, or other lawful ^arrant first had and obtained.

XL. All Licenses, Compositions Fines, Recove^s, Warrants, orders and other
discharges (...) be had, made or granted, for or upon the foresaid seizures,
and Informations, are to (...) entered with the Register aforesaid, and the
^^ony, or moneys thereupon due and payable, (...) the use of his Majesty, to be
paid to the Collectors of the respective Ports.

XLI. All appraisements of Goods, Wares, and merchandises, seized as aforesaid,
are to be showed, and delivered to the Register aforesaid, before they be
returned into the ^chequer, to be by him examined, and entered; And if the Goods
be too much undervalued the said Register is to make flay thereof, and to
acquaint some of the Barons of the Exchequer therewith, to the end that an^
view, and new appraisement may be made of the Goods.

XLII. That all bonds, taken for shipping goods to the Coast for which
certificates fire returned, shall be delivered quarterly into the Exchequer
with the certificate thereunto annexed, and endorsed also thereupon, and every
Term after the Account, of the Officers, that did take them, is past, the said
bonds shall be delivered to every person that shall sue for the same, paying
the usual Fees.

XLIII. All other Bonds, taken by the Collectors that be expired, and all other
bonds for which no certificates are returned according to their conditions
shall be delivered likewise into the Exch equer quarterly after the breach of
such conditions that process and execution may be had thereupon according to
the due course of Law.

XLIV. That the Collectors of the several Ports, shall monthly send up an
abstract of their se^eral Receipts, and quarterly an account of their quarters
Receipts unto the Commissioners of the customs; which account shall be
half-yearly delivered by the said Commissioners unto the Auditor Eeneral of his
Majesty's Exchequer; And every Collector shall yearly betwixt the beginning of
Easter, and ending of Trinity Term, repair to Dubli^, there to make Oath of the
truth of his or their respective accounts sent up to the said Commissioners,
and by them delivered to the Auditor as aforesaid, and shall before they
depart, fully adjust and clear their Accounts, every Collector failing herein
to ^oose his or their place or places.

XIV. That the Commissioners of the custioms shall take and have inspection of
the accounts, actions and proceedings of the Collectors, and all other Officers
in the several Ports, ^y viewing and looking over the books, Papers, and
Accounts, when and as often as they shall see cause; and the said Collectors,
or other Officers, at all times, and upon demand, are to render an Account of
their Actions and proceedings, and to permi^ and suffer them or any of them to
have the sight and perusal of all and every their accounts, books, entries,
warrants, or other Papers whatsoever, and to take notes out (...) all or any of
the same as they shall judg^needfull and requisite, every Officer refusing to
give obedience herein, shall loose and for feit his or their place or places.

XLVI. The said Commissioners, or some of their number, shall once every year
at least, vi^^ the several Out Ports of this Realm, (...) make observation, and
take cognizance ho^^ and in what manner the affairs of the Port^ be carried on,
and how the several Officed demean themselves in discharge of their Trusis, and
to rectify things in the be^ manner they possivly may, by giving su^ sitting
and further Instructions from tim^ to time to be their rule and guide in the
d^^ and lawful execution of this Act, as the the said Commissioners, with the
allowance and approbation of the Lord Deputy, or o^ there chief Governor or
Governors, and Priby Council shall think fit and meet.

XLVII. That for the better management, as well as lessening the charge of his
Majesty's Revenue, the Commissioners of the customs shall not at any time be
more then seven, or less then five in number, to be appointed from time to time
by the Lord Lieutenant, Lord Deputy, or other chief Governor or Governors and
Privy Council of this Realm and known unto them for persons of ability and
experience in custom Affair, who shall have commission under the Creat Seal of
this Realm during pleasure only, and shall make Oath, (the same to be
administered by the Lord chief Baron,) for the true and saithfull discharge of
their Trust, before they enter upon the same.

XLVIII. No Commissioner, Comptroller; Customer, or any other Officer of the
Customs, their Deputies or Servants, shall have any ship of their own, or shall
buy or sell by way of Merchandise, or shall meddle with Fraighting or shipping
or have, or occupy any Wharf or Key, or hold any Hostlery or Lavern, or shall
be any Factor or Attorney for any Merchant, or shall be Host to any Merchant,
or shall be a common officer, or Deputy of any common Officers in the City,
Town, Borough, or Town where he or they shall be Collector, Comptroller, or
Searcher upon pain of loosting his or their office or employment as to the
customs.

XLIX. Every Collector, customer, Comptroller, Searcher, or other Officer,
shall from time to time do his or their diligent attendance at the customhouse,
as shall be most for the dispatch of the merchant, without concealing or
consenting to any thing which may be to the hurt or damage of his Majesty in
the just answering of the customs and Subsidies, upon pain there every such
Officer shall forfeit and loose his hr their several Offices and Employments.
You are hereby required to take care that the Act passed in England, Entitled,
An Act for the encourageing and increasing of Shipping and Navigation, be from
time to time duly observed and executed.

A Table of Fees to be taken by his Majesty's Officers respectively, in the
several and respective Ports of Ireland. (viz)
Customer. Surveyor. Comptroller. Searcher. Gager. Packer. s. d. s. d. s. d. s.
d. s. d. s. d. FOr the Entries of all Ships and Barques, arriving from England,
or Scotland, by English or Irish. 00 04 00 04 00 04 00 06 00 00 00 00 For every
entry or warrant of discharge, by bill of view or otherwise, of all goods in
the same ship or barque by English or Irish. 00 04 00 04 00 04 00 06 00 00 00
00 For the Entry of all ships or barques arriving from Foreign parts, by
English or Irish. 00 08 00 08 00 08 01 06 00 00 00 00 For the Entry and warrant
of discharge by bill of view, or otherwise, of goods in the same ships or
barques, by English or Irish. 00 08 00 08 00 08 00 06 00 00 00 00 Customer.
Searcher. Comptroller. Surveyor. Gager. Packer. s. d. s. d. s. d. s. d. s. d.
s. d. For the Entries of all ships and barques from England, or any other parts
beyond the seas, by strangers. 01 00 01 00 01 00 01 06 00 00 00 00 For the
Entry and warrant of discharge by bill of view or otherwise of goods in the
same ships or barques by strangers. 00 08 00 08 00 08 01 00 00 00 00 00 For
making of bonds to his Majesty's use, by English or Irish, upon any occasion.
01 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 Customer. Surveyor. Comptroller. Searcher.
Gager. Packer. s. d. s. d. s. d. s. d. s. d. s. d. For making o^ Bonds to his
Majesty's use or employment, or upon any other occasion -- 01 06 00 0^ 00 00 00
00 00 00 00 00 For every Entry into the certificate book -- 00 0^ 00 0^ 00 00
00 00 00 00 00 00 For every Endorsement. -- 00 0^ 00 04 00 04 00 00 00 00 00 00
For every bill of store, or allowance unto natives. -- 00 06 00 06 00 06 00 06
00 00 00 00 For the like by strangers. -- 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 06 00 00 00 00
For clearing ships and barques, and examining the book from England, by English
or Irish -- 00 06 00 03 00 03 00 00 00 00 00 00 For the like by the same for
Foreign parts, by English and Irish -- 01 00 00 06 00 06 00 00 00 00 00 00 For
the like from England, or any other parts by strangers -- 01 04 00 08 00 08 00
00 00 00 00 00 For the entries of all Ships and barques, to England or
Scotland, by English or Irish -- 00 04 00 04 00 04 00 06 00 00 00 00 For every
Entry and Warrant for shipping of all goods in the same ship or Barque by
English or Irish. 00 04 00 04 00 04 00 06 00 00 00 00 For the Entry of all
ships and barques to England, or any other Port beyond the Seas by strangers.
01 00 01 0^ 01 00 01 00 00 00 00 00 For every cocquet by English or Irish. 01
00 00 09 00 09 00 06 00 00 00 00 For every such cocquet by strangers. 00 00 00
00 00 ^0 01 00 00 00 00 00 For the sight of every Cocquet by Natives. 00 00 00
00 00 00 00 06 00 00 00 00 For the like by strangers. 00 00 00 00 00 00 01 00
00 00 00 00 For every cocquet of a great ship laden with Corn. 00 00 00 00 00
00 06 08 00 00 00 00 For every small bark laden with corn. 00 00 00 00 00 00 03
04 00 00 00 00 For every Dicker of tanned Hides. 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 02 00 00
00 00 For every Saddle horse paying no custom, and allowed for provision. 00 00
00 00 00 00 00 06 00 00 00 00 For the entry of every Ship, Bark or Boat along
the coast. 00 02 00 01 00 01 00 03 00 00 00 00 For every Warrant for discharge
of goods by Port Cocquet by English or Irish. 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 06 00 00 00
00 For every Warrant of let* pass along the Coast. 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 06 00
00 00 00 For making every certificate for goods which paid Custom Inwards, and
none Outward. 01 02 00 07 00 07 00 00 00 00 00 00 For every Certificate upon
warrant from the Lord Deputy, or other chief Governor or Governors paying no
duty. 01 06 00 09 00 09 00 00 00 00 00 00 For endorsing all warrants and
Licenses. 00 04 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 For every Coast certicate, and
the entry into his Majesty's books. 01 00 00 08 00 08 00 06 00 00 00 00 For
discharging of bonds and filing the certificates. 00 06 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
00 00 For making certificate of return in the Kings books, wax and Parchment.
01 00 00 04 00 04 00 00 00 00 00 00 For taking away the sails of any Ship,
Barque, or other Vessel for a contempt or misdemeanor. 00 00 00 00 00 00 02 06
00 00 00 00 Out of every Barque or boat for bringing in Apples, to the Searcher
one hundred of the same.

Out of every Bark or Boat bringing in Oysters (...) the Searcher one hundred
of the same. For gaging every Tun of Wine, Gager 4 d. For gaging every Tun of
Oil, beer, or other (...) quid commodities, Gager 4 d. Besides out of every
ship bringing in wines, (...) small bottle of wine for a gaging bottle. For
every barrel of Herrings, Gager q, For the like by strangers Gager ob, For
every barrel of Tallow or Butter weighing (...) hundred weight, Gager 1 d. For
the like by strangers, Gager 1 d. ob. For every hundred weight of like
commodities (...) uncertain cask, and not in barrels, Gager ob. For the like by
strangers, Gager 1 d. For every barnel of Beef, Pork, Herrings, or S^^mon, by
Natives, Gager q, For the like by strangers, Gager ob. For every barrel of like
commodity by sta^gers, Gager ob. For every pack of yarn Fardle or bag of W^^
Skins, and all other packable commodities. Packer ^.
And if it so happen that the Fees above mentioned by reason of the smalness of
Trade in any Port or Ports of this Kingdom, shall appear to be too little, or
not sufficient for provision, and maintenance of his Majesty's Officers
employed in such Port or Ports; That then the Lord Lieutenant, Lord Deputy, or
other chief Governor, or Governors, and Privy Council for the time being,
shall have liberty to make and establish, such salary to be paid yearly unto
the said Officers out of his Majesty's Exchequer, as they in their judgments
shall think fit, and as the service, care, and pains of such Officers may,
justly merit and deserve.

Provided always and be it surther Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that it
shall and may be lawful for the Laster of all Wines, Oils, and other Liquors
Imported into any Port of this Kingdom, and the surveyor of the outs and
defects of the same for the time being, to demand and receive the Fees
following (viz.) For every But, Pipe, Puncheon or large Cask that shall be
tasted, or surveyed, six pence. For every Hogshead, Tierce, Barrel, Kundlet or
smaller Vessel, that shall be tasted, or surveyed, three pence.

Provided always that all silks, and silk manufactures imported into this your
Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, from any foreign parts, other then from the
Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Ways, do pay one entire third part
moreover and above the Rates imposed, and set by the book of Rates above
mentioned; Any thing before in this Act, or in the said book of Rates to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also that all Sugars, Indico, Ginger, Cotton Woolls, as all other
woolls, and all other commodities, of the growth, or manufacture of any the
English plantations first imported into, and landed in England or Wales, and
afterward exported from thence into this your Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, do
pay but one half part of all such Custom and Subsidies as according to the said
book of Rates is imposed, and set upon the said commodities; And that all
Wines, and Tobaccoes of what sort soever imported into this your Majesty's
Realm of Ireland, out of your Kingdom of England, or Dommion of Wales, do pay
so much only in subsidy, as upon the exportation of the same Wines, and
Tobaccoes, out of England, shall or ought to be repayed, or discharged of the
subsidy of Lonnage, and Poundage, and additional duties there paid or secured
for the same; And that for all other foreign commodities except Wines, and
Tobaccoes and commodities from the English Plantations above mentioned,
Imported into this your Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, by any your Majesty's
subjects from any the parts and places beyond the seas, other then from your
Majesty's Realm of England, and Dominion of Wales, there shall be satisfied and
paid to your Majesty your Heirs, and successors for ever, one third more in
subsidy, over and above the subsidy payable for the same according to your book
of Rates above mentioned; And that for all or any of the commodities, or
Merchandises mentioned in this Act, or in the book of Rates above mentioned,
which shall hereafter be imported, or exported by any Aliens, or strangers,
born out of your Majesty's allegiance, the said Aliens, or strangers shall pay
double the custom, or subsidy payable by virtue of this Act for the same
commodities, and Merchandises imported, or exported by all or any of your
Majesty's natural born subjects, any thing before in this Act, or in the book
of Rates to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also and it is hereby Enacted that every ship or Vessel belonging to
any the Subjects of the French King which from and after the four and twentieth
day of June in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred sixty two, shall
come into any Port, Creek, Harbor or Road of Ireland, and shall there Lade or
unlade any Goods or commodities, or take in, or set on shore any passengers,
shall pay to the Collectors of his Majesty's Customs in such Port, Creek,
Harbor or Road, for every Tun of which the said Ship or Vessel is of burden
to be computed by such Officer of the Customs as shall be thereunto appointed
the sum of five shillings current money of England, and that no ship or Vessel
be suffered to depart out of such Port, Creek, Harbor or Road, until the said
dury be sully paid, And that this duty shall continue to be collected, Leavied
and paid for such time as a certain duty of fifty solls per Tun lately imposed
by the French King or any part thereof shall continue to be collected upon the
shipping of England Lading in France and three months after and no longer.

FINIS.

