A LETTER OR EPISTLE TO All well-minded People in England, Ireland, Wales, and
Scotland.

Written By Lieut. Col. Joyce, for the undeceiving of the good People, July
7.1651.

That which moved me hereunto, was a consideration of the evils to come upon
those that seek to obstruct Justice; fearing least some would bring themselves
into a snare, as others have formerly done in the like case.

Vain is the help of man.
Arise O God and let thine enemies be scattered.
Fear brings a snare upon the righteous man.
Watch and pray least yea enter into temptation.
When I come, shall I find faith on earth?
July 10th LONDON: Printed by J. C. and are to be sold on Addlinghil. 1651.

Reader observe,
AN Itallian having found his enemy at an advantage, promised him if he would
deny his faith, to save his life; he to save the one, denied the other: which
having done he stabbed him, rejoicing that by this, he had at one time taken
revenge both of soul and body.

A Letter or Epistle to all well-minded people in England, Ireland, Wales, and
Scotland.
THere being more then an ordinary necessity at this time to undeceive the
people, and for the preventing of that distraction and disturbance which might
unhappily come upon or in this City unawares; God having already born witness
against all sorts of men that have directly or indirectly sought to involve
this Nation in to blood; the same God has stretched out his mighty Arm, and
has a long time called for Justice and Judgment.

And no sooner does this Spirit appear in or amongst the great ones, but
immediately arises a spirit of fear amongst some, who lifts up with one
hand, and pulls down with the other. Take heed who ever thou art, God is a
strict watchman, and marketh thy ways; and will find thee out, though thou
go never so secretly to work to obstruct Justice, or delay the execution
thereof.

My love is to mankind, and that all should turn from their evil ways and be
saved; this doctrine I held forth to the late King, who justified himself, and
stood upon his innocence; and dyed a Martyr or sufferer for Truth (and his
people) as he would have made the world believe.

The same spirit was in Mr. Nicholas Love (whose Trial I have heard for the
most part) and unless men had universally heard and seen his carriage and
spirit, will hardly believe the truth thereof, when declared.

But this in the general, I am sure he was many degrees worse spirited then the
king, who had more plea for himself then Mr. Love had, would he have pleaded or
made use thereof; but his principle led him out to what he did,

And when I compare matter of Fact, and foresee what is now come, and will come
if God alone prevent not. I am able to make it appear that Mr. Love's
traiterous and bloody actings have been as bad as the late Kings, who lost his
head, and of almost as long a standing as his was.

The wise man foreseeth an evil and preventeth it, blood is a sad thing to
behold, when brought upon a Nation or people by Stratagems, or designing to
ruin that poor handful of Gods people, who has not at all delighted in blood,
but prayed that they may live a peaceable and Godly life, under a civil
Magistracy; much agreeable to the Scriptures mind, and will of God.

But before I come to declare what I know of the Defign, and the depth, and
antiquity thereof; of which Conspiracy, the like was never heard of in our
generation. I shall present you with my former observations concerning the
personal Treaty, and when the whole Mystery shall be devulged, men will stand
amazed; for the like was never in this world, nor in all the Histories now
extant, for so far as I am able to judge, I shall give you a hint, desiring
that it may suffice at present, and also desire your patient waiting for the
whole, when a Just season comes.

After the King was in the Armies Quarters, some proud hearted men were
ambitions to be acquainted with him, and did often press me to bring them to him,
and through their importunity at last, did gratify their desire; but advised
them to have a care, or else the King would be too hard for them; as it seems
he was after a little while, as you may see by and by.

Huntington, Hobson, Tuledah, and others spoke with the King, and immediately
were lifted up, and nothing would serve them but a Personal Treaty with the
King; and who must be the first moving cause of this passage, but these men
before mentioned, together with some others; they disputed the lawfulness
thereof, and brought Scripture; and at last resolved upon it. And immediately
upon their resolution, some progress was made in the Petition at London and
other places, by them and others; I thought it my duty to acquaint some or all
the forementioned men, of what dangerous consequence it would be, and and
plainly declared to them, it would be a means to divide the godly people, and
break them in pieces, which were all of a piece before; and very unanimous.

But before this could be taken up again (as hushed) the name Leveller was
given out, and a report was made by ( Henry Lilburn) that the Levellers would
kill the King, and this arose upon the stopping of the Petition for a Personal
Treaty; which was carrying on with great zeal, like this for Mr. Love, which
may have a worse effect if great care be not had, or the Providence of God who
is above all, who is able to quiet the stoutest heart, and break in pieces the
devices of men; who lean their shoulders to uphold that pillar of Antichrist
which God will throw down, and is now doing of it; therefore ye sons of Jacob,
take heed ye be not consumed before you are aware of it (as some of the
designers was in that design) and as a just judgment came upon some of the
rest since. Observe.


No sooner was the last I spoke of, namely the Petition, laid aside or
forgotten by that sort of men called Indendents, but they seeing the evil,
being so grossly misled, repented thereof.

But Sion College men, and many other notorious and eminent men in this City,
set on foot a Petition for a Personal Treaty, and nothing else would serve (but
they must, and so they had it) and should I say Mr. Love, Calamy, Ash, Case,
Viner, and many other sitting in Synod, had a great hand in it, I should do
them little wrong; but shall say no more of that at present, only declare a
little of what I know of old, as I before promised, and as much as I have
always believed, that God will not be mocked; but he will, as always he has
done, discover and destroy those that will not appear for him; and bear witness
and testimony against unrighteous men, though in Parliament Army or people, I
mean by laying them aside (or other punishment) as hereafter will more
evidently appear.

Now for the Antiquity of the Design, and how God has from time to time fought
against it:

First consider a little after the Treaty at Uxbridge, where Master Love
preached, and said, It was as easy to reconcile God and the Devil together, as
it was to reconcile the King and Parliament (which thing he himself has now
done, by what Spirit let the world judge: Sometime after this Treaty was over,
a meeting was appointed at Westminster; where the Scottish Commissioners, and
many then Members of Parliament were, where they did solemnly Vow before God,
these things as follows; viz. to endeavor to bring in the King, and to rule
him by force; and to rule England by the same Law Scotland was governed; as I
take it the words were these (By Lords and Barons.)

And at the same time it was also agreed, that a certain number of the House of
Commons, whom they called Factious men, should be chosen out, and there heads
cut off: Also a certain number of the City, and leading men of the Country
chosen out, and hanged for examples, who were the ring leaders of that Party,
and all the rest banished (which made me tremble:) but my God assured me at
that time, the snare they laid to catch others, themselves should be taken in;
or the pit they dug for others, themselves should fall into. And after this
from time to time they met, sometimes at Dr Gouge's, other times elsewhere; and
never left til they had molded a Militia in the City, and hatched a
Remonstrance, and obtained many things, though in order to the forementioned
design; and at length brought it to what you now see, even another War, which
England now feels, to her great cost. Also another War is laid at home, and
will ere long break out (if not timely prevented:) And as the King was in daily
hopes of an Insurrection, by which he might probably had a deliverance; even so
is it now: Take heed, my friends, delays are dangerous; and as you have judged
some Petitions dangerous (this now on foot may be far more then those; and tend
more and more to divide the Godly, not only in this City, but throughout
England. And though I am not against Petitioning (but for it as much as any;)
yet I can do no less but lay these things before you, as a small parcel, picked
out of three or four quier of Paper: And wherein I shall declare the whole, and
all that I have known, seen, and heard of truth; being an attendant upon the
Parliament, and as a Member of the Armies, observed Gods dealings with this
generation, and particular men therein; and what I also believe and know will
come to pass, that so God alone may have all the Glory; and that no flesh
should glory but in the Lord; also that men may take heed, and not to split
themselves against that Rock, which is too hard for them, and will dash all the
Nations of the Earth in pieces; saying, Bring those my enemies before me, that
I may slay them.

And now let none that know the Lord, lean their shoulders, or put there
strength to uphold that Antichrist, which is now falling, though it be like
Christ.

Also take heed my dear friends and brethren, I mean the upright wheresoever,
or of what Name or Title soever, that you sin no more against your Light, but
return to the Lord and repent; then he will heal those that have back slided,
and be a God and guide unto you, for ever and ever. So I take leave and rest,

Englands true and faithful friend and servant, for impartial Justice till
death. G. J.

POSTSCRIPT.
And because I cannot leave the world in ignorance, of what Designs have been
upon the West; God having my life in his own hands, though men cunningly seek
to take it away; thought my self bound in duty to God and my Country; to bear
my witness, that when I come to die, I may have nothing else to do, but to die;
and that for righteousness only.

And that the world may see I have taken notice of former ages; shall briefly
relate as follows.

A people being engaged against a King for Tyranny, could not conquer him; his
strength being too great. An active man, who by his honesty, together with a
small strength, then under his Command; accidentally came to the people, by
which means the people conquered the King, and had Justice executed upon him.

A little after this, some great and wise men among the people, endeavored to
work over this upright man to their party; that so they might have made
themselves as great as the King was before. But he continued his integrity, and
would not be won to unrighteousness, to Tyranny. A debate arose what was best
to be done with this man, some acknowledged he deserved such a gratuity for his
pains, and hazard; that they were not able to reward him for his desert. Others
cunningly suggested to take away his life, lest his honesty should cause the
people to fall in love with him; and if so of what dangerous concernment would
this be to us: they knowing so much, consulted a little while; and at last
agreed to take away his life: A good reward.

Now to the Design.

One brought a Charge to the Honorable Council of State, against Lieutenant
Colonel Reed, Governor of Pool, who was put out of his Governmentand justly
for ought I know; for he has not as yet had a Trial: though the Council of
State have granted many Orders for a just and legal Trial, they being informed,
he was a very honest godly man,

But the potency of one who threatened to ruin the said Governor; has, and
still does endeavor to carry on his Design, not only to ruin him, but many
others also; and to get the whole West into his own, and friends custody.

And beginning too soon, could not do it that way he aimed at; and therefore
has found out away to answer his former design, by slighting the Garrison of
Pool, and getting Col. Hains his Regiment to be removed (which indeed is a very
good work:) And had not the designers been almost persuaded, they should have
removed: Lieutenant Col. Joyce out of the I Will of Portland, and put in another,
that so they might have done their work. Now Lieut. Col. Joyce had never been
so struck at, if he had not known the design and the designers, which he has
along time done, and did what he could to prevent it, fearing blood was at the
bottom thereof; at least setting up a Scottish Presbyterian faction, by
countenancing whatsoever came cunningly from the Priests of that County; For no
sooner had the Priests with others gotten out Lieut. Col. Reed, Governor of
Pool, but immediately got in one Scut, a Towns-man, who was formerly laid
aside, for being against the Parliament and Armies proceedings, in order to
this Commonwealth; If I should say he was cashiered for persecuting of Godly
men, I should do him no hurt: Part of this design was privately carried on by a
potent man, to requite the Townsmen of Pool (who are for the most part
Scotefi'd) for making of one Mr. Dennis Bond's son Recorder of Pool.

The forementioned potent man still goes on with his design, and did lately
obtain a Commission for one Bingham, to be Governor of Gernsey.

And as soon as Bingham was made Governor of that Island, Col. Hayns affirmed
that it was enough to envite an enemy thither; others said they never knew him
fight: Moreover he was dissatisfied with the Parliament and Armies just
proceedings against the late King.

This was not all that mighty man did, for, he also obtained a Commission for
one Lieut. Col. Lacey, a man reputed no fighter, but a common tipler.; these
men to be sent to Gernsey, is not all.

But Major Harrison must be sent for away, though he be a man of an approved
valor, and honesty, truly fearing God.

I shall say little more at present, unless I should be called upon to give the
relation of these designs: And when I have more time, shall manifest unto the
world, the whole design and drivers thereof at large. And how the great
Designer was like to tare the hair from his head, when he could not have his
will answered. And not long since threatened to cut our swords shorter, and many
other abusive words, etc.

The Agent of Dorset-shire, whose name is Brag, son to the Receiver General of
the same County, a lewd deboyst young man: It was therefore desired he might be
put out, being unfit for that place, and a honest man put into his rome; it was
also offered to Mr. Dennis Bond to do it, he being the only man that put him
in: This could not be done, though Lieutenant Col. Joyce, who is that
Countryman, and often times sent to Mr. Bond about it, it being a kinsman of his
own: The answer he had was, if any of the said Country Gentlemen would say as
much or desire the same, he would do what he could in it.

Upon which Lieut. Col. Joyce sent into the Country about the business, and had
this answer as follows.

For his honored Friend Lieut. Col. Joyce, at London.
YOurs I received but cannot answer that expectation; for you know the power of
the great Man is such, that his wrath is counted as the roaring of a Lion; what
have been formerly, is now amended for ought I know. But the understandingst
fellow in our parts, if it were not for the great Man's rage, it were easy to
have it testified; but I think their is another course to be taken, which is to
consider where it be fit, that the Son should be the only surveior of the
Fathers actions, and to give an account thereof when they please. (it is a
strange kind of Reformation) I say no more till I see you, which I hope will
be within this seven days: Thus desiring God to make more honest men, and to
preserve others that he has so made: Is the earnest desire of him who is your
faithful friend

J. R.
July 6, 1651.
FINIS.

