IRELANDS EXCISE, BY The Lords, Justices, and Council there.

As it was Given at his Majesty's Castle in Dublin 24. June, 1643.

LONDON, Printed by F. Leach, for Michaell Spark Senior, and Junior, Anno Dom.
1643. July 29.

IRELADS EXCISE, BY The Lords, Justices and Council there.
Io. Borlase. Hen. Tichborne.
WE having taken into our serious consideration the present State and condition
of this Kingdom, do by this Our Proclamation in pursuance of an Act of
Council made at this Board, bearing date 6. of June 1643. Publish and Declare
that for the reasons in the said Act of Council contained* and* for the
raising of a Sum of money weekly, toward the maintenance of the Army for
six Months next ensuing, that there be during the time aforesaid (if the
necessities of the Army be not in the interim otherwise releeved) a rate and
imposition set upon the particulars hereafter mentioned, in manner and form
hereafter expressed, to be duly paid unto Thomas Leigh, Daniel Foster, and John
Wogan, Gentlemen; upon whom We have for the present conferred the Office of
Impost-masters, or to such as shall be lawfully Authorized to be the
Impost-masters, and at the Office appointed to be keept at the House of Henry
King in Castle-street for the Impost Office, by such persons and in such manner
as hereafter is Declared and that the Moneys arising thereupon be weekly paid
by the said Impost-masters, unto His Majesty's Vice-Treasurer and Treasurer at
Wars, to be by Him issued toward the relief of the Army, in such manner and
form as by Us the Lords, Justices and Council shall be directed.

The rate or imposition upon Ale or Bear bought of the Brewer, to be retailed
or brought from foreign Countries into this Kingdom, and bought here to be
retailed, viz. Ale and Bear of sixteen shillings or eighteen shillings per
Barrel, to pay eight shillings Imposition per Barrel and so rateably for
other gages, and to be retailed at three pence per Quart, and no more.

Beer of eight shillings or ten shillings per Barrel, to pay five shillings
Imposition per Barrel, and so rateably for other gages, and to be retailed at
two pence per Quart, and no more.

Beer of five shillings or six shillings per Barrel, to pay three shillings
Imposition per Barrel, and so rateably for other gages, and to be retailed at
one penny per Quart, and no more.

The Rate or Imposition of Ale or Beer spent in any private House, whether the
same be brewed by the persons themselves that spend it, or bought from the
Brewers, of foreign parts, viz.

Ale or Beer of sixteen shillings or eighteen shillings per Barrel, to pay
four shillings Imposition per Barrel, and so rateably for other gages.

Beer of eight shillings or ten shillings per Barrel, to pay two shillings
Imposition per Barrel, and so rateably for other gages.

Beer of five shillings or six shillings per Barrel, to pay twelve pence
Imposition per Barrel, and so rateably for other gages.

The Rate or Imposition of Ale or Beer to be retailed by them that brew it,
viz. All manner of strong Ale or Beer to pay ten shillings imposition per
Barrel, and so rateably for other gages, and to be sold at three pence per
Quart, and no more.

All Ordinary Ale or Beer to pay three shillings four pence Imposi^ion per
Barrel, and so rateably for other gages, to be sold a penny per Quart, and no
more.

The Rate or Imposition upon Wines bought to be sold again by retaile, viz.
All manner of French Wines rackt or unrackt, to pay six pounds Imposition pe^
Tonne, accounting four Hogsheads to the Tonne and all other smaller gages
rateably, and to be retailed at eight pence per Quart, and no more.

All Wines of the Spanish growth rackt or unrackt, to pay six pound Imposition
per Pipe or But, and all other smaller gages rateably, and to be retailed at
one shilling four pence per Quart, and no more.

The Rate or Imposition upon Wines bought or brought into private Houses for
their own uses, viz. All manner of French Wines rackt or unrackt, to pay three
pound Imposition per Tonne, accounting four Hogsheads to the Tonne, and all
other gages rateably.

All Wine of the Spanish growth rackt or unrackt, to pay three pound Imposition
per Pipe or But, and all other smaller gages rateably.

The Rate or imposition upon Aquavitae and all manner of Hot waters viz.
Aquavitae and all Hot waters bought or sold to be retailed again, to pay two
shillings Imposition per Gallon.

Aquavitae and all Hot waters bought or sold by or to any that shall not
retaile the same again to pay 12, pence imposition per Gallon.

The Rate or Imposition upon Cattle slaughtered to be sold, viz.

All manner of Oxen, Balls, Cowes, Steers, and Bullocks, to pay 4. shillings le
piece Imposition.

All Calves to pay two shillings le piece Imposition.

All Swine* above six weeks old, and all Sheep, and Goats, to pay twelve pence
le piece Imposition.

All Lambs, and Kidds to pay six pence le piece Imposition.

The Rate and Imposition of Cattle, slaughtered by any to Salt up for their
own uses, or to eat or spend fresh in their own Houses, viz. All manner of
Oxon, Bulls Cowes. Steeres and Bullocks, to pay two shillings le piece
Imposition.

All Calves to pay 12 pence le piece Imposition. All Swine above 6. weeks old,
and all Sheep, and Goats to pay 6. pence le piece Imposition.

All Lambs, and Kidds to pay three pence le piece Imposition.

1. And for the better performance, and due execution of all and singular the
premises. We do hereby in his Majesty's name, strictly Charge and command,
that from and after the publishing of this Proclamation no manner of person or
persons whatsoever, within liberties or without, do brew Ale or Beer, or
distill Aquavitae, or any hot waters whithin the City or Suburbs of Dublin, or
6 miles of the said City, until such time as he, or they first enter his and
their names at the said Impost Office and there receive admittance to brew Ale
and Beer, or to distill Aquavitae, and hot waters upon pain of five pounds.

2. That every Brewer of Ale or Beer, and every distiller of Aquavitae, and
hot waters, from and after such admittance keep an exact Account of the
Quality, and Quantity of all the Beer, Ale, Aquavitae and hot Waters, he or
they shall Brew or Distill, upon pain of five Pounds for every Brewing, or
Distilling whereof he shall neglect to keep such account.

3. That no Brewer, Brew any other Sorts of Ale, or Beer, then Ale or Beer of
18. shillings, 16. shillings, 10. shillings, 8. shillings. Six shillings, or
Five shillings the Barrel, upon the like pain of five pounds, for every time,
he shall Brew any other sort of Ale, or Bear.

4. That no Brewer of Ale or Bear, do dispose, sell, or any ways suffer any
Ale, or Beer to go forth of his House other then such Ale, or Beer, as he
shall retaile by the Gallon, or a lesser measure, before the Impost thereof be
paid, and a Ballet for the payment thereof; and of the true quality and
quantity of the said Ale or Beer delivered him or his Clarke, out of the said
Impost office, upon pain of 3. Pound for every Barrel so delivered for the
first Offense, and 6. Pounds, for every Barrel so delivered for the Second
Offense, and 10. Pounds, for every Barell so delivered for the third Offense.

5. That no person or persons whatsoever receive, or cause to be received into
his or any other House any Beer, or Ale until such time as the impost thereof
be paid, and a Billet obtained from the Impost Office of the true quality and
quantity of the said Ale, and Beer, and for the payment of the Impost for the
same Ale and Beer, upon pain of three pound for every Barrel so received for
the first offense, and six pounds a Barrel so received for the second offense,
and ten pounds a Barrel so received for the third offense.

6. That every Brewer of Ale or Beer, that retailes any Ale or Beer in his
own house, or any other house, do within twenty four hours after the
Tonning of his Beer or Ale, enter or cause to be entered the full proportion,
quality and quantity thereof in the said Impost-office, and there pay the
Impost for the same, upon pain of 3. pound per Barrel for the first offense,
and six pounds per Barrel for the second offense, and ten pounds per Barrel
for the third offense.

7. That all private Housekeepers of what degree or quality soever they be,
shall within twenty four hours after the Tonning of their Beer or Ale which
they shall b^ew, enter, or cause to be entered the full proportion, quality,
and quantity thereof in the said Impost-office, and pay the most for the same
upon pain of thirty shillings for every Barrel so Tonned for the first
offense, and fifty shillings for every Barrel so Tonned for the second
offense, and six pounds for every Barrel so Tonned for the third offense.

8. That no manner of person convey, or cause to be conveied out of the
Fortifications of Dublin, any Malt without License or Ticquet from the said
Impost-office, that the same shall be admitted to be conveyed to a place
licenced for Brewing, or otherwise to pay ten shillings per Barrel Impost, for
all the Malt that shall be so conveyed out of the said fortifications upon
pain of five pounds per Barrel for every default.

9. That every buyer of any foreign Beer imported into this Harbor, and
Cellered, fetch his Ticquet from the Impost-office, of the true quantity of the
Beer so by him bought, and pay the Impost set upon the same, and if the
Proprietor do otherwise dispose thereof, he is to pay the Impost for the same,
upon pain of forty shillings for every Barrel so disposed of.

10. That all Ale and Beer be tonned in Hogsheads, Barrells, half Barrells,
and quarter Barrells, of thirty two gallons the Barrel, and no other
proportions upon pain of forfeiture of the Ale and Beer that shall be tonned
in any other vessels, and the same vessels to be knocked in pieces.

11. That all Brewers, Merchants, Retailers, and private house keepers, and all
others that have Beer, Ale or Wine in their houses, Cellers, or store houses,
do within three days after the publishing of this proclamation bring into the
said-Impost-office, a true note of the quantity, and quality of the Beer, Ale,
and Wines they have in their Houses, Cellars, or Storehouses, and that they
that intend to spend, or retaile the same, pay for the same the Moiety of the
Impost set upon such Ale, Beer and Wines, respectively, as are hereafter to be
bought of Merchant or the Brewer, upon pain of forty shillings for every
Barrel of Ale or Beer, and so for other proportions after the same rate, and
upon pain of five pounds for every Hogshead of French Wines, and so rateably
for all other gages, and upon pain of six shillings for every gallon of
Spanish Wine that shall not be so certified.

12. That all Brewers that do not retaile Beer or Ale, shall be considered of
by Commissioners in that behalf, to be authorized for the Beer and Ale they
spend in their own houses, according to the discretion of the said
Commissioners.

13. That all Marchents and others that shall import any Wines or Beer into
this harbor of Dublin, or within six miles of the same, do before the landing
thereof deliver a^r^e note into the hands of the Impost-masters, of the
quality, and quantity of the Wines and Beer, he and they intend to land, and
to land no more then he or they shall so certify, upon pain of forfeiture of
the Wines and Beer so landed, and not certified.

14. That no Merchant or other Seller of Wines or Beer by whole sale, dispose,
sell or suffer to go forth of his house, Cellar or Storehouse any Wines,
French or Spanish, or any Beer, before the Impost thereof be paid and a Billet
or Ticquet thereof obtained from the said Impost-office, upon pain of ten
pounds for every Hogshead of French Wine twelve shillings for every Gallon of
Spanish Wine, and forty shillings for every Barrel of Beer so deliverd
without Ticquet, and so ratably for greater or lesser quantities.

15. That no manner of persons receive or cause to be received into his or any
other house any Wines of what sort soever, until such time as the Impost
thereof be paid, and a Ticquet or Billet for the payment thereof obtained from
the Impost-masters, upon pain of ten pounds for every Hogshead of French Wine,
and 12. shillings for every gallon of Spanish Wine receive without Ticquet, and
so ratably for greater or lesser quantities.

16. That no Merchant Vintner or other, sell any Wine by whole sale, or
retaile, before such time as his name be entered in the said Impost-office, and
there receive admittance for the same, upon pain of five pounds.

17. That all Merchants and others, that have, or shall have any wines to sell,
and shall not retaile the same, shall be rated, and considered of by the said
Commissioners according to their discretions, both for the Wines which shall be
spent in their Houses, and the Lecage.

18. That all Vintners and others that shall retaile Wines shall be in like
manner considered of by the said Commissioners for their spending and Lecage
wine, according to the discretions of the said Commissioners.

19. That no Distiller of Aquavitae or hot waters, or any other importing the
same by Sea or land, by way of Merchandise, do sell or retaile any Aquavitae
or hot waters under the quantity of one whole gallon at a time, unless the
Impost be first paid, and a Ticquet thereof obtained from the Impost-office,
upon pain of ten shillings for every gallon so sold.

20. That no Retailer or other do buy the quantity of a gallon or more of any
Aquavitae or hot waters at any Distillers, or of any others, importing the same
as aforesaid, and that sell the same, unless the Impost thereof be first paid,
and a Ticquet obtained from the Impost-masters for the payment thereof, upon
pain of ten shillings for every gallon of Aquavitae or hot waters so bought.

21. That all such persons as have Aquavitae or hot waters in their houses,
Cellars or Shops to sell, do within three days after the pulishing of this
Proclamation, deliver into the Impost-office a true note of what quantity of
Aquavitae or hot waters they have in their houses, Cellars, or Shops, and pay
the Moiety of the Impost set upon Aquavitae and hot waters, hereafter to be
distilled, and sold upon pain of ten shillings for every gallon of Aquavitae
and hot waters that are in the said houses, Cellars or Shops and not so
certified.

22. That no manner of person whatsoever sell any Aquavitae or hot waters by
whole sale or retaile, until such time as his name be entered into the said
Impost-office, and there receive admittance for the same, upon pain of five
pounds.

23. That all Butchers and others, that shall slaughter any kind or sort of
Cattle before mentioned to sell, do before he or they slaughter any beast,
enter into the said Impost-office, the number and kinds of Cattle or beasts,
that he or they intend to slaughter, and pay the Impost for the same, and
obtain a Ticquet thereof from the Impost-office upon pain of five pounds for
every Ox, Bull, Cow, Steer and Bullock, and upon pain of three pounds for
every Calfe, and twenty shillings for every Sheep, Swine, Goat, Lamb, Kid so
slaughtered.

24. That no manner of person or persons whatsoever slaughter any of the said
kinds of Cattle or beasts before mentioned, either to salt up for his own
use, or to spend, or eat fresh in his own house, until such time as the
number and kinds of such Cattle or beasts, as he or they intend to Slaughter,
be first entered into the said Impost-office, and the Impost set upon the same
paid, and a Ticquet thereof obtained from the said Impost-office, upon pain of
five pounds for every Ox, Bull, Cow, Steer and Bullock, and upon pain of
three pounds, for every Calfe, and upon pain of twenty shillings, for every
Sheep, Swine, Goat, Lamb and Kidd, so slaughtered.

25. That all manner of persons that shall kill, or slaughter any of the kinds
of Cattle, or Beasts, before mentioned, within this City or Suburbs of Dublin
or within six miles of the same, or that shall bring or send any of the said
kinds of Cattle, or Beasts, into this City or Suburbs ready killed, to be
sold, or salted up, do before the sale, or slaughtering of such Beasts, enter
the number and kinds of the same, so be sold or slaughtered, in the said
Impost-office, and pay Impost for the same, after the same rate, as is hereby
appointed to be paid, for Cattle slaughtered by the Butcher, and obtain a
Ticquet from the Impost-office for the same, upon pain of five pounds for
every Ox, Bull, Cow, Steer and Bullock, and upon pain of three pounds for
every Calfe, and upon pain of twenty shillings for every Sheep, Swine, Goat,
Lamb, and Kidd so slaughtered or sold.

26. That all the pains, penalties, and forfeitures hereby imposed, or set
upon such as shall offend in any of the before mentioned premises, be leavied
upon the goods and chattles of the offenders, and to be paid to the said
Impost-masters, and the one mosety thereof by them given to the informer, and
the other to be paid to His Maj^sties Vice-Treasurer and Treasurer at Wars, to
be by him issued out and accounted for, to the use of the Army in manner and
form aforesaid. And We require the Major and Sheriffs of the City of Dublin,
to cause this Proclamation to be forthwith published and Proclaimed, thorowout
this City and Suburbs of Dublin.

Given at His Majesty's Castle of Dublin, the 24. day of June. 1643. R. Bolton.
Canc. La. Dublin. Ormond Roscomon. Moore. Edw. Brabazon. Ant. Midensis. Cha.
Lambert. Ad. Lofius. Geo Shurley. W. Parsons. Gerrard Lowther. I. Temple. Tho.
Rotherham. Fr. Willoughby. Tho. Lucas. Ia. Ware. G. Wentworth. Rob. Meredith.


God save the King.
This is Licenced and entered into the Register Book of the Company of
Stationers according to Order.


