Remonstrance FROM THE LORDS AND COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT at DUBLIN,
concerning the Estate of IRELAND.

The barbarousnesse of the bloody Rebels, and a Protestation of their
Compliance with the Power of England, for reducing of that Kingdom.

This Remonstrance is appointed to be printed and publishe according to the
directions of an ORDER of PARLIAMENT.

DVBLIN: Printed by William B^^den, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1646.

The humble REMONSTRANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS in PARLIAMENT Assembled at
DUBLIN.
HUmbly declaring, that the Religion now professed by the Church of Room
(which in fundamental points is Antichristian and heretical) has of late
years extraordinarily overspread this Kingdom, and has the more increased
by the forbearing to put in execution, the wholesome Laws and Statutes of force
in this Kingdom, against Recusants and others of the Romish-Religion, who have
of late times more then formerly extremely swarmed in this Kingdom. And
whereas it evidently appears; that the s^id Anchristian and heretical
Religion, and the not putting the said Laws in execution has as the fruits
and effects thereof, produced a general confederacy, of the Papists in this
Kingdom, to destroy, and extirpe the Protestant Religion, and all English,
Scottish, and Irish in this Kingdome-professing the same; wherein they have
actually proceeded to execrable cruelties, (with out any prevocation give them
by His sacred Majesty; by the State or Government, or any acts of the
Protestants, or any others) they intending utterly to cast of the English
Government, and most royal Authority of our Sovereign Lord the King. And where
diverse of the Romish Religion have in all parts of this Kingdom, inhumanely
used most bloody and unheard of barbarous cruelties against the persons as well
of the Clergy, as of most of the Protestant Religion within their power, not
only while life lasted, but even after death, digging some of them out of
their graves, cutting them in pieces, and casting them into ditches, defiling
of Churches, and setting up the abominable Idol of the Mass, in stead of Gods
true worship, and service, and in scornful, and reproach^ull manner,
trampleing under foot the holy Bible, and disdainfully burning it, and have by
their said cruelties already destroyed many thousand Protestants, and of those
that remain, and escaped their fury, most of them have been enforced to fly
into England or Scotland for relief, or to beg the Charity of well disposed
people here. The said Lords and Commons duly considering the premises, and the
great dishonor done to God, to his Majesty, to the English Nation, and indeed
to all His Majesty's Kingdoms by the said most wicked Rebellion, plotted and
acted by titulary Bishops, Abbots, Jesuits, Friars, Priests, Moncks, and others
of the Romish Religion; do humbly express their det^stati^n thereof, that
though reformation of Religion may be had in this Kingdom, to the glory of
God, and the honor of His sacred Majesty, and to that end p^ay, that a
present and effectual course may be taken for putting in Execution, the Laws
and Statutes of force in this Kingdom against Recusants, and all others of the
Popish pretended Religion, in all parts of this Kingdom, where the Laws do or
may run, and for suppressing the usurped power, and jurisdiction of the Sea of
Room, and particulare in the City of Dublin, which is now the City of
refuge; for most of the distressed, dis-poiled Protestants of this Kingdom,
who yet are not without just fears, of eminent dangers, by reason of the
multitude of Popish Inhabitants. And they do pray that it may be given in
Charge to all His Majesty's Officers, whom it may concern, faithful, and
without delay to proceed therein, and that monthly Sessions be held for that
purpose, in the said City of Dublin, that Bills may forthwith be transmitted
into England, containing all such Laws as are now in force there against all
Jesuits, Priests, Friars, Monks, and all other superstitious orders and
societies of the Popish pretended Clergy, and their Relievers, and against
Recusants and other Papists to be enacted in this Kingdom. And such further
Laws as are or shall be needful in that behalf, and that such necessary
expressions and provisions may be therein made, as may be agreeable with the
constitutions of this Kingdom and may give hopeful and comfortable assurance
to your supplicants, and their posterity, and to all others of the Protestant
Religion, who are or shall be in this Kingdom. That it may not be in the power
of any Governor, or Governors of this Kingdom, to suspend, inhibit, or connive
at the execution of the said Laws, or any of them, and to this end, that your
Lordships were entrusted by His Majesty with the Government of this Kingdom,
and must one day give an account thereof before the tribunal of Gods justice,
will give present order for performing your supplicants requests herein
expressed: and although since this most hideous, and most bloody rebellions
began, we have had some succors out of England, which we ascribe to the mercy
of God, in the great wisdom, and piety of his sacred Majesty, and in the
careful and charitable endeavors of the Parliament and Kingdom of England,
with His Majesty's grace and goodness, we with the duty and loyalty of
faithful Subjects, do most humbly and thankfully acknowledge to His royal
Majesty, and do also render to his Parliament of England, most hearty thanks
for their said care and endeavor for us; yet we find with inward sorrow, and
grief of heart, that for want of such powerful and speedy succors of men,
money, Victuals, Clothes, Arms, Ammunition, and other requisites of war
necessary to be sent hither out of England; This war for Gods cause, and the
cause of his servants in this Kingdom has hitherto had but a slow proceeding.
They therefore most humbly beseech your Lordships to represent to his sacred
Majesty their humble desires, and supplication, that it may stand with his
Princely pleasure, that an effectual and speedy course may be taken by His
Majesty's high wisdom, and the care of the Par^^^ment, for the hasting of
those needful su^cours, which the said Lords and Commo^^^ humbly conceive,
have been hitherto ^^tarded longer, (they doubt and fear) the^ can well
consist with the safety of this hi^ ancient Rightful Crown and Kingdom and
so by the high wisdom, and gre^^ goodness of his Majesty our great grief^^
and sorrows converted unto joy and gladness, Gods true Religion may be more
firmly established, His Majesty, in wisdom^, and power magnified, his good
Subjects comforted, and his enemies, and the enemies of Gods truth disappointed.

To the Right Honorable, the Lord Lieutenant, and the Lords, Justices, and
Council.
Copia vera

ex, per Phil: Ferneles. Cler. parl. Dom. Com.



FINIS.

