Two ACTS I. An ACT for Reviving Two Statutes lately Expired, and making them
Perpetual; And for Avoiding Unnecessary Suits and Delays. II. An ACT for
Redress of Inconveniences for want of Proof of the Deceases of Persons beyond
the Seas, or Absenting Themselves, upon whose Lives Estates do Depend.




DVBLIN, Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
on Ormonde-Key. 1695.

An Act for Reviving Two Statutes lately Expired, and making them Perpetual;
And for Avoiding Unnecessary Suits and Delays. CHAP. VII.
WHEREAS in a Parliament held in the Seaventeenth and Eighteenth Years of the
Reign of King Charles the Second, the several Statutes hereafter mentioned were
Enacted (vizt.) One Act, Entitled, An Act to prevent Delays in Extending
Statutes, Judgments, and Recognizances. And one other Act, Entitled, An Act to
prevent Arrests of Judgments, and Superseding Executions: Both which Acts are
now Expired; but by Experience have been found to be good and profitable Laws
for this Kingdom, and fit to be Revived and made Perpetual.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same. That the said
several Statutes, and every of them, and all and every the Branches and Clauses
in them, and every of them Contained are hereby Revived, and shall from
henceforth be, Remain and Continue in Force and Effect for Ever.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in all Actions Real
and Personal, or mirt, the Death of either Party between the Verdict and the
Judgment shall not be hereafter alleged for Error, so as Judgment be Entered
within two Terms after such Verdict.

An Act for Redress of Inconveniences for want of Proof of the Deceases of
Persons beyond the Seas, or Absenting Themselves, upon whose Lives Estates do
Depend. CHAP. VIII.
WHEREAS Diverse Lords of Manors and diverse have used to Grant Estates by Lease
for one or more Life or Lives, or else for Years Determinable upon one or more
Life or Lives; And it has often happened that such Person or Persons for whose
Life or Lives such Estates have been Granted have gone beyond the Seas, and
absented sheriff (...) for many Years, that the Lessors and Revertioners cannot
find out whether such Person or Persons be Alive or Dead, by reason whereof
such Lessors and Revertioners have been held due of Possession of their,
Tenements for many years after all the Lives upon which such Estates depend are
dead, in regard that the Lessors and Revertioners when they have brought ^^sons
for the Recovery of their Tenements, have been put upon it to prove the Death
of their Tennants when it is almost Impossible for them to discover the same.
For Remedy of which Mischief to frequently happening to such Lessors or
Revertioners.

Be it Enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the (...) and
Consent of the Goods (...), and the Commons in this (...), and by the Authority
of the same, That if such Person or Persons for whose Life or Lives such
Estates have been or shall be granted, as aforesaid, shall remain beyond the
Seas, or elsewhere absent themselves in this Realm by the space of Seven Years
together, and no sufficient and Evident proof be made of the Lives of such
Person or Persons respectively in any Action Commenced for the recovery of such
Tenements by the Lessors or Revertioners, their Heirs or Assigns: The Judges
before whom such Action shall be brought shall direct the Jury to give their
Verdict as if the person so remaining beyond the Seas, or otherwise, absenting
himself were dead.

And be it further Enacted, That in any such Action, wherein the Life or Death
of any such Person or Persons shall come in question between the Lessor or
Revertioner and the Tennant in possession; it shall and may be Lawful for the
Lessor or Revertioner to take Exception to any of the Jurors returned for the
Trial of that Cause, that the greatest part of the Real Estate of any such
Iuror is held by Lease for Life or Lives, who upon proof thereof shall be set
aside as in case of other Legal Challenges.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, That if any Person or Persons shall be
Evicted out of any Lands or Tenements by Virtue of this Act, and afterward if
such person or persons upon whose Life or Lives such Estate or Estates depend,
shall return again from beyond the Seas, or shall on proof in any Action to be
brought for recovery of the same, be made appear to be Living, or to have been
Living at the time of the Eviction, that then and from thenceforth the Tennant
or Lessee who was outed of the same, his or their Executors, Administrators or
Assigns shall or may Re-enter, Re-possess, Have, Hold and Enjoy the said Lands
or Tenements as in his or their former Estate for and during the Life or Lives
or so long Term as the said person or persons, upon whose Life or Lives the
said Estate or Estates depend shall be Living, and shall also upon Action or
Actions to be brought by him or them against the Lessors, Revertioners or
Tennants in possession, or other persons respectively, which since the time of
the said Eviction received the Profits of the said Lands or Tenements, recover
for Damages the full Profits of the said Lands or Tenements respectively, with
Lawful Interest for and from the time that he or they were outed of the said
Lands or Tenements, and kept and held out of the same by the said Lessors,
Revertioners, Tennants, or other Persons who after the said Eviction Received
the Profits of the said Lands or Tenements, or any of them Respectively, as
well in the Case where the said Person or Persons, upon whose Life or Lives
such Estate or Estates did Depend, are, or shall be Dead at the time of
bringing the said Action or Actions as if the said Person or Persons were then
Living.

FINIS.

