AN ACT For the more Speedy and Effectual Proceeding upon DISTRESSES and
AVOVVRIES for RENT.

W R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE IE MEIN TIENDRAI Royal blazon

DVBLIN, Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
on Ormonde-Key, 1695.

CHAP. XXII. An Act for the more Speedy and Effectual Proceeding upon
Distresses and Avowries for Rent.
FORASMUCH as the Ordinary Remedy for Arrearages of Rents is by Distress upon
the Lands Chargeable therewith; and yet Nevertheless by reason of the Intricate
and Dillatory proceedings upon Replevin, that Remedy is become Ineffectual. For
Remedy whereof,

Be it Enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, with the Advice and
Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the same, That whenever any Plantiff
in Replevin shall be Nonsuit before Issue Joined in any Suit in Replevin, by
Plaint or Writ Lawfully Returned, Removed, or Depending in any of His
Majesty's Courts at Dublin, or any Courts Palatine, or other Courts of Record
within this Kingdom. That the Defendant Avowant making a Suggestion in Nature
of an Avowry or Connusance for such Rent, to Ascertain the Court of the Cause
of Distress, the Court upon his Prayer shall Award a Writ to the Sheriff of
the County where the Distress was taken, to Inquire by the Oaths of Twelve Good
and Lawful Men of the Baliwick, touching the Sum in Arrear at the time of such
Distress taken, and the value of the Goods or Cattle Distrained, and thereupon
Notice of Fifteen Days shall be given to the Plantiff, or his Attorney in Court
of the Sitting of such Inquiry, and thereupon the Sheriff shall Inquire of the
Truth of the matter Contained in such Writ, by the Oaths of Twelve Good and
Lawful Men of his County; and upon the Return of such Inquisition the Defendant
shall have Judgment to Recover against the Plantiff the Arrearages of such
Rent, in Case the Goods or Cattle Distrained shall amount unto the Value; and
in Case they shall not amount to that Value, then so much as the Value of the
said Goods and Cattle so Distrained shall amount unto, together with his full
Costs of Suit, and shall have Execution thereupon by Fieri facias, or Elegit,
or otherwise, as the Law shall Require: And in Case such Plantiff shall be
Nonsuite, after Connuzance or Avowry made, and Issue Joined, or if the Verdict
shall be given against such Plantiff, then the Jurors that are Impannelled or
Returned to Inquire of such Issue shall at the Prayer of the Defendant Inquire
concerning the Sum of the Arrears, and the Value of the Goods or Cattle
Distrained; And thereupon the Avowant, or he that makes Cognizance shall have
Judgment for such Arrearages, or so much thereof as the Goods or Cattle
Distrained amount unto, together with full Costs; and shall have Execution for
the same by Fieri facias, or Elegit, or otherwise, as the Law shall Require.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if Judgment in any
of the Courts aforesaid, be given upon Demurrer for the Avowant, or him that
makes Cognizance for any Rent, the Court shall at the Prayer of the Defendant
Award a Writ to Inquire of the Value of such Distress, and upon the Return
thereof Judgment shall be given for the Avowant, or him that makes Cognizance,
as aforesaid; For the Arrears Alleged to be behind in such Avowry or
Cognizance if the Goods or Cattle so Distrained shall amount to the Value; And
in Case they shall not amount to that Value, then for so much as the said Goods
or Cattle so Distrained amount unto, together with his full Costs of Suit, and
shall have like Execution as aforesaid.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, That in all Cases aforesaid, where the
Value of the Cattle Distrained, as aforesaid, shall not be found to be to the
Value of the Arrears Distrained for, that the Party to whom such Arrears were
Due, his Executors or Administrators may from time to time Distrain again for
the Residue of the said Arrears.

And whereas no Sheaves or Cocks of Corn, Loose, or in the Straw, or Hay in any
Barn or Granary, or in any Hovell, Stack or Rick can by the Law be Distrained,
or otherwise secured for Rent, whereby Landlords are oftentimes Deceived by
their Tennants, who Sell their Corn, Grain and Hay to Strangers, and Remove the
same from the premises Chargable with such Rent, and thereby avoid the payment
of the same.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for Remedying the said
Practice and Deceit, it shall and may from henceforth be Lawful to and for any
Person or Persons, having Rent Arrear and Due upon any Demise, Lease, or
Contract, to Seize and Secure any Sheaves or Cocks of Corn, or Corn Loose, or
in the Straw or Hay, lying, or being in any Barn or Granary, or upon any
Hovell, Stack or Rick, or otherwise, upon any part of the Land or Ground
Charged with such Rent, and to Lock up, or Distrain the same in the place where
the same shall be found, for, or in the Nature of a Distress, until the same
shall be Replevied upon good Security to be given to the Sheriff, as aforesaid.
And in Case such Distress shall not be Replevied or owned within the space of
Eight Days next after the taking thereof, then the same to be Appraised and
Sold according to the Laws and Customs of this Kingdom.

Provided Nevertheless that such Corn, Grain, or Hay so Distrained, as
aforesaid, be not Removed by the Person or Persons Distraining to the Damage of
the Owner thereof, out of the place where the same shall be found and Seized,
but be kept there as Impounded, until the same shall be Replevied or Sold, as
aforesaid. And in Case any Replevin shall be brought for such Sheaf or Sheaves
of Corn or Grain, or Hay, if the Plantiff in such Replevin shall be Nonsuit,
either before or after Appearance, or a Verdict pass against him, or Judgment
be given against him, upon Demurrer, as aforesaid, in all such Cases such
Proceedings to be by Inquisition or Fineing of the Jury at the Bar upon like
Suggestion to be made in the Connuzance or Avowry, and like Execution in such
Cases to be Awarded.

And be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That upon any
Pound-Breach, or Rescue of Goods and Chattles Distrained for Rent, the Person
or Persons grieved thereby shall in a Special Action upon the Case, for the
wrong thereby Sustained, Recover his and their Treble Damages and Costs of
Suit, against the Offender or Offenders, in any such Rescue or Pound-Breach,
any, or either of them, or against the Owners of the Goods Distrained, in Case
the same be afterward found to have come to his Use or Possession.

FINIS.

