A DECLARATION. BY The Major General and Council of Officers in Ireland,
concerning their late Actings there, and for the Trial of such Officers and
Soldiers as find themselves agrieved for being laid aside.
FEw Men in this Nation but have known, and few honest men but have lamented
the strange proceedings of those lately in Authority here, who by casting out
of the Army several eminent and faithful Officers without so much as hearing
them; and filling up their rooms for the most part with factious spirits,
Principled against Magistracy and Ministry; gave us but too much cause to
believe, so ill a way led to a worse end. But not being able so much as to
imagine, these courses were taken to bring about that horrid Design which since
we have had but too much reason to believe these Injustices were some
foundations of; We esteem it our duty with patience to submit, because the
Parliament was sitting, to whose Authority and Justice these proceedings, as we
were assured, were to be presented. But soon after we understood of those
sinful and unparalled Actings of a Factious part of the Army in England, who
not only contrary to the Laws of God and Man, but even contrary to their own
renewed and voluntary Engagements, by force interrupted the sitting of the
Parliament; and adding iniquity to iniquity, Declared some of their Laws to be
null and void to all intents and purposes, a presumption and crime which never
any but themselves durst be guilty of, and in which, as much as in them lay,
they cut up, as it were by the very roots, all those precious Rights, which
with so much Blood and Treasure had been so long and through mercy so
successfully contended for; whereby we too soon and too evidently sound, That
the Parliaments Name and Authority was but made use of, to eject such who they
knew would be obedient thereunto: By which course having freed the Army of
such, they freed all others from the fear of the Parliament by dissolving it,
as much as in them lay, who had they still sat, they knew would punish their
injustice, though they could not prevent it. How guilty herein those lately in
Authority in this Nation, and others, have been, to omit the enumerating of
many other particulars, may appear by their having been so far from declaring
against, and opposing those ruinous Actings, that they on the contrary not only
secretly, but openly promoted and encouraged such who against an express Act of
Parliament in that behalf, did own the L. General Fleetwood for Commander in
chief of the Armies in these three Nations, and advanced, as much as in them
lay, the Elections and sending unto London, of two out of each Regiment, to
subvert the Authority of Parliament, and introduce a new Government, which in
Name only should be Civil, but in Fact and Power should be entirely Military:
Nor yet contented with all this (for guilt neither ever is, nor ever thinks it
self secure) Orders were actually issued for securing and disarming all that
were dissatisfied with such Proceedings: whereby not only a slavery was
entailed upon us, but even we were designedly deprived of all visible means of
ever casting it off. Being therefore invited by the highest Call of Duty and
Necessity, we resolved with the hazard of our lives and estates, to restore the
Authority of the Parliament; and to recover those Rights which are of too much
value to be tamely lost. The justice and necessity of this undertaking was so
deeply imprinted on the hearts of many Officers and Soldiers of this Army,
that (through the mercy of God) without blood, we may say, The snare is broken,
and we are escaped: Men must say, It is wonderful in our eyes; and Christians
will say, It is the Lords doing: It seeming to be a day of Gods power, the
people are so willing.

The next care and duty after the recovery of this Army for the Parliament,
was, to put it into such Hands, as we had good cause to believe, by past and
present Actings, would preserve it for their service; for the accomplishing
whereof, We have been necessitated, to lay aside many Officers, and placed
others, qualified as abovesaid, in their room, till the Parliaments pleasure
were known. In the laying aside any Officers, this Rule has been observed, an
assurance that he had subscribed to the Lord Fleetwood's being Commander in
Chief of the three Armies; contrary to an express Act of Parliament in that
behalf; or had assisted at, or promoted the Election of Two out of each
Regiment, to be sent to London, for the introduction of a new Government, and
consequently, the destruction of the Parliaments Authority: and though none
have been put by, that were not within one of these Qualifications, yet all that
came under them have not been displaced; a difference being put between those
that made the stream, and such who through inadvertancie did swim down in it,
and since by their activeness for the Parliament, have given good proof of
their Repentance for the fault. Those that were guilty within the
above-specified Rules, were too many to admit them to a Regular Trial by the
Rules of War, before the Army was first put into faithful Hands; since to have
made those Judges of guilt, which were participants in it, might have rather
proved a sure means to have the innocent condemned, then the nocent; and to
eject any, without prescribing a known way for their vindication, if they
thought themselves injured, were not only to act an Injustice in it self, but
even that Injustice which was so lately practiced here, and which we our selves
(with so much cause) have declared against. To accord therefore this evil, It
is hereby declared, That a Court Martial is established at Dublin, the
Headquarters, for the Hearing and Determining the Cases of all Field-Officers
and Captains, which shall think themselves injured by being laid aside: And for
the same end, Orders are issuing out for Court-Martials to be held in each
County, for the inferior Officers and private Soldiers; unto which respective
places, such as are conscious of their not having acted against the Parliament,
our only General, may apply themselves for Redress, where they shall be judged
according to the usual Rules and Discipline of War. Provided that by or before
the 24 day of March. next after the publication hereof, they give in their
Names, and signify their desires to be tried accordingly; and no Officer who
is put into the Room of him that is to be tried, shall sit as Judge upon that
Officer whose command he at present enjoys. Those to be heard at Dublin, are to
give in their desire thereof to Dr. Ralph King, appointed Judge-Advocate; Those
to be heard in the Country, are to give in their Desire to the Chief Officer
respectively in each County.

Dated the ninth of January, 1659. Har. Waller. Broghill. Cha. Coote. W.
Gaulfield. Theo. Jones. J. King Eliah Green. Hen. Owen. Ben. Lucas. Rich.
Lehunt. Sol. Cambie. Samps. Towgood. Dan. Lisle. John Maunsel. H. Langrish. J.
Campbel. J. Gregory. Theo. Sandford. Jo. Harrison. Jo. Reding. Simon Garstin.
Boil Maunsel. H. Clotworthy. R. Sheils. A. Barrington.


Dublin, Printed by William Bladen, by special Order, and Reprinted at London,
by James Cottrel. 1659.


