AN ACT FOR THE Relief and Release Of Poor Distressed PRISONERS FOR Debt or
Damages.



DVBLIN: Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
on the Blind-Key, near Copper-Alley, M.DC.XC.IX.

An ACT for the Relief and Release of poor Distressed Prisoners for Debt or
Damages.
CHAP. I.
FORASMUCH as very many persons now detained in Prison, are miserably
Impoverished, either by reason of the late Unhappy Rebellion in this Kingdom,
their own Misfortunes, or otherwise, so as they are totally Disabled to give
any Satisfaction to their Creditors; and by being detained in Prison without
advantage to any, are rendered Useless and a Burden to the Kingdom, to the
great Prejudice thereof.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the same, That all persons
who were in Prison upon the First Day of August, in the Year of Our Lord God
One thousand Six hundred Ninety seven, for Debt or Damages, or for, or upon
any Action or Actions, or upon any Mean Process for Debt, or other Actions
whatsoever; which Actions by Prosecution of Law may become Judgments, or who
have Judgments Entered upon Record against them, or are Charged in Execution, or
Imprisoned upon Attachment Debt, or upon Outlawries, before or after Judgment
for Debt, or upon any other Process whatsoever, Issuing out of any Court of Law
or Equity, for the Cause of Debt or Damages, or Costs only, who shall take the
Oath hereafter mentioned, shall and may be Released, and Discharged from their
Imprisonment, in such way and manner, as is herein and hereafter provided.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful to, and for any Justice of the Peace of any County, City, Town or
Liberty, within the Kingdom of Ireland, by Warrant under his Hand and Seal, to
Require the Sheriff, Jailer, or Keeper of any Prison within his respective
Jurisdiction, to bring before him without delay, the Body of any Person being
in Prison for Debt, or any other Action, as aforesaid, on the First Day of
August aforesaid, and the said person Petitioning such Justice to be Discharged
to some convenient place, within the distance of One Mile from the said Prison,
and shall certify the Cause and Causes of the Imprisonment, before the same
Justice; which Warrant every such Sheriff, Jailer and Keeper, is hereby
Commanded to obey: And in Case such Prisoner coming before such Justice, shall
take an Oath to this effect, before the said Justice.

I A. B. do upon my Corporal Oath, Solemnly Profess and Declare before Almighty
God, That I am not worth in Lands, Money, Goods or Stock, nor any other Estate,
Real or Personal in Possession, Reversion, or Remainder, of the value of Five
pounds in the whole, or sufficient to pay the Debt or Damage, for which I am
Imprisoned: And that I have not directly, or indirectly Sold, Leased, or
otherwise Conveyed, Disposed of, or Entrusted all, or any part of my said
Money, Lands, Goods, Stock, or Estate, whereby to secure the same to Receive,
or expect any profit or advantage thereof, or to Defraud or Deceive any
Creditor or Creditors whatsoever, to whom I am Indebted.

So help me God, etc.

Which said Oath, the said Justice of the Peace, is hereby Empowered and
Authorized to Administer; that then after the making of such Oath, the said
Justice shall Remand the Prisoner to Prison, and shall without Fee give a
Certificate thereof in writing under his Hand and Seal, to the said Prisoner,
to be served on such person or persons, his or their Executors, or
Administrators, or to be left at the place of the usual Abode of such person or
persons, at whose Suit the Prisoner stands Charged and Imprisoned, thereby
appointing as well the said person or persons, as the said Prisoner, to appear
before the Justices at the next General-Quarter-Sessions of the Peace, to be
held for the same County, City, Town or Liberty; and when it shall appear upon
Oath, before the said Justices, which said Oath, the said Justices are hereby
Empowered and Authorized to Administer, that the said Certificate was so
served, or left, Ten Days or more, before the said Sessions; and that the said
Oath taken by the said Pr^soner, be not disproved by good Testimony, of any
Credible person or persons upon Oath, to be Administered by the said Justices,
by Virtue of this Act; Then the said Justices being satisfied therein, shall
without Fee direct their Warrant under their Hands and Seals, commanding the
said Sheriff, Jailer, or Keeper of the Prison, to let at Liberty, and Discharge
the said Prisoner, if Imprisoned for the Causes aforesaid, and no other,
without paying any thing for the Fees, or Chamber-Rent; Which Warrant shall be
a sufficient Discharge to the said Sheriff, Jailer, or Keeper of the Prison,
and no Action of Escape, or other Action shall be brought against them, or any
of them in any wise for the same.

Provided always, That if any Creditor shall insist to have his Debtor
continued in Prison after he has taken the said Oath, and will allow him a
weekly Maintenance, to be appointed by the Justices of the Peace, not
exceeding Fourteen pence the Week; that such Prisoner shall be continued in
Prison for the space of Three Months, on Payment of the said weekly Allowance,
as aforesaid; which said Money shall be Paid weekly to the said Prisoner
himself, and not to the Jailer, Keeper, or any other for him: And if within the
space of Three Months, after such weekly Allowance by any Creditor, no Estate
of the Prisoner shall be Discovered or Made out, before Two Justices of the
Peace of that County and Division, where the said Prisoner is kept in Prison,
then the said Prisoner shall without Fee be forthwith Discharged, by Warrant
under the Hands and Seals of any Two Justices of the Peace, of the same County
or Division, where the said Prisoner shall be so Imprisoned, to the Keeper of
such Prison, in that behalf Directed as fully and amply, as if such Prisoner
shall be so Imprisoned to the Keeper of such Prison in that behalf, directed as
fully and amply as if such Prisoner had been Discharged by Justices of the
Peace at the Quarter Sessions: And that then, and from thenceforth, the said
Weekly Allowance shall cease and determine, as if the same had never been made.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Prisoner
Discharged out of Prison by Virtue of this present Act, shall at any time
hereafter be Imprisoned for, or by reason of any Debt or Damages, or any Sum
or Sums of Money contracted or grown due to, or recovered by any person or
persons at whose Suit the said Prisoner did stand Charged in any Prison, or any
other person or persons to whom such Prisoner did give notice under the Hand
and Seal of some Justice of the Peace of the same County or place, the space of
Ten days before the time of his Discharge, of his Intention to receive the
Benefit of this Act, and of the Way and Course he intended to take for
obtaining the same, before the time of their Discharge, as aforesaid. But that
upon any Arrest for such Debt, Damages, or Sums of Money, it shall and may be
Lawful for them, showing a Duplicate of their Discharges under the Hands and
Seals of the Justices of the Peace, by whom they were Discharged, or of any Two
of them, or of such Justices of the Peace, in Case such Prisoner be discharged
after an Allowance of Maintenance by the Creditors for Three Months, as
aforesaid, which the said Justices are hereby Required to give without Fee to
every Prisoner so by them discharged, to retain an Attorney to appear for them,
and File Common Bail to every such Action, and Plead thereunto, so that the
Plantiff (if he please) may Recover and Enter Judgment against such Prisoner,
to be Executed and Levied upon the Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels of such
Prisoner so discharged, as aforesaid; his or her Wareing Apparel, Furniture for
his or her Dwelling House, the said Furniture and Necessary Tools for his or
her Trade and Occupation not exceeding Five pounds in Value, only Excepted, but
not upon the person or persons of the Prisoners, the persons of such Prisoners
being hereby for ever freed and discharged from Imprisonment for any Debt,
Trespass upon the Case, Duty, Sum or Sums of Money, or things thereunto
relating, contracted or due before the time of their Discharge, having had
Notice, as aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in Case any
Sheriff, Jailer, or Keeper of a Prison, shall refuse or delay for Three days,
to bring before such Justice of the Peace, or after a Warrant of Discharge
delivered to him, as aforesaid, refuse or neglect to set at Liberty any
Prisoner or Prisoners according to the said Order of the Justice or Justices of
the Peace, made in the pursuance of this Act; every such Jailer, Sheriff, or
Keeper of Prison shall Forfeit and pay to such Prisoner so detained, contrary
to such Order, the Sum of Twenty pounds, to be Recovered by Bill, Plaint,
Suit, or Action of Debt, in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record, wherein no
Essoyne Protection, or Wager of Law is to be allowed, nor more than one
Imparlance Granted; and shall also be liable and subject to such Fine and
Imprisonment for such time, not exceeding Two Months, as the said Justices of
the Peace shall, upon Complaint thereof to them made, Order and Award.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That upon any Action of
Escape, or other Suit brought, or to be brought, against any Justice of the
Peace, Sheriff, Jailer, or Keeper of Prison, for any thing done in Obedience to
this Act, it shall and may be Lawful to, and for any such Justice of the Peace,
Sheriff, Jailer, and Keeper of Prison, to Plead the General Issue, and give
this Act in Evidence, which shall be a Good and Sufficient Discharge, and save
harmless every such Justice of the Peace, Sheriff, Jailer and Keeper of Prison,
Pleading the same; and if the Plantiff in any such Action be Non-Suted, or
Verdict pass against him, the Defendant shall have Double Costs, to be Taxed by
the Court where such Action is brought.

Provided always, That the Discharge of any person or persons by Virtue of this
Act, shall not amount unto, or be construed to Free or Discharge any other
person or persons jointly or severally Bound for, or liable to Answer or
Satisfy the said Debt, or any part thereof, either as Principal or Surety, but
that such other person or persons shall be liable to Answer the said Debt and
Damages in such manner, to all Intents and purposes, as they were before the
Discharge of such prisoner.

Provided also, That no person by Virtue of this Act, shall be discharged out
of prison who shall be Charged in Execution with more than the Sum of Fifty
pounds to any one person principal Money and Damages.

Provided always, That if any prisoner who shall be released by Virtue of this
Act, shall at any time afterward be found, or suspected by any Creditor to
have in ready Money, Goods or Chattels in his own hands and possession, or in
the hands of any others to his or her use, or in Trust for him or her, in Value
over and above what he or she is allowed by this Act, other than such Goods in
his Shop or Workhouse, as he shall have been Credited and Trusted with since
the time of his Discharge, and for what he shall be really Indebted at the time
of making such Oath, and he or she will not, or do not upon Covenient demand,
pay his or her Debt or Debts therewith, as far as the same will reach, that
then, and in such Case, at the request of any Creditor, the said Oath shall be
tendered to him or her again by any Justice of the Peace in this Act before
Empowered to Administer the said Oath for Discharge of Prisoners, or by any
Judge of the Court wherein there is Judgment against him when he or she
refusing to take the said Oath, shall be Remanded to prison, in Execution for
such Debt or Debts, any thing in this Act to the contrary, Notwithstanding.

Provided also, That this Act shall not extend to any person or persons in
Execution for any Fine on him or her Imposed for any Offense by him or her
committed.

Prodided, that such person or persons as is, or are detained in Prison upon
any Measne Process, if it shall be desired by any Creditor before any Justice
of the Peace, to whom such Prisoner has applied for his Discharge, shall
forthwith give a Warrant to some Attorney to appear, or File common Bail for
him, or them, in the Court out of which the said Measne Process issued, and to
receive a Declaration at the Plantiffs Suit; and that such Prisoner shall
thereupon have the full Benefit of this Law, as to the Liberty of his person,
against his said Imprisonment, upon the said Measne Process, and against any
Judgment, or Execution, that shall be had against him in that Suit, and against
any other Suit that shall be brought against him for the same matter, or cause
of Action, to all intents and purposes as fully and beneficially, as if he had
been charged in Execution at the said Plantiffs Suit, before the First Day of
August aforesaid; but such person in Prison upon Measne Process, shall in case
of his refusal to give such Warrant of Attorney, loose the whole Benefit of
this Act.

Provided always, That no Merchant Stranger, or other Alien or Foreigner, that
has been Arrested, and is in Prison on any Action or Suit, for, or by reason
of any Debt, or other Engagement contracted, or Entered into beyond the Seas,
shall have any Benefit of this Act; but that all, and every such Merchant
Stranger, and other Alien and Foreigner, shall, and may be detained in prison,
and proceeded against as if this Act had never been made.

Provided always. That no prisoner shall be Discharged by Virtue of this Act,
until he shall before the Justices of Peace, who are by this Act empowered to
Discharge him, declare upon his, or her Corporal Oath, which Oath the said
Justices are hereby appointed to Administer, what Effects are belonging to him
or her, and what Debt or Debts are then Owing to him or her, within any His
Majesty's Dominions, or elsewhere, and by whom, and for what Cause, and upon
what Security; of all which a Schedule shall be made in the presence of such
Justices, and Subscribed by the Prisoner, and shall be by such Justices
returned to the next Quarter Sessions, there to be kept for the better
Information of the Creditor of such Prisoner, who, or such of them as will
join, may thereupon Sue for such Debts, or so much thereof, as will reasonably
satisfy them, in the Name of the Prisoner; and after the same Recovered and
Received, to render the Overplus thereof (their own Debts and Charges first
Deducted) to the Prisoner.

Provided always, and to Deterr all persons who are by the Charitable Intention
of this Act to be Relieved, from abusing the Favor hereby to them intended.

Be it Enacted, That if any person who shall in pursuance of this Act, take his
Oath for any the purposes hereby appointed, shall Forswear, or Perjure him or
herself, then such person being Lawfully Convicted thereof, shall beyond, and
over and above the Penalties which may by the Law now in being inflicted,
Suffer Imprisonment for the space of Seven Years, without Bail or Mainprize.

FINIS.

