THE IMPEACHMENT AND ARTICLES OF COMPLAINT AGAINST FATHER PHILIPS The Queens
Confessor.

Lately committed to the Tower, by the Honorable and high Court of Parliament
Nov. 2. 1641.

AS ALSO, The committing of three of the Queens Servants, that came to visit
him; whodeny to take the Oath of Supremacy, and the Protestation.

With the Plot about the Tower, supposed to Rescue him out, or some such Evil
Design.

With the Popes Breve sent to Father Philips, with presents brought to the
Queens Court, with the Popes picture in Gold.

As also, his sending away of above 10000. pounds, which was partly gathered
with a pretense to assist the King against the Scots.

London Printed for A. I. 1641.

FPTQC
portrait of Father Philips

THE JNPEACHMENT AND ARTICLES OF Complaint, against Father Philips, the Queens
Confessor, lately committed to the Tower, by the Honorable, and High Court of
Parliament.
I. That the said Father Philips has bin observed to be a great cause, both in
himself, and his Adherents of a great part of the unquietness of this State.

II. He with Parsons, and others their Assistants were the only cause, that
the Pope was stirred up to send Breves, to these Kingdoms of England, and
Scotland, to hinder the Oath of Allegiance and lawful Obedience of the
Subjects to our gracious King, that so they may still fish in troubled waters,

III. Of the damnable Doctrine, which he and other Jesuits have taught, to
destroy and depose Kings, has bin the cause of the civil wars, like to
befall these Kingdoms, if God in his mercy did-not prevent it.

IV. They have bin the cause of the Monopolyes projected in this Kingdmne,
especially concerning Soap, the Forest of Deane, and marking of Butter-Casks,
where all the parties were partners, and confederates with them, as Sir Basil
Brook, Sir John Winter, and a brother in Law of the said Sir John, that lived
in Worceste-shire, and Mr. Ployden, whose Servant named Baldwin, has bin seen
to deliver to Captain Read, a substitute of the Jesuits, an hundred pounds at
a time to one Jesuit that lived in his house.

V. Father Philips has bin a great Actor with the Superior of the Capuchins,
who is a most turbulent Spirit, and was sent bisher by Cardinal Richlieu of
France, to be a spy at this Court, for the French faction: and has therefore
labored by all means to breed dissensions; for the French aim at nothing
more then to make a Schism betwixt the English and the Scots, that this State
might so be weakened, and made unable to withstand them: that so they might have
an opportunity to conquer these Kingdoms: these unquiet spirits having access
to her Majesty, may importune things not fit for the State.

VI. The said Philips has bin guided by gray Friar, who by degrees has
intruded himself to be a Clark of her Majestyes Chapel, and Chaplain
extraordinary, in time of Progress. who when he is out of London, goes by the
name of M. Wilson, but his true name is William Tompson, Dr. of Divinity, as
some Jesuits have affirmed; but a most furious spirit, and unquiet: and
therefore by a nickname, is by some called Cacafugor that is, as much, as if
in English you should say, Shit-fire: by whom Fasher Philips has beens so led,
that he has been very offitient to perform whatsoever he would have done:
these two have ruled all the business concerning the two Kingdoms on the
Papists parts, and for the most part of Rome also.

VII. Vhe said Father Philips has placed many unfit persons about her Meiesty,
Sir John Winter to be her Majesty's Secretary; Seignior Gorgeos Conne) late
agent of the Pope, his brother, was by his means, admitted to be servant
extraordinar^ to the Queen; a man altogether unfit for that place; a most
scandalous person having ^hree wives all now alive.

VIII, Sundry persons by the said Father Philips have been admitted to be the
Queens servants exzraordinary, by some supposed office or other: as Myster
Labourne: Oeorge Gage (brother to Colonel Gage) bath both Oratoriant Priests,
the one of the French faction very seditious, he other of the Spanish, whoes
brother is now left reasident at ROME for them by his Master, Master William
Hambelton late agenat ROME-Penrik is sworn servant extraordinary to her
Majesty, who is a sworn Spaniard, and inttelligencer for ROME, in respect his
brother is agent here by Father Phillips; these and many otgers who are
factious and turbulent spirits have by Father Philips his means received
protection from the Queens Mh jesty.

IX. The said Philips has been much ruled by Sir Toby Mathewes. Sir John
Winter and Master Walter Mountague.

X. He was very forward with his Accomplices; for the breaking of the Ice to
begin the Treaty here for the Popes honors sake; and when sir Robert Douglas,
and Soignior Georgio were nominated, whom he thought most fit, Cardinal
Richlieu was thought fittest to be the man, who should direct him to begin the
Correspondency betwixt the Pope, and the Queen; and therefore he was sent to
France with many Letters, and from thence he was dispatched for Rome, by the
Cardinal: where he was received with great respect, and after a Viaticke, he
was dispatched again for England, with some few small Gifts, Pictures,
Crosses, Agnus Deis, and such like Popish stuff to Father Philips, and other
of that Function.

XI. The said Father Philips was the chief Agent in Correspondency with, and
bringing in of Seignior Georgio Parsons the oratorian priest, by whase
direction, this Priest being at Yaris, left wearing of Priests Clothes, and
went in the habit of a Gentleman: and because he had a shaven Crown, therefore
he wore a Perriwig, and Father Philips directed all those that sent to him, to
write to him, as to an Italian Gentleman, desirous to see these Kingdoms, and
by Father Philips: his direction, he afterward came hither: who did here
continue for the space of two years, practicing great and dangerous
Innovations from place to place. And then having dispatched his business,
returned to Rome, with great presents, from the Catholics of the greater fort.

XII. Whereas it has pleased God, to dlesse us with a hopeful Prince, to the
Comfort of our King and Kingdom: yet the said Father Philips has attempted to
traduce his tender years to Popery. But God has prevented him of his purpose:
and let us pray to God to preserve that royal Race from Popery, and the whole
Land from all Innovation: that our gracious King may rule gloriously, and the
whole Land live in peace, to the honor of God, and comfort of us all, Amen.

AT the first coming of Father Philips to the Tower, there were diverse
Jesuits, and many of the Popish faction that came to visit him; but it has
pleased the Honorable Assembly in Parliament (since) to reclaim them. And
amongst the rest, that came to him: there are committed three of the Queens
Servants, who refuse to take the Oath. VIZ. The Clarke of the Queens Closet.
The Queens Cup Bearer. And Her Majesty's Apothecary.


Also, since Father Philips was committed to the Tower, there have to the
number of about an hundred lusty stout fellows taken up lodgings about the
Tower; to what intents, God knows: but because they give no better
satisfaction to the Honorable House of Parliament: it has pleased them to
command them to custody, where they remain about the tower; part at the ship,
and the rest at other places about the Tower, until it please the honorable
Assembly further to examine the matter.

A perfect Copy of the Popes Breve, sent from Rome to Father Philips, by
Seigneor Georgeo.
To the Clergy, Seouler, and Reguler, and Lay-Catholicks of the three Kingdoms
of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
HIs Holiness being very sorry for such jarres, and divisious, between the
Seculer, and the Clergy, to the great prejudice of the Catholic Church, and
for that respect, having a Farherly care of souls in those Kingdoms of
England, Scotland, and Ireland: he has sent expressing the Reverend Fathers
Georgio Parsona, one of his Family, to compose and reconcile them, if he can.

THis Seignior Georgio, after he had gained Audience of the King to the Queen,
he presents Meddals, and Relics of Saints, and some pieces of gold and
silver, with the Popes picture stamped on them. Then at last aspiring to a
Cardinals hat, he laden with great store of Jewels and Gold, mounting to above
10000. pounds, returned to Rome: which 'Jewels and Gold he got, partly of the
money which Recusants sent for the King, to assist him in the Northern
Expedition, and partly given him by Papist Ladies, and Gentiewomen.

This Siegneor Georgeo was made Patriarth of Jerusalem, whose pride was so puffed
np when Sir William Hambleton was sent from Father Philips to that Court: whose
carriage was like to Siegneor Georgeo here, carryig clothed in man's apparel
through England, Scotland, France, and Italy, his sweetheart Eugenius Bonny, a
daughter of the young man, of his Majesty's Wine-Cellec.

FINIS.

