AN ACT For the Settling of the EXCIZE AND NEW IMPOST Upon HIS MAJESTY, His
Heirs and Successors, according to the Book of Rates therein inserted.

DUBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, and are to sold by Samuel Dancer in Castle-street,

An Act FOR The Settling of the Excize or New Impost, upon His Majesty, His
Heirs and Successors, according to the Book of Rates therein inserted.
THe Lords spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, in consideration of the Gracious inclinations and intentions of Your
Royal Majesty, for the good quiet and repose of this your Majesty's Realm of
Ireland, and the great and certain charge which for this cause must and will
exhaust and diminish your Majesty's Treasure, without some timely provision
made for remedy thereof, and withal being very sensible how much it will
concern the peace, tranquillity and welfare of all your Majesty's good Subjects,
that some certain Revenue be established for and toward the constant pay of
the Army and Forces of your Majesty and for defraying other public charges in
the defense and preservation of this your Majesty's Realm: And considering also
that the manner and means of raising moneys by way of an Excize and New Impost,
is found by experience to be the most equal and indifferent Leavy that can be
made or laid on the people for and toward the ends and purposes aforesaid.

In all humbleness We your Majesty's most faithful and loyal Subjects of your
Highness Realm of Ireland, do pray and beseech your Majesty, that it may be
Enacted; And be it Enacted by your most excellent Majesty, by and with the
advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, and by Authority of the same, That from and after
the Five and twentieth day of December, One thousand six hundred sixty one, the
several ^ates and Charges hereafter mentioned, and no other, in and by the name
of the Excize or New Impost, shall be set, laid and imposed, and are hereby
set, laid and imposed to be had, levied, demanded, collected, received,
recovered and paid in and throughout the Realm of Ireland, upon all and every
the Commodities, Merchandises and Manufa^tures, as well Native as imported or
Foreign, in manner and form following, viz.

For every Thirty two Gallons of Ale and Beer, of above six shillings the
barrel price brewed within this Realm by the common Brewer, or in his vessels,
or by any other ^erson or persons who shall tap or sell out Beer or Ale
publicly or privately, to be paid ^y the said Brewer or such other person or
^ersons respectively, Two shillings and six ^ence; and so proportionably for a
greater ^^ lesser quantity.

For every Thirty two Gallons of six ^hillings Beer or Ale, or under that
price, ^rewed by the common Brewer, or in his Vessels, or by any other person
or persons who shall tap and sell such Beer or Ale pub^^^kly or privately, to
be paid by the said Brewer or such other person or persons as aforesaid, six
pence, and so proportionably for a greater or lesser quantity.

For all Aqua-vitae or strongwaters made or distilled within this Realm,
whether of Foreign or Domestic spirits or materials to be afterward sold and
vended, to be paid upon every Gallon by the first maker or Distiller thereof
four pence,

For all manner and sorts of Drugs already imported, and remaining on the hands
of the Merchant importer, who is not a shopkeeper, Retailer or Consumptioner
thereof, or else to be imported or brought into any the Ports or places of this
Realm from and after the said five and twentieth day of December, One thousand
six hundred sixty one, of the value of every Twenty shillings of the same
Drugs, according to the several and particular Rates and Values of the same
Drugs, as they are particularly and respectively rated and valued in the book
of Rates herein after mentioned, and referred unto, to be paid and so after
that Rate for a greater or lesser quantity, two shillings.

For all manner and sorts of Raw hemp, undrest Flax, Tow, Ta^, Rosin, Pitch,
Wax, Cable, Cable Yarn, or Cordage, already imported, and remaining on the
hands of the Merchant importer, who is not a ^^opkeeper, Retailer, or
Consumptioner thereof, or else to be imported or brought in^o any the Ports or
places of this Realm, from and after the said five and twentieth day of
December, One thousand six hundred sixty ^ne, of the value of every Twenty
shillings ^f the same Goods and commodities, according to the several and
particular Rates and Values of the same, as they are particularly and
respectively rated and valued in the said ^ook of Rates hereafter mentioned and
re^^red unto, to be paid, and so after that rate ^r a greater or lesser
quantity, six pence.

For all sorts of Wine, Tobacco, Silks, ^alts, and other Goods, Wares,
commo^ities and merchandises, of what nature or ^inde soever, specified and
rated in the said ^ook of Rates hereafter mentioned and refer^ed unto, already
imported and remaining ^n the hands of the Merchant importer, who ^s not a
shopkeeper, Retailer, or Consump^^oner thereof, or else to be imported and
^rought into any the Ports or places of this ^ealm, from and after the said
five and ^^entieth day of December, One thousand (...) hundred sixty one, of
the value of every Twenty shillings of the same Wines, Tobacco, silks, salt,
and other Goods, Wares, Commodities and Merchandises, according as they are
particularly and respectively rated and valued in this book of Rates herein
after mentioned, and referred unto, and to be paid, and so after that rate for
a greater or lesser quantity, twelve pence.

For all other sorts of Goods, Wares, Commodities, Merchandises whatsoever,
omitted and not specified, contained, or rated in the said books of Rates or
Values hereafter mentioned, except Jewels, Bullion, Corn, Victuals, Arms and
Ammunition already imported, or remaining on the hands of the Merchant importer
who is not a shopkeeper, Retailer, or Consumptioner, or else to be imported or
brought into any the Ports or places of this Realm, from and after the said
Five and twentieth day of December, One thousand six hundred sixty one, of the
value of every Twenty shillings of the same Goods, Wares, Commodities and
Merchandises, as they shall or do stand Taxed in the book of Rates for Customs
established by this present Parliament, and if omitted and not specified there,
then as they shall be rated and valued by the Sub-commissioner, Collector and
Searcher for Excize in the Port or place where the same shall happen to be
imported, or according to the highest price the said commodities in their
several species, sortments and kinds, shall then bear in the Market to be paid;
and so after that rate for a greater or lesser quantity, twelve pence.

All which Duties to be paid for any Commodities or Merchandises already or
hereafter to be imported as aforesaid, shall from time to time and at all times
be paid by the first buyer of all and every the said commodities and
Merchandises, before his receiving of the same from the Merchant that has
already, or shall hereafter import or bring in the same, (except as hereafter
is excepted.)

And unless the merchant importer shall or do happen to be a shopkeeper,
Retailer, or one employing the commodities of his importation for his own use
and consumption, in all and every which cases the duties of Excize shall be
paid and satisfied by such Importer, shopkeeper, Retailer, or other person as
aforesaid, upon the importing and landing of his or their Goods, and before he
or they be permitted and suffered to receive or carry his or their goods away
from the Customehouse, or other place of the Port in which they may happen to
be landed and brought on shore, and the rates and values before mentioned,
according to which the Excize is intended to be paid by this present Act, as
aforesaid, are declared and enacted to be the rates and values mentioned and
expressed in one book of rates and values hereafter following, entitled, A
book of Rates and values of Goods and merchandises imported; according to which
Excize is to be paid by the first buyer or importer respectively, which said
book of rates and values, and every article, rule and clause therein contained,
shall be and remain as eff^ctual to all intents and purposes, as if the same
were included particularly in the body of this Act:

And for the better levying and collecting all and every of the said duties of
Excise aforesaid, and preventing the many frauds, deceipts, and undue practices
which may be had and used by evil disposed persons and others to elude this
present Act.

And be it further enacted and ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all
and every the merchants importers, who keep neither shop, nor retail or consume
the goods and commodities of their own importation, inhabiting or trading
within the city of Dublin, and all other the Towns corporate, Ports, and all
other places of this Kingdom, do at or upon the first day of January, One
thousand six hundred sixty one, make and deliver unto the Commissioners of
Excize hereafter mentioned, their Sub-commissioners, Collectors, or other chief
Officer resident at the Office of Excize, under which he or they live or
inhabit, a ^rue and perfect account, whether they have any imported or foreign
goods and commo^ities excizeable, resting on his or their hands, ^r in the
hands of any other, to his or their ^^se, at the time of giving in such account
or ^ccompts or no, and if so, to mention and ^xpress the true species,
sortment, kind, quality and quantity of all and every the same, and shall
likewise make oath before the said Commissioners, Sub-commissioners, or other
^hief Officer as aforesaid, who, or any one of them, are hereby authorized and
required to admi^ister the same, that the Account then by him ^r them given in,
is a true just and perfect ac^ompt, as it is by him or them delivered in; and
that they not colourably or otherwise, under a^y pretense whatsoever, out of
favor affection, ^r respect to themselves, or any other or others concealed,
omitted, or left out any goods ^r commodities resting or remaining on his or
their hands, or the hands of any other or others, for his or their use at the
time aforesaid. And further, That all and every the goods in the said account
mentioned and expressed, and shown unto the Officer or Officers as hereafter is
directed, were (Bona Fide) imported by him or themselves, and entered upon their
landing in his or their names, and not belonging unto, or entered in the names
of any other or others whatsoever, and after and upon the delivering of every
such account respectively, the said Commissioners of the Excize, or their
Sub-commissioners, Collector or chief Officer respectively, are hereby charged
and required to send one or more Officer or Officers to enter into the cellars,
vaults, storehouses, warehouse, store-cellars, or other places, of every
merchant, delivering ^ giving in account as aforesaid, to search, see, and try
whether the quality and quantity of goods every or any such person has in his
or their hands, or any other person or persons to his or their use, do exceed
such account, or no; and if the same be found to agree, that then the account
given in, shall be the rise and beginning of a new account for the future to be
had, and kept in the Excize office with every the aforesaid merchants
respectively, who ^orthwith, upon the agreeing of their rest, or ^emainder as
aforesaid, shall make and enter unto a sufficient obligation in the Law, in
^uch form and manner as hereafter is direct^d and appointed, to be done by
known Mer^hants entering and landing their goods, not ^o deliver all or any of
the same, before the du^es of Excize shall be duly and truly answer^d,
according to the purport and meaning of ^his present Act: And in case any
Merchant, ^porter, or other, liable to give in an account ^s aforesaid, shall
neglect, omit or refuse to ^ake and deliver in such account at the time
^foresaid, or else making and delivering in such ^ccompt, and at such time as
aforesaid, shall ^ot upon demand thereof by such Officer or ^fficers as shall
be appointed as aforesaid, ^rmit and suffer him or them to enter into ^s or
their several Vaults, storehouses, ^arehouses, Storecellars, or other places ^
search, see and take Account of the quantity and quality of all and every the
goods and ^mmodities Excizeable that shall be or re^ain in all or any the same,
or shall conceal, ^^e, or not show all and every his and their ^^ults,
storehouses, warehouses, storecellars, ^ other places, or any Goods or
commodities ^^oresaid, from the view and search of any such Officer or Officers
shall for every such h^ or their default therein, lose and forfeit (...) sum of
two hundred pounds, to be levied ^ distress, or else for want thereof the party
offending to be committed to prison as he^ after is appointed.

That no goods, wares, commodities ^ merchandises whatsoever excizeable, from
a^ after the said five and twentieth day of D^cember, One thousand six hundred
sixty o^^ be taken up or discharged out of any Gabba^ Lighter, Ship, Vessel or
Bottom whatsoeve^ coming from any part beyond the Sea, bei^ not in leak or
wrack; to be laid on land, or ^den or put off or from any Wharf, Key, or
another place on the land into any gabbard, lig^ter, ship Vessel or other
bottom whatsoever, be transported or shipped off before such Ga^bard, Lighter,
ship, Vessel or other botto^ have been first entered into the Custom house such
Port or other place, where such ve^ shall happen to unlade or lade, or at any
oth^ time or times but only in the day light (the is to say) from the first of
March until the (...) of September, betwixt the sunrising ^ sunsetting, and
from the last day of September until the first of March, between the ho^ of
seven in the morning and four in the aft^noon, nor at, in or upon any other
place or places, than upon the open Key, Wharfs, Land^ng places, slips of the
several Customhouses of the ports of this Realm, or such other places as the
Lord Lieutenant, Lord Deputy, or other chief Governor or Governors and
privie-Council of this Realm for the time being, upon application made unto
them by the commissioners of Excize hereafter mentioned, shall therefore assign
and appoint from time ^o time, any former Law, Custom or usage to the contrary
notwithstanding; nor without the cognizance, knowledge, privity or consent of
such Officer or Officers as shall be on board any such ship or other Vessel
attending the unlading thereof, upon pain of forfeiture not one^y of all such
goods, wares and merchandises so discharged or laden contrary to the true
meaning hereof; but further also the value of the said goods, wares and
merchandises to be levied by distress upon the goods and chattles of ^^e
Claimers or proprietors of the same, as hereafter in this Act is directed and
appointed.

That all Owners, Masters, Pursers or other persons taking charge of any ship,
^essel or bottom, out of or into-which wares ^r merchandises imported from or
shipped out ^r beyond the Seas, shall be discharged or laden, delivering,
receiving or permitting any suffering either themselves or any of their ships
company for them, either by or without his or their consent, to be delivered
from or received on board into or out of any Gabbar^ Lighter, Hoyboat or other
vessel whatsoever any goods, wares or merchandises in any other place or
places, or at any other hours o^ times than is before limited and appointed or
without the cognizance, knowledge, privi^^ or consent of the Officer or
Officers on boar^ as aforesaid, where any such Officer shall b^ every such
Owner, Master, Purser, or other person, taking charge of any such ship, gabba^
or vessel, shall forfeit and lose for every suc^ offense one hundred pound, to
be levied by d^stress of the goods and chattles of such o^ner, Master, Purser
or other person, or in d^fault thereof to be committed unto prison, ^^
hereafter is directed, there to remain ^^ twelve months without bail or
main-priz^ unless he shall before that time pay and sati^fie the same.

And every Mariner, Seaman or other person knowing, consenting, aiding,
assisting ^^ being present at the delivering or receiving any goods or
commodities out of or into a^^ ship, gabbard, lighter, hoy-boat or other ves^^^
whatsoever, contrary to the true intent and meaning hereof as aforesaid, who
shall not within one month after the doing thereof disclose the same unto the
chief Commissioners, their Sub-commissioners, or Officers for the Excize
hereafter in this Act mentioned, of the port or place where or within whose
office or charge any such offense shall be committed or done, shall for every
such concealment or not disclosing such offense, as is afores^id forfeit and
lose ten pounds of good and lawful moneys to be levied by distress, or in
default thereof the party offending to be sent to the next house of Correction,
and dealt with as hereafter is directed and appointed.

That no person or persons having the charge of any Gabbard, Lighter, Boat,
Wher^y, Skiff or other vessel whatsoever* usually bringing and carrying goods
from on board any ship or vessel to the shore or from the shore, to any other
ship or vessel, riding or being in any road, harbor or port of this Realm
shall ^eceive any goods or commodities Excizeable unto his or their Gabbard,
Lighter, Boat, ^herry, Skiff or other Vessel to carry the same on board any
other ship or Vessel as aforesaid, at any other place or places, or at any
other hours or times than is expressed and appointed in the foregoing Articles,
nor shall receive or take into his or their Gabbard, Lighter, Boat, Wherry,
Skiff or other vessel, from on board any other ship or vessel, riding or being
in any road, harbor or port, not being in wrack or leak, any goods or
commodities whatsoever to carry the same on shore but at the same hours and
places, nor before he or they shall first receive a note from the Officer for
Excize where any such Officer shall be attending on board such ship or vessel,
out of which the said goods shall be delivered, which Note the said Officer is
hereby required and enjoined to make and deliver accordingly specifying the
name of such person that has charge of the same Gabbard, Lighter, boat,
Wherry, Skiff, or other vessel, and the marks and numbers of every Cask,
Hogshead, Pack, Farthel, Truss, bale, Seron, bag, Potace, ballot, Role, bundle,
box, or outward form ^^ bulk of any parcel or piece goods within the same and
also the Key, Wharf or place where the said goods are to be landed, which shall
^^ such Key, Wharf or place, and no other, as i^ or shall be allowed and
appointed for landing and bringing goods on shore as aforesaid, ^^ shall
afterward discharge and land, or attemp^ or cause to be discharged and landed
all or any the goods and commodities received from ^board as aforesaid, at any
other hours, ^imes or seasons, than at the hours and times aforesaid, or at any
other place or places than ^t or upon the open Key, Wharf or other landing
places of the several and respective Custom houses of the ports of this Realm,
or such other place or places as is or shall be al^owed and appointed for doing
thereof, or without he or they first produce and deliver to the Waiter on shore
the note received from the Waiter or Officer on board, where such Officer shall
be as aforesaid, upon pain not only that every such person or persons having
charge of such Gabbard, Lighter, boat, Wherry, Skiff or other vessel, doing
contrary hereunto* shall forfeit and lose the sum of Ten pounds to be levied by
distress on his and their respective goods and chattles, or in default thereof
suffer imprisonment, and be punished as is hereafter directed and appointed,
but also every Gabbard, Lighter, boat, Wherry, ^kiff or other vessel into or
out of which such Goods shall be received or landed, together with the Goods so
received and landed, or attempted to be landed, together with their value,
shall be forfeited and confiscated: And all Mariners and seamen or other
persons, that shall be found or discovered to have sailed rowed, shored, towed
and managed, or were helping and assisting in the sailing, shoring, towing, or
managing of any such Gabbard, Lighter, boat, Wherry, skiff or other vessel so
forfeited, shall pay and lose every of them the sum of five pounds to be levied
by Distress, or else the party offending to be imprisoned and punished as
hereafter is directed, such only of them excepted, as shall within thirty days
next after any such Offense committed, make known or discover the same unto
some or more of the Commissioners of Excize, their sub-commissioners,
Collectors or Officers of the Port or place where the same was done and acted.

That no Wharffinger, or keeper of any Crane or Warehouse, no Porter, Carman,
Waterman or other person, do take up or let down, or help to take up or let
down, or otherwise permit, suffer, help, aid or assist the bringing on or
shipping off any Wharf, Key or other place, any Goods or merchandises
whatsoever, but in the presence of an Officer for the excize, and at seasonable
hours as aforesaid, upon penalty to forfeit ten pounds for every such offense.

That every Porter, Carman, or other person whatsoever, that shall at any
unseasonable hour, or from any unlawful place, draw, ^arry or convey any goods
or merchandises ^xcizeable in any Coach, Cart, Wagon, ^umbrel, or other manner
of Draught or ^se by way of burden, and every Porter, Car^an, or other person,
that shall knowingly ^^ any other time whatsoever, though sea^^nable, load,
drive, carry or convey any ^oods and Merchandises, which shall have ^^en
landed, or laid on shore, before Entry ^^st made at any unseasonable hour, or
at any ^nlawfull place, shall for his or their so doing, ^ot only lose and pay
five pounds to be levied ^ distress, or else punished as hereafter is ^rected;
but the Coach, Cart or other ^raught, with the Horses or Cattle drawing (...)
them, or their value shall be forfeited and ^^^fiscated.

And in case any Porter, Carman or other ^^^son carrying or conveying, as
aforesaid, ^ll be met and discovered doing thereof, ^t it shall and may be
lawful for any Offi^^r of the Excise, or other person to seize ^^d secure
every such Coach, Cart, Wagon, ^^mbrel, Draught, with the horses and ^^ttle
drawing, and the person driving in the ^^^e, that so they may be proceeded
against ^herein is directed and appointed.

That all Goods, Wares, Merchandises and Commodities whatsoever, coming in
going out either from or to any Part Place beyond the sea, or to any Port or
^^ven of this Realm, that shall be unshippe^ landed or laid on shore, or else
shipped (...) from the same at any hours or times, or ^ther Keys, Wharfs or
places than as before in this Act mentioned, which are hereby i^tended and
declared to be the only seasona^^^ and lawful times and places for shipping ^^
landing Goods, or that shall be unshipp^^ at any time before due Entry of the
sa^^ made with, or the Warrant or License (...) and obtained from the Officer
of Excise in t^^ Port where such Goods shall be unshipp^^ landed or shipped
off, for doing thereof sh^^ be lost and forfeited, and the Merchant I^porter,
or other person that shall land, or sh^^ or cause the same or any part thereof
to ^^ landed or shipped, shall likewise forfeit m^^^ the just vain of the
Goods so landed or sh^^ped off, or otherwise be proceeded against hereafter is
appointed.

That no Merchant or Merchants, or ^ other person or persons whatsoever, entr^
any Goods, Wares, or Merchandises I^wards from beyond the seas, shall enter ^^
or their Goods or Commodities in any oth^^ than the name of the true and real
Importer of the said Goods and commodities, nor shall make use of the name of
any known Merchant, or any other person or persons whatsoever, to color his or
their goods, whether ^t be with or without the consent of such known Merchant,
or other person or persons, upon pain of forfeiture of such goods or the ^alue
of the Goods found or discovered to be so entered or colored contrary to the
true meaning hereof, to be levied or proceeded against, as hereafter in this
Act is directed and ^ppointed.

That every merchant or Importer that is not a shopkeeper, Retailer or
Consumptioner, after Entry of his or their Goods by ^ill under his or their
hand or the hand of such for whom he or they will engage to be answerable,
presently and before he or they ^e permitted to have any Warrant to receive his
or their Goods out of the ship, or from the waterside, shall make and enter
into sufficient Obligation in the Law, in which he or they singly, if he or
they be known Merchants and reputed responsible persons, or otherwise with
sufficient security, shall be bound to our Sovereign Lord the King in such sum
or sums of Money as shall amount to the double value of his or their Goods,
with Condition that he or they shall not and will n^^ deliver or cause to
suffer any of the said Good to be delivered unto any of the buyers thereof, or
put or delivered into the custody o^ possession of any shopkeeper or Retayle
whatsoever, before such time as the duty o^ Excize set and imposed by this
present Act upon his or their said Goods, be first duly paid and satisfied.

And in case any the persons aforesaid cannot or will not give bond in manner
an^ form aforesaid, That every such person sha^ then be liable to pay down the
Excize of h^^ Goods, and if he shall not be able, or els^ refuse the doing
thereof, that then the Commissioners of Excize, their Sub-Commissioners and
Collectors respectively, in every Port of this Realm, or such as they shall
appoint, are hereby authorized and required t^ take up such persons Goods, and
after du^ notice taken in the presence of the Owner, o^ such as he shall
appoint, of the Quantity an^ Quality thereof; or if he refuse, in the presence
of two good witnesses, to house an^ lay the same up in his Majesty's or other
fitting Warehouse or Warehouses, there to be kept until sufficient bond be
given or Excize fully paid, as aforesaid. And the Owner or Proprietor
aforesaid, coming to clear his or their Goods, shall besides his or their
Excize pay and satisfy such moderate Rates by the Week or Month for Warehouse
Room of his or their Goods, as the Commissioners of Excize, or their
sub-commissioners, Collectors, or other chief Officer in the Ports respectively
in their discretions shall think meet.

That every Merchant, or Importer of any Excizeable Commodities, after he has
Entered his Goods and given bond as aforesaid, shall afterward upon sail of all
or any part of the same, under his own hand, or the hand of his servant, for
whom he shall be responsible, certify in writing the Quality, Quantity, Weight
and Measure of his goods sold, with the name of the buyer, who bringing and
delivering of the same unto the Office of Excize under which he lives, shall
then and there pay the Excize of the Goods so certified to be sold, unto the
Officer appointed to receive the same, who shall thereupon give him a receipt
for such his Excize, and no Merchant Importer aforesaid, before delivery of
such Certificate, and payment of the Excize as aforesaid, shall deliver or
cause to be delivered, nor any buyer or other person receive all or any such
Goods upon pain of forfeiture of double the value of the Goods so delivered and
received, which Forfeiture the said buyer and Receiver shall be only liable
unto, and subject to such other proceedings for want of Distress, as is
hereafter directed.

That a barter, Truck or Exchange of one Goods for another, shall to all
Intents and Purposes be deemed and reputed a sale, and Excize presently paid
for both Commodities, if they be both liable to pay Excize, or for such of the
Commodities as is liable thereunto, upon pain of forfeiting by the parties
bartering, trucking or exchanging equally, as in case of not paying Excize for
Goods upon sale of them.

That every Shopkeeper, Retailer, or other person importing any Commodities or
wares of his own Trade, or for his own private use or expense, shall not be
permitted to unship, take up or land the same, before he shall first make true
Entry both for the Quantity and Quality, nor be permitted to carry away all or
every part of the same, before the Excize be fully paid and satisfied.

And if any shopkeeper or Retailer either shall take up, or carry away his
Goods before due Entry, or Payment of Excize, or shall enter his Goods in any
other persons name than his own, or if any shall enter or take up any Goods for
any shopkeeper, Retailer, or Consumptioner, such shopkeeper, or Retailer, or
other person whatsoever, shall respectively forfeit double the Value of the
said Goods so taken up or carried away, to be levied by distress of the Goods
and Chattels of such Offender respectively: And in default thereof every such
Offender to be Imprisoned till due satisfaction be made for such Forfeiture, as
is hereafter appointed.

That if any Merchant, shopkeeper or other person having Goods to Enter, shall
voluntarily declare upon his Oath, before the Commissioners of Excize, their
Sub-Commissioners or other chief Officer in the respective Ports, who are
hereby authorized and empowered to take and administer such Oath, that he knows
not the true and just Quantity or Quality of such his Goods, in all and every
such case, or upon any other emergencie requiring the same, it shall and may
(any thing before in this present Act to the contrary notwithstanding) be
lawful to the Commissioners of Excize, their Sub-commissioners, and Collectors
respectively in the Ports, to grant Warrant and License for bringing the same
to the Customhouse Key or Wharf, where the same shall be taken up, and viewed
in some convenient place, in the presence of an Officer appointed thereunto;
and the owner and Proprietor shall thereupon make particular Entries thereof,
both for quantity and quality, upon pain of forfeiting the Goods and value of
the Goods which shall be omitted to be entered, or else which shall be entered
short, or not according to their true denominations and kinds.

That all and every Owner, Master and Commander of any ship or coasting Vessel
transporting or carrying any Goods or Commodities from one Port to another
within this Realm shall not receive on board, discharge or deliver on shore, or
into any other Gabbard or Lighter or Boat, to be carried on shore, any Goods or
commodities Excizeable at any other than seasonable hours and times, and from,
at or upon no other Keys and places than is before declared, nor without
License and leave first had for doing thereof from the Commissioners of Excize,
their Sub-Commissioners, Collectors or Officers upon ^ain, that every Owner,
Master and Commander of such ship or Vessel shall for every ^me he shall so
offend, pay and lose the sum ^f twenty pounds, and every Mariner, Seaman or
other knowing thereof, or being aid^ng, a betting or assisting in doing
thereof, the ^um of five pounds, to be levied by distress, or ^therwise
proceeded against as hereafter is directed: that every Owner, Master or
Commander taking charge of any coasting Vessels as aforesaid, after he is
entered or laden, shall not go out of the Port before he do first ^eceive a
Let-pass or Transire, from the Commissioners of Excize, their
sub-commission^rs, Collectors or other Officer in the re^pective Ports out of
which he is going, spe^ifying and expressing the Quality and Quan^ity of the
Goods and Commodities excizeable, and to what Port, which to Let-pass or
Transire the said Commissioners and their Officers respectively are hereby
charged and ^equired to make and give accordingly. Nor shall any such Owner,
Master or Command^r arriving afterward at his or their intended, ^r at any
other Port of this Realm be permitted to receive any Warrant for landing and
delivering of the Goods and Commodities ^y him or them transported and carried
at or upon the shore or Land before he or they do first deliver unto the
Officer for Excize in the said Port appointed to receive the same, the
aforesaid Let-pass or Transire, and that then the aforesaid Owner, Master,
Commander or such other person who was constantly on Board and sailed along the
whole Voyage of the said ship or Vessel, and no other shall make Oath before
the Commissioners for excize, their Sub-Commissioners, Collectors, or other
Officers who are hereby authorized and empowered to administer such Oath, that
to his certain knowledge there was not nor had not been laden on board, or taken
into the said ship or Vessel, any Goods or Commodities excizeable, since the
granting of the said Let-pass or Transire, nor that the said ship or Vessel had
been beyond the seas, nor at any other place or Port except such place and Port
as he shall then and there declare: And in case such ship or Vessel be to
deliver part of her Goods or lading at one Port, and the rest at any other Port
or Ports that the Officers for excize where such part or parts of the said
Good^ or lading shall happen to be delivered, shall certify or endorse on the
backside of the said Let pass or Transire, the quantity and quality of the
Goods or lading mentioned in the said Let-pass, which have been landed and
delivered in such Port or Ports.

That all shopkeepers, Retailers and others shipping Goods which had before
paid excize for any the Ports of this Realm shall take and receive from the
Officer of excize in the Port out of which he shall ship the same, certificate
under the hand of such Officer certifying the contents, Quantity and Quality of
the same, and that they are the Goods and Wares of a shopkeeper or Retailer,
which Certificate shall be delivered to the Officer of excize in the Port where
they arrive, who shall thereupon grant Warrant for their landing and taking up
without further question or trouble; but if such Certificate be concealed or
omitted to be taken out or delivered as aforesaid, that then such Goods shall
be reputed Merchants Goods, and shall be liable to entry, have bond given, or
payment made of the excize of the same, in such manner as if they had come
directly thither from any Part or places beyond the ^eas.

That all goods entered for the Custom either inwards or outward, shall be
entered in the name of the true Owner and Proprietor of the same, and no other,
upon pain that all Goods entered otherwise for evading or eluding the present
Duties of Excize shall be seized, forfeited and condemned, as is hereafter
directed.

And in case any shopkeeper, Retailer or other, shall colourably or otherwise
fraudulently ship out any Goods or Commodities of some known Merchants or
other, and not liable to Excize until sa^e of the same, al^ and every such
shopkeeper or Retayler pretending property in such Goods shall forfeit double
the value of the same, to be levied by Distress, and further be proceeded
against a^ is hereafter directed and appointed; and likewise be disfranchised
and made incapable for ever after to be a Member of any Borough or Town
Corporate within thi^ Realm; and the Mayor and other Magistrates of the
Borough or Town Corporate ^ which he is a Member, are hereby require^ and
authorized upon proof made thereof, ^ proceed to the disfranchising of such
person accordingly.

That forasmuch as sundry Commoditi^^ are perishable and liable to leakidge,
wa^ and decay, the Commissioners of Excize, the^ sub-commissioners, and
Collectors of t^^ Ports respectively, shall therefore and are hereby authorized
to appoint sworn Officers for the tasting of all decayed Wines, and viewing of
all perishable Commodities, and upon report made by them shall make and give
such allowance for the said cause and reasons, upon the landing and before the
housing of such Goods as they in their Judgments shall think fit, not
exceeding or allowing more than is given or afforded for the same cause in the
like matter of Customs, and subsidy of Tonnage or poundage, according to which
they shall at all times regulate and govern themselves accordingly.

That for taking away all disputes or con^roversies that may arise touching the
con^ents of a Tun of Wines, It is hereby De^lared, although two hundred Fifty
two Gal^ons is the just measure of one Tun, that ^evertheless two buts, two
Pipes, four Hog^eads of what sort soever, six Teirces, three ^uncheons, or
Tercions, and eight Quar^er Casks, shall be reckoned and accounted a ^un of
Wine, and every Cask of Wine ^^ported, which if full, shall exceed a
Quar^er-Cask, shall be accounted for a Teirce, and every Cask that shall exceed
a Teirce, ^^all be accounted for a Hogshead, and every Cask that shall exceed
an Hogshead shall be accounted for a Puncheon, and every Cask that exceeds a
Puncheon shall be accounted a But or Pipe, without any allowance of Vndergage
whatsoever.

That all common Brewers of beer and Ale-makers, and Distillers of Aqua-vitae
and Strong Water to sell again in their shops, who by this present Act are
charged with Excize, and liable to payment thereof, upon the brewing or making
of their beer and ale, Aqua-Vitae and strong water, shall under their own
hands, or the hands of such for whom they shall be responsible weekly (that is
to say) On the monday of every Week, make true entry at the Office of Excize
under which they live, of the Quality and Quantity of all beer and ale,
Aqua-Vitae and strong water by them brewed, made and distilled the Week
foregoing, and at the same time pay and clear the Excize, upon pain of
forfeiting twenty pounds for the first, forty pounds for the second, and sixty
pounds for the third week they or any of them, or any other for them as
aforesaid, shall neglect, refuse or omit to make such entry and payment as
aforesaid, and further to forfeit double the value of the beer, ale, Aqua-Vitae
and strong water by them made and brewed in those or any of those Weeks, and
before such Entry and payment of Excize as aforesaid, the same to be levied by
distress, and in default thereof, the party offending to be proceeded against
as is hereafter mentioned and expressed.

And in case any common brewer of beer, and ale-maker, or Distiller of
Aqua-Vitae or strong water shall for more than three several Weeks neglect or
refuse to enter and pay weekly his Excize as aforesaid, every such brewer,
maker or distiller of Aqua-Vitae or strong water, I shall for ever after be
disabled and made incapable of exercizing the Trade of a common brewer, maker
or distiller of Aqua-Vitae or strong water, unless and until he shall pay one
hundred pounds, and give bonds unto our Sovereign Lord the King, with
sufficient Sureties for his due and constant entering and paying weekly in the
future, as aforesaid.

That all common brewers in paying and clearing their Excize, shall from time
to time, and at all times, be allowed sixty four Gallons in every seven hundred
and four Gallons, of beer; and Thirty two Gallons in every six hundred seventy
Two Gallons of Ale, and so proportionably for a greater or lesser Quantity by
them brewed free of Duties to be deducted and defaulked from their payments to
be for and in respect of Filling, Waste, Leakage, Returns, or at any other
Accidents or Considerations whatsoever.

That no Vintners, Inkeepers, Victualers, Alehouse-keepers, or other persons
whatsoever, that use common selling of beer, Ale, Aqua-Vitae, or strong water,
shall be permitted to brew, make or distill his or their own beer, Ale,
Aqua-Vitae or strong water, unless such Vintners, Inkeepers, Victualers,
Alehouse-keepers and other Persons whatsoever, brewing making and vending by
Retail in their houses as aforesaid, do forthwith enter into bond to our
Sovereign Lord the King, with sufficient sureties in such sum or sums of money
as the Commissioners or sub-Commissioners of Excize shall judge reasonable for
the true entering and paying weekly at the Office of Excize, under which he or
they live, of the Excize of all their beer, Ale, Aqua-Vitae or strong water,
in case he or they live not above three miles from the said Office, or else
every Fourteen days, in case they live further off from the same, upon pain
that every Vintner, Alehouse-keeper or other person brewing, making or
distilling his or their beer, Ale, Aqua-Vitae or strongwaters, without bond
given as aforesaid, shall upon due proof thereof made before the Commissioners
of Excize, or their sub-Commissioners respectively forfeit for every such
Offense the sum of Twenty shillings, and if the said person shall offend the
second time, then to forfeit the sum of Forty shillings to be levied by
distress or otherwise, as hereafter by this Act is appointed; and if the said
person shall notwithstanding commit the like Offense the third time, then such
person or persons so offending, shall not only forfeit three pounds, to be
levied as aforesaid, but shall and may be committed to some common Gaol by the
said Commissioners or sub-Commissioners till he or they do enter into bond with
a good surety to his Majesty's use: in the penal sum of Twenty pounds Sterling,
that he shall not and will not brew, make, distill and vend by retail or
otherwise, beer, Ale, Aqua-Vitae or strongwaters any more, or at any time
afterward.

That for the better accompting with the common brewer, Vintner, Inkeeper,
Victualer, Alehouse-keeper and others brewing, making and retayling beer, Ale,
Aqua-Vitae or strong*Waters, it shall and may be lawful for the Commissioners
of Excize or their Sub-commissioners respectively under their Hands and Seals
to constitute and appoint such and so many sworn Gager or Gagers, searcher or
searchers as they shall find needful to enter by night or by day into all or
any of their houses, brew-houses* still-houses, Outhouses, storehouses (...)
other places whatsoever, of or belonging (...) an^ common brewer, Vintner,
Inkeeper* Victualer, Alehouse-keeper or other brewer Maker or distiller of
beer, Ale, Aqua-Vitae or Strong Water, and to gage the Co^pers, Fats, Keeves
and other Vessels of any brewer, and take account of the ba^el of drink brewed,
and quantity of Aqua-Vitae or Strong Water distilled or made from time to
time, and to make his or their return or Report signed under his or the^ hands
to the said Commissioners, their Sub-Commissioners or Deputies of such Beer
Ale, Aqua-Vitae or Strong Water, as b^ their gage or search they shall find to
ha^ been made, brewed or distilled, and the Re^urns or Report of such Gager or
searcher shall be a charge upon the said common ^rewer, Vintner, Inkeeper,
Victualer, Alehouse-keeper or other brewer and distil^er who shall pay Excize
accordingly, in case ^e Return or Report of such Gager or sear^^er do exceed
what the said common and ^ther brewers and distillers shall upon their ^ntries
charge themselves with, and not ^therwise.

That if any common brewer, distiller or ^aker of Aqua-Vitae or strong water,
or (...) any Vintner, Inkeeper, Victualer, Ale^ouse-keeper or other person
brewing and ^^lling beer, Ale, Aqua-Vitae or Strong Water shall refuse or deny
any Gager or ^^archer as aforesaid, to enter into his or their Houses,
brew-houses, stilling-houses, Outhouses, stores or other places whatso^ver of
or belonging unto them, or any of them, and to gage or take Account of his
(...) their brewing Vessels, Coppers, Fats, ^eeves or other Vessels, and of his
or their ^eer, Ale, Aqua-Vitae or Strong Water, ^rewed, made or distilled, or
else admitting (...) or them so to do, shall hide or conceal any part or parcel
of his or their beer, Ale, Aqua-Vitae or strongwaters from the gag^ view or
sight of the Gager or Gagers, sea^cher or searchers, or else make use of an^
private Tun, Copper, Fat, Keeve, stil^ Alimbicks or other Vessel for the making
brewing or distilling of his or their bee^ Ale, Aqua-Vitae or strongwaters,
without acquainting or giving notice thereof unt^ such Gager or Gagers,
searcher or searchers every such common brewer or distiller an^ maker of
Aqua-Vitae or strongwaters shall for every Copper, Fat, Keeve, still Alimbeck
or other Vessel so made use ^^ without acquainting or giving notice as
aforesaid, forfeit the sum of Twenty pound^ and every Vintner, Inkeeper,
Victualer or Alehouse-keeper Five pounds, and s^ denying entrance and liberty
of Gaging ^^ concealing any beer, Ale, Aqua-Vitae o^ strongwaters as aforesaid,
shall be presenti^^ forbidden by such Gager or searcher, t^ carry or deliver
any beer, or Ale, or retai^ any more beer, Ale, Aqua-Vitae or strong water,
which if he shall nevertheles^ do, He or they respectively shall beside^ the
forfeiture of double the value of all such beer and Ale, Aqua-Vitae and
strongwaters forfeit more to be paid by every such common brewer Fifty pounds,
and by every Vintner, Inkeeper, Alehousekeeper, Distiller or other, the sum of
Five pounds, to be levied by distress or otherwise, the party offending to be
proceeded against as hereafter is appointed.

Provided always, That if any Vintner, Inkeeper, Victualer, Alehouse-keeper,
or Maker, or distiller of Aqua-Vitae or strong waters, using common selling and
retailing of beer, ale, Aqua-Vitae or strong Waters, shall think fit to
compound for the Excize of all beer, ale, Aqua-Vitae or strong Waters which he
or they shall brew, make, distill, draw, retail or bend in his or their houses,
that they the said Commissioners of Excize, or Sub-Commissioners respectively,
are hereby authorized and empowered to agree and compound with such Vintner,
Inkeeper, Victualer, Alehouse-keeper, or others, as aforesaid accordingly, for
any time not exceeding Twelve Months, and at such Rates to be paid monthly, as
they the said Commissioners or sub-Commissioners respectively shall judge meet
and reasonable, in which regard is to be had to the number of Gallons of beer,
ale, Aqua-Vitae or strong Waters, likely to be made, drawn or sold by every
such Vintner, Inkeeper, Victualer, Alehouse-keeper or other, as aforesaid, in
or at their Houses respectively and not elsewhere, and which are not to be
computed and compounded for at less than such Vintner, Inkeeper, Victualer,
Alehouse-keeper or other persons, his or their Excize for beer, Ale, Aqua-Vitae
or strong water respectively amounted unto at any time for Twelve months
before going; and upon Composition and Agreement made, such Vintner, Inkeeper,
Victualer, Alehouse-keeper, or other person as aforesaid, shall with able
sureties enter into sufficient Obligation to our Sovereign Lord the King, as
shall be appointed and concluded on for his or their performing, and paying
according to such Composition and Agreement as shall be made betwixt them, and
thereupon such Vintner, Inkeeper, Victualer, Alehouse-keeper or others so
compounding shall be discharged and acquitted from making Entries weekly, or
every fourteen days, or having any Gage or search made of what beer, ale,
Aqua-Vitae or strong water, shall be by them made or brewed during the time
and term of their Compositions, and of and from all Penalties and Forfeitures
for or concerning all or any of the same, any thing before in this present Act
to the contrary notwithstanding.

That all persons selling and retailing beer, ale, Aqua-Vitae or strong water
only in places where the General Assizes or Quarter Sessions shall be kept,
during the time of the Assizes or sessions or at any Fair or Fairs, during the
time of Fair or Fairs shall upon the place pay the Excize of such beer, ale,
Aqua-Vitae or strong water, except the same were brewed by any Common brewer
before they draw or tap the same, unto such sub-Commissioners or other Officer
for Excize, as shall be appointed, then and there to receive and demand the
same. And if any person shall neglect or refuse doing thereof, such
sub-Commissioners or other Officers shall and may seize and detain in his or
their Custody such beer, ale, Aqua-Vitae or strong water, until such person
pay and clear the Excize of the same.

That no Vintner, Inkeeper, Victualer, Alehouse-keeper or other persons as
aforesaid, having compounded or given bond for Entry or Payment of his or their
Excize shall vend or dispose of any their beer or Ale to any other
Housekeeper, Victualer or other person by the barrel, half barrel, Kilderkin,
Ferkin or Gallon, for his or their private expense or consumption, or
otherwise, to be by them retailed, upon pain that every such housekeeper,
victualer, or other person, buying or receiving such beer or Ale from such
Vintner, Inkeeper, Alehouse-keeper or other person, shall pay double the Excize
for all such beer or Ale so by him or them bought and received, and in default
of such payment both Vintner, Inkeeper, Victualer, Alehouse-keeper and other
persons selling, as also every Housekeeper, or other person buying and
receiving such beer or ale, shall be equally liable to the Forfeiture of Forty
shillings a piece, to be levied by distress, as hereafter is mentioned.

That all Vintners, Inkeepers, Victualers, Alehouse-keepers, or other persons
selling beer or ale by retail, shall either wholly brew and make their own beer
and ale, or take the same from some common brewer. And that every Vintner,
Inkeeper, Victualer, Alehouse-keeper or other as aforesaid, doing otherwise by
brewing part of his or their beer and ale, and taking other part from a common
brewes, shall be liable and pay excize nevertheless, as if he or they had
themselves brewed all and every part thereof, upon pain of forfeiting all such
beer or ale which he or they shall take from such common brewer, or else the
value thereof to be leviad by distress, ^s hereafter is directed.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, that no Distress made or taken by virtue
of this present Act, of the goods and Chattels of any Vintner, Inkeeper,
Victualer, alehouse-^eeper or other, brewing, making and sel^ing by retail any
beer, ale, Aqua-vitae or strongwaters, shall be sold or disposed of until
fourteen days after any such Goods or Chattels shall be distrained, and within
(...) at time any such Vintner, Inkeeper, Victu^ler, alehouse-keeper or other
person as afore^aid, finding him or themselves grieved, shall or may make his
or their complaint unto one or more of the next Justices of the Peace, who upon
such complaint to him or them made by such party or parties, are hereby
authorized and required to hear and examine the same upon Oath, which Oath any
one or more of the said Justices are hereby authorized to administer and
finally ^o determine the matter of complaint, and to ^mitigate any fine,
penalty, forfeiture inflicted or imposed upon any such person by this present
Act, so as by such Mitigation the same may not be made less than double the
value of the Duties of the Excize which should or ought to have been paid,
besides the reasonable costs and charges of the Officer or Officers
distraining, to be allowed by the said Justice or Justices, nor the party
complaining receive Encouragement to continue the practice of any Fraud,
Deceit, Obstinacy or Disobedience in breach of any clause o^ Article of this
present Act.

Provided nevertheless, That if any person distrained, and complaining as
aforesaid shall not prosecute his or their complain unto an hearing and
sentence before the sai^ Justice or Justices within the aforesaid tim^ of
Fourteen days that then the said Commissioners or their sub-Commissioners
respectively, shall and may proceed to the sale and di^posal of the Goods and
Chattels distraine^ in such manner as they ^r any of them man lawfully do, and
in all other cases of distres^ and as hereafter in this Act is mentioned an^
expressed.

And for the more regular and orderly putting in execution of this present Act,
be (...) Enacted and Ordained by Authority aforesaid, That there be an Office
constituted and erected in the City of Dublin, to be called and known by the
name of The Office of Excize, or New Impost* and to be managed and governed by
Commissioners, not exceeding Five in Number, and also a Surveyor; all to be
appointed by the Lord Lieutenant, Lord Deputy, or other Chief Governor or
Governors of Ireland for the time being, and to be commissioned under the
Great seal of this your Majesty's Realm, to have and to hold to them
respectively during their good behavior respectively, which said
Commissioners, or any three or more of them, shall have power, and are hereby
authorized from time to time with the approbation of the Lord Lieutenant, Lord
Deputy, or other Chief Governor or Governors of Ireland for the time being,
to choose and appoint such fitting Clerks, Searchers, Wayters, Messengers, and
all other Officers, for the City, Suburbs and Liberties, of Dublin, and the
Port of Dublin, and the several Creeks and Members thereof, as they may
necessarily have occasion to employ for the advantage of your Majesty's
service, and the same again from time to time with the approbation aforesaid,
to displace and place others in their Rooms, and to allow them and every of
them such several yearly Wages to be paid Quarterly out of the Receipts of the
said Office and other accidental Rewards for their pains and service, as the
said Commissioners, or the major part of them shall think fit and reasonable,
and as shall be allowed and approved of by the Lord Deputy, or other chief
Governor or Governors of Ireland for the time being as aforesaid, and for all
the other Cities, Counties and Ports of this Kingdom, and the several Creeks
and Members thereof, excepting the City, Suburbs and Liberties of Dublin, and
the Port of Dublin, and the Creeks and Members thereof.

That the Lord Treasurer of Ireland for the time being shall have power, and is
hereby authorized from time to time to choose and appoint such fitting Clerks,
Searchers, Wayters and Messengers, as they may necessarily have occasion to
employ for the advantage of your Majesty's service; and the same again from
time to time to displace, and place others in their Rooms, and to allow them
and every of them such several yearly Wages to be paid Quarterly, out of the
Receipts of the said Office, and other and other accidental Rewards for their
pains and service, as the said Lord Treasurer shall think fit and reasonable,
and as shall be allowed and approved of by the Lord Deputy, or other chief
Governor or Governors of Ireland for the time being, as aforesaid.

That the Commissioners of the Excize for the time being, are hereby appointed
to be Governors and chief Commissioners of and for the said Office: Which said
Commissioners, and all others from time to time, as shall be employed under
them, shall before they enter upon their respective Employments, take the Oath
of Supremacy prescribed by the Statute made in Ireland, in the second year of
the Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth, and the Oath of Allegiance prescribed by
Statute in England, made in the time of the late King James: and likewise the
following Oath, mutatis mutandis, for their true and faithful performance of
their respective Trusts: viz.

YOU shall swear to be true and faithful in the place of Commissioner,
Sub-Commissioner, Collector, etc. for the Excize, during the time you shall be
a Commissioner, Sub-Commissioner, Collector: You shall according to the best of
your Knowledge, power and skill execute the same diligently, faithfully and
impartially: You shall make and deliver a true Account of all your Receipts
from time to time, and further do all things without having any private
respects to your self in prejudice of His Majesty's Revenue.

So help you God, etc.
Which Oath the Lord Chief Baron of His Majesty's Exchequer is hereby
authorized to administer unto the said Commissioners, and the said
Commissioners or the major part of them, unto all other employed under them.

That all Parishes, Parts and Places of the City and County of the City of
Dublin, and County of Dublin, and all and every the Baronies, Parts, and Places
of the same, shall be subject to the Rule and Government of the said Office.

That the like Office and Offices, and so many of them, and in them such or so
many subordinate Commissioners, Sub-Commissioners or Collectors, or subordinate
Commissioners, Sub-Commissioners or Collectors from time to time shall be
nominated and appointed in all or any of the Counties of this Realm, and in all
other Cities, Towns, Ports and places thereof, as the said Commissioners, or
the major part of them* shall from time to time think fitting, to be approved
of by the Lord Lieutenant, Lord Deputy, or other Chief Governor, or
Governors, and Privy Council of Ireland for the time being.

Which said subordinate Commissioners, sub-Commissioners or Collectors, shall
take the like Oath as aforesaid respectively before the Lord Chief Baron of his
Majesty's Exchequer, or before the said chief Commissioners or any two of them,
or before any of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace, which Oath the said Lord
chief Baron, Justices and Commissioners are hereby authorized to administer the
same accordingly, and every the said subordinate Commissioners,
sub-Commissioners or Collectors, so to be appointed as aforesaid, shall enter
into Recognizance with good security to His Majesty's use, in such sum or sums
of Money as shall be thought fit and reasonable before the Lord chief Baron of
His Majesty's Exchequer, with condition for the due execution of his or their
places, and paying monthly all moneys by him or them received for Excize, their
own and Officers Salaries, and other contingent charges first deducted, and
accounting quarterly into his Majesty's Exchequer at Dublin.

And the said Commissioners, subordinate Commissioners, sub-Commissioners or
Collectors shall have for their several pains in and about the said business,
such reasonable sums of moneys allowed them by way of Poundage or otherwise, as
the Lord Lieutenant, Lord Deputy, or other chief Governor or Governors, and
Privy Council of Ireland shall think sit

That the said Office or Officers in all places where they shall be appoined,
shall be kept open all days except the Lords day, or Holy days, in all places
from nine of the clock to twelve in the forenoon and from two of the clock till
five in the afternoon of each day, for the taking and enregistring the Entries
of all Merchants Retaylers, Brewers and others, and for the receiving all
moneys which shall be due and payable by all or any of them, and for other
things necessary to be done, touching the business of Excize, and affairs
relating thereunto.

That the several surveyors, searchers, Wayters and all other Officers which
shall from time to time be deputed or appointed thereunto by the said chief
Commissioners under the hands and seals of them, or the major part of them, in
the several Ports, Creeks, Havens, and other Members of the same within this
Realm shall have full power and authority to go on board and enter into any
ship or other Vessel whatsoever, as well by night as by day arriving and coming
into any the several Ports, Havens, Creeks or other places, and not only to
continue there on board until such ship or other Vessel shall be fully unladen
and discharged, but also by night as by day to enter as well into all other
ships, Gabbards, Hoys, Barks, bottoms, or other boats or Vessels whatsoever as
in the day time to go and enter into all Houses, Cellars, Vaults, shops,
warehouses, storehouses, store-cellars, or other places belonging to any
person whatsoever, where they shall have just cause of suspicion, to see,
survey, and make search for any Goods or commodities excizeable, either put on
board any ship or Vessel, or taken out or carried away, or intended to be
carried away without due entry first had and made of the same, or payment of
such Excize as shall (...) due and payable thereupon, and the sai^ Goods as
also all other Goods excizeable and Merchandise whatsoever, which they or any
of them shall meet, find or discover to be carrying or conveying either by Land
o^ by water, at unlawful hours or times, o^ before due Entry or payment had or
made for the said Goods or Merchandises, or which shall be landed or attempted
to be landed and laid on shore at any unlawful place or places for landing
Goods, as in and by this present Act is before declared or without license or
sufferance granted by the said Commissioners, or their sub-Commissioners or
Collectors respectively, for the landing or shipping the said Goods or
Merchandise, to seize attach, carry away and put into safe custody by bringing
or causing them to be brought to the Office for Excize, next adjoining to the
place when such Goods shall be so seized, there to be de^^ined and kept.

And in case the said Goods and Merchandises so seized, shall not be claimed by
the true and lawful Owner or Proprietor thereof, or by one deputed under his
or their ^ands, within one and twenty days after ^eizure, the said Goods shall
be absolutely ^orfeited and confiscated, and shall and may ^e sold at the next
general day of sale to be ^ppointed by the Commissioners of Excize, ^r their
sub-Commissioners respectively, after that time, and the proceed to be divided
as ^ereafter in this present Act is directed and ^ppointed.

And in case such Goods or commodities so ^eized, shall be claimed within time
afore^aid, and if the Owner or claimer as afore^aid shall not make it appear
unto the said commissioners of Excize, their sub-Commissioners or Collectors
respectively, or un^o the major part of them, or either of them, that the said
Goods and Merchandises so ^eized, were or have been duly entered or ^nladen,
and landed at a lawful time and place as aforesaid, or that license or
sufferance ^ad been obtained and granted for doing ^hereof, that then the said
Goods and Merchandise shall likewise be forfeited and confiscated, and sold and
disposed of as hereafter in this present Act is directed and appointed.

And if it shall so happen, that any Master, Owner or commander of any ship or
Vessel or any other person whatsoever, shall refuse to permit or will not
suffer an^ the aforesaid Officers to enter or come into or remain on board his
or their ship, Gabbard, Hoye, Barque, bottom, boat or other Vessel, or into his
or their house, Cella^ Vault, shop, Warehouse, Storehouse, ^ storecellar, or
other place or places, to searc^ as aforesaid, or else permitting them or an^
of them so to do, shall oppose, hinder or rest^ them or any of them, in the
seizing attac^ing, or carrying away any Goods and Me^chandize for the causes
and Reasons afor^said, shall for every such Offense forfeit Fifth pounds, to be
levied by distress, as hereaft^^ is appointed. Or if any Porter, Carma^
Waterman, or other person or persons wha^soever, shall be aiding, assisting, or
abettin^ to any other that shall oppose, hinder or rest^ the said Officers, or
any of them, seizin^ attaching or carrying away any Goods ^ Merchandise as
aforesaid, or if any person usually implo^ed as Porter, Carman or Waterman, to
carry, roomage or remove Good^ shall (if required thereunto by any suc^ Officer
or Officers) refuse to carry, load an^ drive away any Goods and Merchandize^
seized or attached as aforesaid, to the Offic^ for Excize next adjoining to the
place where the said goods shall be so seized and attached as aforesaid,
reasonable satisfaction being tendered and allowed them for their pains therein,
every such person shall for every such offense forfeit Ten pounds to be levied
by distress, or in default thereof, the said offenders to be otherwise
proceeded against, as hereafter is directed and appointed.

That for the better accompting with the Merchants importers whose goods,
commodities or merchandises are not liable to excize until sale of the same,
the said Commissioners, their Sub-commissioners or collectors respectively in
their several offices, shall frame and keep a distinct and several account by
the name of an Import account, with all and every such Merchants whose several
and respective Accounts shall constantly from time to time be armed and charged
with the rest or remainder of all such goods and commodities as shall be
remaining in his or their hands, at or upon the Five and twentieth day of
December, One thousand six hundred sixty one, as is before mentioned, and with
the several Entries of Goods which he or they shall make for any Goods or
Merchandises Inwards from beyond the Seas, or from the Coast, and again
exonerated and discharged by what shall appear in the Excize books to have been
paid upon the sale and delivery of all or any of the said Goods or
Merchandises, and by the several Quantities of all or any of them which shall
be shipped out and landed beyond the Seas, or else in any other Port or Haven
of this Realm, and there entered, of which he or they shall make Oath, and all
things else appearing by certificate or otherwise to be done with the
sub-Commissioner or Collector there, as is by this Act directed and appointed
to be done, upon the Importation of all Goods and Merchandises Excizeable from
any parts beyond the Seas.

Provided always, and it is hereby declared, Intended and Enacted, That for
all Goods that shall be sent by Land carriage or otherwise, by any such as
Merchants aforesaid, into the County, or unto any City, Town, Borough or Place
whatsoever, other than the Ports and Members thereof, in this Realm, and there
entered as aforesaid, every such Merchant upon his accompting with the said
Commissioners, sub-Commissioners or Collectors, shall make good the Excize of
all such Goods and Merchandises by payment of the Excize of the same himself,
and is therefore to be allowed him by the buyer in the Price of his commodity,
any thing before in this present Act in any manner of wise to the contrary
notwithstanding.

That the Commissioners of the Excize and their sub-Commissioners or Collectors
respectively in their several and respective Offices, once every Three Months
without fail, or oftener if they shall see cause, shall take care for the
ballancing and adjusting of the Merchants their Import accounts, by calling and
requiring them and every of them, to bring and deliver to them respectively a
particular account of all goods and Merchandises excizeable which shall be
remaining then on his or their hands, at the time he or they shall be so called
upon or required, and if any such Merchant Importer or other person shall upon
notice given him or them or upon notice or summons left at his or their usual
place of abode or habitation, warning him or them thereunto, refuse or neglect
to give in such account for the space of four days after such notice, warning
or summons as aforesaid, every such Merchant or Importer shall be presently
liable to payment of the full Excize of all goods that shall be found to stand
charged in the Excize books on his or their Import account, by his and their
rest and remainder as aforesaid, and his or their entries of goods upon
Importation, which have not been discharged or cleared by payment of Excize or
shipping out of such Goods, and accordingly adjudged and warned by summons as
aforesaid, or otherwise to pay the same within six days next after following
at furthest, or in default thereof, every such Merchant importer shall not
only forfeit double the value of all such goods as shall be found wanting,
resting or remaining on his Import Account, to be levied as hereafter is
mentioned, but shall ever after be incapable of taking up any goods or
commodities Excizeable in any Port of this Realm either for his own or any
others use, without payment down of the Excize of such Goods as if he were a
shopkeeper, Retailer or consumptioner of the same: But if such Importer shall
upon demand, or within four days after give in such Account as aforesaid, then
the said Commissioners of Excize, their Sub-Commissioners and Collectors shall
forthwith appoint one or more Officer or Officers to enter into all the
Cellars, Warehouses, storehouses, store-cellars and other places whatsoever
belonging unto such Importer, to search, see and try by taking an Account of
the Quality and Quantity of the Goods and Merchandises therein remain^ng,
whether such Importers remainder do agree with his Account or no, and to make
report thereof unto the said Commissioners, sub-Commissioners or Collectors
respectively, which report of such Officer or Officers in case of difference
betwixt the Remainder and Account of such Merchant; shall be reputed, taken and
esteemed for the true and just Remainder, according to which the said
Commissioners, sub-Commissioners or Collectors shall proceed in making up his
Account, and then such Merchant making Oath before the sai^ Commissioners,
sub-Commissioners or Collectors respectively, that the Goods and Merchandises
remaining viewed and seen by the Officer or Officers aforesaid, and all other
Goods shipped out by him, by which his Account is to be discharged, were all
and every part and parcel of them such Goods and Merchandises as had been bona
fide formerly Imported by himself, and entered in the excize office, and there
charged on his proper Import account, and that the said Goods and Merchandises
foun^ so remaining had not been sold or altered either directly or indirectly
in their property, since their first Importation and bringing i^ of the same
into this Realm, the said Commissioners, sub-Commissioners and Collectors
respectively, allowing upon the account such Remainder, and also such other
Goods and Merchandises which such Merchant shall at any time betwixt the time^
of his accompting have shipped out and landed in any part beyond the Seas, or
shipped out, landed and entered in any other Port or Member thereof in this
Realm, sha^^ have power to adjust his account to the day, and to receive Excize
presently of hi^ for so much Goods and Merchandises a^ shall be found wanting
on his account without any further penalty, any thing before in this Act to the
contrary notwithstanding: And so go on to the framing of ^ New Import account
with him from the whole Remainder stated and agreed on ^ aforesaid, without
demanding any Exciz^ till he sell or dispose thereof, but if any Merchant as
aforesaid shall refuse to permit an^ Officer or Officers to enter into and
searc^ his or their Cellars, Warehouses, Storehouses, store-Cellars and other
places, and to take an account of the quality and quantity of his or their
Goods therein remaining, every such Merchant shall for every such refusal
forfeit one hundred pounds; and if permitting entrance and search as aforesaid
shall nevertheless afterward refuse to make Oath that the Goods and
Merchandises viewed and seen by, and shown unto the Officer or Officers as
aforesaid, or by him shipped out as aforesaid, were all of them imported by
himself, or for his account from beyond the Seas, and entered upon his Import
account in the Office of Excize, and without alteration of property, all and
every such Goods shall be esteemed and reputed the Goods and Merchandises of
some other than such Merchants, and therefore not at all to be reckoned in
discharge of his account, and if such Merchant shall make Oath, and yet shall
neglect or refuse for six days follow^ng after the doing thereof, to pay and
sa^isfie stch Excize as shall be due or payable ^hereupon, every such Merchant
his Bond given upon Entry of those Goods which shall be found wanting shall be
returned into the Exchequer there to be prosecuted according to the course of
Law, and shall not afterward upon his or their Importation of Goods into any
Port of this Realm be permitted to take up, land or lay on shore his or their
Goods before payment down of their full excize unto the Officer appointed to
receive the same at the Port where such his Goods shall arrive or be brought in.

That the Commissioners, sub-Commissioners or Collectors of excize
respectively, in the limits and districts of their several and respective
Offices, or the major part of them, where there are or shall be more than one
sub-Commissioner and Collector, or else such other persons, or the major part
of them as shall be authorized thereunto, together with such sub-Commissioners
or Collectors under the hands and seals of the said commissioners, or the major
part of them, an^ hereby authorized and required to hear and determine all
offenses and breaches of any clause or Article in this present Act mentioned,
other than such as are or shall be otherwise by this present Act appointed;
which said Commissioners, sub-commissioners and Collectors or others,
authorized under the hands and seals of the said Commissioners, or the major
part of them, are hereby authorized upon any notice, complaint or information,
to proceed to examination of the matter of Fact, by summoning or causing
Parties and Witnesses to be summoned to appear before them, by causing summons
^n writing under the hand of their Clerk or other Officer thereunto appointed,
to be left at the usual place of abode or habitation of such Parties or
Witnesses, and to examine such Witnesses upon Oath in the presence of the Party
accused, if such party accused do appear, and in case any person or persons
duly warned as aforesaid, to be a Witness and give Testimony, shall wilfully
neglect or refuse to appear, or else appearing shall refuse to make Oath for
discovery of his knowledge concerning the matter in Question, or else making
Oath and refusing to answer to such Questions or Interrogatories as shall be
demanded of him touching the matter in Question, every such person shall for
every time so offending, forfeit Ten pounds to be levied by distress: And in
case the party accused being summoned shall wilfully neglect or refuse to
appear, the said Commissioners, their Sub-Commissioners and collectors
respectively, or such as shall be authorized together with one of them as
aforesaid, are hereby authorized to proceed as if he had been present, and
defending himself against the complaint or information, to examination of
matter of fact, and any offense or breach of any clause or article in this
present Act mentioned, being proved by the voluntary confession of the party,
or by the Oath of one or more credible witness or witnesses, the said
Commissioners, their sub-Commissioners, Collectors or others as aforesaid, are
hereby authorized to give judgment and Sentence accordingly, as in and by this
Act is directed and appointed; and afterward to issue Warrant of Distress
under the hands and seals of them, or the major part of them, for levying of
any forfeiture, Fine or Penalty inflicted or imposed by this present Act, by
Distreyning so much of the Goods and Chattels of the party against whom
Judgment and sentence shall be given as aforesaid, as may be sufficient to
satisfy any such Forfeiture, Fine or Penalty, and if any goods and chattels so
distrained, shall not be redeemed within six days following, except before
excepted, it shall and may be lawful unto the said Commissioners, their
sub-Commissioners, Collectors and others as aforesaid to put the same to sale,
in such manner as is hereafter directed.

And if such Distress be better or more than will satisfy such Forfeiture,
Fine or Penalty, the said Commissioners, sub-Commissioners, Collectors and
others shall render and restore the Surplusage to the party whose goods or
chattles shall be so distrained, if there be any; if less than will answer the
same, the party shall forthwith pay the Surplusage, or be distrained again.

But if no sufficient distress can be had or obtained, upon proof made thereof
before the said Commissioners, sub-Commissioners, Collectors or others, they
the said Commissioners, sub-Commissioners, Collectors and others, shall and may
by Warrant under the Hands of them, or the major part of them, commit the Party
offending to Prison, there to remain until he pay and satisfy the Forfeiture,
Fine or penalty imposed on him, or until he be discharged and released thence
by Warrant or Direction of the said Commissioners, sub-Commissioners,
Collectors or others as aforesaid, who committed him, or else by Warrant or
Order of the Lord Lieutenant, Lord Deputy, or other chief Governor or
Governors and Privy-councill of Ireland for the time being, as hereafter is
appointed.

That for want of Distress to be had to satisfy any Forfeiture, Fine or
Penalty imposed by this present Act, not exceeding Ten pounds, it shall and may
be lawful to the said Commissioners in the City and port of Dublin, and to the
Sub-commissioners and collectors in any other Port of Ireland, together with a
Justice of Peace or other chief Magistrate of any Corporation-Town, to commit
the Party offending to the next Goal or House of correction, there to be put to
work and labor, if they be able, and to have such and so much allowance as
they shall deserve by their own labor and work, during such time as they shall
continue in the said Goal or House of correction, which shall not exceed the
space of six weeks; and all Iaylers and Keepers of any Prison, and all
Governors and Masters of any House of correction are hereby authorized and
required to receive and keep in safe custody, and put to work and labor all
such persons as by Warrant of the Commissioners of Excize or their
Sub-commissioners or collectors, and the said Justices of Peace or chief
Magistrate as aforesaid, shall be from time to time committed unto their
several Goals, Prisons or Houses of Correction, for which Prisoners so
committed to Goal, all Sheriffs respectively shall ^e responsible; and if any
sheriff, his Depu^y or Deputies, shall make replevin dr deli^erance of any
distress or distresses taken by ^irtue of this present Act, or if any sheriff,
Jailer, Governor or Master of any House ^f Correction shall refuse to receive
and set ^n work such persons or shall permit or suffer any person or persons to
him or them committed as aforesaid to escape out of his or their custody, or
permit him or them to go ^orth out of Prison or house of Correction, without
warrant or Order in writing from ^im or them that committed such person, or
that as well before as hereafter by this Act ^re authorized to do the same,
every such She^iff, Iayler, Governor, Master or other Officer aforesaid, shall
forfeit double the value ^f every sum or sums of money for which ^uch person
was or shall be committed to him ^r them as abovesaid, the same to be levied by
^istress and sale of the goods and Chattels ^f such sheriff, deputy or
deputies, Iaylor, Governor or Master of any House of cor^ection: as before in
this present Act is di^ected and appointed.

Provided always, and be it enacted by authori^y aforesaid, that this act, nor
any thing therein contained, shall not extend to charge an^ person or persons
with any Penalty, Fo^feiture and Punishment for and concernin^ any offense to
be done contrary to the T^nor of this Act, or of any the Articles o^ Branches
of the same, unless he or the^ so offending, be informed against, or complained
of to the said Commissioners, the^ sub Commissioners or Collectors within ^
months after the same Offense shall be do^^ and committed as aforesaid, any
thing contained in this Act to the contrary notwit^standing.

And provided always, That if any dif^^rence or other matter of controversy
or di^ficulty happen to arise between any Me^chant, Trader or Dealer, and the
said Commissioners, sub-Commissioners, Collector^ or other Officers, or if any
person or person^ shall judge him or themselves agrieved (...) injured with any
manner of proceedings t^ be had, made or done by the said Commissi^ners,
sub-Commissioners, Collectors o^ other Officers, that it shall and may be
lawful for every such person or persons to mak^ his appeal unto the Lord
Lieutenant, Lord Deputy, or other chief Governor or Governors and Privy
Council of Ireland, o^ such as they shall appoint by Commission under the great
seal, which Commissioners shall take the Oath following, Videlicet.

YOU shall be true and faithful in the place of Commissioner for Appeals, you
shall in all things execute the same impartially, without any respect, favor,
reward or affection to any person whatsoever.

So help you God.
Which said Oath the Lord Chief Baron is hereby authorized to administer, and
the said Commissioners for Appeals, or the major part of them are hereby
Authorized and Empowered to receive all or any Appeals that may or shall be
made from the said Commissioners, sub-Commissioners, Collectors or others, and
to send for Parties and witnesses, and all manner of papers and writings
belonging to any case brought before them, and to examine upon Oath, and to
hear and determine all such Appeals matters in difference, and thereupon to
confirm or reverse all Judgments and sentences given by the said
Commissioners, sub-Commissioners, Collectors or others as aforesaid, against
any person, and by warrant under their or the major part of their hands to
discharge, release and set at liberty, any person committed to prison, or any
house of correction by the said Commissioners, sub-Commissioners or Officers,
and further from time to time to mitigate and abate all fines penalties and
forfeitures, set, imposed and adjudged by them or any of them, by virtue of
thi^ present Act, as to them shall seem meet, and as shall be according to
equity and good conscience.

Provided always, That in the mitigating such forfeiture, fine or penalty, care
be had that the informer or prosecutor may be duly encouraged for his care,
pains, and discovery, according to the nature and quality of the fraud, had,
used and discovered.

That the said Commissioners of Excize, or the major part of them, shall have
power and authority to frame, make and give such instructions from time to time
unto their several and respective Officers employed under them, as shall be
most for the true and orderly putting in execution of this present Act, so as
the same be first allowed and approved of by the Lord Lieutenant, Lord deputy
or other chief governor or Governors and Privy Council of Ireland and such
Officer or Officers as shall not give due observance unto such instructions or
shall be wilfully negligent, remiss, careless or unfaithful in the Execution
of his or their trust and employment, the said Commissioners or the major part
of them, shall punish all and every such Officers by fine, not exceeding double
the value of his or their yearly salary or wages, and to forfeit his office or
employment, the fine to be levied by distress, or in default thereof such
Officer or Officers to be proceeded against, as aforesaid.

That the said last beforementioned Commissioners, or any one of them, their
Sub-commissioners, Collectors and all others authorized thereunto by commission
under their hands and seals, or under the hands and seals of the major part of
them respectively, shall and have hereby power to administer all such Oath or
Oaths as in all and every case in this present Act is required and appointed to
be made and given, other than such as are appointed otherwise to be administered.

And if any person or persons shall from and after the said Five and twentieth
day of De^ember, one thousand six hundred sixty one, ^nlawfully or corruptly
procure any witness ^r witnesses, by reward, promise or any ^^nister and
unlawful means, whatsoever, to commit any wilful or corrupt perjury in any
matter cause or thing, which by virtue of this present Act shall depend or come
before the said Commissioners for Appeals or of Excize, their sub-Commissioners
or Collectors, by complaint or Information, or if any person or persons either
by subornation, unlawful procurement, sinister persuasion or means of any
others, or by their own Act, consent or agreement, from and after the said Five
and twentieth day of December, One thousand six hundred sixty One, wilfully or
corruptly commit any manner of wilful perjury, by his or their depositions
before the said respective commissioners, or their sub-commissioners or
collectors, or any of them, in any matter before mentioned, every such Offender
or Offenders shall for hi^ or their said offense being thereof lawfully
indicted and convict, lose and forfeit such sum and sums of money, and further
shall be proceeded against, set and put in the Pillory, a^ in and by one
statute made in this Realm i^ the Eight and twentieth year of the Reig^ of the
late Queen Elizabeth, is Enacted and Ordained, and the Justices of Assize an^
Goal Delivery, in their several circuits, an^ the Justices of Peace in every
county with in this Realm at their Quarter Sessions, both within Liberties and
without, shall have full power and authority by virtue hereof, to inquire of
all and every the defaults and offenses last beforementioned, by inquisition,
presentment, Bill or Information before them exhibited, or otherwise, lawfully
to hear and determine the same, and thereupon to give Judgment, award, process
and Execution of the same, according as in and by the said statute is directed
and ordained.

That if any Goods distrained in pursuance of this present Act shall not be
redeemed within six days, except before excepted, or if any goods seized,
shall not be claimed or cleared within one and twenty days after, as
aforesaid, the commissioners of Excize, their sub-Commissioners and Collectors
respectively appointing a general day of sale, and giveing public notice
thereof, shall cause the said goods to be appraised by two sworn Officers or
others, and afterward sell and dispose of the same by the candle unto such
person as shall bid or give most for the same, and all sales so made of any
Goods seized or distrained, shall be good in Law to all person and persons
buying the same.

That all seizures, Fines, forfeitures and penalties mentioned in this Act, all
necessary charges for recovery thereof, being first deducted, the same to be
rated and allowed of by the Commissioners of Excize, their sub-Commissioners or
Collectors respectively the moiety or one half part of the remainder of such
fines, Forfeitures and Penalties shall be to the use of his Majesty His Heirs
and Successors, and the other moiety or one half part to him or them that shall
seize or discover, or give Information of, and prove any breach of any clause
or Article of this present Act.

Provided always, and be it declared, That in case any person or persons
subject to any Fine, or Penalty, or Forfeiture, who is not a Principal, but an
Abettor or Accessory to any offense or breach of this present Act, shall
discover, declare, or make known any such offense or breach of this present Act
unto the Commissioners of Excize, their sub-Commissioners or Collectors, every
such person shall not only be acquitted and discharged of and from any penalty
in relation to himself, but shall have and receive the one moiety of the Fines,
Forfeitures and penalties incurred by any others, whose offense or breach of
this present Act he shall so declare and make known, any thing in this present
Act before to the contrary notwithstanding.

That for the better and more effectual and vigorous execution of this Act, all
Sheriffs, Justices of the peace, Mayors, Portriffs, Sovereigns, Constables, and
all others his Majesty's Officers in the several Counties, Baronies, Liberties,
Franchenzices and Jurisdictions of this his Majesty's Realm of Ireland, be and
are hereby required to be from time to time, and at all times aiding and
assisting unto the Commissioners of Excize, their sub-Commissioners,
Collectors, and all other Officers and Persons employed by or under them, in
the due Execution of this Act, and punishing all Offenders according to law,
and doing all other things, as in and by this present Act is required to be
done by all, every or any of them.

And His Majesty is graciously pleased that it be Enacted, and it is hereby
Enacted and declared by the Authority aforesaid, That, for the space of seven
years next ensuing, there be no lease made by his Majesty, his Heirs or
Successors, to any person or persons, or any Authority given as Agent or Agents
or otherwise, for granting licenses for any of the premises, otherwise than as
by this Act is appointed, nor after the said seven years, without special
advice in that behalf of the chief Governor or Governors, and six or more of
the Council of this Kingdom, and even that not to be without then reserving
thereout yearly to his Majesty, His Heirs and successers, the highest Rent
yearly thereout, that in any one Year of the now next succeeding seven years,
the same shall yield to His Majesty, His Heirs or successors, and if any such
Lease as aforesaid shall be made of any the premises contrary to this Act, the
same is hereby declared to be void.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the several Rates
and duties of Excize in and by this present Act rated, imposed and set, to be
had, received, levied, and demanded within your Majesty's Realm of Ireland
shall be had, received and demanded for the use of your most Excellent Majesty,
your Heirs and successors for ever, and all powers and authorities therein
given and granted, shall be exercised, continued and put in execution from the
said Five and twentieth day of December, One thousand six hundred sixty and
one, and thenceforward for ever.

And lastly, Be it Declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
said several Rates and Duties of Excize, and all Fines, Penalties, Forfeitures,
or other sum or sums of money, rated, imposed, set or forfeited in and by this
present Act, are meant and intended to be current and lawful money or moneys
of England, and that all and every of the same be therefore demanded, received,
paid, and satisfied accordingly.

A BOOK OF RATES AND Value of Goods and Merchandise imported, according to
which Excize is to be paid by the first Buyer or Importer respectively.
A.
l. s. d. ALLom the tun 15 00 00 Aneil of barbery the pound 00 01 08 Annoto the
pound 00 01 06 Argal white and red, or powder ^he hundred weight, containing
^ne hundred and twelve pounds 01 02 00 Aggats small the hundred dozen 00 13 04
Aggats large the piece 00 00 06 Amber the pound 00 01 08 Ashes called Potashes
the hundred weight, containing one hundred and twelve pounds 02 00 00 Ashes
called Wood or Soap Ashes the hundred weight, containing 112 pounds 01 00 00 B.
Babies-heads of earth the dozen 00 09 00 Balks Great the hundred, containing
120 20 00 00 Balks Middle the hundred, containing 120 06 00 00 Balks Small the
hundred, containing 120 04 00 00 Gold balances the groce, containing twelve
dozen pair 04 00 00 Balances called Ounce balances the groce, containing 12
dozen pair 02 00 0^ Balances called The sort containing four dozen 02 13 0^
Balls called Tennis balls the thousand 01 10 0^ Balls called Washing balls the
groce, containing 12 dozen 00 10 0^ Band strings the dozen knots 03 00 00
Barlings the hundred, containing 120 pounds 12 00 00 Barilla, or Saphora to
make glass, the hundred weight containing 112 pounds 01 10 00 Basket rods the
bundle 00 08 00 Baskets called hand-baskets or Sports the dozen 00 04 00
Battery basherons, or Kettles the 100 weight, containing 112 pound 06 00 00
Beads of Amber the pound 01 00 00 Beads of Bone the groce containing 12 small
groce 01 10 00 Beads of Box the great groce 01 10 00 Beads of Corral the pound
01 10 00 Beads of Crystal the thousand 03 00 00 Beads of Glass and wood all
sorts, the great groce 00 10 00 Beads of Gla^s the pound 00 02 00 Beads of The
small groce, containing twelve Dicker 00 04 00 Beads of Jasper square the
hundred Stones 02 00 00 Beer and Ale imported, the barrel 00 05 00 Bells called
Hawks bells, French making, the dozen 00 12 00 Dogs bells the great groce 00 08
00 Blacking, or Lamp-black the hundred weight, containing one hundred and
twelve pounds. 04 00 00 Boards called Clap-boards, the hundred, containing one
hundred and twenty boards 05 00 00 Bome-Spars the hundred, containing one
hundred and twenty 03 00 00 Bottles of Earth covered with wicker the dozen 00
01 06 Bottles of Glass covered with wicker the dozen 00 03 00 Bottles of Glass
uncovered the dozen 00 03 00 Bottles of Glass with wires covered with leather
the dozen 00 03 00 Bowling stones the bushel 00 10 00 Boxes namely Nest boxes
the groce containing twelve dozen nest 02 00 00 Boxes Money boxes the groce,
containing 12 dozen 00 03 06 Boxes Drawing boxes the dozen 00 04 00 Boxes Round
boxes or French boxes for Marmalade or Gelly the dozen 00 02 06 Boxes Tobacco
boxes the groce containing twelve dozen 00 12 00 Bracelets or Neck-laces of
glass the small groce containing 12 bundles or dickers 00 04 00 Brass or lever
cocks the pound 00 01 0^ Brickstone the thousand Brickstones 00 13 00
Brickstones Flanders Tyle to scour with, the thousand 01 00 00 Brickstones
Gally Tyles the Foot 00 00 06 Brickstones Pavlng Tyles the thousand 05 00 00
Brimstone the hundred weight containing 112 pound 00 15 00 Bristles Dressed the
pound 00 01 00 Bristles Undrest the pound 00 00 06 Buckrams of East Country the
piece 00 05 00 Buckrams of Roan the dozen 03 00 00 Buckrams of Caen the dozen
02 10 00 Buckrams of Hamborough black the piece 00 10 00 Bugle Of glass the
pound 00 02 06 Bugle Great the pound 00 04 00 Bugle Small or seed Bugle the the
pound 00 06 08 Bugle Lace the pound 00 08 00 Buttons of Brass, steel, copper or
lattin, the great groce, containing twelve small groce, every groce 12 dozen 01
06 08 Buttons of Crystal the dozen 00 04 00 Buttons of Glass the great groce,
containing 12 small groce 00 13 04 Buttons of Third the great groce, containing
12 small groce 00 10 00 Buttons of Silk the great groce, containing 12 small
groce 03 00 00 Buttons of Bugle the dozen 00 00 08 Buttons of Hair the groce,
containing twelve dozen 00 04 00 Buttons of Handkerchiefs the groce containing
12 dozen 01 00 00 Bull-rushes the lead 01 00 00 Burs for mil-stones the hundred
containing five score 02 00 00 C.
Cables tarr'd or untarr'd to be free 00 00 00 Candle wick the hundred weight,
containing 112 pounds 04 00 00 Canes the hundred 00 10 00 Canes the groce,
containing 12 dozen 00 05 00 Cantspars the spar 00 05 00 Capars the hundred
weight, containing 112 02 10 00 Cap-hooks, or hooks ends the groce, containing
12 dozen pair 00 12 00 Cards called playing cards the groce containing twelve
dozen pair 02 00 00 Carpets called Brunswicks and Gentish Carpets, stripped and
unstript the piece 00 08 00 Carpets called Carpets of Turkey for Chests the
piece 01 00 00 Carpets called Carpets of Turkey or Venice short the piece 01 15
00 Carpets called Turkey or Venice long, containing four yards and upwards 06 00
00 Carpets called Carpets of Persia short the piece 02 10 00 Carpets called
Carpets of Persia long the piece 06 00 00 Chasing Dishes of brass or Latin the
pound weight 00 01 02 Chests of Iron small or middle sort the piece 04 00 00
Chests of Iron large the piece 08 00 00 Chests of Cyprus wood the chest 05 00
00 Coaches for childrn the dozen 00 03 00 Compasses of brass and iron the dozen
03 00 00 Copper the hundred weight, containing 112 pounds 04 00 00 Copper as
green the 100 weight containing 112 pounds 00 10 00 Copper as the hundred
weight, containing 112 pounds 00 06 08 Cork the hundred weight, containing 112
pounds 01 00 00 Counters of brass the pound 00 02 00 D.
Deals called Norway Deals the hundred containing six score 04 00 00 Deals
called Burgindrop deals the hundred, containing six score 10 00 00 Deals called
Spruce deals the hundred containing six score 12 00 00 Dials of Wood the dozen
00 00 06 Dials of Bone the dozen 00 05 00 Dimity the yard 00 00 06 Dishes of
China Great and small under a quart the dozen 01 00 00 Dishes of China Of a
quart and upwards the dozen 03 00 00 Drapery called Old drapery the yard coming
from England 00 00 00 Drapery called Coming from any other parts the yard 08 10
00 Drapery called New Drapery, to wit, Kersies, Searges, and all other Stuffs
of wool, or mixed with wool coming from England the yard 00 00 00 Drapery
called From any other parts. 02 05 00 Drugs called Acacia the pound 00 04 00
Drugs called Acorus the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Adiantum Album the the
pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Adiantum Nigrum the pound 00 00 06 Drugs called
Agaricus or Agarick the pound, trimed or pared 00 10 00 Drugs called Agaricus
rough or untrimmed the pound 00 02 06 Drugs called Agnus Castus seeds the pound
00 01 00 Drugs called Alcanet Roots the pound 00 00 09 Drugs called Alkermes
Syrup the pound 00 03 04 Drugs called Alkermes Confectio the pound 02 00 00
Drugs called Aloes Succotrina the pound 00 02 06 Drugs called Aloes Epatica the
pound 00 01 06 Drugs called Allom romish or Roach the hundred, containing 112
pounds 01 06 08 Drugs called Amber greece black or gray the ounce Troy 03 00 00
Drugs called Ameous seeds the pound 00 00 06 Drugs called Amomy seeds the pound
00 00 06 Drugs called Anacardium the pound 00 03 00 Drugs called Angelica the
pound 00 00 10 Drugs called Antimonium praeparatum or Stibium the lb. 00 01 00
Drugs called Antimonium crudum the pound 00 00 02 Drugs called Argentum
sublime, or Lymum the pound, or Quicksilver 00 03 0^ Drugs called Aristolochia
longa, or Rotunda the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Arsenick white or yellow, or
Rosealger the the pound 00 00 0^ Drugs called Asarum roots, the pound 00 00 10
Drugs called Asphalathus the pound 00 01 04 Drugs called Assafoetida the pound
00 01 0^ Drugs called Almonds bitter the hundred weight, containing 112 pounds
01 07 0^ Drugs called Alumen plume the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Balaustium
the pound 00 02 06 Drugs called Balsamun the pound artificial 00 03 04 Drugs
called Balsamum the pound natural 02 00 00 Drugs called Bayberries the 112
pounds 00 13 04 Drugs called Barley huld or French barley the 112 pounds 01 00
00 Drugs called B^ellium the pound 00 02 00 Drugs called Benalbum or Rubrum the
pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Benjamin of all sorts the pound 00 02 06 Drugs
called Bezar stone of West Indies the ounce Troy 00 04 00 Drugs called Bezar
stone of the East Indies, the ounce Troy 01 15 00 Drugs called Blacklead the
112 pounds 01 10 00 Drugs called Balla byzantia the pound 00 12 00 Drugs called
Bolus communis or armoniacus the hundred weight, containing 112 pounds 00 05 00
Drugs called Bolus verus the pound, or the fine bole 00 01 04 Drugs called
Borax in paste, or unrefined, commonly called Tinckull the pound 00 01 00 Drugs
called Borax refined the pound 00 02 08 Drugs called Bunkins, holly-wortles, or
pistolochia the the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Cacao nuts the pound 00 00 09
Drugs called Calamus the pound 00 00 03 Drugs called Camphire the pound refined
00 06 08 Drugs called Cancri oculus the pound 00 03 0^ Drugs called Catharides
the pound 00 04 0^ Drugs called Caraway seeds the 112 pounds 00 06 0^ Drugs
called Cardomomes the pound 00 02 0^ Drugs called Carpo balsami the pound 00 02
0^ Drugs called Carraby or Succinum the pound 00 01 0^ Drugs called Carthamum
seed the pound 00 00 0^ Drugs called Caffia Fistula the pound of all sorts 00
00 0^ Drugs called Cassia lignea the pound 00 01 0^ Drugs called Castoreum, or
Beaver cods the pound 01 00 0^ Drugs called Cerussa the hundred and twelve
pounds 01 10 0^ Drugs called China roots the pound 00 03 0^ Drugs called
Ciceres white and red the pound 00 00 0^ Drugs called Cyprus longus and
rotundus the pound 00 00 0^ Drugs called Cyprus nuts the pounds 00 00 0^ Drugs
called Civet the ounce Troy 02 00 0^ Drugs called Coculus Indiae the pound 00
00 0^ Drugs called Coloquintida the pound 00 01 0^ Drugs called Corral white or
red in fragments for physical use the pound 00 01 04 Drugs called Corral whole
the pound 00 10 00 Drugs called Corfu berries the pound 00 02 06 Drugs called
Coriander seeds the hundred 12 pounds 00 12 00 Drugs called Cortex guaiaci the
pound 00 00 05 Drugs called Cortex capparum the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called
Cortex tamarisci the pound 00 00 06 Drugs called Cortex mandragorae the pound
00 01 00 Drugs called Costus dulcis and amara the pound 00 01 04 Drugs called
Cubebs the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Cummin seeds the hundred and 12 pounds
01 13 04 Drugs called Cyclamen roots the pound 00 01 04 Drugs called Citrago
the pound 00 00 06 Drugs called Cetarch the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called
Cinabrum, or Vermilion the pound 00 03 04 Drugs called Coperas White the pound
00 00 05 Drugs called Coperas Blew of Dantzick of Hungary the pound 00 00 02
Drugs called Cambogium, or Gutta Camboae the pound 00 01 0^ Drugs called
Crystal broken in pieces for physical uses the pound 00 03 0^ Drugs called
Carlina the pound 00 00 0^ Drugs called Carolina the pound 00 00 0^ Drugs
called Cortex winteranus the pound 00 01 0^ Drugs called Cuscata the pound 00
00 0^ Drugs called Daucus crecicus the lb. 00 02 0^ Drugs called Diagredium, or
Scamony the pound 00 12 0^ Drugs called Diptaninty Leaves the lb. 00 04 0^
Drugs called Diptaniny Roots the pound 00 01 0^ Drugs called Dronicum the pound
00 01 0^ Drugs called Eleborus albus and niger the pound 00 00 0^ Drugs called
Epithemum the pound 00 01 0^ Drugs called Es Ustum the pound 00 01 0^ Drugs
called Euphoribium the pound 00 00 0^ Drugs called Fennel seeds the pound 00 00
0^ Drugs called Fenu greek the hundred and twelve pound 01 10 0^ Drugs called
Florey the pound 00 02 0^ Drugs called Folium Indiae the pound 00 03 0^ Drugs
called Fox lungs the pound 00 01 0^ Drugs called Frankincense of France, or
Parosin the 112 lb. 00 12 0^ Drugs called Galbanum the pound 00 02 00 Drugs
called Galganga the pound 00 01 04 Drugs called General the pound 00 01 00
Drugs called Gentiana the pound 00 00 04 Drugs called Ginney pepper the pound
00 00 04 Drugs called Grana Pinae the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Green ginger
the pound 00 10 00 Drugs called Gum armoniack the lb. 00 01 00 Drugs called Gum
carrana the pound 00 10 00 Drugs called Gum tragagant the lb. 00 00 09 Drugs
called Gum elemni the pound 00 02 06 Drugs called Gum hedere the pound 00 02 00
Drugs called Gum lack the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Gum oppopanas the lb. 00
03 00 Drugs called Gum sarcocol the pound 00 01 04 Drugs called Gum serapinum,
of sagapinum the pound 00 01 06 Drugs called Gum taccamahacca the pound 00 10
00 Drugs called Gum tinctorum the lb. 00 01 00 Drugs called Grains of Guinny,
or French Grains the 112 pounds 01 04 00 Drugs called Gum Arabic, or Gum
Seneca the 112 pounds 00 15 00 Drugs called Gum sandrack, or gum Juniper the
112 pounds 01 10 00 Drugs called Gum guaiaci the pound 00 03 04 Drugs called
Gum caramen the pound 00 02 00 Drugs called Hermodactilus the pound 00 01 02
Drugs called Hypocistis the pound 00 01 08 Drugs called Horns of Hearts of Stags
the hundred weight 02 10 00 Drugs called Incense or Olibanum the 112 pounds 03
12 00 Drugs called Ireos the 112 pounds 03 00 00 Drugs called Iron glass the
110 pound 10 00 00 Drugs called Jujubes the pound 00 00 06 Drugs called Jolop
the pound 00 04 00 Drugs called Juniper berries the pound 00 13 04 Drugs called
Labdanum or Labdonum the pound 00 01 04 Drugs called Lapis calaminaris the
pound 00 00 02 Drugs called Lapis hematitis the pound 00 02 00 Drugs called
Lapis judaicus the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Lapis tutiae the pound 00 01 00
Drugs called Lapis lazuli the pound 00 06 08 Drugs called Leaves of roses, of
Violers, of flowers the pound 00 00 10 Drugs called Lyntiscus or Xylobalsamum
the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Lignum aloes the pound 00 10 00 Drugs called
Lignum asphaltum the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Lignum Rhodium the 112 pounds
00 06 08 Drugs called Lignum vitae the 112 lb. 00 10 00 Drugs called Litharge
of gold the 112 pounds 01 05 00 Drugs called Litharge of silver the 112 pounds
01 00 00 Drugs called Locusts the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Lupins the 112
pounds 00 12 00 Drugs called Lentils the 112 pounds 01 17 04 Drugs called Lapis
contrayerva the ounce 00 03 04 Drugs called Lignum nephriticum the pound 00 01
04 Drugs called Madder roots or rubia tinctorum the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called
Manna the pound 00 03 00 Drugs called Marmalade the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called
Mastich white the pound 00 02 08 Drugs called Mastich red the pound 00 01 00
Drugs called Mechoacan the pound 00 02 00 Drugs called Mercury sublimate the
lb. 00 04 00 Drugs called Mercury precipitate the pound 00 05 00 Drugs called
Mithraidate Venetia the lb. 00 06 08 Drugs called Millium solis the pound 00 01
00 Drugs called Mirobalans dry the pound 00 00 06 Drugs called Mirobalans
condited the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Mirttle berries the pound 00 00 06
Drugs called Mummia the pound 00 01 06 Drugs called Musk the ounce Troy 01 10
00 Drugs called Musk cods the ounce 00 10 00 Drugs called Mirrha the pound 00
01 06 Drugs called Nigella the pound 00 00 04 Drugs called Nitrum the pound 00
01 01 Drugs called Nutmegs condited the piece 00 00 03 Drugs called Nux de
benne the pound 00 00 09 Drugs called Nux cupressi the pound 00 00 06 Drugs
called Nux indica the piece 00 01 00 Drugs called Nux vomica the pound 00 00 08
Drugs called Nardus celtica, or spica romana the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called
Nux pini, or grana pini the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Olibanum, or incense
the pound 00 00 11 Drugs called Opium the pound 00 06 00 Drugs called Osippium
huerredum the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Orcant or Aluvet the lb. 00 00 06
Drugs called Orange Flower Ointment the pound 00 02 00 Drugs called Orange
Flower Water the gallon 00 04 00 Drugs called Origanum the pound 00 00 06 Drugs
called Ossa de cord cervi the lb. 00 12 00 Drugs called Oil of Amber the pound
00 12 00 Drugs called Oil of Rosemary the lb. 00 03 04 Drugs called Oil de bay
the 112 lb. 02 16 00 Drugs called Oil of Mace of Nutmegs the pound 00 15 00
Drugs called Oil de ben the pound 00 05 00 Drugs called Oil of spike the pound
00 01 06 Drugs called Oil of almonds the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Oil of
Scorpions the lb. 00 02 00 Drugs called Oleum petroleum the lb. 00 01 06 Drugs
called Oleum turpentine the lb. 00 00 06 Drugs called Orabus the pound 00 00 06
Drugs called Orpment, auripgimentum the pound 00 00 05 Drugs called Panther the
pound 02 00 00 Drugs called Panis porcinus the pound 00 01 04 Drugs called
Pearl seed the ounce Troy 00 10 00 Drugs called Pellitorie the pound 00 00 09
Drugs called Pepper long the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Perrosen, vide
Frankincense the 100 weight 00 12 00 Drugs called Piony seeds the pound 00 00
06 Drugs called Piony roots the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Pistachias, or nux
pistachia the pound 00 00 06 Drugs called Pix burgundy the 112 lb. 00 15 00
Drugs called Polium montanum the lb. 00 01 00 Drugs called Polypodium the pound
00 00 03 Drugs called Pomgranate pills the lb. 00 00 04 Drugs called Poppie
seeds the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Precipitate the pound 00 05 00 Drugs
called Psyllum the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Prunellas or pruens of Brunelia
the pound 00 00 06 Drugs called Quicksilver the pound 00 03 00 Drugs called
Rhaponticum the pound 00 02 00 Drugs called Radix esulae the pound 00 08 00
Drugs called Red lead the 112 pounds 00 18 00 Drugs called Rhabarbarum or
rubarb the pound 00 16 00 Drugs called Rosalger, vide arsenick the pound 00 00
04 Drugs called Rosset the pound 00 00 06 Drugs called Radix contrayerva the
lb, 00 01 00 Drugs called Radix scorcionera the lb. 00 02 00 Drugs called Radix
pioniae the pound 00 00 06 Drugs called Sal alkali the pound 00 02 00 Drugs
called Sal ammoniacum the lb. 00 00 09 Drugs called Sal gem the pound 00 00 06
Drugs called Sal niter the pound 00 01 04 Drugs called Sandracha or gum
sandrick the pound. 00 00 04 Drugs called Sadracha or gum juniperi the pound 00
00 04 Drugs called Sandiver the 112 pounds 00 09 00 Drugs called Sanguis
Draconis the lb. 00 01 00 Drugs called Sarsaparilla the pound 00 02 00 Drugs
called Sasafras, wood or roots the pound 00 00 02 Drugs called Sanders white
the pound 00 01 06 Drugs called Sanders yellow the lb. 00 02 00 Drugs called
Sanders red, alias stock the pound 00 00 09 Drugs called Scamony, vide
diagredium the pound 00 12 00 Drugs called Scinchus marinus the piece 00 00 03
Drugs called Scordium the pound 00 00 06 Drugs called Scorpions the hundred 00
03 00 Drugs called Sebestins the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Seeds for gardens
of all sorts the pound 00 00 10 Drugs called Seler montanus the pound 00 00 08
Drugs called Semen cucumeris cucurb. caruli melon. the lb. 00 00 08 Drugs
called Sena the pound 00 04 00 Drugs called Soldonella the pound 00 00 08 Drugs
called Sperma ceti fine the lb. 01 00 00 Drugs called Sperma ceti course Oily
the 112 pounds 04 00 00 Drugs called Spica celtica, vide nardus celtica, or
spica Romana the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Sanguis hirci the pound 00 01 00
Drugs called Spicknard the pound 00 04 00 Drugs called Spodium the pound 00 01
00 Drugs called Spunges the 100 weight 00 05 00 Drugs called Squilla the 112
pound 00 06 08 Drugs called Squinanthum the pound 00 05 04 Drugs called
Stechaded the pound 00 01 04 Drugs called Staphisager the pound 00 00 05 Drugs
called Stibium, vide antimonium praeparatum the lb. 00 01 00 Drugs called
Storax calaminta the lb. 00 04 00 Drugs called Storax liquida the pound 00 01
00 Drugs called Succus liquiritae the lb. 00 00 09 Drugs called Sulphur vivum
the pound 00 00 06 Drugs called Tamarindes the pound 00 00 06 Drugs called
Terra lemnia the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Terra sigillata the pound 00 01 02
Drugs called Thlaspir semen the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Torusal the pound
00 00 08 Drugs called Trochisci de vipera the ounce Troy 00 02 06 Drugs called
Treacle common the lb. 00 01 04 Drugs called Treacle of Venice the lb. 00 06 08
Drugs called Trubith the pound 00 02 06 Drugs called Turme^ick the pound 00 00
06 Drugs called Turpentine of Venice, Scio or Cyprus the lb. 00 02 00 Drugs
called Turpentine common the 112 pounds 00 13 04 Drugs called Talk white the
pound 00 00 06 Drugs called Talk green the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called
Verdegreece the pound 00 01 08 Drugs called Vernish the 112 pound 02 00 00
Drugs called Vermillion, vide cinabrium the pound 00 03 00 Drugs called
Vitriolum romanum the pound 00 13 00 Drugs called Umber the 100 weight
containing 112 pounds 00 11 00 Drugs called Viscus quercinus the lb. 00 01 00
Drugs called White lead the 112 lb. 01 06 08 Drugs called Wormseeds the pound
00 03 04 Drugs called Zedorea the pound 00 13 00 Drugs called Xylobalsamum,
vide lintiscus the pound 00 01 00 E.
Elephants teeth the hundred containing five score. 08 00 00 Emery stones the
hundred weight containining 112 pounds 00 04 00 Ebony wood the tun 50 00 00 F.
Fans For corn the piece 00 03 00 Fans For women and children french making the
dozen 02 00 00 Feathers Of Russia the hundred weight 01 15 00 Feathers Of
France for beds the hundred weight 04 00 00 Feathers Of Ostridges Black the
pound 00 03 06 Feathers OF Ostridges White the pound 00 10 00 Fidles for
children the groce 00 18 00 Files the groce, containing 12 dozen 00 08 00 Flax
Spruce Muscovia, and all flax undrest foreign, the 100 weight, containing 112
pound 02 00 06 Flax Dressed or wrought flax Ditto 112 pound 07 00 00 Flower Roots
the hundred, containing five score 00 05 00 Furs called Ermins the Timber,
containing forty skins 01 10 00 Furs called Badgers skins the piece 00 02 00
Furs called Bears skins Black the piece 01 00 00 Furs called Bears skins White
or red the piece 00 06 08 Furs called Beaver skins Whole the piece 00 10 00
Furs called Beaver skins Wombs the piece 00 05 00 Furs called Budge White tawed
the 100, being five score skins 02 00 00 Furs called Budge White untawed the
hundred, containing five score skins, 03 10 00 Furs called Budge Black tawed
the the dozen skins 01 06 08 Furs called Budge Black untawed the hundred,
containing five score skins 02 00 00 Furs called Budge Poules the fur
containing four pair 01 00 00 Furs called Budge Navern the hundred legs
containing five score 02 00 00 Furs called Budge Rumney the hundred, legs
containing five score 05 00 00 Furs called Calaber Shubs of Calaber the piece
or Shub 02 00 00 Furs called Calaber Untawed the Timber, containing forty skins
00 06 08 Furs called Calaber Tawed the Timber containing forty skins 00 08 00
Furs called Calaber Seasoned the pain 01 00 00 Furs called Calaber Stag the
pain 00 12 06 Furs called Foynes Wombs seasoned the pain or mantle 01 06 08
Furs called Foynes Wombs Stag the pain or mantle 00 15 00 Furs called Grayes
Untawed, the Timber containing 40 skins 00 08 04 Furs called Grayes Tawed the
timbet, containing forty skins 00 12 06 Furs called Jenets Black raw the skin
00 12 06 Furs called Jenets Black seasoned the skin 00 16 08 Furs called Jenets
Gray raw the skin 00 03 00 Furs called Jenets Gray seasoned the skin 00 04 00
Furs called Letwis Taw'd the timber containing forty skins 00 08 04 Furs called
Letwis Untaw'd the timber containing 40 skins 00 06 00 Furs called Leopards
Skins the piece 01 05 00 Furs called Leopards Wombs the pain 05 00 00 Furs
called Lewxerns skins the piece 02 10 00 Furs called Matrons The timber
containing forty skins 10 00 00 Furs called Matrons The pain or mantle 09 00 00
Furs called Caleber Black skins the 100 containing five score 05 00 00 Furs
called Calaber Pouls the hundred containing five score 01 00 00 Furs called
Calaber Poults the mantle 00 06 03 Furs called Calaber Wombs the pain or mantle
00 06 03 Furs called Dockerrers the timber containing 40 skins 00 13 04 Furs
called Fitches The timber containing 40 skins 01 00 00 Furs called Fitches the
pain or mantle 00 12 06 Furs called Foxes The black Fox skin 10 00 00 Furs
called Foxes The ordinary skin 00 02 00 Furs called Foxes The pain or mantle 00
15 00 Furs called Foxes Wombs pouls or pieces the pain 00 10 00 Furs called
Foynes Black the dozen 01 05 00 Furs called Foynes Tails the pain or mantle 00
12 06 Furs called Foynes With tails the piece 00 03 06 Furs called Foynes
Without tails the piece 00 04 00 Furs called Foynes Raw the piece 00 01 00 Furs
called Foynes Pouls the 100 containing five score 01 06 08 Furs called Matrons
Pouts the pain or mantle 00 10 00 Furs called Matrons Gills the timber
containing 40 skins 00 12 00 Furs called Matrons Tails the 100 containing forty
skins 02 00 00 Furs called Miniver the mantle 00 13 00 Furs called Minks
Untawed the timber containing 40 skins 03 00 00 Furs called Minks Tawed the
timber. containing forty skins 04 00 00 Furs called Mould skins the dozen 00 00
06 Furs called Otter skins the piece 00 05 00 Furs called Ounces skins the
piece 00 12 06 Furs called Sables of all sorts the timber containing 40 skins
03 00 00 Furs called Weasel skins the dozen 00 00 04 Furs called Wolf skins
Tawed the piece 01 10 00 Furs called Wolf skins Untawed the piece 01 03 00
Fustians called Wolverings the piece 00 15 00 Fustians called Amsterdam,
Holland or Dutch Fustian the piece, containing two half pieces of 15 yards the
half piece 05 00 00 Fustians called Barmillions the piece, containing two half
pieces 05 00 00 Fustians called Cullen Fustians the piece, containing two half
pieces 05 00 00 Fustians called Millain Fustians the piece, containing two half
pieces 05 00 00 Fustians called Naples Fustians, Trape or Velure plain the
piece, containing fifteen yards 05 00 00 Fustians called Of Weazel the piece,
containing two half pieces 05 00 00 Fustians called Fustians called Janes,
Millions, Barmillions English the piece, containing 2 half pieces 02 00 00 G.
^ally dishes the dozen of all sorts 00 05 00 Girdles Of Cruel, the groce
containing twelve dozen 01 06 08 Girdles Of Leather the groce, containing 12
dozen 01 00 00 Girdles Of Silk the dozen 01 00 00 Girdles Of Velvet the dozen
02 00 00 Glass for windows called Burgundy white the chest or case 03 10 0^
Glass for windows called Burgundy colored the chest 03 00 0^ Glass for windows
called Normandy whice the case 03 00 0^ Glass for windows called Normandy
colored the case 03 00 0^ Glass for windows called Rhenish the way or web
containing 60 bunches 03 00 0^ Glass for windows called Muscovy glass, or Slude
the pound 00 02 0^ Drinking glasses called Venice drinking glasses the dozen 00
04 0^ Drinking glasses called Flanders drinking glasses the 100 glasses,
confive score 02 10 0^ Drinking glasses called French drinking glasses the
hundred, containing five score. 01 00 0^ Drinking glasses called English
drinking glasses containing 5 score to the hundred 01 00 0^ All other English
glasses after half rate per centum 00 00 0^ Glasses called Burning glasses the
dozen 00 12 0^ Glasses called Ballin glasses the groce, containing 12 dozen 02
00 0^ Vials the 100 containing five score 00 10 00 Water glasses the dozen of
all sorts 00 03 00 Looking glasses Penny half penny ware the gross containing
12 dozen 00 06 08 Looking glasses Steel small the dozen 00 05 00 Looking
glasses Steel large the dozen 00 10 00 Hour glasses of Flanders making course
the groce, containing 12 dozen 02 00 00 Hour glasses of Venice making the dozen
02 00 00 Glass stone plates for Spectacles rough the dozen 00 06 08 Glass pipes
Small the pound 00 02 00 Glass pipes Great the pound 00 03 00 Globes small the
pair 03 00 00 Globes large the pair 06 00 00 Gold foil the small groce,
containing twelve dozen 00 04 00 Gravers and pincers the pound 00 01 00 Ditto
the dozen 00 03 00 Grain or scarlet powder the pound 00 04 06 Grindle stones
the chaulder 01 10 00 Grocery ware called Almonds the 100 weight, containing
112 pounds 03 00 00 Grocery ware called Anniseeds the 100 weight containing 112
pounds 01 00 00 Grocery ware called Cloves the pound 00 08 00 Grocery ware
called Currants the 100 containing 112 pounds 04 00 00 Grocery ware called
Dates the 100 containing 112 pounds 04 00 00 Grocery ware called Ginger of the
East Indies, or other Foreign Plantations the pound 00 01 04 Grocery ware
called Ginger of the English Plantation the hundred weight, containing 112
pounds 01 00 00 Grocery ware called Liquorish the hundred weight, containing
112 pounds 01 00 00 Grocery ware called Mace the pound 00 15 00 Grocery ware
called Raisins of all sorts the 100 weight, containing 112 pounds 02 03 04
Grocery ware called Nutmegs the pound 02 06 00 Grocery ware called Pepper the
pound 00 02 00 Grocery ware called Cinnamon the pound 00 03 00 Grocery ware
called Figs the 100 weight containing 112 pounds 01 10 00 Grocery ware called
Prunes the 100 weight, containing 112 pounds 00 15 00 Grocery ware called Sugar
Of Barbary the hundred weight, containing 112 pounds 02 00 00 Sugar Candy brown
the 100 weight, containing 112 pounds 05 00 00 Sugar Candy white the hundred
weight, contain-containing 112 pounds 12 00 00 Sugar Whites of the English
plantation the 112 lb. 05 00 00 Sugar Whites of Lisbone the 112 pounds 05 06 08
Sugar Muscavadoes of the English plantation 112 lb. 01 00 00 Sugar Muscavadoes
from elsewhere, the 112 pounds 02 00 00 Sugar Panellis of all sorts, the 112
pounds 00 10 00 Sugar Single or double refined Sugar 07 00 00 H.
Handkerchiefs the dozen 02 00 00 Hauks of all sorts the Hauk 04 00 00 Hauks
hoods the groce, containing twelve dozen 01 06 08 Hair called Elks hair for
Saddles the pound 00 00 06 Goats hair the pound 00 02 00 Heath for Brushes the
hundred, containing 112 pounds 01 00 00 Hempseed to be free 00 00 00 Hemp
called Cullen and Steel Hemp, and all other sorts of dressed Hemp, the 100
weight, containing 112 pound 05 00 00 Spruce Muscovia hemp the 100 weight,
containing 112 pounds 01 00 00 Hides called Buff hides, the hide 01 10 00 Hides
called Cow hides of Barbary Muscovia, the hide in the hair 00 07 00 Hides
called Cow or horse hides the piece 00 10 00 Hides called India hides, the hide
00 07 00 Hides called Losh hides, the piece 01 00 00 Hides called Red or
Muscovia hides tanned, colored or uncolored the hide 00 06 08 Hoopes of Iron
for pipes or hogsheads the 100 weight containing one hundred and twelve pound
03 00 00 Horses, Mares, Geldings or Nags to be free 00 00 00 Horses of Wood the
groce containing twelve dozen 00 05 00 Honey the barrel 04 00 00 I.
Jars of China of all sorts the pair 01 00 00 Incle Unwrought the pound 00 01
06 Incle Wrought the dozen pound 01 02 00 Indico to be free 00 00 00 Indico
dust to be free 00 00 00 Iron called Amys Spanish spruce swethish, and all
sorts the tun 66 00 00 Iron called Oar and Cinders the tun to be free 00 00 00
Iron called Backs for Chimneys small the piece 01 00 00 Iron called Backs for
Chimneys large the piece 02 00 00 Iron called Bands for kettles the hundred
weight containing 112 pounds 05 00 00 Iron called Juice of Lemons the pipe 04
00 00 K.
Knives called Butchers knives the dicker, containing 10 knives 00 03 00 Knives
called Carving knives the dozen 01 10 00 Knives called Collen knives the groce
containing 12 dozen 10 00 00 Knives called French knives the groce, containing
12 dozen 07 04 00 Knives called Glovers knives the bundle containing 6 knives
00 05 00 Knives called Houncides the dozen 03 00 00 L.
Lace called Lace of gold or silver, or silver and gold, the pound Troy, or
venice weight 20 00 00 Lace called Silk Bone-lace the small pound, containing
sixteen ounces of all sorts 40 00 00 Lace called Silk Lace of all other sorts,
the pound, containing sixteen ounces 10 00 00 Lattin black and shaven the
hundred weight, containing 112 lb. 05 00 00 Lead the tun, containing twenty
hundred pounds 06 00 00 Leather hangings gilt the piece 04 00 00 Linseed the
Bushel, to be free 00 00 00 Lins the dozen 00 12 06 Linen cloth or Callicoes
fine or course the piece 00 12 00 Linen cloth or Cambricks The half piece,
containing six else 01 05 00 Linen cloth or Cambricks The piece containing
thirteen else 02 10 00 Linen cloth or The Packet 02 00 00 Linen cloth or
Canvas called Dutch Barras and Hessons canvas the 100 03 10 00 Linen cloth or
Canvas called else containing six score Linen cloth or Canvas called French
and Normandy canvas and line, narrow, brown or white, the 100 else, containing
six score 06 10 00 Linen cloth or Canvas called Noyals canvas the hundred else
containing 120 08 00 00 Linen cloth or Canvas called White French or Normandy
canvas broad, the 100 else containing 120 10 00 00 Linen cloth or Canvas
called French canvas and Line broad, sor tabling, being an ell and half a
quarter and upwards, the 100 else containing 120 15 00 00 Linen cloth or
Canvas called Packing canvas, Guttings and spruce canvas the 100 else
containing 120 03 00 00 Linen cloth or Canvas called Poldavis, Spuce, Elbing,
or Quinsborow canvas, the bolt containing 28 else 00 18 00 Linen cloth or
Canvas called Stripped or tufted canvas with thread the piece containing fifteen
yards 01 10 00 Linen cloth or Canvas called Stripped Canvas with copper, the
piece, containing 15 yards 02 00 00 Linen cloth or Canvas called Stripped or
tufted, or quilted canvas with silk, the piece containing 15 yards 00 18 00
Linen cloth or Canvas called Vandolose or Vittry canvas the 100 else
containing 120 06 00 00 Linen cloth or Canvas called Working canvas of
cushions, narrow the 100 else containing 120 03 00 00 Linen cloth or Canvas
called Working canvas broad the 100 else containing six score 05 00 00 Linen
cloth or Danmask Tabling of holland making the yard 00 08 00 Linen cloth or
Danmask Towelling and napkinning of holland making the yard 00 03 00 Linen
cloth or Danmask Tabling of Silesia making the yard 00 04 00 Linen cloth or
Danmask Towelling and napkinning of Silesia making the yard 00 01 00 Linen
cloth or Lawns Diaper Tabling of holland making the yard 00 05 00 Linen cloth
or Lawns Diaper Towelling and napkinning of holland making the yard 00 01 08
Linen cloth or Lawns Diaper Napkins of holland making the dozen 01 10 00
Linen cloth or Lawns Diaper Of Silesia making tabling the yard 00 02 06 Linen
cloth or Lawns Diaper Towelling and napkinning of Silesia making the yard 00 02
06 Linen cloth or Lawns Diaper "The half piece, containing six else and one
half 01 10 00 Linen cloth or Lawns Diaper The piece containing thirteen else
03 00 00 Linen cloth or Lawns Diaper Callico lawns the piece 01 00 00 Linen
cloth or Lawns Diaper French lawns the piece 01 05 00 Linen cloth or Lawns
Diaper Silesia lawns the piece containing between four and eight yards 00 10 00
Linen cloth or Flanders linen cloth Oudnard Courtrey Gentish Issinghams Iper
Outnal
And all other sorts of flanders and French linen white the ell 00 03 04
Linen cloth or Issingham and Gentishbrown, and all other brown linen the ell
00 02 06 Linen cloth or Bag holland of holland making the ell 00 06 08 Linen
cloth or H^lland linen Acts cloth Prabant
And all other Embden Freese Gulick
cloth of Holland the ell --
00 03 04 Linen cloth or H^lland linen Overissels Rowse
And all other shepards cloth of holland the ell
00 03 04 Linen cloth or British the hundred else containing five score 06 00
00 Linen cloth called Cowsseild Cloth or plats the ell 00 01 06 Linen
cloth called Drilling and pack-duck the 100 else containing six score 02 105
00 Linen cloth called Elbing or dansk cloth double ploy the ell 00 01 00
Linen cloth called Hamborough the Silesia cloth broad the 100 else
containing 120 white or brown 07 00 00 Linen cloth called Hamborough cloth
narrow the 100 else, containing six score 04 00 00 Linen cloth called
Hinderland, middlegood Headlake and Muscovia linen narrow the 100 else
containing six score 02 10 00 Linen cloth called Lockrams the piece broad 10
00 00 Linen cloth called Lockrams the piece narr. 06 00 00 Linen cloth
called Minsters the roll, containing 1500 else, at five score to the hundred 47
10 00 Linen cloth called Oxenbridges, the Roll containing 1500 else, at 5
score to the 100 60 00 00 Linen cloth called Soultwich the 100 else,
containing six score 04 00 00 Linen cloth called Polonia, Ulsters, Hannovers,
Lubeck, narrow Sletia, narrow Wesphalia, narrow Harford, plain Napkenning, and
all other narrow cloth of High Dutchland, and the East Country white or
brown, and not otherwise rated, the 100 else, containing 6 score 05 00 00
Linen cloth called Strasborough or Hamborough linen the ell 00 03 00 Locks
called Budget or hanging locks small the groce, containing 12 dozen 01 00 00
Locks called Hanging locks large the groce containing 12 doz. 02 00 00
Lutestrings called Catlings the groce, containing 12 dozen 00 06 08 M.
Crop Madder, and all other Dale madder, the hundred weight containg 112 pound
01 00 00 Madder called Fat madder the hundred weight, containing 112 pounds 00
10 00 Madder called Mul madder, the hundred weight containing 112 lb. 00 06 08
Magnus the hundred weight, containing 112 pound 01 00 00 Masks of Velvet the
dozen 01 04 00 Masts For ships, small the mast 01 00 00 Masts Middle the mast
02 00 00 Masts Great the mast 05 00 00 Mats Russia, the mat. 00 01 08 Mats Mats
called dutch the yard 00 01 08 Melasses or Rameals the hundred weight,
containing 112 pounds 00 05 00 Moccado ends the dozen pounds 03 00 00 Mittins
of Wadmol the dozen pair 00 09 00 N.
Napkins French making the dozen 00 12 00 Nedles called Sowing needles the
dozen thousand 02 00 00 Nedles called Pack needles the thousand 00 10 00 Nedles
called Sail needles the thousand 00 05 00 O.
Okeham the hundred weight, containing 112 pound to be free Oar, vide Iron Oar,
to be free Oars the 100 containing six score 10 00 00 Oils called Rape and
Linseed Oil the tun 30 00 00 Oils called Sivil Oil, Majorca Oil, Minorca oil,
Apuglia Province oil, and Portugal oil, the tun 32 00 06 Oils called Train Oil
of Greenland the tun 08 00 00 Train oil of New Foundland, and the like sort
the tun 06 00 00 Olives the Hogshead 08 00 00 Onions The barrel 00 03 04 Onions
The hundred bunches 00 16 08 Onions Seed the 100 weight containing 112 pounds
04 00 00 Orchal the hundred weight, containing 112 pounds 01 10 00 Oranges and
Lemons free Orsedewe the dozen pound 02 00 00 P.
Pans called dripping and frying pans the hundred weight, containing 112 pounds
03 00 00 Paper called Blew paper the ream 00 10 00 Paper called Brown paper the
bundle 00 03 00 Paper called Cap paper the ream 00 07 06 Paper called Morlaix
paper the ream 00 02 06 Paper called Paper of Caen and Roan ordinary, the ream
00 04 06 Paper called Ordinary printing paper and copy paper, the ream 00 02 06
Paper called Painted paper the ream 01 00 00 Paper called Pressing paper the
100 leaves 01 00 00 Paper called Rochel paper as large as demi paper, the ream
00 09 00 Paper called Royal paper the ream 01 00 00 Paper called Demi paper the
ream 00 12 00 Parchment the dozen, containing twelve sheets 00 12 00 Ditto the
roll, containing six dozen 03 00 00 Pins English the dozen thousand 00 09 00
Pincers and pliers the dozen 00 04 00 Pintadoes, or Callico cupboard clothes
the piece 03 00 00 Pipe, Hogshead or Barrel staves the hundred, containing six
score 01 00 00 Pipes for children the groce, containing twelve dozen 00 08 00
Pitch great band the Last, containing twelve barrels 06 00 00 Small band the
last 04 00 00 Plaster of Parris, the mount containing three thousand weight 01
10 00 Plank the hundred foot, containing five score 00 12 06 Planks of Cedar
the foot 00 01 00 Lattin plates called Single white the barrel qt. three
hundred 04 00 00 Lattin plates called Double white the barrel qt. three hundred
08 00 00 Lattin plates called Single black the barrel containing 300 plates 04
00 00 Lattin plates called Double black the barrel, containing 300 plates 08 00
00 Pumice stones the tun 05 00 00 Pomgranats the hundred, containing five score
00 05 00 Pots called Of earth or stone covered, the hundred cast 05 00 00 Pots
called Of earth or stone uncovered the 100 cast, containing a gallon to every
cast, whether in one pot or more 03 00 00 Pots called Gally pots the 100
containing five score 02 00 00 Pots called Melting pots for Goldsmiths the
thousand 01 10 00 Pots called All Pots and Kettles of Iron the dozen 12 00 00
Pullies, viz. Pullies of Iron the groce, containing 12 dozen 08 00 00 Pullies,
viz. Of brass the dozen 00 04 00 Q.
Quills called Goose-quills; the thousand 00 02 06 R.
Rape of Grape the tun 06 00 00 Rattles for children the groce, containing
twelve dozen 01 00 00 Ribband of silk of all sorts, the pound containing
sixteen ounces 05 00 00 Rice the hundred weight, containing 112 pounds 01 06 08
Rozen the hundred weight, containing 112 pounds 00 06 08 Ribband of gold,
silver, or both the pound qtt. sixteen ounces 08 00 00 S.
Salfore the hundred weight, containing 112 pounds 00 04 00 Saffron the pound
01 10 00 Salt of all sorts the bushel, containing eight gallons 00 05 00
Saltpeter the hundred weight, containing 112 pounds 02 00 00 Scales for
scabbars the bundle 00 01 00 Scamotty the yard 00 01 00 Scamotty the piece,
containing 13 yards 00 13 00 Scissars the groce, containing twelve dozen 03 00
00 Sea holly Roots the pound 00 01 00 Sheets old the pair 00 06 00 Shirts old
the piece 00 01 06 Syder and Perry the tun 04 00 00 Silk called Bolognia,
Naples and Organsive silk the small pound containing sixteen ounces 01 08 00
Silk called Bassan, Vicentia, Orsoy and Messina Thrown silk, the small pound 01
04 00 Silk called Capiton silk double the small lb 00 09 00 Silk called Ferret
and Floret silk the small pound 00 16 00 Silk called Naples Thrown silk the
small pound 01 02 06 Silk called Raw legee silk the great lb. containing 24
ounces 00 18 00 Silk called Raw Ardas silk the great lb. 00 14 00 Silk called
Raw Belledine, Bias and Messina silk the great pound 01 00 00 Silk called Raw
Bengala silk the great lb. 00 15 00 Silk called Raw Morea silk the great lb 00
09 00 Silk called Raw China silk the great pound of all sorts 00 18 00 Silk
called Raw Capiton silk the great lb. 00 10 00 Silk called Thrown silk died,
the pound containing 16 ounces 02 10 00 Silk called All silks wrought of the
Fabric or Manufacture of the East Indies, Italy, or any other part or place
whatsoever, the pound weight containing 16 ounces 05 00 00 Skins called Buck
skins In the hair the skin 00 02 06 Skins called Buck skins Dressed the skin 00
05 00 Skins called Calves skins Raw the dozen 00 06 08 Skins called Calves skin
Tanned the dozen 00 15 00 Skins called Dogs fish skins or Fletchers the skin 00
00 06 Skins called Elks skins, the skin 01 10 00 Skins called Fox skins dressed,
the dozen 01 05 00 Skins called Gold skins, the skin 00 00 06 Skins called Goat
skins Of Barbary, or the east country in the hair the dozen 01 00 00 Skins
called Goat skins Tanned the doz. 02 00 00 Skins called Huss skins for
Fletchers the skin 00 00 06 Skins called Kid skins In the hair the 100
containing 5 score 01 00 00 Skins called Kid skins Dressed the 100 containing
five score 02 00 00 Skins called Lamb skins in the wool the hundred, containing
120 01 05 00 Skins called Portugal skins the dozen 02 00 00 Skins called Seal
skins the skin 00 01 08 Skins called Shamway skins the dozen 01 10 00 Skins
called Sheep skins blew of France the dozen 02 00 00 Skins called Rabbet and
Coney skins of all sor^s, the 100 skins containing five score 01 10 00 Skins
called Squirrel skins the 1000 05 00 00 Skins called Spanish, Sivil or
Cordovant skins the dozen 05 00 00 Skins called Spruce skins tawed the dozen 02
00 00 Skins called Sheep skins in the wool the skin 00 00 09 Slude the pound 00
02 00 Smalt the pound 00 01 00 Snouting alias Snayl, or dressed tow the 12 pound
00 05 00 Spars the middle the hundred containing six score 01 00 00 Spars small
the hundred, containing six score 10 00 00 Spangles of Copper the thousand 00
01 00 Spectacles without cases the groce, containing twelve dozen 00 18 00 All
spirits made of Wine or Cider the gallon 00 06 08 All strong water perfectly
made, the gallon 01 00 00 Soap hard or soft, the hundred and twelve pound 06 00
00 Starch the hundred and 12 pounds 01 10 00 Steel called Steel wisp or long,
per faggot, or per hundred weight, containing 112 pounds 02 00 00 Steel called
Gad steel the half barrel 12 00 00 Stockings of silk the pair 02 00 00 Stockins
worsted for men or women the pair 00 06 08 Stockins for children the pair
worsted 00 03 04 Stockins woolen for men or women the pair 00 03 04 Stockins of
woollen for children the pair 00 01 08 Stones called Cane stones the tun 00 10
00 Stones called Dog stones the last, containing three pair to the last, to be
free Stones called Millstone the last containing 3 pair to be free Stones called
Milstones the pair to be free Stones called Quern stones small the last 10 10
00 Stones called Quern stones large the last 13 10 00 Stones called Slick
stones the hundred containing five score 10 02 00 T.
Tallow the hundred weight, containing 112 pounds 03 10 00 Tapistry With hair,
the Flemish ell 00 03 00 Tapistry With Caddas, the flemish ell 00 06 00
Tapistry With Silk the flemish ell 00 06 00 Tapistry With wool, the flemish ell
00 03 00 Tarras the barrel 00 06 08 Tar small band, the last 02 00 00 Tar great
band, the last containing 112 barrels 03 06 08 Teazles the thousand 00 02 00
Thread called Black and brown thread the dozen pound 01 00 00 Thread called Lions
or Par is third the bail containing 100 bolts 03 00 00 Thread called Outrial
thread the dozen lb 03 00 00 Thread called Sisters thread the pound 00 15 00 Thread
called Whited brown the dozen pound 01 13 04 Thrums Of Linen or Fustain the
pound 00 00 06 Thrums Of Woolen 00 01 00 Ticks called Brizel Ticks, and
counterfeit Brizil the Tick, or Turnel Tick 01 00 00 Timber the load,
containing 50 foot 01 00 00 Tiles called pantiles the thousand 05 00 00
Tinglase the hundred weight, containing 112 pounds 03 00 00 Tinshore the groce,
containing 12 dozen 00 03 00 Towe the hundred weight, containing 112 pounds 01
00 00 Treakle Flanders Treakle the barrel 04 00 00 Treakle Of Jeane the pound
00 01 04 Trees of all sorts free Trumpets for children the groce 00 08 00 Twine
of Hamborough the hundred weight, containing 112 lb. 02 10 00 Twist for
Band-strings, the dozen knots 00 10 00 Tobacco of English Plantation, the pound
00 01 08 Spanish Tobacco of all other Plantations the pound 00 10 00 V.
Verditer the hundred weight containing 112 pounds 01 06 08 Verders Tapistry,
containing 8 or 10 else with hair, the flemish ell 00 02 00 Vinegar the tun 10
00 00 W.
Wadmol the yard 00 00 09 Wainscots the piece 00 10 00 Wax the hundred weight,
containing 112 pound 05 10 00 Wax called hard wax the pound 00 02 04 Waters
distilled, vide strong waters Whale-bone the hundred weight 00 10 00
Wherstones, the hundred stones containing five score 00 16 08 Woad the hundred,
containing 112 pounds 00 18 00 Whale-bone the Tun 50 00 00 All Wines of the
growth of Spain, or Dominions thereof the tun 200 00 00 All French, Rhenish and
other Wines whatsoever the tun 140 00 00 Wood called Box Wood the tun 12 00 00
Wood called Brazeil or Farnambuck the hundred weight, containing 112 pound 01
00 00 Wood called Brazilleto, or Jamaica wood the 100 weight containing 112
pounds 00 14 00 Wood called Logwood the hundred weight containing 112 pounds 03
10 00 Wood called Speckled wood the hundred weight, containing 112 pounds 01 00
00 Wood called Touchwood the pound 00 02 00 Wood called Fustick the 100,
containing a hundred and 12 pounds 00 06 00

Errata.
Acts of Customs the Rates INWARDS.
Bands Cutworke of Flanders, or any other County, page 4 for 2 0 0 read 20 00
00 Buffins Muccadoes Lisle-Grograms. Narrow the single piece not above fifteen
yards page 9 for 0 3 0 read 03 00 00 Chess boards the dozen, page 13 for 0 10 0
read 01 00 00 Halberts guilt the piece, page 45 for 0 13 0 r. 00 13 04 Hemp
vocat. Spruce Muscovia and all other rough Hemp etc. page 47 for 0 13 0 read 00
13 04 Shubs of Calaber the piece or Shub page 69 for 2 0 6 read 02 00 00
Blanckets vocat Paris Mantles Colored the Mantles page 5 for 1 0 5 read 01 05
08 Butter of England the 100 weight containing 112, page 9 for 1 0 0 read 00 10
00 Comashes out of Turkey the piece page 14 for 0 0 4 read 04 00 00 Cruses of
stone without covers the 100 containing five score to be added page 16 00 10 00
For Durretty the piece read Dutties page 17 Sperma Ceti fine the pound page 27
for 5 0 0 read 00 05 00 Gloves of all sorts the dozen page 42 for 1 0 0 read 01
10 00 Bazill Leather the dozen page 52 for 2 0 0 read 20 00 00 Ordinary
printing paper and Copy paper the Ream page 63 for 0 2 0 read 00 02 00 Pipes
for Tabors the dozen page 64 for 4 0 0 read 00 04 00 Syder and Perry the Tun
page 69 for 3 0 0 read 02 00 00 Swords course of Flanders making the dozen
page 75 for 10 0 0 read 01 00 00 Tacks of Iron the thousand page 75 for 0 0 8
read 00 06 08 Tar great band the last containing twelve barrels page 75 for 3
6 0 read 03 06 08 Verders of Tapistry with hair the flemish yard page 78 for
yard read ell Vizards the dozen page 79 for 1 0 4 read 01 04 00

Customs Outward.
Shoes old the 100 dozen pair page 94 which should be 95 for 4 0 0 read 04 10
00 Woad netts the hundred containing 6 score page 98 read 5 score

Excize.
Balances the sort containing 4 dozen page 82 for 2 13 4 read 02 13 00
Brickstones the Thousand Brickstones page 85 for 0 13 0 read 00 13 04 Bull
rushes page 86 for lead read load Drugs Bala Byzantia the pound page 91 for 0
12 0 read 00 02 00 Bolus verns the pound or the fine bole page 91 for 0 1 4
read 00 00 04 Gum serapinium, or sagapinum the pound page 89 which should be 95
for 0 1 6 read 00 01 00 Camphire unrefined the pound in page 92 to be added 00
03 04 page 96 for Iron glass read Ison glass Vermillion vide cinabrium the
pound page 103 for 0 3 0 read 00 03 04 Vitriolum Romanum the pound page 103 for
0 13 0 read 00 03 04 Wormfeeds the pound page 103 for 0 3 4 read 00 03 00
Zedorea the pound page 103 for 0 13 0 read 00 01 04 Furs Matrons Tails the 100
containing forty skins page 108 for forty kins read five score Miniver the
Mantle page 108 for 0 13 0 read 00 13 04 Sables of all sorts the Timber
containing forty skins page 108 for 3 0 0 read 30 00 00 Grocery Dates the 100
containing one hundred and twelve pound page 112 for 4 0 0 r. 04 10 00 Nutmegs
the pound page 112 for 2 6 0 read 00 06 00 Inckle wrought the dozen pound page
115 for 1 2 0 read 02 00 00 Linen Damask Towelling and napkinning of Silesia
making the yard page* 119 for 0 1 0 r. 00 01 04 Hamborough cloth narrow the 100
else containing six score page 121 for 4 0 0 read 05 00 00 Parchment the dozen
containing 12 sheets page 121 which should be 125 for 0 12 0 read 00 10 00
Oils called Sivil Oil, Majorca Oil Minorca Oil etc. page 112 which should be
(123) for 32 0 6 read 32 00 00 Pipe, Hogshead or barrel staves the hundred
containing 6 score page 121 which should be 125 for 1 0 0 read 10 00 00 Spars
small the hundred containing 6 score page 130 for 10 0 0 read 01 00 00 Stones
Quern stones small the Last page 131 for 10 10 0 read 01 10 00 Tallow the
hundred weight containing 112 pound page 131 for 3 10 0 read 01 10 00 Tapistry
with silk the flemish ell page 132 for 0 6 0 read 00 10 00 Ticks called Brizel
Ticks, and counterfeit Brizil the Tick, or Turnel Tick page 132 for 1 0 0 read
01 10 00 Tar great band, the last containing 112 barrels page 132 for 112
Barells read 12 barrels Wine called Brandy Wine the Tun page 135 for 200 0 0
read 20 00 00


