AN Impartial Character Of that famous POLITICIAN And late admired MINISTER OF
STATE, Cardinal Mazarine.

De mortuis nil nisi Bonum.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1661.

An Impartial Character of that famous Politician, and late admired Minister of
State, Cardnal Mazarine.
WHat need we wonder (whilst we live in an age so envious, that when men find
they cannot arrive to those heights of parts or virtues wherewith God, Nature
or Industry has endowed others, they think it a glory to brand their Fame,
whose Perfections they cannot reach to) That this worthy Cardinal should be
endeavored, during his whole course of life, to be made the public scorn and
odium of the world, whilst yet certainly no scandals whatsoever cast upon him,
could make him disesteemed in the minds of any persons, unless those who not
having worth in themselves, hoped that envious detraction might bring him so
low as to make them shine in the same sphere.

It has been the folly of the world for many ages past, to represent
inimitable Wisdom as absolute Wickedness: Nor have any fallen more under this
plague, then those who have been called to be Ministers of State; as if the
being endowed with a Prudence above other men, and fitted with greater
abilities to serve their King and Country, were a crime sufficient to make
them odious to all: But England has been a sad Example to other Nations, and a
caveat it will be for them to beware not to esteem Enemies their wisest
preservers; nor is it (I think) a despicable supposition to imagine, That
France had run into the same distractions with us, had she lost a Mazarine by
the same violence we lost a Strafford.

Methinks it is a Paradox to me to consider that Ministers of State should be
so often subject to the peoples violent love and hatred; so that whilst with
one breath they deifie them, the very next air they suck in, shall proclaim
them Devils, or worse; but the Multitude is Bellua multorum Capitum, a Beast of
many Heads, and every Head (like so many horns springing out of it) filled with
various Caprivio's and humors, most of which being bad, must necessarily
incline to their Center, and think all like themselves; besides the depravity
of most Natures has bred such a corruption in Mankind, that twenty, nay five
hundred good actions are wiped out and forgotten by the remembrance of one
lapse, which perhaps proceeded from no other design or cause, but as it is
humanum errare.

Yet I endeavor not hereby to justify all Ministers of State (there may be
voluntary errors in some, who instead of being the preservers, may prove the
destroyers of their Country) but to maintain, that Policy (however esteemed)
is justifiable, though by it (to the damage of others) we procure our own
safety.

But this may seem too large a deviation; I will therefore descend to my
promised purpose: This worthy Cardinal, who for so long time has steered the
Helm of France, was indeed of but an obscure Birth and Extraction, his Country
Sicilie, the people of which Island are observed of all Italians, to be most
sagace and cunning; a Composition as it were, of Spaniard, Italian and French;
not so lofty as the first, somewhat more solid then the second, and not so
light as the last; not so tedious in their Counsels as the Spaniard, nor so
slow in execution as either them or the Italian; yet not so quickly desperate
as the French,

The greatness of his spirit appeared in his youth, which made his ingenuous
Soul detest confinement to his Native Soil, where the obscurity of his Birth
might make him despised, and not put him in a capacity to exercise those parts
wherewith Nature has endowed him. This made him resolve to travel, and the
Glories of Rome invited him thither; where he first became Page to a Germane
Count, whose being addicted to play; was the Rise of Mazarines fortunes; for
he being both cunning and witty observed those tricks which his Master used,
and having perfectly learned them; First practiced with his Companions, and
after with others, by which means fortune (having designed him great) so
favored him that he soon got a stock of one thousand Crowns.

Thus having money to set forth and imbellish his wit judgment, the knowledge
he had of his own parts made him aspire to some higher preferment then Page, to
one who lived only by his Wits, and his abilities too compass what he desired,
encouraged him to get into the service of Cardinal Barbarino then chief
Favorite to his Holiness the Pope, which by the help of his money and a
pleasing and affable carriage, he soon effected, and so behaved himself in his
service that before many years were past, the Cardinal began to take notice of
the sagacity and greatness of his spirit, and to look upon him as a person fit
to be entrusted with the most important affairs: yet such was Barbarino's
wisdom, that before he would employ him in those; he made use of him in
business of smaller moment

The performance of these in such a manner as suited with the Cardinals
liking, made him at length resolve to employ him in greater, as a reward of his
being faithful and careful in the less; he had observed that during the time
of his service he made it his business at spare times to study State-affaires,
and that with a kind of greediness he listened after and strove to keep in
memory; those State maxims which he often oferved to fall from his so
well-skil'd Master; and as the Excellency of the one made the other ambitious
to learn of him, so the others willingness and aptness to learn was a Prompter
to the Teacher to instruct him.

Without doubt, as the Sudy of State-policies, is of all the most difficult, so
the most delightful: for besides the promise which a man makes to himself by
being well versed in the Government and Politick-Rules of ordering and swaying
Kingdoms and States: there is a kind of delight in the thing it self, just
like the Alchymist, who though he makes the Elixar his chief hopes and design,
yet he finds pleasure in those several operations, by which he thinks to
attain it.

But to proceed, our Politician, having with care and industry sucked in those
rules which were given him by his wise and understanding Master; 'twas thought
fit that his Theory should be turned into practice, which is the life of all
Learnnings or Doctrines watsoever, for still then all the rest seems but a
Chaos, a thing confused, and indeed nothing.

Yet is he not at first trusted to himself, lest Phaeton-like, his too young
experienced Judgment might prove rash, and so overthrow him; for young heads
[though they may well understand the management of a business before they are
put upon it] are to a Subject to a prove fiery, and ruin both themselves and
what they undertake, it has therefore always been held as a constant maxim,
That experience is best gained by degrees.

He is therefore first made Coadjutor or Deputy to the Florentine Nuncio; and
after some time of experience under him used rather as a Spy upon him, then
associate to him: his Letters continually informing his master Cardinal
Barberino of the Legates transactions, whereby he not only had the opportunity
to give proof of the abilities of his pen, but likewise to improve that
knowledge he had already attained.

For there is nothing more enlightens any man, whether employed in Merchandise
or State Affairs, then the having the happiness of a good and able
Correspondent, for his Epistles are like so many flowers; out of which we may
suck honey to return in answer, whilst our knowledge of his abilities makes us
endeavor to retort the purest and clearest.

But the Abilities of our Politicians pen was not the only thing that made him
so much respected, his Carriage on both sides made him more deservedly be
wondered at; for though he was placed as a so over the Florentine Nuntio, yet
he comported himself with that Strange Kind of affection toward him, that he
rather deemed him his bosom friend, whilst yet he let nothing either in favor
or prejudice of him pass with which he acquainted not his Master Barbarino.

And indeed it was now his time to play his Cards well, or throw up the Game;
for should he have been at first discovered to have been but a weak Gamester,
it is ten to one, whether any more Stakes would have been ventured on his head,
whilst managing his prime employments well he madeway to himself, for those
greater and more glorious that attended him.

For not long was it e're the Florentine Nuntio dying? 'twas no difficult thing
for his Master Cardinal Barbarino to procure his holiness, the Pope, to
declare Mazarin, Nuntio, which he did; so that from Coadjutor to a Legate he
became to be an absolute Legatt; and from being Substitute to others to steer
himself no small Helm in the management of State affairs; but such was the
Excellency of his knowledge, Industry and Ingenuity; that in the transacting of
these affairs he came off with greater honor and applause then ever.

For he continually made that his care (which should be the duty of every
Legatt or Ambassador, to wit, that the sole aim of his actions should be to
benefit those that employed him; nor would he only take occasions to do it when
they were proffered, but from the Abyss of his politic judgment would fetch
up occasions to serve them.

These prudent managements of business in this small State were the motives
which made him be called to Rome, there to attend some higher Employment; where
he for some time waited the pleasure of his holiness, who now undertook no
Counsels, at least determined on nothing till he made Mazarini privy to it, so
that he began to shine like a Star in the Popes Court.

But at length an Employment was thought of worthy his great Spirit, because
none other was thought fit for it but him self; The cunning Plots, Windings and
Artifices of Cardinal Richlieu in France, made not only the Austrian Princes,
but the Church it self stand in fear whither his designs might tend: 'Twas
therefore thought fit that some person or other should be sent to counter-plot
him, and if possibly to fathom the bottom of his intentions; and this
Employment by a general Voice is cast on Mazarine, who having a Cap given him
by the Pope, is sent.

Being arrived at Paris, and settled in his Employment there, he first scrues
himself into a familiarity with Richlieu, that he might have the better
opportunity to draw his designs out of him: he uses all the artifices that awel
experienced Politician or Statesman could imagine to dive into his intentions;
but finding that the farther he waded, the farther he was to seek, and that all
his endeavors would prove as vain as the fathoming a bottomless sea; he thinks
to desist farther pursuit, yet knows not what to do.

To have returned to Rome, and there given an account of his ill success and
inabilities to finish what he had undertaken, would for ever have blasted that
Honor and Repute he had formerly gotten; and that being forgotten, he should
for ever after live obscure: His ambitious thoughts therefore prompt him to a
piece of infidelity, finding that he cannot thrive and be faithful to Rome; he
resolves to turn unfaithful, that he might still rise higher; and therefore
instead of searching out the depth of the French Cardinals Councils against the
Church, he declares to him the depth of the Churches Councils against him.

I confess this was a piece of infidelity which can no way be justified or
excused, to betray the secrets of his Embassy to an Enemy, and worse of all it
was to join with him; for Richlieu finding him to be a man of an excellent,
sagace and subtle understanding, in requital of his having betrayed the Popes
Counsels to him, receives him into his favor, makes him his Creature, and
instills into him all his Plots and Devices; so that during his life he was his
Coadjutor, and after his death his Successor: which Place that he has managed
with an unimaginable Discretion, Prudence and Policy, the Christian World is
judge.

Thus from an obscure Sicilian was our Cardinal advanced by steps and degrees
to be the chief Minister of State in France, and proved indeed the Support of
that Kingdom. His first entrance unto this Employment was in the time of Lewis
the 13th. but during his Reign he was but Coadjutor to Richlieu, or at least
had but to follow his steps; who from a weak and Imbecil Prince, had made that
King the fear of Christendom: But after the death of Richlieu and Lewis, he was
chief of Council to the Queen Regent, who being a Woman of a deep searching,
had during the life of Richlieu, received him into favor, as perceiving in how
great need she should stand of such a Counselor at Richlieu's death, who was
then aged; and these were the chief Reasons of her casting so benevolent a
countenance upon him, rather then that he was received into her bed, as many
fondly have imagined.

During the Infancy of the young King Lewis the 14th. his Prudence and Policy
kept the State and Kingdom of France from any considerable disturbances, though
he had continually the envy of the Princes of the blood, who though they could
comport Richlieu, as being their own Countreyman, yet could not endure that a
stranger should be advanced to the chief Manage of the State, which they
thought of right did belong to them, as persons upon whom in time the Crown it
self might justly descend: The chief of his Enemies indeed was the Prince of
Conde, who left no way unattempted to rid bim out of the way; which made many
understanding men, who looked upon the inside of things to imagine, that if
Conde could remove so faithful a Counselor, he would next attempt to thrust
the young King out of his Throne.

But such was the Wisdom and Prudence of our Politic Cardinal, that he not
only frustrated all his designs, but at length drove him out of France, and
made him fly to the Enemies of his Country, the Spaniards, for relief and
succor; but especially at that time he showed himself a true Politician, when
Conde had so much incensed the Princes and People of Paris against him, that
the King being but now arrived at the age to take the Government of the State
into his own hands, was with the Cardinal forced to depart from Paris, and Arms
ready to be raised on both sides; the Duke of Lorain who had then an Army
standing, being called into the assistance of the Princes, whom nothing but
either the Death or Banishment of the Cardinal could satisfy; but Mazarine by
his cunning artifices drew Lorain from aiding hem, so that the Princes came to
an agreement with the King, and left Conde to shift for himself.

This was the grand difference in which his Majesty of England is said to have
enterposed, and sensible of the miseries he and his Countries and Kingdoms
suffered by a Civil War, persuaded them to a Mediation and Reconciliation,
whereby he is said to have gained to himself an odium from both Parties, each
believing him to be against them; but especially the Cardinal is said to have
been possessed, that he should advise the King of France, rather to let him be
banished from his Court and Kingdom, them hazard the embruing his Country in a
Civil War, from whence so many evils must necessarily ensue; which some affirm
made him ever after an implacable Enemy to his Majesty of England.

But indeed I do neither believe him to be his Enemy, nor either friend or
enemy to any Prince or Country, any farther then at it stood with the interest
of France, whose faithful Minister of State he was, and whose interest he
pursued. according indeed to his duty, without respect either to Alliance or
Consanguinity. That this sufficiently appears by his making Peace and League
with that Tyrant and Traitor Oliver Cromwell, upon connection of banishing all
the Royal Progeny of England out of France; which though it were an action that
sounded with a great deal of dishonor in the ears of all Christian Princes, yet
was it a League very much for the Interest of France, and therefore
correspondent to his duty as a Statesman, whose care was not to preserve the
King of England, but the Kingdom of France, and by it himself in his Power and
Glory. And self-preservation we all know to be the first Maxim of Policy.

And that this League was absolutely beneficial and necessary for France, as
the state of that Kingdom then stood, who can doubt, when they consider what
Potent Enemies she had then to wage War withal, the Spaniards daily and hourly
intrenching upon the French Dominions, besides a Faction to oppose within it
self; so that without some assistance, she seemed to be in a sinking condition;
and how by that assistance she again sprung up, and shooted out her branches,
is so lately done, that it cannot be forgotten.

Nor must we account it among the least of his policies, that of contracting
the Match between the King of France and Infanta of Spain, which seems to me
just as it were the period of this Labors, that as he had maintained that
Kingdom flourishing during his whole lifetime by his Wisdom and Policy, so he
would at death leave it in a firm and entire peace; and who knows but that he
intended by this Peace to have endeavored (had not God restored him by better
means before it was perfected) the instating of our King into his Crowns and
Kingdoms, in recompense of those wrongs the Interest of France had before
swayed him to.

Should I enumerate all his Politic transactions, I should swell this intended
short Character of him into a Volume: I shall therefore give an account of his
Person and particular Virtues; and so conclude.

He was neither of a tall stature, nor very Corpulent; of a Mercurial
Complexion, Sanguine, yet somewhat inclining to a melancholy constitution,
adorned with very handsome features in his face, without doubt excellent in his
youth; yet in his oldest age so clear, that a man might guess by them the
greatness of his Soul.

His Carriage and Discourse were generally affable to all; yet so extremely
reserved and close in all his designs, as was admirable, though he would often
seem to disclose or discover what he kept most secret; A man every way fitted
for a Statesman, and such a one whose Foxes Tail being pieced to the Lyon-like
strength of France, might in time (had it not been for her Civil and intestine
Factions) have made her the terror of the World.

I never could hear that his worst Enemies could ever brand him with any
peculiar Vice: Covetous he was not; for though he must needs have gotten great
sums of money, yet he expended so freely, and chiefly in Curiosities fetched
from Italy; my self have seen fiften hundred ancient Roman Statuaes in his
Palace at Paris, which in all inward glories, far exceeded that of the Kings of
France.

He was a Person of whom I cannot believe any other reason for his being made
odious, but that he exceeded others in Prudence and Policy. In sum, he was to
the Kingdom of France what the Lord H. is to our present Sovereign, A faithful
Counselor, and prudent Minister of State.

An Advertisement.
THere is lately published an excellent piece, Entitled, Modern Policy
completed; or, The Actions and Counsels, Civil and Military of his Excellency
the Lord General MONCK, under all Revolutions since 1640, to 1660; with the
Principles moral and Political upon which they were grounded; illustred out of
the best Masters of Policy, Ancient and Modern. Sold by Henry Marsh at the
Princes Arms in Chancery Lane. 1661.

FINIS.

