A brief vindication of the Religion and GOVERNMET OF NEW ENGLAND Against the
Presbytery of SCOTLAND: Together with some material Observations worthy of
Consideration.
By Lieutenant Colonel JOHN JUBBES.
ALthough I was not Ignorant of the Court design, both of K. James, as well as
the late King Charles to involve this Nation in extreme Ignorance and slavery,
and in order thereunto had for that purpose settled such Bishops and heads of
the Schools of Universities, and Judges, and heads of the Innes of Court, also
as corrupted and perverted the truth of the divine Gospel, Law, and word of
Christ, as well as the Common and Civil Law and word of morallitie of the
Nation also; Yet when the Scots began to make their party in England; as for
Gospel-Freedome and Liberty, and had entered our Country with an Army; I was not
their friend therein, but greatly feared a horrid event of that miserable
beginning, for these reasons.

First, because they did set their quarrel by Religion, to which it is
considerable, that they that are deceived, drawn, and forced into any
Antichristian Religion, and unto any obedience on pain of the curse, and of
damnation, are oftentimes through Ignorance and slavish fear, as zealous (as is
verified by the Papists and Turk also) (almost) as the truly valiant Christian,
that the saving Love of Christ constrains.

Secondly, because all Gospel-Liberty, I say, and maintain all; true
Gospel-Liberty is known by its unerring marks of equality, through
answerablenesse to each other in the Law; for avoiding the cause of contention,
and for the making sober, and continuing all men in an equal, external Peace,
Freedom, and godly prosperity thereby, which must first be in order to the
Catholic Faith, Love, and Peace internal.

Thirdly, on the contrary, the debaucht, slavish, and beast-like ignorant
condition of the generality of the inferior, and common sort of people of
Scotland is such, that the Turks and other Infidells do much surpass them,
both in Freedom and morality. Therefore I conceive them a sad president of
Gospel peace and liberty unto us.

Fourthly, the deep conjunction and unity of that Nation in themselves, and
their great wisdom of uncrediblenesse unto all others.

Fifthly, the aptness of this Nation unto disunity and carelessness of its
own members, and crediblenesse unto others, as have not only been ever
observed by other Nations; but lately sufficiently verified by our Invitations
of the Scots. But when the late King had left the Parliament, and levied war
against it, about half a year after, it pleased God that I raised a Company
for the Parliament, and continued engaged both before, and in all the service
of the Earl of Manchester, and after in the new Model, in all five years, in
which time, according as I covenanted with the Lord at my first beginning, that
as I was not then rich, so should not these miserable and unnatural wars make
me rich, and although I have since had as great means thereto, as most men
have, yet can I boast of nothing so much as of my being enabled to perform the
same; And when I found that Wars were like to break forth again, and having
received Christ in that his glorious office of mediation, did thereupon lay
down my Commission to labor therein, and accordingly have endeavored for a
Gospel-accommodation unto all Interests, not according to the stream of my own
desire, but to move all men (if it might be) to the glorious work of
consideration, and trial of all things of good and evil; that every one might
be persuaded in his own Conscience, and although I have not prevailed, yet if
every one would have done the same, it could not have been avoided no more then
the glory and peace which my soul receives through my earnest discharge of my
duty, for which I was created; yet can I not but greatly take blame upon my
self, for some bitterness of Spirit vented by me, against some precious men,
and my dearest friends when I have thought them in the least blame thereto; but
having considered many sad presidents unto those people that have gained a
sword, and upon their adversaries credit have suffered them (suddenly) to share
with them therein again, must greatly condemn my passion and evil thereof.
And one president of many I shall here lay down.

In the late great War of the Parliament and King Charles the ninth of France,
(which yet exceeds not the memory of man) after the King and Lords had on both
sides deeply wearied the Nation, they then were able and closed up a bargain,
that according to the ignorant desires of the Common people (for peace sake)
that they should submit unto, and trust the King with their Liberties, but that
the Lords should be free of all Taxes whatsoever except only that when the King
should go to War, that he should command any of them a Warfare at their own
cost (as to their particular expense) by which their freedom and exemption from
taxes they are so greatly enriched, that some of them have purchased and gotten
estats of 100000. pounds a year. Others to the value of 150000 l. a year, and
yet the poor Pesants so called are at the charge of maintaining the most
magnificent Court in the world, and at all times not fewer then 80000 men in
Arms to inslave and keep themselves under, even more miserable then many
beasts, but since the War between Spain and them not le^^ ^hen 160000 The
charge of the Navy, the Marriage of the Kings Children and all other Charges
whatsoever, and besides all this; that interest of people which first opposed
the Crown notwithstanding as large Acts of forgetfullnesse and pardons as ever
were, or could be made, there was massacred and slain to the number of 10000,
souls in one night; and scores of thousand vassalzed, ruined, and utterly
captived.

Why now should Consideration be wanting unto the Presbyterian that caused this
war as well as to the Independent; And seeing it is said in the Scots Covenant
that we shall reform our Religion in Doctrine, Discipline and Worship,
according to the best reformed Churches: and also because the Religion which is
practiced in every State is the seal of obedience unto bondage or freedom.
Therefore I mayntaine that the Religion which is practiced in New England ought
to be our pattern, because you shall find that although it is as barren a
Country as Scotland is, which is now planted more then 200 miles in length, and
yet that one shall not see a person there that begges his bread, or any to be
drunk, or swear an Oath, or that is reputed a Whore-monger by the year
through^, and likewise, if any shall injure another, or shall but subtly
overreach his neighbor in bargaining, and that this be told unto the Church,
restitution and satisfaction is made in love (even the first day) as also if a
man be known to live in much Covetousness, that he is not holden worthy by
the Church to bear any office there, or in the Commonwealth, and that you
shall not see nor hear of one to be whipped in many months, or hanged in many
years, will it not be said of a truth God is there, and that this is the most
pure Religion, and peaceable Government of Christ (above all others that is yet
professed) and that I have sufficiently proved the thing. But if this be not
sufficient, I beseech all men to examine, if the nature of the Presbyterian
Government of Scotland take more from their King then it adds unto the
Ministry, so as the people gets neither knowledge or Freedom thereby, and to
give you an unerring president, consider what I said in the beginning, and let
any that knows the nature of that Country judge and answer, if the debaucht
slavish condition of the inferior and Common sort of people in Scotland (which
is continued by the ties of Religion) be less slavish and miserable then the
Turks or other infidells.

And I say, if every Religion that is practiced in any State, ought to be
judged on to be of Christ or Antichrist, according as it brings a sober and
godly Freedom with it, and that thee remony or form of worship is not the
substance, but righteousness is the mark of Christ, And slavery which is the
fruits of unrighteousness the mark of the beast; Then I conceive no man will
maintain any thing in opposition hereunto, but if any shall be pleased to
oppose the truth hereof, I shall in a Christian way be ready to reply, provided
we may hold to the true grounds of distinction, between good and evil; The
nature of Christ and Antichrist, according to Gospel-warrant; and can it be
conceived that when the debaucht person do rightly consider the peril of his
soul by his trade of evil, as also that the custom and trade of education in
the days of those: peoples youth do enlarge their hearts through Love (not by
fear) hereunto, that he will not only say, that where the same government is
proclaimed to be firmly established, it ought to be embraced above all others,
and that it had been good for him to have been educated under such a means of
grace, but will petition, as also assist the honorable Parliament to establish
the like noble things with us.

And whereas some have been pleased to give out reports concerning some arrears
which are holden by me, I have briefly laid down the substance of my judgment
to trial again. First, I hold the pure word of God, and strength of the
Scriptures do prove that God is the life, Motion, and being of all things (but
all in Order) and as he did, so he does create all things good, and nothing
evil. Secondly, that all good is that which proceeds from the perfect love of
moderation, and the proper use of things according to Ggreements, by the
wisdom of God in Man, for the preservation of Love, peace, and Admiration unto
him the Creator. Thirdly, that all evil comes of the imperfect love of
immoderation, and the improper use of things contrary to agreement, by the
wisdom of God in Man, to the hindrance of Love, Peace and Admiration.
Fourthly, that the true, Catholic, or universal faith of Jesus Christ is to
believe, that as God is our life, and being, so is he able, and will save to
the utmost all them that trust in him. Fifthly, that this love of moderation
(Mediation or Reconciliation) is the saving love of Christ, by which he had
Communion with the Father before the world was, and by which the world was
made, and is still preserved and continued. Sixthly, that this universal faith
of Christ is first in order to his universal love (for faith shall cease, but
love shall endure.) Seventhly, that it is the nature of Christ by which we are
saved, and although it is said, there is no other name then the name of Jesus
only, by which we can be saved; it is true, for by his name we figure out his
nature, and his name varies as the Languages do, besides we may see Christ in
the fruit and Actions of a Christian; but doubtless not in him that profanely
and desperately swears by it, and when his name and Nature go together, then
shall every knee bow, but if at his name only judge ye. Eighthly, that
understanding of God in man which proceeds only from the Love of Moderation,
for the proper use of things according to Agreement, is to be called Reason;
and it is not the high conceit to work curious works; or speak elegant words,
nor yet the subtle Art to destroy one another, that is to be said of Reason:
for then the Wolf, the Be, the Spider, the Parrot should be called reasonable
Creatures; And the height and excellency thereof is to be measured, according
as it extends it self in a peaceable order, for the regulating and making of
the most equal and just agreements. Now having received Christ as before, so
walk I, or desire to walk in him, and square my reason as well as my actions
by him, being at peace and in universal love with all men; but if any thing
may be objected against any of this, or whatsoever else, I have or shall lay
down, I doubt not but to give satisfaction either by a sober answer of
justification or sudden acknowledgment of my error with much rejoicing; Now if
at this and every season all things stand, and are good according to the divine
decree then ought every man (who has but the present moment of time) to
endeavor the preservation thereof through the exercise of reason, of the love
of moderation, and for want whereof, things which are not shall destroy things
which are, and because all things may be lawful (yet not) at every season
expedient, but now looking at the best visible thing with us, I have freely
taken the Engagement, to be true and faithful to the Commonwealth of England,
without a King, or house of Lords; Touching which through God I shall not
faintly endeavor to perform to the utmost; For although he that is a true
Christian by nature can readily lay down his life for the most righteous Peace
and freedom unto the public; yet ought he to know that in order to the best
Thing, valor, and courage must not be absent, and that Command of Christ that
says unto him, he that strikes us on one cheek, we should turn the other,
has referen^e unto persons, seasons, time, and place, as I might instance many
ways by his own example, and that this is only to be done, where in reason it
may convert into mercy, and as among such as have partaken of the nature of
Christ, and bear good will to the Gospel (by which meekness we may build them
up therein (it oftententimes ought to be) but this command extends not to be
practiced by us unto the Turks and Infidels, or other the sensual persons of
immoderat^ion, that have received Christ but nominally, to whom the true
Christian is odious; And as a good man is merciful to his beast, so is it
mercy (...) in many Cases to kill his beast, as when they grow fierce and mad,
and destroy others, (as well as to sustein the life of man who keeps the sheep
from the wolves, and by his wisdom and order preserves and causes them to
increase and multiply) so is it mercy and righteousness in the reasonable true
Christians, to raise and exercise the sword against the sensual and immoderate
persons, as well by war as in times of Peace, for the most public Good.

FINIS.

