The Touchstone OR, TRIAL OF TOBACCO Whether it be good for all Constitutions.
With a Word of Advice against immoderate Drinking and Smoking. LIKEWISE
Examples of some that have drunk their Lives away, and died suddenly. With King
James' Opinion of Tobacco, and how it came first into England. Also the first
Original of Coffee. To which is Added Witty Poems about Tobacco and Coffe;
something about Tobacco, written by George Withers, the late Famous Poet. The
Picture Represents the Tobacchonists Arms, and Turks Coffee-House.

COFFEE, a kind of Turkish Renegade,
Has late a match with Christian water made;
A Coachman was the first (here) Coffee made,
And ever since the rest drove on the trade;
Me no good Engalash? and sure enough,
He played the Quack to salve his Stygian stuff;
Ver boon for de stomach, de Cough, de Ptisick,
And I believe him, for it looks like Physic
London, Printed and are to be Sold by the several Booksellers. 1676.

To all Taverns, Inns, Victualling-Houses, Alehouses, Coffee-houses,
Strong-water-shops, Tobacconists-shops, in England, Scotland or Ireland.
Gentle Readers,
HEre is presented to you a Brief, Learned, and a very seasonable Treatise for
the Age we live in: It was many years since Penned by King James of happy and
blessed Memory, Entitled, A Counterblast to Tobacco; It it here verbatim,
faithfully transcribed out of the large and learned Volume of His other Works
in Folio, which are rare and scarce to be had for money, and of too great a
price for the common sort of Tobacco-smokers to purchase: It is granted, the
thing may be good, and Physical, and healthful, being moderately and but seldom
taken; but for men to take ten or twenty Pipes in a day in all Companies,
Morning, Noon and Night, before and presently after Meals; this is a strange
way of taking Physic. Now the King understanding the evil Custom of taking
Tobacco, or, as we now call it, smoking a Pipe, was grown to a great head, he
seems to be very much insensed at it, and discovers how it first came into
England, and its first Original; and how that it was used much amongst the
savage Indians, to cure Jews Venerea, a Disease among them: His Majesty wisely
foreseeing the evil consequences that would follow, by such immoderate sucking
in the foul smoke of this Indian Weed, and He being the Physician of the Body
Politic, does by many strong and excellent Arguments, dissuade his Subjects
from imitating the practice of the Heathen Indians, in drinking this noxious
fume. It was in his Time but a Novelty, and practiced but a little, except
amongst the Nobility, Gentry, or great Ones: But now what is more frequently
used in every Alehouse and Coffee-house, besides great Inns and Taverns in
London, and all the Three Kingdoms over. Whereas if men were so wise for their
own good, both in Body, Soul, and Estate, as to handle a good Book, either of
Divinity, or of Morality, half so often as they do the Pipe of smoke, it would
be better for them in all respects, more precious time and money would be
saved. I shall detain you no longer from a more learned Epistle and Treatise of
the matter in hand: And as King Solomon, who was the wisest of Kings, says in
his Book of Ecclesiastes, That where the word of a King is, there is power; so
I say, If what our famous King James has written, be not of Power sufficient
to divert all English men, etc. from this evil and hurtful Custom; It is here
seconded, and backed home, by the words and advice of an able and learned
Doctor of Physic now living; it being so suitable to the purpose, was thought
fit to be added to this Counterblast. And that it may not be said (as the
common Proverb is) To be only one Doctors opinion, I have thought fit to add
another, Collected out of a Treatise Of the Blood, written by that learned
Physician Dr. George Thompson, who agrees with the former against smoking
Tobacco, as dangerous. I apprehend, that what has been spoken against drinking
Tobacco, may much more be said against immoderate drinking of Wine, Ale, Beer,
or any strong Liquors, and Dishes of Coffee, etc. Thus hoping thou will make a
good use of what is here gathered together, and offered for thy good, I rest.

A Well-wisher to thy Health, J. H.

To the Reader.
AS every humane body (dear Countrymen) how wholesome soever, is
notwithstanding subject, or at least naturally inclined to some sorts of
Diseases or Infirmities: So is here no Commonwealth, or Body-Politick, how
well governed or peaceable soever it be, that lacks their own popular Errors,
and naturally inclined Corruptions; And therefore it is no wonder, although
this our Country and Commonwealth, though peaceable, though wealthy, though
long flourishing in both, be amongst the rest, subject to their own natural
Infirmities. We are of all Nations the people most Loving, and most reverently
Obedient to our Prince; yet we are (as time has often born witness) too easy
to be seduced to make Rebellion upon very slight grounds. Our fortunate and
oft-proved Valor in Wars abroad, our hearty and reverent Obedience to our
Princes at home, has given us a long, and thrice-happy Peace; our Peace has
bred wealth: And Peace and Wealth has brough forth a general sluggishness,
which makes us wallow in all sorts of idle Delights, and soft Delicacies, the
first seeds of the subversion of all great Monarchies. Our Clergy are become
negligent and lasie, our Nobility and Gentry prodigal, and sold to their
private Delights; Our Lawyers covetous, our common People prodigal and curious;
and generally all sorts of People more careful for their private ends, then for
their Mother the Commonwealth.

For remedy whereof, It is the King's part (as the proper Physician of his
Politic Body) to purge it of all those Diseases, by Medicines meet for the
same; as by a certain mild, and yet just form of Government, to maintain the
Public quietness, and prevent all occasions of Commotion; by the example of
his own Person and Court, to make us all ashamed of our sluggish Delicacy, and
to stir us up to the practice again of all honest Exercises, and martial
shadows of War; as likewise by His, and His Courts moderateness in Apparel, to
make us ashamed of our Prodigality: By his quick Admonitions, and careful
over-seeing of the Clergy, to waken them up again, to be more diligent in their
Offices: By the sharp Trial, and severe Punishment of the partial, covetous,
and bribing Lawyers, to reform their Corruptions: And generally by the example
of His own Person, and by the due execution of good Laws, to reform and abolish
piece and piece, these old and evil-grounded Abuses: For this will not be Opus
unius Diei, but as every one of these Diseases, must from the King receive the
one Cure proper for it; so are there some sorts of Abuses in Commonwealths,
that though they be of so base and contemptible a condition, as they are too
low for the Law to look on, and too mean for a King to interpose his Authority,
or bend his Eye upon; yet are they Corruptions, as well as the greatest of
them. So is an Ant an Animal as well as an Elephant; so is a Wren Avis, as well
as a Swan; and so is a small dint of the Toothache a Disease, as well as the
fearful Plague is. But for these base sorts of Corruption in Commonwealths;
not only the King, or any inferior Magistrate, but Quilibet e populo may serve
to be a Physician, by discovering and impugning the error, and by persuading
reformation thereof.

And surely in my Opinion, there cannot be a more base, and yet hurtful
Corruption in a Country, then is the vile use (or rather abuse) of taking
Tobacco in this Kingdom, which has moved me shortly to discover the abuses in
this following little Pamphlet.

If any think it a light Argument, so it is but a Toy that is bestowed upon it.
And since the Subject is but of Smoke, I think the sum of an idle Brain, may
serve for a sufficient battery against so fumous a feblean Enemy. If my grounds
be found true, it is all I look for; but if they carry the force of persuasion
with them, it is all I can wish, and more then I can expect. My only care is,
my dear Countrymen may rightly conceive even by this smallest trifle, of the
sincerity of my meaning in greater matters, never to spare any pains, that may
tend to the procuring of your Weal and Prosperity.

A COUNTERBLAST TO TOBACCO.
THat the manifold abuses of this vile custom of Tobacco-taking, may the
better be espied; It is fit, That first you enter into Consideration both of
the first Original thereof, and likewise of the Reasons of the first entry
thereof into this Country; for certainly as such Customs that have their first
Institution, either from a godly; necessary, or honorable ground, and are
first brought in by the means of some worthy, virtuous, and great Personage;
are ever, and most justly holden in great and reverent estimation and account
by all wise, virtuous and temperate Spirits: So should it by the contrary,
justly bring a great Disgrace into that sort of Customs, which having their
Original from base Corruption and Barbarity, do, in like sort, make their first
entry into a Country, by an inconsiderate and childish affectation of Novelty,
as is the true case of the first Invention of Tobacco-taking, and of the first
entry thereof amongst us. For Tobacco being a common Herb, which (though under
diverse Names) grows almost every where, was first found out by some of the
Barbarous Indians to be a Preservative, or Antidote against the Pox, a filthy
Disease, whereunto these Barbarous People are (as all men know) very much
subject, what through the uncleanly and adust constitution of their Bodies, and
what through the intemperate heat of their Climate. So that as from them, was
first brought into Christendom, that most detestable Disease: So from the
likewise was brought this use of Tobacco, as a stinking and unsavory Antidote,
for so corrupted and execrable a Malady; the stinking suffumigation whereof
they yet use against that Disease, making so one Canker or Vermin to eat out
another.

And now, good Countrymen, let us (I pray you) consider what Honor or Policy
can move us to imitate the barbarous and beastly Manners of the wild, godless
and slavish Indians, especially in so vile and stinking a Custom. Shall we
that disdain to imitate the Manners of our Neighbor France, (having the style
of the great Christian Kingdom) and that cannot endure the Spirit of the
Spaniards (their King being now comparable in largeness of Dominions, to the
greatest Emperor of Turkey;) Shall we, I say, that have been so long civil and
wealthy in Peace, famous and invincible in War, fortunate in both; We that have
been ever able to Aid any of our Neighbors (but never deafed any of their Ears
with any of our Supplications for assistance;) Shall we, I say, without
blushing, abase our selves so far, as to imitate these beastly Indians, Slaves
to the Spaniards, Refuse to the World, and as yet Aliens from the holy Covenant
of God? Why do we not as well imitate them in walking naked, as they do, in
preferring Glasses, Feathers, and such toys, to Gold and precious Stones, as
they do? Yea, why do we not deny God, and adore the Devil, as they do.

Now to the corrupted baseness of the first use of this Tobacco, does very well
agree the foolish and groundless first Entry thereof into this Kingdom: It is
not long since the first entry of this abuse amongst us here, as this present
Age cannot yet very well remember, both the first Author, and the form of the
first Introduction of it against us. It was neither brought in by King, great
Conqueror, nor learned Doctor of Physic.

With the Report of a great Discovery for a Conquest, some two or three Savage
men were brought in, together with this Savage Custom: But the pity is, the
poor, wild, barbarous men died; but that vile barbarous Custom is yet alive,
yea in fresh vigor, so as it seems a miracle to me, how a Custom springing
from so vile a Ground, and brought in by a Father so generally hated, should be
welcomed upon so slender a warrant: For if they that first put it in practice
here, had remembered for what respect it was used by them from whence it came; I
am sure they would have been loath to have taken so far the Imputation of that
Disease upon them as they did, by using the Cure thereof; for Sanis non est
opus medice, and Counter-Poysons are never used, but where Poison is thought to
proceed.

But since it is true, that diverse Customs slightly grounded, and with no
better warrant entered in a Commonwealth, may yet in the use of them
thereafter, prove both necessary and profitable; it is therefore next to be
examined, if there be not a full sympathy and true proportion between the base
ground and foolish entry, and the loathsome and hurtful use of this stinking
Antidote.

I am now therefore heartily to pray you to consider, first upon what false and
erroneous grounds you have first built the general good liking thereof; and
next, what Sins toward God, and foolish Vanities before the World, you commit
in the detestable use of it.

As for those deceitful grounds, that have specially moved you to take a good
and great conceit thereof: I shall content my self to examine here only four
of the Principals of them, two founded upon the Theorick of a deceivable
appearance of Reason, and two of them upon the mistaken practick of general
Experience.

First, It is thought by you a sure Aphorism in the Physic; That the brains
of all men being naturally cold and wet, all dry and hot things should be good
for them, of which nature this stinking suffumigation is, and therefore of good
use to them. Of this Argument both the Proposition and Assumption are false,
and so the Conclusion cannot but be void of it self: For as to the Proposition,
That because the Brains are cold and moist, therefore things that are hot and
dry are best for them; it is an inept Consequence: For man being compounded of
the four Complexions (whose Fathers are the four Elements) although there be a
mixture of them all, in all the parts of his body, yet must the diverse parts of
our Microcosme, or little World within our selves, be diversely more inclined,
some to one, some to another Complexion, according to the diversity of their
uses; that of these Discords a perfect Harmony may be made up for the
maintenance of the whole Body.

The application then of a thing of a contrary nature to any of these parts, is
to interrupt them of their due function, and by consequence hurtful to the
health of the whole Body; as if a man, because the Liver is as the fountain of
Blood, and, as it were, an Oven to the Stomach, would therefore apply and wear
close upon his Liver and Stomach a Cake of Lead, he might within a very short
time (I hope) be sustained very good cheap at an Ordinary, besides the clearing
of his Conscience from that deadly fin of Gluttony: And as if because the Heart
is full of vital Spirits, and in perpetual motion; a man would therefore lay a
heavy pound stone on his Breast, for staying and holding down that wanton
Palpitation; I doubt not but his Breast would be more bruised with the weight
thereof, then the Heart would be comforted with such a disagreeable and
contrarious Cure. And even so is it with the Brains; for if a man because the
Brains are cold and humide, would therefore use inwardly by smells, or
outwardly by application, things of hot and dry quality; all the gain that he
could make thereof, would only be to put himself in great forwardness for
running mad, by over-watching himself; the coldness and moisture of our Brains
being the only ordinary means that procure our Sleep and Rest. Indeed, I do
not deny, that when it falls out that any of these, or any part of our Body,
grows to be distempered, and to tend to an extremity beyond the compass of
Natures temperate mixture, that in that case Cures of contrary qualities to the
Intemperate inclination of that part being wisely prepared, and discreetly
ministered, may be both necessary and helpful for strengthening and assisting
Nature in the expulsion of her Enemies; for this is the true definition of all
profitable Physic.

But first, These Cures ought not to be used, but where there is need of them;
the contrary whereof is daily practiced in this general use of Tobacco, by all
sorts and Complexions of people.

And next, I deny the minor of this Argument, as I have already said, in regard
that this Tobacco is not simply of a dry and hot quality, but rather has a
certain venomous faculty joined with the heat thereof, which makes it have an
Antipathy against Nature, as by the hateful smell thereof does well appear; for
the Nose being the proper Organ and Convoy of the sense of smelling to the
Brains, which are the only fountain of that sense, does ever serve us for an
infallible witness, whether that Odor which we smell be healthful or hurtful
to the Brain, (except when it falls out that the sense it self is corrupted and
abused, through some infirmity and distemper in the Brain:) And that the
suffumigation thereof cannot have a drying quality, it needs no further
probation, then that it is a smoke, all smoke and vapor being of it self
Humide, as drawing near to the nature of the Air, and easy to be resolved
again into water, whereof there needs no other proof but the meteors, which
being bred of nothing else but of the vapors and exhalations sucked up by the
Sun out of the Earth, the Sea and Waters; yet are the same smoky vapors turned
and transformed into Rains, Snows, Dews, Hoar-Frosts, and such like watery
meteors; as by the contrary, the rainy Clouds are often transformed and
evaporated in blustering Winds.

The second Argument grounded on a show of Reason, is, That this filthy Smoke,
as well through the heat and strength thereof, as by a natural force and
quality, is able and fit to purge both the Head and Stomach of Rheumes and
Distillations, as experience teaches by the spitting, and avoiding Phlegm,
immediately after the taking of it. But the fallacy of this Argument may easily
appear, by my late proceeding Description of the meteors; for even as the smoky
vapors sucked by the Sun, and stayed in the lowest and cold Region of the Air,
are there contracted into Clouds, and turned into Rain, and such other watery
meteors; So this stinking Smoke being sucked up by the Nose; and imprisoned in
the cold and moist Brains, is by their cold and wet faculty turned and cast
forth again in watery Distillations, and so are you made free, and purged of
nothing, but that wherewith you wilfully burdened your selves; and therefore
are you no wiser in taking Tobacco for purging you of Distillations, then if
for preventing the Cholick, you would take all kind of windy Meats and Drinks;
and for preventing of the Stone, you would take all kind of Meats and Drinks
that would breed gravel in the Kidneys; and then when you were forced to avoid
much wind out of your Stomach, and much gravel in your Urine, that you should
attribute the thank thereof to such nourishments as breed those within you,
that behoved either to be expelled by the force of Nature, or you to have burst
at the broad side, as the Proverb is.

As for the other two Reasons founded upon Experience; The first of which is,
That the whole people would not have taken so general a good liking thereof, if
they had not by experience found it very sovereign and good for them: For
answer thereunto, How easily the minds of any people, wherewith God has
replenished this World, may be drawn to the foolish affectation of any Novelty,
I leave it to the discreet Judgment of any man that is reasonable.

Do we not daily see, that a man can no sooner bring over from beyond the Seas
any new form of Apparel, but that he cannot be thought a man of Spirit, that
would not presently imitate the same; and so from hand to hand it spreads, till
it be practiced by all; not for any commodity that is in it, but only because
it is come to be the Fashion; for such is the force of that natural self-love
in every one of us, and such is the corruption of envy bred in the Breast of
every one, as we cannot be content, unless we imitate every thing that our
Fellows do, and so prove our selves capable of every thing whereof they are
capable, like Apes, counterfeiting the Manners of others to our own
destruction. For let one or two of the greatest Masters of Mathematics in any
of the two famous Universities, but constantly affirm any clear day, that they
see some strange Apparition in the Skies; They will, I warrant you, be seconded
by the greatest part of the Students in that Profession; So loath will they be,
to be thought inferior to their Fellows either in depth of Knowledge or
sharpness of Sight: and therefore the general good liking, and embracing of
this foolish Custom, does but only proceed from that affectation of Novelty
and popular Error, whereof I have already spoken.

And the other Argument drawn from a mistaken experience, is but the more
particular probation of this general, because it is allege to be found true by
proof, That by the taking of Tobacco, diverse, and very many, do find themselves
cured of diverse Diseases, as on the other part no man ever received harm
thereby. In this Argument, there is first a great mistaking, and next a
monstrous absurdity; for is not a very great mistaking, to take non causam
proeausa; as they say in the Logicks; because peradventure when a sick man has
had his Disease at the height, he has at that instant taken Tobacco, and
afterward his Disease taking the natural course of Declining, and consequently
the Patient of recovering his health, O then the Tobacco forsooth was the
worker of that Miracle! beside that, it is a thing well known to all
Physicians, That the apprehension and conceit of the Patient has by wakening
and uniting the vital Spirits, and so strengthening Nature, a great power and
virtue to cure diverse Diseases: For an evident Proof of mistaking in the like
case, I pray what foolish Boy, what silly Wench, what old doting Wife, or
ignorant Country Clown, is not Physician for the Toothache, for the Cholick,
and diverse such common Diseases; yea, will not every man you meet withal teach
you a sundry Cure for the fame, and swear by that mean, either himself, or some
of his nearest Kindsmen and Friends was cured; and yet, I hope, no man is so
foolish as to believe them: And all these toys do only proceed from the
mistaking non causam pro causa, as I have already said; and so if a man chance
to recover one of any Disease after he has taken Tobacco, that must have the
thanks of all: But by the contrary, if a man smoke himself to death with it (as
many have done) O then some other Disease must bear the blame for that fault!
So do old Harlots thank their Harlotry for their many years, that Custom being
healthful (say they) ad purgandos renes, but never have mind how many die of
the Pox in the flower of their Youth: And so do old Drunkards think they
prolong their days by their Swine-like Diet, but never remember how many die
drowned in Drink before they be half old.

And what greater absurdity can there be then to say, that one Cure shall serve
for diverse, nay contrarious sorts of Diseases. It is an undoubted ground among
all Physicians, That there is almost no sort, either of Nourishment or
Medicine, that has not some thing in it disagreeable to some part of man's
body, because, as I have already said, the nature of the temperature of every
part is so different from another, that according to the old Proverb, That
which is good for the Head is evil for the Neck and the Shoulders: For even as
a strong Enemy that invades a Town or Fortress, although in his Siege thereof
he do belay and compass it round about, yet he makes his Breach and Entry at
some one or few special parts thereof, which he has tried and found to be
weakest and least able to resist: So sickness does make her particular assault
upon such part or parts of our Body as are weakest and easiest to be overcome
by that sort of Disease which then does assail us, although all the rest of the
Body, by sympathy, feel it self to be as it were belaid and besieged by the
affliction of that special part, the grief and smart thereof being by the sense
of feeling dispersed through all the rest of the members; and therefore the
skilful Physician presses by such Cures to purge and strengthen that part which
is afflicted, as are only fit for that sort of Disease, and do best agree with
the nature of that infirm part; which being abused to a Disease of another
nature, would prove as hurtful to the one, as helpful for the other; yea, not
only will a skilful and wary Physician be careful to use no Cure, but that
which is fit for that sort of Disease; but he will also consider all other
circumstances, and make the Remedies suitable thereunto, as the temperature of
the Clime, where the Patient is, the Constitution of the Planets, the time of
the Moon, the season of the Year, the Age and Complexion of the Patient, the
present state of his Body in strength or weakness: For one Cure must not ever
be used for the self same Disease but according to the varying of any of the
aforesaid Circumstances, that sort of Remedy must be used which is fittest for
the same: where by the contrary in this case, such is the miraculous
Omnipotency of our strong-tasted Tobacco, as it cures all sorts of Diseases
(which never any Drug could do before) in all Persons, and at all times. It
cures all manner of Distillations, either in Head or Stomach (if you believe
their Axioms) although in very deed is do both corrupt the Brain, and, by
causing over quick digestion, fill the Stomach full of Crudities. It cures the
Gout in the Feet, and (which is miraculous) in that very instant when the smoke
thereof, as light, flies up into the Head, the virtue thereof, as heavy, runs
down to the little Toe: It helps all sorts of Agues; it makes a man sober, that
was Drunk; it refreshes a weary man, and yet makes a man hungry; being taken
when they go to Bed, it makes one sleep soundly; and yet being taken when a man
is sleepy and drowsy, it will, as they say, awaken his Brain, and quicken his
Understanding; As for curing of the Pox, it serves for that use, but among the
Pocky Indian Slaves. Here in England it is refined, and will not deign to cure
here any other then cleanly and gentlemanly Diseases. O omnipotent power of
Tobacco! And if it could by the smoke thereof chase out Devils, as he smoke of
Tobias Fish did (which, I am sure, could smell no stronger) it would serve for
a precious Relict, both for the superstitious Priests, and the insolent
Puritans, to cast out Devils withal.

Admitting then, and not confessing, that the use thereof were healthful for
some sorts of Diseases, should it be used for all Sicknesses? should it be used
by all men? should it be used at all times? yea, should it be used by able,
young, strong, healthful men? Medicine has that virtue, that it never leaves a
man in that state wherein it finds him; it makes a sick man whole, but a whole
man sick: And as Medicine helps Nature, being taken at time of necessity; so
being ever and continually used, it does but weaken, weary, and wear Nature.
What speak I of Medicine? Nay, let a man every hour of the day, or as often as
many in this Country use to take Tobacco; let a man, I say, but take as often the
best sorts of Nourishments, in Meat and Drink, that can be devised, he shall,
with the continual use thereof, weaken both his Head and his Stomach, all his
members shall become feeble, his Spirits dull, and in the end, as a drowsy,
lasie Belly-god, he shall ^vanish in a Lethargy.

And from this weakness it preceeds, that many in this Kingdom have had such a
continual use of taking this unsavory Smoke, as now they are not able to
forbear the same, no more then an old Drunkard can abide to be long sober,
without falling into an incurable Weakness, and evil Constitution; for their
continual custom has made to them habitum, alteram naturam: So to those that,
from their Birth, have been continually nourished upon Poison, and things
venomous, wholesome Meats are only poysonable.

Thus having, as I trust, sufficiently answered the most principal Arguments
that are used in defense of this vile custom. It rests only to inform you,
what Sins and Vanities you commit in the filthy abuse thereof: First, Are you
not guilty of sinful and shameful lust, (for lust may be as well in any of the
Senses as in feeling) that although you be troubled with no Disease, but in
perfect health, yet can you neither be merry at an Ordinary, nor lascivious in
the Stews, if you lack Tobacco to provoke your Apetite to any of those sorts of
Recreation; lusting after it as the Children of Israel did in the Wilderness
after Quails. Secondly, It is as you use, or rather abuse it, a branch of the
sin of Drunkenness, which is the root of all Sins; for as the only delight
that Drunkards take in Wine, is in the strength of the taste, and the force of
the some thereof that mounts up to the Brain; for no Drunkards love any weak or
sweet Drink; So are not those (I mean the strong heat and fume) the only
qualities that make Tobacco so delectable to all the Lovers of it? And as no
man likes strong heady Drink the first day (because nemo repent fit
turpissimus) but by custom is piece and piece allured, while, in the end, a
Drunkard will have as great a thrist to be drunk, as a sober man to quench his
thirst with a draught, when he has need of it. So is not this the very case of
all the great takers of Tobacco, which therefore they themselves do attribute
to a bewitching quality in it? Thirdly, Is it not the greatest sin of all, that
you, the people of all sorts of this Kingdom, who are created and ordained by
God, to bestow both your Persons and Goods for the maintenance both of the
honor and safety of your King and Commonwealth, should disable your selves in
both? In your Persons, having by this continual vile Custom brought your selves
to this shameful imbecility, that you are not able to ride or walk the Journey
of a Jews Sabbath, but you must have reeky coal brought you from the next poor
House to kindle your Tobacco with; whereas he cannot be thought able for any
Service in the Wars, that cannot endure oftentimes the want of Meat, Drink and
Sleep, much more then must he endure the want of Tobacco: In the times of the
many glorious and victorious Battles fought by this Nation, there was no word
of Tobacco; but now if it were time of Wars, and that you were to make some
sudden Cavalcado upon your Enemies; if any of you should seek leisure to stay
behind his Fellow for taking of Tobacco, for my part, I should never be sorry
for any evil chance that might befall him: To take a Custom in any thing that
cannot be left again, is most harmful to the people of any Land. Mollities and
delicacy were the rack and overthrow, first of the Persian, and next of the
Roman Empire. And this very custom of taking Tobacco (whereof our present
purpose is) is even at this day accounted so effeminate among the Indians
themselves, as in the Market they will offer no price for a Slave to be sold,
whom they find to be a great Tobacco-taker.

Now how you are by this Custom disabed in your Goods, let the Gentry of this
Land bear witness, some of them bestowing three, some four hundred pounds a
year upon this precious Stink, which, I am sure, might be bestowed upon many
far better Uses. I read indeed of a Knavish Courtier, who for abusing the
favor of the Emperor Alexander Severus, his Master, by taking Bribes to
intercede for sundry Persons in his Masters Ear (for whom he never once opened
his mouth) was justly choked with smoke, with this doom, Fumo pereat quifummum
vendidit. But of so many Smoke-Buyers as are at this present in this Kingdom, I
never read nor heard.

And for the Vanities committed in this filthy Custom, is it not both great
Vanity and Uncleanness, that at the Table, a place of Respect, of Cleanliness,
of Modesty, men should not be ashamed to sit tossing of Tobacco-Pipes, and
puffing of the smoke of Tobacco one to another, making the filthy smoke and
stink thereof to exhale athwart the Dishes, and infect the Air, when very often
men that abhor it are at their Repast: Surely smoke becomes a Kitchen far
better then a Dining-Chamber, and yet it makes a Kitchen also oftentimes in the
inward parts of men, soyling and infecting them with an unctious and oily kind
of soot, as has been found in some great Tobacco-Takers, that after their
Death were opened: And not only meat-time, but no other time nor action is
exempted from the public use of this uncivil trick; so as if the Wives of
Diep list to contest with this Nation for good Manners, their worst Manners
would in all reason be found at least not so dishonest (as ours are) in this
point, the public use whereof at all times, and in all places, has now so far
prevailed, as diverse men very sound both in Judgment and Complexion, have been
at last forced to take it also, without desire, partly because they were
ashamed to seem singular, (like the two Philosophers that were forced to duck
themselves in that Rainwater, and so became Fools as well as the rest of the
people) and partly to be as one that was content to eat Garlic (which he did
not love) that he might not be troubled with the smell of it in the breath of
his Fellows. And is it not a great vanity that a man cannot heartily welcome
his Friend now, but straight they must be in hand with Tobacco: No, it is
become in place of a Cure, a point of good Fellowship; and he that will refuse
to take a Pipe of Tobacco among his Fellows (though by his own election he
would rather smell the savor of a sink) is accounted peevish, and no good
company; even as they do with tippling in the cold Eastern-Countries, yea the
Mistress cannot in a more mannerly kind entertain her Servant, then by giving
him out of her fair hand a pipe of Tobacco; but herein is not only a great
vanity, but a great contempt of God's good Gifts, that the sweetness of man's
breath being a good gift of God, should be wilfully corrupted by this stinking
smoke, wherein I must confess it has too strong of virtue, and so that which
is an Ornament of Nature, and can neither by any artifice be at the first
acquired, nor once lost be recovered again, shall be filthily corrupted with an
incurable stink, which vile quality is as directly contrary to that wrong
Opinion which is holden of the wholesomeness thereof, as the venom of
putrefaction is contrary to the virtue preservative.

Moreover, which is a great iniquity, and against all humanity, the Husband
shall not be ashamed to reduce thereby his delicate, wholesome, and
clean-complexion'd Wife to that extremity, that either she must also corrupt
her sweet Breath therewith, or else resolve to live in a perpetual stinking
torment.

Have you not reason then to be ashamed, and to forbear this filthy Novelty, so
basely grounded, so foolishly received, and so grossly mistaken in the right use
thereof: In your abuse thereof sinning against God, harming your selves both in
Persons and Goods, and raking also thereby the marks and notes of Vanity upon
you; by the Custom thereof, making your selves to be wondered at by all
foreign civil Nations, and by all Strangers that come among you, to be scorned
and contempted; a custom loathsome to the Eye, hateful to the Nose, harmful to
the Brain, dangerous to the Lungs, and in the black stinking fume thereof,
nearest resembling the horrible stigian smoke of the Pit that is bottomless.

Dr. Maynwaring's serious Cautions against Tobacco, collected out of his
Treatise of the Scurvy, Page 70.
ANother grand procuring and promoting cause of the Scurvy is, Tobacco; not
taken notice of by any I meet with in print. And here we may charge much of the
frequency, and the unwonted Phenomenon, or symptomatical appearance of this
Disease, upon the late custom of taking Tobacco. Many wonder that the Scurvy
should so much abound now in most places, and become so common and obvious now
to every Eye, that was so rarely taken notice of in former times,
notwithstanding some of its procuring causes were very Antique. But we need not
wonder so much, if we consider the manner of living in former Ages, compared
with our own; new Customs and Diets beget new Diseases, or modifie the old so,
as they seem to be new, in their unwonted manner, or frequency of appearance.

The Scurvy being altered and differenced now from what it was in ancient
times; that the Phenomenon or symptoms of the Disease in the Syndrome and
Concurrence, is not exact alike with the description of the Ancients; which
has caused a doubt, and it is held by some Physicians, That the Scurvy is a
new Disease: But it is the old Scurvy dressed in a new garb, which by new
procuring causes, and additional complications, is become more depravel, more
frequent, and more enlarged: few persons but harbor this unwelcome Guest.

As an additional procurer of the Scurvy, Tobacco comes now to be examined,
since whose general use the Scurvy has much increased, and is become the most
Epidemical. That this Plant is injurious and destructive to Nature, and
consequently an introducer of the Scurvy will appear, if we consider the
effects that supervene and follow the taking of it. The Consequents or Effects
may be divided into two sorts; First, Such as accompany or supervene the first
use of it. Secondly, Such as follow the long and constant use of it.

Symptoms arising upon the first and unaccustomed use of smoking it, are
Vomiting, Giddiness, Fainting, Drunkenness Sleepiness, depravation of the
Senses, and such like as follow upon the taking of some kind of Poisons.

Effects upon the accustomed familiar use of it, are, Salivation, drawing a
Flux of moisture to the mouth, and drayning the Body; heat, dryness, lassitude
and weariness of the Spirits, a dullness and indisposition of mind after; apt to
sleep, a filthy unsavory taste in the mouth, a check to to the Stomach or
Appetite.

The latent and more secret Effects wrought in the Body by the constant smoking
of Tobacco, are; the inducing a Scorbutic disposition, and promoting it where
it is already radicated. And this is procured these ways: First, By depressing
the Spirits, and alienating them from their genuine propriety and purity.
Secondly, By vitiating the Stomach, and depraving the Palate. Thirdly, By
exhausting the dulcid good juice of the Body, leaving behind and procuring the
remainder more viscous, acrid and sharp. Fourthly, By prejudicing and
weakening the Lungs and vital Parts.

That it has a property to depress and clog the Spirits, is apparent by its
narcotick virtue, causing a dullness, heaviness, lassitude, and disposing to
sleep after the use of it. That it alienates the Spirits, is concluded from its
virulent nature, and discord with our nature, and that is argued from the
symptoms that attend the first use.

That it is noxious to the Stomach (the first grand Laboratory of the Body) is
rational to assert; For as Tobacco affects the mouth with an ill stinking taste,
so the Stomach also goes not free, but is tainted with it, which is
communicated to the Food received. Now considering the nature of Tobacco, as it
is hot and dry, acrid, salt, biting, Purgative, or rather virulent, altogether
medicinal, and not alimental; and this constantly to impregnate and tincture
our nutimental success with these properties and qualities, we cannot otherwise
expect by length of time and daily use, but that it will show its power and
virtue to change and alter our Bodies; since it is not nutritive, but
medicinal, estranged, and at a great distance from the nature of our Bodies,
not fit to nourish, but to alter and produce some notable effects.

So great a sympathy there is between the Stomach and Mouth, that the one is
not affected, but the other is drawn into consent; if the Stomach be foul, the
Mouth has an ill relish; and if the Mouth distasts any thing, the Stomach
nauseates at it. Now this great Harmony and consent between these two, arises
upon this account; the Mouth is appointed by nature the Stomachs taster, to
judge and discern what is fit and agreeable for the Stomach to receive; and
therefore the same membrane which invests the Mouth, and is the instrument of
tasting, does also line the Stomach, so that hereby what is pleasant and
acceptable in the Mouth, is gratefully received into the Stomach; now by this
affinity and sympathy, you may rationally conclude, that vitiating of the taste
by Tobacco and tainting the Mouth with its stinking scent, must of necessity
communicate the same to the Stomach, which takes Physic every time you take
Tobacco, does mix with and infect the chile of the Stomach, and is conveyed
with it into all parts of the Body; and having so great a medicinal power, must
needs alter and change the Body, according to the properties it is endowed
with, by the constant use, and daily reception of it.

Now Tobacco being of an accrimonious, hot, dry, etc. nature, does pervert and
change the Balsamic juyces of the Body into a more sharp and fiery temper,
and alienate them, whereby they are not so amicable and fit for nutrition, as
many scorbutic Tobacconists do evidence upon examination, and their
constitution changed by the evil use of this Plant; and it is very reasonable
to expect it, and impute such alterations to the use thereof, since they are
the proper effects of such a Cause; the more remarkable discovery, and
frequency of the Scurvy, may well and justly be imputed to Tobacco, since of
latter years that Tobacco has been in use, and in those Countries where
Tobacco is much taken, it does abound most.

Although I discommend the use of Tobacco by smoking it, as an injurious
Custom, yet I highly applaud it, as very medicinal, being rightly used. I
remember about fifteen years since, a Patient of mine in Derby-shire fell into
a great Paroxysm of an Asthma, almost to suffocation, I exhibited a Dose of the
Sirrup of Tobacco, which gave him present help, and within a few hours was
relieved, that he could draw his Breath with much ease and freedom: And about
a year after, at Maxfield in Cheshire, I cured a Gentlewoman of an Ulcer in Ano
of seven years standing, chiefly with the Ointment of Tobacco; and although
other things were used, yet I ascribe most of the Cure to that Unguent. And in
many other cases Tobacco is of good use, which I have experienced; but smoking
of it I find to be hurtful, if it be customary. I shall not be so strict and
severe against the use of it, as to forbid all persons the smoking it upon any
score whatever; for that which may be used at certain times as medicinal, upon
just occasions requiring in some persons, may prove very bad and pernicious
upon the constant and general use; and this is the case of Tobacco.

Tobacconists, whom custom has ensnared, and brought them to delight in it,
are willing to be persuaded and deluded, that it is good and wholesome, at
least harmless; the pretenses which they urge in defense of it, are such as
these: Some plead for it, and use it after Meat, as a help to Digestion, and
therefore take it as a good remedy against a bad Stomach and weak Digestion.

To this I answer, They are much mistaken herein, not distinguishing between
digestion, and precipitation of meat out of the Stomach; digestion is not
performed but in due time, by retexture, alteration, fermentation, and
volatization of Meat, and till then, is not fit to pass out of the
Digestive-Office, which requires some hours more or less, according to the
nature of the Food received, of facil or difficil digestion; now that which
provokes the Stomach to a distribution of semi-digested Chyle, and unloading it
self before digestion be finished and perfected, offers great injury to the
Body; and this is the case of Tobacco (by its lavative stimulating properties)
which error committed in the first Digestive-Office is not corrected, nor the
damage recompensed by the accuteness and strong elaborations of the subsequent
digestions; Aphorism.
and for this reason in part, the Scurvy is procured hereby. Some take Tobacco
for refreshment after labor, and divertisement of serious thoughts, being
tired with business, study and musing. True it is, Tobacco puts a suspension
upon serious thoughts, and gives a relaxation for a time in some persons;
others contemplate, and run over their business with more delight, by the help
and during the taking of a Pipe: But both these persons though seemingly
delighted and refreshed for a short time, yet afterward the Spirits are
lassated and tired, and are more flat, dull and somnolent, when the Pipe is
out; this was but a cheat, the Spirits were not truly refreshed, invigorated
and reinforced; as Wine does enliven and make brisk the Spirits, by affording
and communicating an additional supply; but by the fume of Tobacco the Spirits
are a little inebriated and agitated by an other motion then their own, which
is a seeming refreshment, and short, not real, substantial and lasting.

Others plead for Tobacco, and take it as a Remedy against Rheum, because a
great dryer and exhauster of superfluous Moisture. To evince the Error of this
Opinion, consider what is the cause whereby Rheumes and crude moisture in the
Body do abound; and then you will plainly see, whether smoking Tobacco be a
proper or likely Remedy to prevent or oppose it. Phlegm and superfluous
moisture does arise and abound in the Body, from a deficiency and debility of
the Digestions, as also impediment or impotency of the expulsive faculty, that
the remainders after digestion be not transmitted by the common ductures. Now
this fume of Tobacco gives no Roboration, adds no strength to the digestive
faculties, having no symbolical qualities to comply with, and assist them, is
very plain. Also that separation and expulsion of superfluous moisture by this
fume, is not promoted and transmitted through the more commodious ductures and
passages appointed by nature for emission; only a salivation by the mouth is
procured, which brings no advantage, but detriment; for this Flux of moisture
does not arise as critical, from the impulsion of Nature, separating and
protruding; but from a promiscuous attraction of fluid moisture, (by virtue of
its acrimonious heat) as well the landable, util succus, as the degenerated and
superfluous; so that constantly draining the Body of this dulcid serosity, must
cause many inconveniences through the want of it, in as much as it is very
serviceable to the Body, in the integrity of its nature, but being alienated,
is then reduced or vented by better means, nature concurring with the medicine:
But admit this did attract only excrementitious moisture (which it does not)
yet considering it Vitiates the Stomach, and Impregnates the Chyle, with its
evil properties, it is much better to forbear then to use it; that benefit would
not recompense this injury. And further, that which is a preventing or curative
remedy of superfluous Moisture, Rheum, or Phlegmatique matter, applies a
Priori to the Digestions, the Springs from whence such Effects do arise; not a
Posteriori to the producted matter, which this fume seems to pump out, but does
not stop the Leak, is therefore no radical Medicine; and they that smoke
Tobacco upon this account as a great dryer, and exhauster of superfluous
moisture, are much deceived in the expected benefit; it only brings a current
of moisture, which ought to be expended otherwise, but it abates nothing in the
Fountain or Springs; rather augments, and makes an overflow, (for the Reasons
aforesaid) as Tobacconists do evidence by their much spitting.



Tutela sanitatis.
But yet the Crime were less, if only to themselves the prejudice did extend,
but also to Posterity their Diseases are propagated; the Children having
impressed upon them, and radicated in the principals of their nature, the
seminal power and productive virtue of inordinate and intemperate living of
their Genitors and Progenitors, that the Children may bear witness to the
following Age, the vice and folly of their Parents and Predecessors, recorded
and characterised in them, etc.

Hereby you may understand, that evil customs (as of smoking Tobacco) do not
injure only the person doing so, but the Generation after them are prejudiced:
And, here by the way, we may take notice of the many Rickity Children in this
latter Age, since the use of Tobacco, which Disease was not known, before the
frequent use of it. Tobacco does enervate and debilitate the faculties, that we
may rationally expect the Children from this Generation to be Scorbutic,
Rickity, and more feeble then formerly.

Amurath the Fourth of that Name, Amurath
Grand Seignior of the Turkish Empire, put forth his Edict againgst the smoking
of Tobacco, and made it a Capital Crime for any that should so use it; the
Reason of this severe Prohibition was, that it did render his People infertile:
I shall not urge the inconvenience of. Tobacco so far, but this I may assext,
that it causes an infirm Generation, by debilitating the Parents, and
rendering them Scorbutic, which Impressions are carried in semine to their
Children, and makes a diseased Issue. And I observed in Virginia, being some
time in that Colony, that the Planters who had lived long there, being great
Smokers, were of a withered decayed Countenance, and very Scorbutic, being
exhausted by this imoderate fume; nor are they long-lived, but do shorten their
days by the intemperate use of Tobacco and Brandy.

King James, that learned Philosophical Prince of this Nation, wisely
considering the nature of this Plant, and having a good Stoxastick Head to
foresee the inconveniences that would arise to his People, by the ill custom
of smoking it, he being the great Physcian of the Body Politic, does
excellently dehort his Subjects (being tender of their future welfare) from
this noxious fume, His Counter blast to Tobacco.
and writes an Invective against it; whose Oratory and solid Arguments were
enough to have broken the neck of this Custom, had they any regard to his
kindness, or sense of their own good, and of their Posterity.

I might have enlarged my self upon this Subject, and run over most Scorbutic
symptoms, showing how they are either first procured or aggravated by this
fume: But from what has been said already, it plainly appears, that Tobacco is
a great procurer and promoter of the Scurvy, in as much as many Scorbutic
symptoms are the proper effects of smoking Tobacco, as lassitude, dullness,
somnolency, spitting, ill taste in the mouth, etc. And although some few persons
either by the strength of nature, do strongly resist the bad impressions it
sets upon several parts of the Body, or by the peculiarity of nature is less
offensive and hurtful to some, or brings some particular benefit (amongst its
many ill properties) that makes it seemingly good; yet insensibly and by time
it damageth all; and those few good effects in some few persons are not of
validity to give it a general approbation and use, and free it from the censure
of a great procurer of the Scurvy, but may be justly reckoned in that Catalogue.

Preservation of Health in the choice of Drinks, and Regular Drinking.
DRink for necessity, not for bad fellowship; especially soon after meat, which
hinders the due fermentation of the Stomach, and washes down before digestion
be finished: but after the first concoction, if you have a hot Stomach, a dry
or costive Body, you may drink more freely then others: or if thirst importunes
you at any time, to satisfy with a moderate draught is better then to forbear.

Accustom youth and strong Stomachs to small drink, but stronger drink, and
Wine, to the infirm and aged: it chears the Spirits, quickens the Appetite, and
helps Digestion, moderately taken: but being used in excess, disturbs the
course of Nature, and procures many Diseases: for corpulent gross and fat
Bodies, thin, hungry, abstersive penetrating Wines are best, as White Wind,
Rhenish, and such like.

For lean thin Bodies; black, red and yellow Wines, sweet, full bodied and
fragrant, are more fit and agreeable; as Malaga, Muscadel, Tent, Alicant and
such like.

For Drink, whether it be wholsomer warmed than cold, is much controverted;
some stiffly contending for the one, and some for the other: I shall rather
choose the middle way, with limitation and distinction, then impose it upon all
as a rule to be observed under the penalty of forfeiting their health, the
observations of the one or the other.

There are three sorts of persons, one cannot drink cold Beer, the other cannot
drink warm, the third, either: You that cannot drink cold Beer, to you it is
hurtful, cools the Stomach, and checks it much: therefore keep to warm drink as
a wholesome custom: you that cannot drink warm Beer, that is, find no
refreshment, nor thirst satified by it, you may drink it cold, nor is it
injurious to you: you that are indifferent and can drink either, drink yours
cold, or warmed, as the company does, since your Stomach makes no choice.

That warm drink is no bad custom, but agreeable to Nature in the generality;
First, Because it comes the nearest to the natural temper of the Body, and
similia similibus conservantur, every thing is preserved by its like, and
destroyed by its contrary. Secondly, Though I do not hold it the principal
Agent in digestion, yet it does excite, is auxiliary, and a necessary
concomitant of a good digestion, ut signum and causa. Thirdly, Omne frigus per
se, and proviribus destruit; Cold in its own nature, and according to the
graduation of its power, extinguisheth natural heat, and is destructive; but
per accidens, and as it is in gradu remisso, it may contemperate, allay, and
refresh, where heat abounds, and is exalted.

Therefore as there is variety of Palates and Stomachs liking and agreeing best
with such kind of Meats and Drinks, which to others are utterly disgustful,
disagreeing and injurious, though good in themselves: so is it in Drink warmed
or cold; what one finds a benefit in, the other receives a prejudice; at least
does not find that satisfaction and refreshment, under such a qualification;
because of the various natures, particular appetitions, and idiosyncratical
properties of several bodies, one thing will not agree with all: Therefore he
that cannot drink warm, let him take it cold, and it is well to him; but he
that drinks it warm, does better. And this is to be understood in Winter, when
the extremity of cold has congelated and fixed the spirits of the Liquor in a
torpid inactivity; which by a gentle warmth are unfettered, 'Primum crater ad
sitim pertinere, secundum ad hilaritatem, tertium ad voluptatem, quartum ad
insaniam dixit Apuleius.
volatile and brisk; whereby the drink is more agreeable and grateful to the
Stomachs fermenting heat being so prepared, then to be made so by it.

There are three sorts of Drinkers: one drinks to satisfy Nature, and to
support his body; without which he cannot well subsist, and requires it as
recessary to his Being. Another drinks a degree beyond this man, and takes a
larger dose, with this intention, to exhilarate and cheer his mind, to banish
cares and trouble, and help him to sleep the better; and these two are lawful
Drinkers. A third drinks neither for the good of the body, or the mind, but to
stupifie and drown both; by exceeding the former bounds, and running into
excess, frustrating those ends for which drink was appointed by Nature;
converting this support of life and health, making it a procurer of sickness
and untimely death.

Many such there are, who drink not to satifie Nature, but force it down many
times contrary to natural inclination; and when there is a reluctance against
it: as Drunkards, that pour in Liquor, not for love of the drink, or that
Nature requires it by thirst, but only to maintain the mad frollick, and keep
the Company from breaking up. Some to excuse this intemperance, hold it as good
Physic to be drunk once a month, and plead for that liberty as a wholesome
custom, and quote the authority of a famous Physician for it. Whether this
Opinion be allowable, and to be admitted in the due Regiment for preservation
of Health, is fit to be examined.

It is a Canon established upon good reason; Omne nimiun naturae est inimicum.
That every thing exceeding its just bounds, and golden mediocrity, is hurtful
to Nature. The best of things are not excepted in this general rule; but are
restrained and limited here to a due proportion. The supports of life may prove
the procurers of death, if not qualified and made wholesome by this corrective.

Meat and drink is no longer sustenance, but a load and overcharge, if they
exceed the quantum due to each particular person; and then they are not, what
they are properly in themselves, and by the appointment of Nature, the
preservatives of life and health; but the causes of sickness, and consequently
of death.

Drink was not appointed man, to discompose and disorder him in all his
faculties, but to supply, nourish, and strengthen them. Drink exceeding its
measure, is no longer a refreshment, to irrigate and water the thirsty body,
but makes an inundation to drown and suffocate the vital powers. It puts a man
out of the state of health, and represents him in such a degenerate condition
both in respect of body and mind, that we may look upon the man, as going out
of the World, because he is already gone out of himself, and strangely
metamorphosed from what he was.

I never knew sickness or a Disease, to be good preventing Physic; and to be
drunk, is no other then an unsound state, and the whole body out of frame by
this great change. What difference is there between sickness and drunkenness?
Truly I cannot distinguish them otherwise then as genus and species:
Drunkenness being a raging Disease, denominated and distinguished from other
sicknesses, by its procatarctick or procuring cause, Drink.

That Drunkenness is a Disease or sickness, will appear in that it has all the
requisites to constitute a Disease, and is far distant from a state of health:
for as health is the free and regular discharge of all the functions of the
body and mind; and sickness, when the functions are not performed, or weakly
and depravedly: then Ebriety may properly be said to be a Disease or sickness,
because it has the symptoms and diagnostick signs, of an acute and great
Disease: for, during the time of drunkenness, and some time after, few of the
faculties perform rightly, but very depravedly and preternatually: if we
examine the intellectual faculties, we shall find the reason gone, the memory
lost or much abated, and the will strangely perverted: if we look into the
sensitive faculties, they are disordered, and their functions impedited, or
performed very deficiently: the eyes do not see well, nor the ears hear well,
nor the palate reMifh, etc. The speech faulters and is imperfect; the stomach
perhaps vomits or nauseates; his legs fail: Indeed if we look through the whole
man, we shall see all the faculties depraved, and their functions either not
executed, or very disorderly and with much deficiency.

Now according to these symptoms in other sicknesses, we judge a man not likely
to live long; and that it is very hard he should recover; the danger is so
great from the many threatening symptoms that attend this sickness, and
prognosticate a bad event: here is nothing appears salutary; but from head to
foot, the Disease is prevalent in every part; which being collated, the syndrom
is lethal, and judgment to be given so.

Surely then Drunkenness is a very great Disease for the time, but because it
is not usually mortal, nor lasts long; therefore it it slighted, and looked
upon as a trivial matter that will cure it self. But now the question may be
asked; Why is not Drunkenness usually mortal? since the same signs in other
Diseases are accounted mortal, and the event proves if so. To which I answer;
All the hopes we have that a man drunk should live, is; first, From common
experience that it is not deadly: Secondly, From the nature of the primitive or
procuring Cause, strong Drink or Wine; which although it rage, and strangely
discompose the man for a time, yet it lasts not long, nor is mortal. The
inebriating spirits of the liquor, flowing in so fast, and joining with the
spirits of man's body, make so high a tide, that overflows all the banks and
bounds of order: For, the spirits of man's body, those agents in each faculty,
act smoothly, regularly and constantly, with a moderate supply; but being
overcharged, and forced out of their natural course, and exercise of their
duty, by the large addition of furious spirits; spurs the functions into
strange disorders, as if nature were conflicting with death and dissolution;
but yet it proves not mortal.

And this, first, because these adventitious spirits are amicable and friendly
to our bodies in their own nature, and therefore not so deadly injurious, as
that which is not so familiar or noxious.

Secondly, Because they are very volatile, light, and active; Nature therefore
does much sooner recover her self, transpires and sends forth the overplus
received; then if the morbifick matter were more ponderous and fixed; the
gravamen from thence would be much worse and longer in removing: as an
over-charge of Meat, Bread, Fruit, or such like substances not spirituous; but
dull and heavy (comparative) is of more difficult digestion, and lays a
greater and more dangerous load upon the faculties, having not such volatile
brisk spirits to assist Nature, nor of so liquid a fine substance, of quicker
and easier digestion: So that the symptoms from thence are much more dangerous,
then those peracute distempers arising from Liquors. So likewise those bad
symptoms in other Diseases are more to be feared and accounted mortal (then the
like arising from drunkenness) because those perhaps depend upon malignant
causes; or such as by time are radicated in the body; or from the defection of
some principal part: but the storm and discomposure arising from drunkenness,
as it is suddenly raised, so commonly it soon falls, depending upon benign
causes, and a spiritucus matter, that lays not so great an oppression; but
inebriates the spirits, that they act very disorderly and unwontedly; or by the
soporiferous virtue, stupefies them for a time, until they recover their
agility again.

But all this while, I do not see, that to be drunk once a month, should prove
good Physic: all I think that can be said in this behalf, is; that by
overcharging the Stomach, vomiting is procured; and so carries off something
that was lodged there, which might breed Diseases.

This is a bad excuse for good Fellows, and a poor plea for drunkenness: for
the gaining of one supposed benefit (which might be obtained otherwise) you
introduce twenty inconveniences by it. I do not like the preventing of one
Disease that may be, by procuring of one at the present certainly, and many
hereafter most probably: and if the Disease feared, or may be, could be
prevented no otherwise, but by this drunken means; then that might tolerate
and allow it: but there are other ways better and safer to cleanse the body
either upwards or downwards, then by overcharging with strong drink, and making
the man to unman himself; the evil consequents of which are many, the benefit
hoped for, but pretended; or if any, but very small and inconsiderable.

And although, as I said before, the drunken fit is not mortal, and the danger
perhaps not great for the present; yet those drunken bouts being repeated; the
relicts do accumulate, debilitate Nature, and lay the foundation of many
chronick Diseases. Nor can it be expected otherwise; but you may justly
conclude from the manifest irregular actions which appear to us externally,
that the functions within also, and their motions are strangely disordered:
for, the outward madness and unwonted actions, proceed from the internal
impulses, and disordered motions of the faculties: which general disturbance
and discomposure (being frequent) must needs subvert the economy and
government of humance Nature; and consequently ruin the Fabric of man's body.

The ill effects, and more eminent products of ebriety, are; first, A changing
of the natural tone of the Stomach, and alienating the digestive faculty; That
instead of a good transmutation of food, a degenerate Chyle is produced. Common
experience tells, that after a drunken debauch, the stomach loses its
appetite, and acuteness of digestion; as belching, thirst, disrelish,
nauseating, do certainly testify: yet to support nature, and continue the
custom of eating, some-food is received; but we cannot expect from such a
Stomach that a good digestion should follow: and it is some days before the
Stomach recover its eucrasy, and perform its office well: and if these
miscarriages happen but seldom, the injury is the less, and sooner recompensed;
but by the frequent repetition of these ruinous practices, the Stomach is
overthrown and alienated from its integrity.

Secondly, An unwholesome corpulency and cachectick plenitude of body does
follow: or a degenerate macilency, and a decayed consumptive constitution. A
Cacotrophy, or Atrophy.
Great Drinkers that continue it long, few of them escape, but fall into one of
these conditions and habit of body: for, if the Stomach discharge not its
office aright; the subsequent digestions will also be defective. So great a
consent and dependence is there upon the Stomach; that other parts cannot
perform their duty, if this leading principal Part be perverted and debauched:
nor can it be expected otherwise; for, from this Laboratory and prime office of
digestion, all the parts must receive their supply; which being not suitable,
but depraved, are drawn into debauchery also, and a degenerate state; and the
whole Body fed with a vicious alimentary succus.

Now that different products or habits of body should arise from the same kind
of debauchery, happens upon this score. As there are different properties and
conditions of bodies; Quicquid recipitur, recipitur per modum recipientis. Ax.
so the result from the same procuring causes shall be much different and
various: one puffs up, fills, and grows hydropical; another pines away, and
falls Consumptive, from excess in drinking; and this proceeds from the
different disposition of parts: for, in some persons, although the stomach be
vitiated, yet the strength of the subsequent digestions is so great, from the
integrity and vigor of those parts destinated to such offices; that they act
strenuously, though their object matter be transmitted to them imperfect and
degenerate; and therefore do keep the body plump and full, although the juyces
be foul, and of a depraved nature. Others e contra, whose parts are not so firm
and vigorous; that will not act upon any score, but with their proper object;
does not endeavor a transmutation of such aliene matter, but receiving it with
a nice reluctance, transmits it to be evacuated and sent forth by the next
convenient ducture, or emunctory: and from hence the body is frustrated of
nutrition, and falls away: So that the pouring in of much liquor (although it
be good in sua natura) does not beget much aliment, but washes through the
body, and is not assimilated.

But here some may object and think; That washing of the body through with good
Liquor, should cleanse the body, and make it fit for nourishment, and be like
good Physic for a foul body. But the effect proves the contrary; and it is but
reason it should be so: for, suppose the Liquor (whether Wine, or other) be
pure and good; yet when the spirit is drawn off from it, the remainder is but
dead, flat, thick, and a muddy phlegm. As we find in the destillation of Wine,
or other Liquors; so it is in man's body: the spirit is drawn off first, and all
the parts of man's body are ready Receivers, and do imbibe that limpid
congenerous enlivener, freely and readily: but the remainder, of greatest
proportion; that heavy, dull, phlegmy part, and of a narcotick quality; lies
long fluctuating upon the digestions, and passes but slowly; turns sour, and
vitiates the Crases of the parts: So that this great inundation, and supposed
washing of the body, does but drown the Faculties, stupefie or choke the
Spirits, and defile all the Parts; not purify and cleanse. And although the
more subtle and thinner portion, passes away in some persons pretty freely by
Urine; yet the grosser and worse part stays behind, and clogs in the
percolation.

A third injury, and common, manifest prejudice from intemperate drinking, is;
An imbecility of the Nerves; which is procured from the disorderly motions of
the Animal Spirits; being impulsed and agitated preternaturally by the
inebriating spirits of strong Liquors: which vibration being frequent, begets a
habit, and causes a trepidation of Members.

Transcribed verbatim out of Doctor Maynwaring's Treatise Of long Life.

That it may not be said to be only one Doctors Opinion, here is added another
Collection against Tobacco-smoking, written by the learned Doctor George
Thompson, in his Book Of Preservation of the Blood.
A Bove all, I much condemn the common abuse of Tobacco; out of which, no other
symptoms, than a scorbutical Venom is accidentally sucked. Agreeable to which
Judgment of mine, is that of the Legitimate Artist Doctor Maynwaring, who marks
where Tobacco is much taken, the Scurvy does most abound: I wish those who are
too forward to condemn Chemical Preparations, ordered by true Philosophers,
would reflect upon themselves and others, as yet ignorant of Pyrotomy, how that
they are too forward in rushing into this Science; Indirectly making use of a
Retort with a receiver, I mean a Pipe, and the mouth for the reduction of this
Plant into Salt and Sulphur, proving not a little injurious to them. If they
were conscious how subtle an enemy it is, how hardly to be dealt withal, in a
moderate sense; how insinuating, tempting, deluding; how disagreeing to nature,
as is manifest at first taking it, pretending an evacuation only of a
superfluous moisture, when it also generates the same; how it wrongs the
Ventricle; by reason of a continuity of its membrane, with that of the mouth;
how it taints the nutricious Juice; how it dozes the Brain, impairing its
Faculties, especially the memory: They would quickly commit this Herb to the
hand of those that know what belongs to the right management and improvement
thereof.

I confess it has a Dowry bestowed upon it, which may make it very acceptable
to all ingenious Artists, for inward and outward uses; yet as the matter is
handled indiscreetly, I know nothing introduced into this Nation has
discovered it self more apparently hurtful, in aggravating and graduating this
scorbutical evil among us then Tobacco.

I am not ignorant what some Object, That there are those who taking an
extraordinary quantity of Tobacco, have lived a to great age, as Sixty or
Seventy Years. 2. That multitudes not taking this fume, are yet notwithstanding
over run with the Scurvy. 3. That some have protested, they have received
certain benefit by this Plant, when other Remedies prescribed by able
Physicians have been invalid to relieve them. 4. That there are places where
Man, Woman and Child, take in this Smoke, none of these sad effects appearing.

As to the first, I answer, One Swallow makes no Summer; I reckon this among
raro contingentia: I have known one very intemperate in Dier, live to the
forementioned age; but doubtless had he Regulated himself according to the
Rules of Mediocrity, he might have doubled that age. Innate Strength of Body
does carry a man sometimes through that, without any great damage, which
destroys another.

2. I do not affirm, that this Vegetable is the sole Co-adjuvant cause of the
Scurvy, it being certain there are many Promoters thereof. Besides, yet granted
that your great Compotators, Ventricolae, Gormandizers, who have as the
Grecians (...), Lazy panches, little else to do but to take Tobacco, to pass
away the time; filling Pipe after Pipe, as fast as possible they can exhaust
it, are commonly incident to this feral Malady. Hereupon this very same
specific Disease may be diffused and communicated to others, by expiration or
ffluvium, sent out of a Body infected therewith; so that it seems rare to me,
that the Wife should be exempted from this Cacoettick Sickness, if the Husband
be afflicted therewith; or the Husband be free, if the Wife be vexed: Doubtless
some Peoples Breath does exceedingly taint the Air, to the great annoyance of
others.

3. I condemn not medicinal appropriation and application of this Drug, for I
know it to be of excellent Virtue: There is great difference, Inter dictum
secundum quid and dictum simpliciter, between the censure of any thing as
absolutely evil, and the indirect practice of it: Moreover, what is one man's
Meat, may be another Poison.

4. The generality of smoking it in some places, without those ill effects we
find, does not at all frustrate my assertion: For I have observed a more
moderate course of life in Diet, the goodness of the Air, with an hereditary
Custom, has in great measure balanced the nocument or inconveniences, which
otherwise they would have contracted by excess thereof; neither are these
numerous Tobacconists acquitted from this evil, as it appears by those frequent
eruptions in the skin, whereby a greater mischief is prevented within, they
being only efflorescences of a scorbutical pravity.

There are, as I apprehend, two principal Reasons to be given, why this Weed
has captivated so many Thousands in such sort, that they become mere Slaves to
it.

One is, the seeming delight it affords in the present taking thereof, inducing
a pleasing bewitching melancholy, exceedingly affecting their Fancies, so that
they could wish with him in the Poet, Hic furor, o superi, sit mihi perpetuus,
O that I might always thus melancholize; not considering though the Prologue
be cheerful, the Epilogue is often sad; though the Spirits are as it were
titillated, and charmed into a sweet complacency for a short space; yet
afterward a dullness, gloominess, seizes upon them; indeed, how can it be
otherwise, seeing they are but forcibly lulled into this secure placid
Condition, by that which is as far remote from the Vitals, as the Beams of the
Sun are from a black Cloud.

I find in this Smoke, a stinking, retunding, condensing Opiatelike Sulphur,
and an acrid Salt, profligating, extimulating, so that by the bridling much of
the one, and the excessive spurring of the other; the spirits, like a free
metalsome Horse, are quite tired out at last: It is impossible that the
frequent insinuations of this subtle fume, making show of affinity, but quite
of another tribe with the animals, should not at length (let a body be never so
strong, and custom how ever prevalent) either pervert or subvert his well
constituted frame.

Another Reason (observable only by those that are true Gnostics of
themselves) why Tobacco is so highly set by, and has so many Followers; is its
meretricious kisses, given to those that embrace it: oftentimes secretly
wounding them mortally, yet are they not thoroughly sensible who gave them the
stroke. I have taken notice of very temperate Persons in other things, who, for
diversion, have indulged their genious, ad Hilaritatem, continuing for
urbanitysake in Company they liked, longer then ordinary, have so closely
pursued this pernicious Art of sucking in the smoke of this Herb, that never
any Chemist was more solicitous, in greater have to fetch his matters over the
Helm by Distillation: Behold what the event was! the next morning I have heard
complaints come from them, that their Brains were something stupid, dozed,
their Stomach nauseous, being thirsty, also feverish: All this they attribute
to their transgressing limits of Sobriety in drinking, or to the sophisticated
adulterated Liquors, not finding the least fault with the extravagant use of
Tobacco, which above all did them the most hurt privately: Something I can
speak experimentally to this purpose, for having been wedded to it many years
past, supposing I had got an Antidote against Hypochondriack melancholy with an
Apophlegmatism, to discharge crude matter; I applauded it in all Company,
without advertency at that time, how false and treacherous it was, which
afterward perceiving, I withdrew my self from the use thereof by degrees, at
length was altogether divorced from it.

Praevisa spicula levius feriunt; Could we see the poisoned Arrows that are
shot from this Plant, questionless we would endeavor to avoid them, that they
might less intoxicate us.

Latet anguis in Herba; We are suddenly surprised by this Serpentine Plant,
before we are aware; thus that which we take for an Antidote, becomes mere
Poison to us, supplanting and clancularly confounding the (...), or good
government of this Republic, consisting in the strength and goodness of a
seminal Archeus, vigorous ferments, the just constitution and harmony of every
part. Needs must then Indigestions, Crudities, Degeneration and Illegitimation
of the nutricious juice follow, promoting Causes and products of the great
Poison of the Scurvy.

My advice therefore to any immoderate (...), a Fumesucker, is, That he would,
as he tenders the Salvation of Body and Soul, wean himself by degrees from
excess herein; If so, doubtless he will find if the Scurvy infest him much, an
abatement of the tedious symptoms therefore.

Such as are so accustomed to Tobacco, that they cannot forbear it, let what
can be said against it; So that neither the good and solid Persuasions of a
great, wise, and learned King, nor the wholesome and rational Arguments of two
able and skilful Physicians, will be of force to prevail with them:

My Advice to such is, while they take it, To meditate on this Poem following,
by which they may be able to make this double spiritual use of it, Viz.

I. To see the Vanity of the World. II. The Mortality of Mankind.
Which, I think, is the best use can be made of it and the Pipe, etc.

The Indian Weed withered quite,
Green at Noon, cut down at Night;
Shows Thy decay, all Flesh is hay:
Thus think, then drink Tobacco.
The Pipe that is so lilly-white,
Shows Thee to be a mortal Wight,
And even such gone with a touch:
Thus think, then drink Tobacco.
And when the Smoke ascends on high,
Think thou behold'st the Vanity
Of worldly stuff, gone with a puff:
Thus think, then drink Tobacco.
And when the Pipe grows foul within,
Think on thy Souldefil'd with Sin,
And then the Fire it does require:
Thus think, then drink Tobacco.
The Ashes that are left behind
May serve to put thee still in mind,
That unto Dust return thou must:
Thus think, then drink Tobacco.
Answered by George Withers thus, Thus think, drink no Tobacco.

Woe to Drunkards: A SERMON Preached many Years since By Mr. Samuel Ward,
PREACHER OF IPSWICH.
PROVE. 23. Verse 29, 32. To whom is Woe? to whom is Sorrow? to whom is Strife?
etc.
In the end it will bite like a Serpent, and sting like a Cockatrice.

SEer, art thou also blind? Watchman, Esaias 2.
art thou also drunk, or asleep? Or has a Spirit of slumber put out thine
Eyes? Up to thy Watchtower, what descriest thou? Ah Lord! what end or number
is there of the Vanities which mine Eyes are weary of beholding? But what see
thou? I see men walking like the tops of Trees shaken with the wind, like Masts
of Ships reeling on the tempestuous Seas. Drunkenness, I mean, that hateful
Nightbird; which was wont to wait for the twilight, to seek Nooks and Corners,
to avoid the howting and wonderment of Boys and Girls; Now as if it were some
Eaglet to dare the Sun-light, to fly abroad at high Noon in every Street, in
open Markets and Fairs, without fear or shame, without control or punishment,
to the disgrace of the Nation, the out-facing of Magistracy and Ministry, the
utter undoing (without timely prevention) of Health and Wealth, Piety and
Virtue, Town and Country, Church and Commonwealth. And do thou like a dumb
Dog hold thy peace at these things, do thou with Solomon's sluggard fold
thine hands in thy Bosom, and give thy self to ease and drowsmess, while the
envious man causes the noisomest and baseth of weeds to overrun the choicest
Eden of God? Up and Arise, lift up thy Voice, spare not, and cry aloud? What
shall I cry? Cry, woe and woe again unto the Crown of pride, Esaias 5.11, 22.
the Drunkards of Ephraim. Take up a parable, and tell them how it stingeth
like the Cockatrice; Esaias 28.1.
declare unto them the deadly poison of this odious sin. Joel 1.5.
Show them also the soveragin Antidote and Cure of it, Hab 2.
in the Cup that was drunk off by him, James 5.
that was able to overcome it: Cause them to behold the brazen Serpent, and be
healed. And what though some of these deaf Adders will not be charmed nor
cured, yea though few or none of this swinish herd of habitual Drunkards,
accustomed to wallow in their mire; yea, deeply and irrecoverably plunged by
legions of Devils into the dead sea of their filthiness; what if not one of
them will be washed, and made clean, but turn again to their Vomit, and trample
the Pearls of all admonition under feet; yea, turn again, and rend their
Reprovers with scoffs and scorns, making Jests and Songs on their Alebench: Yet
may some young ones be deterred, and some Novices reclaimed, some Parents and
Magistrates awakened to prevent and suppress the spreading of this Gangrene:
And God have his work in such as belong to his Grace. And what is impossible to
the work of his Grace?

Go to then now ye Drunkards, listen not what I, or any ordinary Hedge-Priest
(as you style us) but that most wise and experienced Royal Preacher has to say
unto you. And because you are a dull and thick eared Generation, he first deals
with you by way of question, a figure of force and impression. To whom is woe?
etc. You use to say, Woe be to Hypocrites. It Is true, woe be to such and all
other witting and willing sinners; (...). Basil.
but there are no kind-of Offenders on whom woe does so palpably inevitably
attend as to you Drunkards. You promise your selves Mirth, Pleasure, and
Jollity in your Cups; but for one drop of your mad mirth, be sure of Gallons,
and Tuns of Woe, Gall, Wormwood, and bitterness here and hereafter. Other
Sinners shall taste of the Cup, but you shall drink off the dregs of God's
Wrath and Displeasure. To whom is Strife: You talk of good fellowship and
friendship, but Wine is a rager and tumultuous makebate, and sets you a
quarreling, and meddling. When wit's out of the head and strength out of the
body, it thrusts even Cowards and Dastards, unfenced and unarmed, into needless
Frayes and Combats. And then to whom are Wounds, broken Heads, blue Eyes,
maimed Limbs? You have a drunken byword, Drunkards take no harm; but how many
are the mishaps and untimely misfortunes that betide such, which though they
feel not in drink, they carry as marks and brands to their Grave. You pretend
you drink Healths, and for Health; but to whom are all kind of Diseases,
Infirmities, Deformities, pearled Faces, Palsies, Dropfies, Headaches? If not
to Drunkards.

Upon these premises, he forcibly infers his sober and serious advise. Look
upon these woeful effects and evils of Drunkenness, and look not upon the Wine;
look upon the blue. Wounds, upon the red Eyes it causes, and look not on the
red color when it sparkleth in the Cup. If there were no worse then these, yet
would no wise man be overtaken with Wine: As if he should say, What see you in
the Cup or Drink, that countervaileth these dreggs that lie in the bottom.
Behold, this is the Sugar, you are to look for, and the tang it leaves behind.
Woe and alas, sorrow and strife, shame, poverty and diseases; these are enough
to make it odious, but that which follows withal, will make it hideous and
fearful. For Solomon duly considering that he speaks to men past shame and
grace, senseless of blows, (...) A charito and tanquam chena hash, veche
Siphgnoni iaphresh; novissimo tanquam Serpens mordebis, regulas punget Montinur
and Mercerus; tanquam haemorihois vel dissas, Tremelius.
and therefore much more of reasons and words, insisteth not upon these party
woes; which they, bewitched and besotted with the love of Wine, will easily
over-see and overleap: but sets before their Eyes the direful end and fruit,
the black and poyfonful tail of this sin. In the end it stingeth like the
Serpent, it biteth like the Cockatrice, (or Adder) faith our new Translation.

All Interpreters agree, That he means some most virulent Serpent, whose Poison
is present and deadly. All the woes he has mentioned before, were but as the
sting of some Emmet, Waspe, or Nettle, in comparison of this Cockatrice which
is even unto death; death speedy, death painful, and woeful death, and that as
naturally and inevitably, as Opium procures sleep, as Hellebore purges, or
any Poison kills.

Three forked is this sting, and three fold is the death it procures to all
that are strung therewith. The first is, the death of Grace; The second is, of
the Body: The third is, of Soul and Body eternal. All sin is the poison
wherewithal the old Serpent and red Dragon envenomes the soul of Man, but no
sin (except it be that which is unto death) so mortal as this, which though not
ever unpardonably, yet for the most part is also irrecoverably and inevitably
unto death. See thou one bitten with any other Snake, there is hope and help:
as the Father said of his Son, when he had information of his Gaming, of his
Prodigality, yea, of his Whoring: But when he heard that he was poisoned with
Drunkenness, he gave him for dead, his case for desperate and forlorn. Age and
experience often cures the other; but this increases with years, and parts
not till death. Whoring is a deep Ditch, yet some few shall a man see return
and lay hold on the ways of life, one of a thousand, but scarce one Drunkard
of ten thousand. One Ambrose mentions, and one have I known; and but one of all
that ever I knew or heard of. Often have I been asked, and often have I
enquired, but never could meet with an instance, save one or two at the most. I
speak of Drunkards, not of one drunken; of such who rarely and casually have
Noah-like been surprised, over-taken at unawares: But if once a Custom, ever
Necessity. Wine takes away the Heart, and spoils the Brain, overthrows the
Faculties and Organs of Repentance and Resolution. And is it not just with God,
that he who will put out his natural light, should have his spiritual
extinguished? He that will deprive himself of Reason, should lose also the
Guide and Pilot of Reason, God's Spirit and Grace: He that will wittingly and
willingly make himself an Habitation of Unclean Spirits, should not dispossess
them at his own pleasure? Most aptly therefore is it translated by Tremelius
Hamorrbois, which Gesner confounds with the Dipsas, or thirsty Serpent, whose
poison breeds such thirst, drought, and inflammation; like that of Ratsbane,
that they never leave drinking, till they burst and die withal. Would it not
grieve and pity and Christian-soul, to see a towardly hopeful young man, well
natured, well nurtured, stung with this Cockatrice, bewailing his own case,
crying out against the baseness of the sin, inveighing against-Company, melting
under the persuasions of Friends; yea, protesting against all enticements, vow,
covenant, and seriously indent with himself and his Friends for the
relinquishing of it: And yet if he meet with a Companion that holds but up his
Finger, he follows him as a Fool to the Stocks, and as an Ox to the
Slaughterhouse, having no Power to withstand the Temptation; but in he goes
with him to the Tipling-house, not considering that the Chambers are the
Chambers of Death, and the Guests, the Guests of Death; and there he continues
as one bewitched, or conjured in a Spell; out of which he returns not, till he
has emptied his Purse of Money, his Head of Reason, and his Heart of all his
former seeming Grace. There his Eyes behold the strange Woman, his Heart
speaks perverse things, becoming heartless, as one (says Solomon) in the
heart of the Sea, resolving to continue, and return to his Vomit, whatsoever it
cost him, to make it his daily work. I was sick, and knew it not: I was struck,
and felt it not; when I awake, I will seek it still. And why indeed (without a
Miracle) should any expect that one stung with this Viper should shake it off,
and ever recover of it again. Yea, so far are they from recovering themselves,
that they infect and become contagious and pestilent to all they come near. The
Dragon infusing his Venom, and assimulating his Elses to himself in no sin so
much as in this, that it becomes as good as Meat and Drink to them, to spend
their Wit and Money to compass Alehouse after Alehouse; yea, Town after Town,
to transform others with their Circean-Cups, till they have made them Bruits
and Swine, worse then themselves. The Adulterer and Usurer desire to enjoy
their Sin alone; but the chiefest pastime of a Drunkard is to heat and overcome
others with Wine, that he may discover their nakedness and glory in their foyl
and folly. In a word, excess of Wine, and the spirit of Grace are opposites;
the former expels the latter out of the Heart, as smoke does Bees out of the
Hive: and makes the man a mere Slave and Prey to Satan and his snares; when, by
this Poison, he has put out his Eyes, and spoiled him of his strength, he
uses him as the Philistines did Sampson, leads him in a string whither he
pleases, like a very drudge, scorn, and make-sport to himself and his Imps;
makes him grind in the Mill of all kind of Sins and Vices. And that I take to
be the reason why Drunkenness is not specially prohibited in any one of the Ten
Commandments, because it is not the single breach of any one, but in effect the
violation of all and every one: It is no one sin, but all sins, because it is
the Inlet and Sluice to all other Sins. The Devil having moistened, and steeped
him in his Liquor; shapes him like soft Clay, into what mould he pleases:
having shaken off his Rudder and Pilot, dashes his Soul upon what Rocks, Sands,
and Syrts he lists, and that with as much ease as a man may push down his
Body with the least thrust of his Hand or Finger. He that in his right wits,
and sober mood, seems religious, modest, chaste, courteous, secret; in his
drunken fits, swears, blasphemes, rages, strikes, talks filthily, blabs all
secrets, commits folly, knows no difference of Persons or Sexes, becomes wholly
at Satan's command, as a dead Organ, to be enacted at his will and pleasure. Oh
that God would be pleased to open the Eyes of some Drunkard, to see what a
Dunghill and Carrion his Soul becomes, and how loathsome effects follow upon
thy spiritual death, and sting of this Cockatrice, which is the Fountain of the
other two following, temporal and eternal death!

And well may it be, that some such as are altogether fearless and careless of
the former death, will yet tremble, and be moved with that which I shall in the
second place tell them. Among all other sins that are, none brings forth bodily
death so frequently as this, none so ordinarily slays in the act of sin as
this. And what can be more horrible then to die in the act of a Sin, without
the act of Repentance? I pronounce no definitive Sentence of Damnation upon any
particular so dying, but what door of hope or comfort is left to their Friends
behind of their Salvation? The Whore-Master he hopes to have a space and time
to repent in age, though sometimes it pleases God that death strikes Cozbi and
Zimri napping, as the Devil is said to slay one of the Popes in the instant of
his Adultery, and carry him quick to Hell. The Swearer and Blasphemer has
commonly space, though seldom Grace, to repent and amend: and some rare
examples stories afford, of some taken with Oaths and Blasphemies in their
mouths. The Thief and Oppossor may live, and repent, and make restitution, as
Zacheus: though I have seen one slain right-out with the Timber he stole half
an hour before; and heard of one that having stolen a Sheep, and laying it down
upon a stone to rest him, was grin'd and hanged with the struggling of it about
his Neck. But these are extraordinary and rare cases: God sometimes practicing
Marshal-Law, and doing present execution, left Fools shall say in their Hearts,
There were no God, or Judgment: but conniving and deferring the most, that men
might expect a Judge coming, and a solemn day of Judgment to come. But this sin
of Drunkenness is so odious to him, that he makes it self Justice, Judge and
Executioner, slaying the ungodly with misfortune, bringing them to untimely
shameful ends, in brutish and beastial manner, often in their own vomit and
ordure; sending them sottish, sleeping, and senseless to Hell, not leaving them
either time, or reason, or grace to repent, and cry so much as Lord have mercy
upon us. Were there (as in some Cities of Italy) an Office kept, or a Record
and Register by every Coroner in Shires and Counties, of such dismal events
which God has avenged this sin withal, what a Volume would it have made
within these few years in this our Nation? How terrible a Threater of God's
Judgments against Drunkards, such as might make their Hearts to bleed and
relent, if not their Ears to tingle, to hear of a taste of some few such noted
and remarkable Examples of God's Justice, as have come within the compass of
mine own notice, and certain knowledge; I think I should offend to conceal them
from the World, whom they may happily keep from being the like to others,
themselves.

An Ale-wife in Kesgrave, near to Ipswich, who would needs force three
Serving-men (that had been drinking in her House, and were taking their leaves)
to stay and drink the three Outs first, that is, Wit out of the Head, Money out
of the Purse, Ale out of the Pot; as she was coming toward them with the Pot
in her hand, was suddenly taken speechless and sick, her Tongue swollen in her
mouth, never recovered speech, the third day after died. This Sir Anthony
Felton, the next Gentleman and Justice, with diverse others Eve-witnesses of her
in Sickness related to me; whereupon I went to the House with two or three
Witnesses, and inquired the truth of it.

Two Servants of a Brewer in Ipswich, drinking for a rumpe of a Turkey,
struggling in their drink for it, fell into a scading Caldron backwards: whereof
the one died presently, the other lingringly and painfully since my coming to
Ipswich.

Anno 1619. A Miller in Bromeswell, coming home drunk from Woodbridge (as he
often did) would needs go and swim in the Milpond: his Wife and Servants knowing
he could not swim, dissuaded him, once by entreaty got him out of the water,
but in he would needs go again, and there was drowned: I was at the house to
inquire of this, and found it to be true.

In Barnewell, near to Cambridge, one at the Sign of the Plough, a lusty young
man, with two of his Neighbors, and one Woman in their Company, agreed to
drink a Barrel of strong Beer; they drank up the Vessel, three of them dyed
within twenty four hours, the fourth hardly escaped after great sickness. This
I have under a Justice of Peace his Hand near dwelling, besides the common same.

A Butcher in Hastingfield hearing the Minister inveigh against Drunkenness,
being at his Cups in the Alehouse, fell a jesting and scoffing at the Minister
and his Sermons: And as he was drinking, the Drink, or something in the Cup,
quackled him, stuck so in his Throat, that he could get it neither up nor down,
but strangled him presently.

At Tillingham in Dengy Hundred in Essex, three young men meeting to drink
Strong waters, fell by degrees to half pints: One fell dead in the Room, and
the other prevented by Company coming in, escaped not without much sickness.

At Bungey in Norfolk, three coming out of an Alehouse in a very dark Evening,
swore, they thought it was not darker in Hell it self: One of them fell off the
Bridge into the water, and was drowned; the second fell off his Horse, the
third sleeping on the Ground by the Rivers-side, was frozen to death: This have
I often heard, but have no certain ground for the truth of it it.

A Bailiff of Hadly, upon the Lord's Day, being drunk at Melford, would needs
get upon his Mare, to ride through the Street, affirming (as the Report goes)
That his Mare would carry him to the Devil; His Mare casts him off, and broke
his Neck instantly. Reported by sundry sufficient Witnesses.

Company drinking in an Alehouse at Harwith in the night, over against one
Master Russels, and by him out of his Window once or twice willed to depart; at
length he came down, and took one of them, and made as if he would carry him to
Prison, who drawing his Knife, fled from him, and was three days after taken
out of the Sea with the Knife in his hand. Related to me by Master Russel
himself, Mayor of the Town.

At Tenby in Pembrokeshire, a Drunkard being exceeding drunk, broke himself all
to pieces off an high and steep Rock, in a most fearful manner; and yet the
occasion and circumstances of his fall were so ridiculous, as I think not fit
to relate, lest, in so serious a Judgment, I should move laughter to the Reader.

A Glasier in Chancery Lane in London, noted formerly for Profession, fell to a
common course of drinking, whereof being often by his Wife and many Christian
friends admonished, yet presuming much of God's mercy to himself, continued
therein, till, upon a time, having surcharged his Stomach with drink, he fell a
vomiting, broke a Vein, lay two days in extreme pain of Body, and distress of
Mind, till in the end recovering a little comfort, he died: Both these Examples
related to me by a Gentleman of worth upon his own knowledge.

Four sundry instances of Drunkards wallowing and tumbling in their drink,
slain by Carts; I forbear to mention, because such examples are so common and
ordinary.

A Yeoman's Son in Northamptonshire, who being drunk at Wellingborough on a
Market Day, would needs ride his Horse in a bravery over the plowed-lands, fell
from his Horse, and brake his Neck: Reported to me by a Kinsman of his own.

A Knight notoriously given to Drunkenness, carrying sometime Payls of drink
into the open Field, to make people drunk withal; being upon a time drinking
with Company, a woman comes in, delivering him a Ring with this Posie, Drink
and die; saying to him, This is for you; which he took and wore, and within a
week after came to his end by drinking: Reported by sundry, and justified by a
Minister dwelling within a mile of the place.

Two Examples have I known of Children that murdered their own Mothers in
drink; and one notorious Drunkard that attempted to kill his Father; of which
being hindered, he fired his Barn, and was afterward executed: one of these
formerly in Print.

At a Tavern in Breadstreet in London, certain Gentlemen drinking Healths to
their Lords, on whom they had dependence; one desperate Wretch steps to the
Tables end, lays hold on a pottle-pot full of Canary-sack, swears a deep Oath;
What will none here drink a health to my noble Lord and Master? and so setting
the pottlepot to his mouth, drinks it off to the bottom; was not able to rise
up, or to speak when he had done, but fell into a deep snoaring sleep, and
being removed, laid aside, and covered by one of the Servants of the House,
attending the time of the drinking, was within the space of two hours
irrecoverably dead: Witnessed at the time of the Printing hereof by the same
Servant that stood by him in the Act, and helped to remove him.

In Dengy Hundred, near Mauldon, about the beginning of his Majesty's Reign,
there fell out an extraordinary Judgment upon five or six that plotted a solemn
drinking at one of their Houses, laid in Beer for the once, drunk healths in a
strange manner, and died thereof within a few weeks, some sooner, and some
later: witnessed to me by one that was with one of them on his deathbed, to
demand a Debt, and often spoken of by Master Heydon, late Preacher of Mauldon,
in the hearing of many: The particular circumstances were exceeding remarkable,
but having not sufficient proof for the particulars, I will not report them.

One of Aylesham in Norfolk, a notorious Drunkard, drowned in a shallow Brook
of water, with his Horse by him.

Whilst this was at the Press, a man Eighty five years old, or thereabout, in
Suffolk, overtaken with Wine, (though never in all his life before, as he
himself said a little before his fall, seeming to bewail his present condition,
and others that knew him so say of him) yet going down a pair of stairs
(against the persuasion of a woman sitting by him in his Chamber) fell, and was
so dangerously hurt, as he died soon after, not being able to speak from the
time of his fall to his death.

The Names of the Parties thus punished, I forbear for the Kindreds sake yet
living.

If conscionable Ministers of all places of the Land would give notice of such
Judgments, as come within the compass of their certain knowledge, it might be a
great means to suppress this Sin, which reigns every where to the scandal of
our Nation, and high displeasure of Almighty God.

These may suffice for a taste of God's Judgments: Easy were it to abound in
sundry particular Casualties, and fearful Examples of this nature. Drunkard,
that which has befaln any one of these, may befall thee, if thou will dally
with this Cockatrice; what ever leagues thou make with Death, and
dispensations thou give thy self from the like. Some of these were young,
some were rich, some thought themselves as wise thou; none of them ever looked
for such ignominious ends, more then thou, who ever thou art: if thou hate
such ends, God give thee Grace to decline such courses.

If thou beeft yet insensate with Wine, void of Wit and Fear, I know not what
further to mind thee of, but of that third, and worst sting of all the rest,
which will ever be gnawing, and never dying: which if thou will not fear here;
sure thou art to feel there, when the Red Dragon has gotten thee into his Den,
and shall fill thy Soul with the gall of Scorpions, where thou shall yell and
howl for a drop of water to cool thy Tongue withal, and shall be denied so
small a refreshing, and have no other liquor to allay thy thirst, but that
which the lake of Brimstone shall afford thee. And that worthily, for that thou
would incur the wrath of the Lamb for so base and sordid a sin as
Drunkenness, of which thou may think as venially and slightly as thou will.
1 Cor. 6.10.
But Paul that knew the danger of it, gives thee fair warning, and bids thee
not deceive thy self, expressly and by name mentioning it among the mortal sins,
excluding from the Kingdom of Heaven. Esaias 5.14.
And the Prophet Esaias tells thee, That for it Hell has enlarged it self,
opened its mouth wide, and without measure; and therefore shall the multitude
and their pomp, and the jollyest among them descend into it. Consider this, you
that are strong to pour in drink, that love to drink sorrow and care away: And
be you well assured, that there you shall drink enough for all, having for
every drop of your former Bousings, Vials, yea, whole Seas of God's Wrath,
never to be exhaust.

Now then I appeal from your selves in drink, to your selves in your sober
fits. Reason a little the case, and tell me calmly, would you for your own, or
any man's pleasure, to gratify Friend or Companion, if you knew there had been
a Toad in the wine-pot (as twice I have known happened to the death of
Drinkers) or did you think that some Caesar Borgia, or Brasutus had tempered
the Cup; or did you see but a Spider in the Glass, would you, or durst you
carouse it off? And are you so simple to fear the Poison that can kill the
Body, and not that which kills the Soul and Body ever; yea, for ever and
ever, and if it were possible for more then for ever, for evermore? Oh thou
vain Fellow, what tellest thou me of friendship, or good fellowship, will thou
account him thy Friend, or good Fellow, that draws thee into his company, that
he may poison thee? and never thinks he has given thee right entertainment, or
showed thee kindness enough, till he has killed thy Soul with his kindness,
and with Beer made thy Body a Carcass fit for the Biere, a laughing and
loathing-stock, not to Boys and Girls alone, but to Men and Angels. Why rather
say thou not to such, What have I to do with you, ye Sons of Belial, ye
poysonful Generation of Vipers, that hunt for the precious life of a man? Oh
but there are few good Wits, or great Spirits now adays, but will Pot it a
little for company. What hear I? Oh base and low-spirited times, if that were
true! If we were fallen into such Lees of Time foretold of by Seneca, in which
all were so drowned in the dregs of Vices, that it should be virtue and honor
to bear most drink. But thanks be to God, who has reserved many thousands of
men, and without all comparison more witty and valorous then such Pot-wits, and
Spirits of the Buttery, who never bared their knees to drink health, nor ever
needed to whet their Wits with Wine; or arm their courage with Pot-harness. And
if it were so, yet if no such Wits or Spirits shall ever enter into Heaven
without Repentance, let my Spirit never come and enter into their Paradise;
ever abhor to partake of their brutish pleasures, lest I partake of their
endless woes. If young Cyrus could refuse to drink Wine, and tell Aftyages, He
thought it to be Poison; for he saw it metamorphose men into Beasts and
Carcases: what would he have said, if he had known that which we may know, that
the wine of Drunkards is the wine of Sodom and Gomorrah; Deuteronomy. 32.32.
their grapes, the grapes of gall; their clusters, the clusters of bitterness,
the Juice of Dragons, and the venom of Asps. In which words, Moses is a full
Commentary upon Solomon, largely expressing that he speaks here more briefly,
It stings like the Serpent, and bites like the Cockatrice: To the which I may
not unfitly add that of Paul's, and think I ought to write of such with more
passion and compassion, then he did of the Christians in his time, which sure
were not such Monsters as ours in the shapes of Christians, Whose God is their
Belly, (whom they serve with Drink Offerings) whose glory is their shame, and
whose end is damnation.

What then, take we pleasure in thundering out Hell against Drunkards? is there
nothing but death and damnation to Drunkards? Nothing else to them, so
continuing, so dying. But what is there no help nor hope, no Amulet, Antidote
or Triacle, are there no Presidents found of Recovery? Ambrose, I temember,
tells of one, that having been a spectacle of Drunkenness, proved after his
Conversion a pattern of sobriety. And I my self must confess, that one have I
known yet living, who having drunk out his bodily Eyes, had his spiritual Eyes
opened, proved diligent in hearing and practicing. Though the Pit be deep, miry
and narrow, like that Dungeon into which Jeremy was put; yet if it please God
to let down the cords of his Divine mercy, and cause the Party to lay hold
thereon, it is possible they may escape the snares of death. There is even for
the most debauched Drunkard that ever was, a sovereign Medicine, a rich
Triacle, of force enough to cure and recover his Disease, to obtain his Pardon,
and to furnish him with strength to overcome this deadly Poison, fatal to the
most: And though we may well say of it, as men out of experience do of Quartane
Agues, that it is the disgrace of all moral Physic, of all Reproofs, Counsels
and Admonitions; yet is there a Salve for this Sore; there came one from Heaven
that trod the Winepress of his Fathers fierceness, drunk of a Cup tempered
with the bitterness of God's Wrath, and the Devils Malice, that he might heal
even such as have drunk deepest of the sweet Cup of Sin. And let all such know,
that in all the former discovery of this Poison, I have only aimed to cause
them feel their sting, and that they might with earnest Eyes behold the Brazen
Serpent, and seriously repair to him for Mercy and Grace, who is perfectly able
to eject even this kind, which so rarely and hardly is thrown out where once he
gets possession. This Seed of the Woman is able to bruise this Serpents head.
Oh that they would listen to the gracious offers of Christ! if once there be
wrought in thy Soul a spiritual thirst after mercy, as the thirsty Land has
after rain, a longing appetite after the water that comes out of the Rock,
after the Blood that was shed for thee; then let him that is athirst come, let
him drink of the water of life without any money; of which if thou have took
but one true and through draught, thou will never long after thy old puddle
waters of Sin any more. Easy will it be for thee after thou have tasted of the
Bread and Wine in thy Father's House, ever to loath the Husks and Swill thou
were wont to follow after with greediness. The Lord Christ will bring thee into
his Mothers House, cause thee to drink of his spiced Wine, of the new Wine of
the Pomegranate: Yea, he will bring thee into his Cellar, spread his Banner of
Love over thee, stay thee with flagons, fill thee with his love, till thou
be sick and overcome with the sweetness of his Consolations. In other Drink
there is excess, but here can be no danger. The Devil has his invitation,
Come, let us drink; and Christ has his inebriamini, Beye filled with the
Spirit. Here is a Fountain set open, and Proclamation made. And if it were
possible for the bruitishest Drunkard in the World to know who it is that
offers, and what kind of water he offers; he would ask, and God would give
it frankly without money; he should drink liberally, be satisfied, and out of
his Belly should sally Springs of the water of Life, quenching and
extinguishing all his inordinate longings ofter stolen water of Sin and Death.

All this while, little hope have I to work upon many Drunkards, especially by
a Sermon read (of less life and force in God's Ordinance, and in its own
nature, then preached,) my first drift is, to stir up the Spirits of Parents
and Masters, who in all Places complain of this evil, robbing them of good
Servants, and dutiful Children, by all care and industry to prevent it in their
Domestical Education, by carrying a watchful and restraining hand over them.
Parents, if you love either Soul or Body, thrift or piety, look to keep them
from this Infection. Lay all the bars of your authority, cautions, threats and
charges for the avoiding of this epidemical Pestilence. If any of them be
bitten of this Cockatrice, sleep not, rest not, till you have cured them of it;
if you love their Health, Husbandry, Grace, their present or future lives. Dead
are they while they live, if they live in this Sin. Mothers, lay about you as
Bathsheba, with all entreaties, What my Son, my Son of my loves and delights,
Wine is not for you, etc.

My next hope is, to arouse and awaken the vigilance of all faithful Pastors
and Teachers. I speak not to such Stars as this Dragon has swept down from
Heaven with its tail: for of such the Prophets, the Fathers of the Primitive,
yea, all Ages complain of. I hate and abhor to mention this abomination: to
alter the Proverb, As drunk as a Beggar, to a Gentleman is odious; but to a Man
of God, to an Angel, how harsh and hellish a sound it is in a Christians ears?
I speak therefore to sober Watchmen, Watch, and be sober, and labor to keep
your Charges sober and watchful, that they may be so found of him, that comes
like a Thief in the night. Two means have you of great virtue for the quelling
of this Serpent, zealous Preaching and Praying against it. It Is an old received
Antidote, that man's spittle, especially fasting spittle, is mortal to Serpents.
Saint Donatus is famous in story for spitting upon a Dragon, that kept an
Highway, and devoured many Passengers. This have I made good Observation of,
That where God has raised up zealous Preachers, in such Towns this Serpent
has no nestling, no stabling or denning. If this will not do, Augustine
enforces another, which I conceive God's and Man's Laws allow us upon the
reason he gives: If Paul (says he) forbid to eat with such our common Bread,
in our own private Houses, how much more the Lord's Body in Church Assemblies:
If in our Times, this were strictly observed, the Serpent would soon languish
and vanish. In the time of an Epidemical Disease, such as the Sweating or
Neezing Sickness, a wise Physician would leave the study of all other Diseases,
to find out the Cure of the present raging Evil. If Chrysostom were now alive,
the bent of all his Homilies, or at least one part of them, should be spent to
cry drown Drunkenness, as he did swearing in Antioch: never desisting to
reprove it, till (if not the fear of God, yet) his imporunity made them weary
of the fin.

Such Anakims and Zanzummims, as the spiritual Sword will not work upon, I turn
them over to the Secular Arm, with a signification of the dangerous and
contagious spreading of this poison in the Veins and Bowels of the
Commonwealth. In the Church and Christ his name also, entreating them to carry
a more vigilant Eye over the Dens and Burrows of this Cockatrice, superfluous,
blind, and Clandestine Alehouses I mean, the very Pest-houses of the Nation?
which I could wish had all for their fign, a picture of some hideous Serpent,
or a pair of them, as the best Hieroglyphick of the genius of the place, to
warn Passengers to shun and avoid the danger of them. Who sees and knows not,
that some one needless Alehouse in a Countrey-Town, un does all the rest of
the Houses in it, eating up the thrift and fruit of their Labors; the ill
manner of sundry places, being there to meet in some one Night of the Week, and
spend what they they have gathered and spared all the days of the same before,
to the prejudice of their poor Wives and Children at home; and upon the Lords
day (after Evening Prayers) there to quench and drown all the good Lessons they
have heard that day at Church. If this go on, what shall become of us in time?
If woe be to single Drunkards, is not a National woe to be feared and expected
of a Nation overrun with Drunkenness? Had we no other Sin reigning but this
(which cannot reign alone) will not God justly spue us out of his mouth for
this alone? We read of whole Countries wasted, dispeopled by Serpents. Pliny
tells us of the Amyclae, Lycophron of Salamis; Herodotus of the Neuri, utterly
depopulate and made unhabitable by them. Verily, if these Cockatrices multiply
and get head amongst us a while longer, as they have of late begun, where snall
the people have sober Servants to till their Lands, or Children to hold and
enjoy them. They speak of drayning Fens; but if this Evil be not stopped, we
shall all shortly be drowned with it. I wish the Magistracy, Gentry, and
Yeomanry, would take it to serious consideration, how to deal with this
Serpent, before he grow too strong and fierce for them. It is past the egg
already, and much at that pass, of which Augustine complains of in his time,
that he scarce knew what remedy to advise, but thought it required the meeting
of a general Council. The best course I think of, is, if the great Persons
would first begin through Reformation in their own Families, banish the spirits
of their Butteries, abandon that foolish and vicious Custom, as Ambrose and
Basil calls it, of drinking Healths, and making that a Sacrifice to God for the
health of others, which is rather a Sacrifice to the Devil, and a bane of their
own. I remember well Sigismund the Emperor's grave Answer, wherein there
concurred excellent Wisdom and Wit (seldom meeting in one saying) which he gave
before the Council of Constance, to such as proposed a Reformation of the
Church to begin with the Franciseans and Minorites. You will never do any good
(says he) unless you begin with the Majorites first. Sure, till it be out of
fashion and grace in Gentlemen's Tables, Butteries and Cellars, hardly shall you
persuade the Countryman to lay it down, who, as in Fashions, so in Vices,
will ever be the Ape of the Gentry.

If this help not, I shall then conclude it to be such an Evil as is only by
Sovereign Power, and the King's Hand curable. And verily next under the word of
God, which is Omnipotent, how potent and wonder-working is the Word of a King?
when both meet as the Sun, and some good Star in a benign Conjunction; what
Enemy shall stand before the Sword of God and Gideon? what Vice so predominant
which these subdue not? If the Lion roar, what Beast of the Forest shall not
tremble and hide their head? have we not a noble experiment hereof yet fresh in
our memory, and worthy never to die, in the timely and speedy suppression of
that impudent abomination of Women's mannish habit, threatening the confusion of
Sexes, and ruin of Modesty? The same Royal Hand, and care the Church and
Commonwealth implores for the vanquishing of this Poison, no less pernicious,
more spreading and prevailing. Take us these little Foxes was wont to be the
suit of the Church, for they gnabble our Grapes, and hurt our tender Branches:
but now it is become more serious. Take us these Serpents, lest they destroy
our Vines, Vine-Dressers, Vineyards and all: This has ever been Royal Game.
How famous in the story of Diodorus Siculus, is the Royal munificence of
Ptolomy King of Egypt for provision of Nets, and maintenance of Huntsmen, for
the taking and destroying of Serpents, noxious and noisome to his Country. The
like of Philip in Aristotle, and of Attilius ReGulus in Aulus Gellius. The
Emblem mentioned at large by Plutarch, engraven on Hercules Shield; what is it
but a Symbol of the Divine honor due to Princes following their Herculean
labors, in subduing the like Hidraes, too mighty for any inferior person to
take in hand? It is their honor to tread upon Basilisks, and trample Dragons
under their Feet, Solomon thinks it not unworthy his Pen to discourse their
danger.

A royal and eloquent Oration is happily and worthily preserved in the large
Volume of ancient Writings, with this Title, Oration magnifici and pacifici
Edgari Regis habita ad Dunstanum Archiep. Episcopos, etc. The main scope
whereof is, to excite the Clergies care and devotion for the suppressing of
this Vice, for the common good. Undertakers of difficult Plots promise
themselves speed and effect, if once they interest the King, and make him
Party. And what more generally beneficial can be devised or proposed then this,
with more Honor and less Charge to be effected, if it shall please his Majesty
but to make trial of the strength of his Temporal and Spiritual Arms? For the
effecting of it, if this help not, what have we else remaining, but wishes and
prayers to cast out this kind withal. God help us. To him I commend the
success of these Labors, and the vanquishing of this Cockatrice.

TOBACCO BATTERED, AND THE PIPES SHATTERED (About their Ears, that id'ly
Idolize so base and barbarous a WEED: OR, At leastwise over-love so loathsome
Vanity.)
Collected out of the famous POEMS of Joshua Sylvester, Gent.
Whatever God created, first was good,
And good for man, while man uprightly stood:
But, falling Angels causing man to fall,
His foul Contagion con-corrupted all
His Fellow Creatures for his Sin accursed,
And for his sake transformed from the first;
Till God and man, man's Leprie to re-cure,
By Death killed Death, re-making all things pure.
But to the Pure, not to the still Profane,
Who Spider-like turns Blessing into Bane;
Usurping (right-less, thank-less, need-less) here,
In wanton, wilful, wastful, lustful cheer,
Earths plenteous Crop, which God has only given
Unto his own (Heirs both of Earth and Heaven)
Who only (rightly) may with Praise and Prayer,
Enjoy the increase of Earth, of Sea, of Air,
Fowl, Fish and Flesh, Gems, Metals, Cattle, Plants,
And namely (that which now no Angle wants)
Indian Tobacco, when due cause Requires,
Not the dry Dropsy of Fantastic Squires.
None therefore deem that I am now to learn,
(However dim I many things discern)
Reason and Season to distinguish fit,
The use of a thing, from the abuse of it;
Drinking, from Drunking, Saccharum cum Sacco,
And taking of, from taking all Tobacco.
Yet out of high Disdain and Indignation
Of that stern Tyrant's strangest Usurpation,
Once Demi-captive to his puffing pride,
(As millions are too-wilful foolifi'd)
Needs must I band against the needless use
Of Don Tobacco, and his foul abuse;
Which (though in Inde it be an Herb indeed)
In Europe is no better then a Weed,
Which to their Idols Pagans Sacrifice,
And Christians (here) do well-nigh Idolize:
Which taking, Heathens to the Devils bow
Their Bodies, Christians even their Souls do vow;
Yet the Heathen have, with the ill, some good withal,
Since their con-native, it is non-natural:
But see the nature of abounding sin,
Which more abounding, punishment does win;
For knowing Servants wilful Arrogance,
Then silly Strangers savage Ignorance,
For what to them is Meat, and Med'cinable,
Is turned tous a Plague intolerable.
Two smoky Engines, in this latter Age,
(Satan's short Circuit; the more sharp his Rage)
Have been invented by too-wanton wit,
Or rather vented from the infernal Pit;
Guns and Tobacco-Pipes, with fire and smoke,
(At least) a third part of Mankind to choke,
(Which, happily, the Apocalypse fold-told)
Yet of the two, we may (think I) be bold
In some respect, to think the last the worst,
(However, both in their effects accursed,)
For Guns shoot from-ward, only at their foen,
Tobacco-Pipes home-ward, into their own,
(When for the touchhole firing the wrong end
Into our selves the Poisons force we send;)
Those in the Field, in brave and hostile manner,
These, cowardly, under a covert banner;
Those with defiance, in a threatful Terror,
These with affiance, in a wilful Error,
Those, (though loud-roaring, goaring-deep) quick-ridding;
These, stilly stealing, longer Languors breeding,
Those, full of pain (perhaps) and fell despite,
These with false pleasure, and a seem-delight,
(As Cats with Mice, Spiders with Flies) full rife,
Pipe-Playing, dallying and deluding life.
Who would not wonder in these sunny-days,
(So bright illightned with the Gofpel's Rays)
Whence so much smoke and deadly vapors come,
To dim and dam so much of Christendom;
But we must ponder too, these days are those,
Wherein the Devil was to be let lose,
And yawning broad-gate of that black abyss
To be set open, whose bottom boundless is,
That Satan, destined evermore to dwell
In smoky Furnace of that Darksom Cell,
In smoke and darkness might inure and train
His own deer minions, while they here remain;
As Roguing Gypsies tan their little Elves,
To make them tan'd and ugly like themselves.
Then in despite, who ever dare say nay,
Tobacconists keep on your course; you may,
If you continue in your smoky ure,
The better far Hells sulphury Smoke endure;
And herein (as in all your other evil)
Grow nearer still, and liker to the Devil,
Save that the Devil (if he could revoke)
Would fly from filthy, and unhealthy Smoke;
Wherein (cast out of Heaven for Hellish-pride)
Unwilling he, and forced, does abide;
Which herein worse than he (the worst of ill)
You long for, lust for, lie for, die for, still;
For as the Salamander lives in fire,
You live in smoke, and without smoke expire.
Should it be questioned (as right well it may)
Whether discovery of America,
That Newfound World, have yielded to our old
More hurt or good, till fuller answer should
Decide the doubt, and quite determine it,
Thus for the present might we answer fit;
That, thereby we have (rightly understood)
Both given and taken greater hurt then good:
And that on both sides, both for Christians,
It had been better, and for Indians,
That only good men to their coast had come,
Or that the Evil had still staid at home;
For, what our People have brought thence to us,
Is like the headpiece of a Polypus,
Wherein is (quoted by sage Plutarch's quill)
A Pest'lence great good, and great Pest'lence ill.
We had from them, first to augment our Stocks,
Two grand Diseases, Scurvy and the Pocks;
Then two great Cordials (for a Counterpoize)
Gold and Tobacco; both which, many ways,
Have done more mischief, then the former twain;
And all together-brought more loss then gain.
But true it is, we had this trash of theirs,
Only in barter for our broken Wares;
Ours for the most part carried out but sin,
And, for the most part, brought but Vengeance in;
Their Freight was Sloth, Lust, Avarice and Drink,
(A burden able with the weight to sink
The hugest Carrak; yea, those hallowed Twelve
Spain's great Apostles-even to over-whelve)
They carried Sloth, and brought home scurvy skin;
They carried Lust, and brought home Pox within:
They carried Avarice, and Gold they got;
They carried Bacchus, and Tobacco brought:
Alas poor Indians! That, but English none,
Could put them down in their own Trade alone!
That none but English (more alas! more strange!)
Could justify their pitiful exchange.
Of all the Plants that Tellus Bosom yields,
In Groves, Glades, Gardens, Marshes, Mountains, Fields:
None so pernicious to man's life is known,
As is Tobacco, saving Hemp alone,
Betwixt which two there seems great sympathy,
To ruinate poor Adam's Progeny;
For in them both a strangling virtue note,
And both of them do work upon the Throat;
The one, within it; and without the other;
And the one prepares work unto the the other:
For there do meet (I mean at Gaile and Gallows)
More of these beastly, base Tobacco-Fellows,
Then else to any profane Haunt do use,
(Excepting still the Playhouse and the Stews)
Since it is their common lot (so double-choaked)
Just bacon-like to be hanged up and smoked;
A destiny as proper to befall
To moral Swine, as to Swine natural.
If there be any Herb in any place,
Most opposite to God's good Herb of Grace,
It Is doubtless this; and this does plainly prove it,
That, for the most, most graceless men do love it;
Or rather dote most on this withered Weed,
Themselves as withered, in all gracious deed:
It Is strange to see, (and unto me a wonder)
When the prodigious strange abuse we ponder
Of this unruly, rusty Vegetal,
From modern Symmists Jesu critical,
(Carping at us, and casting in our dish
Not Crimes, but Crumbs, as eating Flesh for Fish;)
W' hear in this case, no Conscience-cases holier,
But, like to like, the Devil with the Collier.
For a Tobacconist (I dare aver)
Is first of all a rank Idolater
As any of the Ignatian Hierachy;
Next as conformed to their foppery
Of burning daylight, and good Night at Noon,
Setting up Candles to enlight the Sun;
And last the Kingdom of new Babylon,
Stands in a dark and smoky Region,
So full of such variety of smokes,
That there-with-all, all Piety it choaks.
For there is first of all the smoke of Ignorance,
The smoke of Error, smoke of Arrogance,
The smoke of Merit super-er'gatory,
The smoke of Pardons, smoke of Purgatory,
The smoke of censing, smoke of thurifying
Of Images, of Satan's fury flying,
The smoke of Stews (from smoking thence they come,
As horrid hot, as torrid Sodom some)
Then smoke of Powder Treason, Pistol Knives,
To blow up Kingdoms, and blow out Kings Lives:
And lastly too, Tobacco's smoky mists,
Which (coming from Iberian Baalists)
No small addition of adustion fit,
Bring to the smoke of the unbottom'd Pit
Yerst opened, first (as opens St. John)
By their Abaddon and Apollyon.
But since they are contented to admire
What they dislike not, if they not desire;
(For, with good reason, may we ghess that they
Who swallow Camels, swallow Gnatlings may;)
It Is ground enough for us in this dispute,
Their Vanities thus obvious to refute
(Their Vanities, Mysterious mists of Rome,
Which have so long besmoked Christendom.)
And for the rest, it shall suffice to say,
Tobacconing is but a smoky Play;
Strong arguments against so weak a thing,
Were needless, or unsuitable, to bring;
In this behalf there needs no more be done,
Since of it self the same will vanish soon;
TO evaporate this smoke, it is enough,
But with a breath the same aside to puff.
Now, my first puff, shall but repel the ill savor
Of Place and Persons (of debaucht behavior)
Where it is most frequent; second, show I will,
How little good it does; third, how great ill:
It Is vented most in Taverns, Tipling-cotts,
To Ruffians, Roarers, Tipsy-tosty-pots,
Whose Custom is, between the Pipe and Pot,
(The One cold and moist, the other dry and hot;)
To skirmish so (like Sword-and-Dagger-fight,)
That it is not easy to determine right,
Which of their Weapons has the Conquest got
Over their Wits, the Pipe or else the Pot;
Yet it is apparent, and by proof express,
Both stab and wound the Brain with drunkenness;
For even the derivation of the name,
Seems to allude, and to include the same:
Tobacco, as To akcho, one would say,
To Bacchus (Cup-god) dedicated ay.
And for conclusion of this Point, observe
The places which to these abuses serve;
How-ever of themselves noisome enough,
Are much more loathsome with the stench and stuff,
Extracted from their Limbeckt Lips and Nose,
So that the Houses, common haunts of those,
Are liker Hell than Heaven, for Hell has smoke,
Impenitent Tobacconists to choke;
Though never dead, there shall they have their fill;
In Heaven is none, but Light and Glory still.
Next, multitudes them daily, hourly, drawn
In this black Sea of smoke, tossed up and down
In this vast Ocean, of such latitude,
That Europe only cannot it include;
But out it rushes, over-runs the whole,
And reaches well-nigh round, from Pole to Pole
Among the Moors, Turks, Tartars, Persians,
And other Ethnicks full of Ignorance
Of God and good; and, if we shall look home,
To view (and rue) the State of Christendom;
Upon this Point, we may this Riddle bring;
The Subject has more Subjects then the King:
For Don Tocacco has an ampler Reign,
Than Don Philippo, the great King of Spain,
(In whose Dominions, for the most it grows,)
Nay, shall I say (O horror to suppose!)
Heathenish Tobacco (almost every where)
In Christendom (Christ's outward Kingdom here)
Has more Disciples than Christ has, I fear,
More Suits, more Service (Bodies, Souls, and good)
Than Christ that bought us with his precious Blood:
O great Tobacco, greater then great Can,
Great Turk, great Tartar, or great Tamerlan!
With Vulturs Wings thou have (and swifter yet
Then an Hungarian Ague, English Sweat)
Through all degrees flown, far, nigh, up and down,
From Court to Cart, from Count to Country-Clown;
Not scorning Scullions, Cobblers, Colliers,
Jakes-farmers, Fiddlers, Ostlers, Oysterers,
Rogues, Gypsies, Players, Pandars, Punks, and all,
What common Scums in Common-Sewers fall;
For all as Vassals at thy beck are bent,
And breath by thee, as their new Element:
Which well may prove thy Monarchy the greater,
Yet prove not thee to be a whit the better;
But rather worse, for Hells wide-open road
Is easiest found, and by the most still trod,
Which, even the Heathen had the Light to know,
By Arguments, as many times they show.
Here may we also gather (for a need)
Whether Tobacco be a Herb or Weed;
And whether the excessive use be fit,
Or good or bad, by those that favor it;
Weeds, wild and wicked, mostly entertain it;
Herbs, wholesome Herbs, and holy minds disdain it.
If then Tobacconing be good, how is it,
That lewdest, loosest, basest, foolishest;
The most unthrifty, most intemperate,
Most vicious, most debaucht, most desperate,
Pursue it most: The wisest, and the best,
Abhor it, shun it, flee it as the Pest,
Or piercing poison of a Dracons whisk,
Or deadly eye-shot of a Basilisk
If Wisdom baulk it, must it not be folly?
If Virtue hate it, is it not unholy?
If men of worth, and minds right generous,
Discard it, scorn it, is it not scandalous?
And (to conclude) is it not, to the Devil,
Most pleasing, pleasing so (most) the most evil?
My second puff, is proof, how little good
This smoke has done (that ever hear I could:)
For first, there is none that takes Tobacco most,
Most usually, most earnestly, can boast,
That the excessive and continual use
Of this dry-suck-at ever did produce
Him any good, civil or natural,
Or moral good, or artificial;
Unless perhaps, they will allege, it draws
Away the ill, which still it self does cause;
Which course (methinks) I cannot liken better,
Then to a Userers kindness to his Debtor;
Who under show of lending, still subtracts
The Debtors own, and then his own exacts,
Till, at the last, he utterly confound him,
Or leave him worse, and weaker then he found him.
Next, if the Custom of Tobacconing
Yield the Users any good in any thing,
Either they have it, or they hope it pressed,
(By proof and practice, taking still the best:)
For, none but Fools will them to ought beslave,
Whence benefit they neither hope nor have.
Therefore yet farther (as a Questionist)
I must enquire of my Tobacconist,
Why if a Christian (as some sometimes seem)
Believing God, waiting all good from him;
And unto him all good again referring,
Why (to eschew the Ungodly's graceless erring)
Why pray they not not? why praise they not his name
For hoped good, and good had by this same?
As all men do, or ought to do for all,
The gifts and goods that from his goodness fall;
Is It not, because they neither hope nor have,
Good (hence) to thank God for, nor farther crave:
But as they had it from the Heathen first,
So heathenishly they use it still accursed;
And (as some jest of Jisters) this is more,
Ungodly meat, both after and before.
Lastly, if all delights of all Mankind
Be vanity, vexation of the Mind,
All under Sun, must not Tobacco be,
Of Vanities, the vainest Vanity?
If Solomon, the wisest earthly Prince
That ever was before, or has been since;
Knowing all Plants, and then perusing all,
From Cedar to the Hysop on the -- Wall;
In none of all professes, that -- he sound
A firm Content, or Consolation found:
Can we suppose, that any shallowing,
Can find much good in often Tobacconing?
My third and last Puff points at the great evil,
This noisome Vapor works (through wily Devil)
If we may judge; if knowledge may be had,
By their effects, how things be good or bad:
Doubtless, the effects of this pernicious Weed
Be many bad, scarce any good indeed;
Nor does a man scarce any good contain,
But of this Evil justly may complain;
As thereby made in every part the worse,
In Body, Soul, in Credit, and in Purse.
A Broadside AGAINST COFFEE: OR, THE Marriage of the Turk.
COFFEE, a kind of Turkish Renegade,
Has late a match with Christian water made;
At first between them happened a Demur,
Yet joined they were, but not without great stir;
For both so cold were, and so faintly meet,
The Turkish Hymen in his Turbant swet.
coffee was cold as Earth, Water as Thames,
And stood in need of recommending Flames;
For each of them steers a contrary course,
And of themselves they sue out a Divorce.
Coffee so brown as berry does appear,
Too swarthy for a Nymph so fair, so clear:
And yet his sails he did for England hoist,
Though cold and dry, to court the cold and moist;
If there be ought we can, as love admit;
It Is a hot love, and lasts but a fit.
For this indeed the cause is of their stay,
New castle's bowels warmer are than they.
The melting Nymph distills her self to do it,
Whilst the Slave Coffee must be beaten to it:
Incorporate him close as close may be,
Pause but a while, and he is none of he;
Which for a truth, and not a story tells,
No Faith is to be kept with Infidels.
Sure he suspects, and shuns her as a Whore,
And loves, and kills, like the Venetian Moor;
Bold Asian Brat! with speed our consines flee;
Water, though common, is too good for thee.
Sure Coffee's vexed he has the breeches lost,
For she is above, and he lies undermost;
What shall I add but this? (and sure it is right)
The Groom is heavy, 'cause the Bride is light.
This canting Coffe has his Crew inricht,
And both the Water and the Men bewitched.
A Coachman was the first (here) Coffee made,
And ever since the rest drive on the trade;
Me no good Engalash! and sure enough,
He played the Quack to salve his Stygian stuff;
Ver boon for de stomach, de Cough, de Ptisick,
And I believe him, for it looks like Physic.
Coffee a crust is charkt into a coal,
The smell and taste of the Mock China bowl;
Where huff and puff, they labor out their Lungs,
Lest Dives-like they should bewail their Tongues.
And yet they tell ye that it will not burn,
Though on the Jury Blisters you return:
Whose furious heat does make the water rise,
And still through the Alembicks of your eyes,
Dread and desire, ye fall to it snap by snap,
As hungry Dogs do scalding porrige lap.
But to cure Drunkards it has got great Fame;
Posset or Porrige, will it not do the same?
Confusion huddles all into one Scene,
Like Noah's Ark, the clean and the unclean.
But now, alas! the Drench has credit got,
And he is no Gentleman that drinks it not;
That such a Dwarf should rise to such a stature!
But Custom is but a remove from Nature.
A little Dish, and a large Coffee-house,
What is it, but a Mountain and a Mouse?
Men's humana novitatis avidissima.

I have heard it is good for one thing (and that falls out too often) when men
are so drunk with Wine, Beer or Ale, or Brandy, that they are unfit to manage
their Employment; then a Dish of hot Coffee is a present Remedy to settle their
Heads.

No doubt, but a Dish of Broth, or Beer, will work the same Cure, if it be
drank as hot.

This short Collection should more properly have taken place next to what was
collected out of the other Doctors, but it came not to my sight, till it was
too late: And because it agrees with what is mentioned in the first Epistle,
that it is a strange way of taking Tobacco, as Physic, just before, and
presently after Meals; I thought fit to put it in here. And if any are so wise
as to be convinced by what has been written, That immoderate smoking of
Tobacco is hurtful for them, they were best to leave it gradnally; for that is
most safe, for such as have been accustomed long to it; or else it is good to
chew the leaf in the mouth; or as some do, smoke a Pipe with other
Ingredients, as Rosemary, Bitony, or Mints: This Collection was taken out of
that Book of Dr. Everard's, Entitled, The Virtue of Tobacco.

YOung men especially must take great care how they suck in this smoke, for the
custom and too much use of it, brings their brains out of order, and makes
them to be over-hot, so that they lose their good temper, and are beyond the
bounds of their health, and that sacred anchor is lost irrecoverably. For the
nourishment of young men requires a gentle moisture, to strengthen them, and to
make their bodies grow to their just perfection. Especially for those that are
choleric, whose brains cannot endure excess of heat, for the native heat would
be oppressed by the accidental heat. See Gallen his Comment, in lib. de vict.
salub.

Also this smoke does vehemently move the Stomach to nauseat, and to vomit, (as
daily experience teaches us) namely, by cleaving to the inward parts, and so
offending the peculiar juyces contained in the Stomach, and the Mesentary; it
destroys their ordinary operations. For in thrusting forth the matter from the
Stomach it cannot be, but also something must be cast out, wherein the force of
nature resides; and also, because when nature is doing her office, she sends
the nourishment into the habit of the body, as to the circumference, but all
disturbing and purgative things draw the juyces and spirits to the center.
Wherefore nature is wonderfully tired with these contrary motions, for she can
endure nothing less then two contrary motions at the same time. Wherefore it is
a most bitter enemy to the Stomachs of very many men, especially if they use to
take it presently after Supper or Dinner. And in this respect it is mischievous
to the bodies of all sound men, according to Hippocrates his Rule. 2. Aphoris.
37. It is troublesome to purge those that are in good health. For frequent use
of purging Medicaments will soon make a man old; for the sorces are broken by
the resolving of the solid parts, by an Hypercatharsis of all nutrimental juice.

By these things mentioned, it is easy to collect, that the smoke of Tobacco
shortneth men's days. For being that our native heat is like to a flame, which
continually feeds upon natural moisture, as a Lamp lighted, drinks up the Oil
by its heat; it follows necessarily, that for want of food, life must needs fly
away quickly, when the proper subject of life is dissipated and consumed: for
with that moisture, the imbred heat fails also, and death succeeds.

You understand therefore (that are Tobacconists) that the sooty fumes of
Tobacco, wherein you are wallowing (as it were) in the deepest mire, are of
great force to shorten your days. Galen speaking of opening Medicaments,
asserts, that by the frequent use of them, the solid parts of the body are
dried, and that the blood grows gross and clotted, which being burned in the
Reins, breed the stone. The same thing may be truly maintained concerning
Tobacco, which many use too frequently, and more then any do use those kind of
opening Medicaments; for this is more hot and dry then they are, and therefore
is more forcible to hurt sound and well-tempered bodies. Take warning therefore
you that love Tobacco, that you do not exceed in using too much of it, and
enslave your selves to this fuliginous smoke, by hunting after it, and making a
god of it. The goods of the body, are beauty, strength, and sound health. The
most grave Author Plutarch, commending the last as the best of all, affirmed
most gravely and learnedly, That health is the most divine, and the most
excellent property of the body, and a most precious thing. There is nothing in
this World better; nothing more to be desired, and nothing can be found to be
more pleasant. Without this (as Hippocrates faith) there is no pleasure or
fruit of any other things. This is it, which in this life fills all perfection:
Without this no man could ever be said to be happy: This far exceeds the
greatest Honors, Treasures, and Riches.

tobacconist's arms in a Turkish coffee house

A POSTSCRIPT By way of APOLOGY.
Honest Reader,

THis intended Porch being so Impolished, and so rude a Draught, I have judged
it more fit to make a Backdoor, then a Fore: Neither durst I presume to set it
in the Forefront, for I count it but as an overplus Sheet; however it may
serve for wast Paper to wrap up the learned Collections, or else to light a
Pipe of Tobacco, and will make as good Smoke: It lies at thy mercy, to use or
to abuse as thou please.

For my part, I pretend to no great Learning, yet am a Lover of it, and a
well-wisher to it: Neither am I worthy to carry the Books after these learned
Authors, out of whose Works I have made this Collection; therefore I make this
humble Apologetical Postscript. I know for my labor of reviving this noble
Counterblast, etc. I can expect no better, but to be counterblasted by the
black and foul mouths of many Tobacconists, and common Tobacco-Smokers; for
endeavoring to pull down their great Diana, which they labor Demetrius like to
cry up, because of the much gain it brings them. If I meet with Reproaches and
Scorns, it is no more then I expected from them, and I value it not: Neither is
it any news or wonder; for we live in the last days, and as the Apostle Peter
foretold many hundred years since, in 2 Pet. 3.3. That in the last days
should come Scoffers, walking after their own lusts. To such King Solomon
propounds a, question, which they can hardly be able to answer, in Prove. 22.
How long ye simple Ones will ye love sumplicity? and ye Scorners delight in
scorning, and Fools hate Knowledge? There have been many such in all Age, of
the World, as it may easily be instanced.

Before I conclude, I thought it not amiss, or improper, to say something
briefly against excessive drinking of Healths, and Drunkenness, which calls to
remembrance, amongst other, of His Majesty's noble and gracious Acts, since his
Restuaration, wherein he has had merciful Respect to the Lives, Estates, Souls
and Bodies of his good Subjects, and therein gone beyond his Predecessors. I
shall but name to his perpetual Honor these three, viz. In the first place,
His Act of Oblivion, passing by all that was done against Him or his Father,
excepting only those that were his Royal Fathers Judges. In the next place, He
was pleased to publish a Proclamation to all His loving Subjects, against that
sinful Custom of drinking his Health, His Majesty wisely considering how apt
many would be to fall into that evil extreme, does in that Proclamation, rebuke
such as can express their Love him in no better way, then drinking His Health.
In the next place, I cannot but take notice, and mention, to His Majesty's
Renown, His late gracious Declaration, For Liberty and Indulgence to tender
Consciences, that could not in all things conform to the Ceremonies and
Discipline of the Church of England, by Law established: This by the way. But
now to speak a little more against drinking Healths, which is to our purpose in
hand.

There was many years since a Book Published, by Mr. William Prynne, against
drinking of Healths, Entitled, Healths Sickness, but not now to be had, or
seldom thought of; he shows the greatness of that Sin, and the dangerous
consequence of it both to the Souls and Bodies of Men. There is another large
Treatise published by Mr. Robert Young, Entitled, The Drunkard's Character:
Also a Sermon preached long since by Doctor Robert Harris, called The
Drunkard's Cup, out of Isaiah 5. from the 11. to the 18. verse. And a Sermon
published many years since, Preached at Paul's Cross, by Doctor Abraham Gibson,
Entitled, The Lands mourning for vain Swearing; out of these words, Because of
Oaths the Land mourns.

And now the Land may mourn, not only for vain Swearing, but for vain Drinking
of Healths and Drunkenness.

After His Majesty's Restoration, there was, I remember, a great Feast, at
which time there was a Health drank for His Majesty, and when it came to the
turn of an able learned grave Minister there present, he utterly disliked and
refused it: Answering, That he would pray for His Majesty's Heath. And if all
that are Wellwishers to his Majesty's Health, would obey his Proclamation
against that Vice, in leaving off drinking, either of the Kings Health, or any
others, and leave of swearing and profaning the Sabbath; and would constantly,
earnestly, and heartily pray for His Majesty's Health, according as the Apostle
St. Paul exhorts Timothy, 1 Timothy 2.3. That Supplication and Prayer be made for
Kings, and all that are in Authority; that we may lead a quiet and peaceable
life in all godliness and honesty. I say, then we should be in hopes to see
better Times, and better Trading: The generality cry out of their want of
Trading, and of the Sins of the Rulers; but our chief Work and Duty is to look
more narrowly at home, and to find out the Plague of our own Hearts. Who smites
upon his Thigh? who says, what have I done? We are apt to forget the late
dreadful Judgments of God; as that of the Destroying-Sword, the sad destroying
Pestilence, when from the 20th of December, 1664, to the 15th of December,
1665. there died of all Diseases 97396, and of the Plague 68596; and in one
week, which I find to be the greatest of all, was in September 19. 1665, there
died of the Plague in London and Liberties 7165, of all Diseases 8297 that one
week. Can London ever forget those sad and lamentable consuming Flames, that
brake forth the Second of September, 1666? The ruinous heaps on 373 Acres
within, and 63 Acres without the old Line, the ghastly walls of 89
Parish-Churches, and stately Houses and Halls, with the Royal Exchange, and as
it was computed Thirteen thousand and two hundred Houses, with a vast deal of
Goods, Household Stuff, and rich Commodities; and, I think, Booksellers may
easily remember the many Warehouses of good Books of all sorts, then turned to
Ashes, at St. Faiths Church, and in other places about the City.

There was a Book published by Mr. Thomas Brooks, Dedicated to Sir William
Turner Lord Mayor (who deserved much Love and Honor, for being so great a
Furtherer of building the City and Royal Exchange, that lay long in Ruins)
Entitled, London's Lamentations, being a serious Discourse of the late fiery
Dispensation, that turned our Renowned City into a ruinous Heap. In the second
part, or application of that Book, Page 36. is showed, That the burning of
London was a National Judgment, and that God in smiting London, did smite
England round: And what Sins bring desolating Judgments upon Persons and
Places? Intemperance and Drunkenness is one Sin, and that we are to see the
hand of the Lord in that dreadful Fire, and to take heed of those Sins that
bring the fiery Rod, with the several Lessons and Duties we are to learn by it.

We may easily see that the Lord will not suffer us to be forgetful of his
great Judgments, by the several fresh Remembrances he has given us, by sad
Fires in diverse places since, in and near the City. Not long after the dreadful
Fire, there was a Merchants great house, almost finished, in Mincing Lane,
burned and quite defaced; after that, two great Fires brake forth in Southwark
at several times and places: Another at the Savoy, which did much harm; Another
at the corner of St. Bartholomew Lane, a Herald Painter's House, Mr. Francis
Nowers himself, his Child and Nurse was burned. Another in White-Chappel, and
several persons burned there. Another sad Fire was in or near Thames street,
which burned to the ground a great Sugar-Baker's House, with many thousand
pounds worth of Sugar, belonging to several Partners; it began September the
Second, the Lord's Day, 1671. And now last Whit-Sunday morning, at St.
Katherines near Tower Hill, brake forth a very grievous lamentable Fire, which,
as it is Reported, consumed above one hundred Dwelling-houses, and diverse
Ships, and some people were burned and killed by it. After that, another great
Fire that consumed about a dozen Houses, and part of Sir Paul Pindar's house,
without Bishopsgate, in June, 1672. A few dayys after brake forth another Fire,
which burned several Houses in Crutched Friars. One at Camomile-street: At the
Swan at Holborn-Bridge: A Brick house in Grub-street.

We may do well to take that Counsel of our Savior to the impotent man that he
had cured, and had been at the Pool of Bothsaida, who had an Infirmity thirty
eight years, John 5.14. Christ bid him go and sin no more, least a worse thing
befall him; it was old Mr. Wheatlyes Text of Banbury, after it was burned: Read
the 26. of Leviticus, how greatly the Lord threatened the people of Israel, if
they were Disobedient to him; He threatens great Judgments, and to make their
Cities wast, and the Land desolate; and in the verses 18, 21, 24, 28. it is
four times threatened, That he will punish them seven times more for their
Iniquities. God has shot Three Arrows against us, and how easily can he shoot
a Fourth sore Arrow, that of the Famine, unless we turn from our Sins by true
Repentance. It is to be feared, that after all that has or can be said to
reclaim men from their evil Courses, and excesses in Drinking, that they will
be swayed by Custom, which is a second Nature; and it will be found as
difficult for them to be temperate in Smoking, and Drinking, and Feasting, as
it is for the Blackmore to change his Skin, or the Leopard his Spots. So that
they will rather say, as he that being advised by his Physician to leave of his
evil Courses, or else he would loose his Sight, answered, Tum valeat lumen
amicum, Then farewell sweet Light. To such it may be said, as Solomon says,
Rejoice O young man in thy Youth, walk in the sight of thine Eyes, and let thy
Heart cheer thee; but remember that for all these things God will bring thee to
Judgment.

We all know, That Sin is the forerunner of all Plagues and Calamities, that
ever came upon any People or Nation under Heaven; it is the Plague of Plagues:
What provoked God to drown the old World, but Sin? What caused God to rain down
Fire and Brimstone on Sodom and Gomorrah, but their Sins of Pride, Idleness,
and fullness of Bread? And whilst Abraham interceded for Sodom, had there been
but Ten righteous persons found amongst them, God would have spared them for
their sakes. Thus I have spoken against Sin in general, as that which draws
down Judgments upon our Heads: I will only lay a few Scriptures before you,
touching the Lord's anger against Sin, which he cannot endure to behold without
great indignation: For it is only Sin that makes a separation between God and
our Souls; and I desire the Reader to turn to them at his leisure, and to make
the best use and application of them, Hosea 4.1, 2, 3. Isaiah 22.12, 13, 14.
Isaiah 24.7, 8, 9. Genesis 12.10. Chap 26.1.42.5.43.1. Chap. 41.30.36.50.56.
57. Prove. 15.26.29.

That Seaman that being engaged in a Ship, and sees it in danger to sink or to
be cast away; is but an ill and unworthy Seaman that will not put to his
helping hand to save her. And are not all Englishmen engaged in the Ship of
the Kingdom, or Commonwealth of England? and is it not in a Storm, compassed
with Enemies without, and within molested and assaulted with the most dangerous
Enemies of all; over-laden with our grand Enemies, Sins of all sorts? Is it not
the part of an honest true Englishman to help to save this Ship, by lightening
its burden, and casting these bad Commodities overboard? I mean its Sins, that
by so doing, we may engage God, the Lord of Hosts on our side, and then, si
Deus nobiscum cuis contranos: Did but England's Sins weigh lighter then her
Enemies Sins, then we were more likely to be Victorious and Conquerors over all
our Foreign Enemies.

Does not England match any of her Enemies in Sins and Provocations, namely
Drunkenness? Does it come behind the Dutch, Dane, or Swede, which are counted
the highest Drinkers in the World, of the highest form, and so for swearing
most horrible Oaths, and scoffing at Religion and Piety.

Within ten days since I began this Collection or Postscript I was an Eye and
Ear-witness, That a swaggering Blade rapt out this Oath, God damn me, about a
trifle in a scoffing Frolic, saying, He had got a Presbyterian Band on he
thought. Another man on Whitson-Eve I saw so sadly drunk, he could neither go
nor stand, but sat down on a Door-stone, I asked him, Where he had been? He
would give no other Answer but this, That he was troubled with the Megromes. So
I and others about him left him, and know not what became of him: These two
were in the heart of the City, near the Exchange.

After I had seen King James his Counterblast against Tobacco, and taken a
liking to it: I did at the first intend only to get that printed alone, but
afterward meeting with these pertinent, suitable, and profitable Directions,
for the preservation of long, Life, both against Tobacco, and intemperate
drinking; Published in the Works of that learned Physician Doctor Maynwaring,
now living: I thought it not amiss to join them together, and likewise to add a
good old Sermon at the latter end, Preached, in or near the time of King James,
by a famous Learned Divine, Mr. Samuel Ward then Preacher of Ipswich, printed
1627. It is but brief, and the best I know of in print against the Sin of
Drunkenness and Health-drinking, wherein are discovered diverse sad Examples of
many that have been notorious Drinkers or Drunkards, called Woe to Drunkards,
that have killed themselves by drinking immoderately.

In the last place I shall but commend to the Reader a few good useful Books,
viz. Mr Thomas Brook's Londons Lamentations, also his Book called Precious
Remedies against Satan's Devices, and his Twenty two Sermons on Ephesians. 3.8. Of
the unsearchable Riches of Christ, His Cabinet of Jewels, His Closet Prayer,
and a profitable and very delightsome Book of good Counsel for all young
Persons, called His Apples of Gold for young Men and Women etc. Mr. Thomas
Watson's new Treatise, Entitled, The mischief of Sin, it brings a person low,
on Psalm. 106.43. Mr. Ralph Venning's Book, called Sin the Plague of Plagues, or
sinful Sin the worst of Evils, on Romans 7.13. These Books do set forth Sin in
its own proper colors; it is compared in Scripture to filthy Rags, and to a
menstruous Cloth; and I think it cannot be called by so bad a name as it is.
Also lately Published Mr. Robert Perrot's new Book called Englands Sole, and
Sovereign way of being saved. Mr. Calamie's Godly man's Ark, which I think is a
useful and seasonable Book these stormy Times: Now we are pursued by Enemies on
all sides, outward and inward, it is good to get into an Ark, or City of Refuge:
These are sold at the Three Bibles in Popes head Alley, where the best and
newest shorthand Books, and Books of Divinity are to be had: Also History,
Husbandry Astronomy, Mathematics, Arithmetic, Law, Sea, Physic, the best
Poetry, School Books, etc.

Five Books of the learned Doctor Maynwarings.

1. His Preservation of Health, and Prolongation of Life. 2. His Treatise Of
the Sourvy, showing, That Tobacco is a procuring Cause. 3. The rise and
progress of Physic Historically, Chromologically and Philosophically
illustrated, showing, The abuse of Medicines etc. 4. His Treatise Of
Consumptions, demonstrating their Nature and Cure. 5. The ancient and modern
Practice of Physic examined, stated and compared.
The true Elixir Proprietatis of Van Helmont, Paracelsus and Crollius, with a
Book of its use and virtue, highly commended by Mr. Lilly.

As for other Books of vain idle Romances, Lascivious and Vicious Poetry and
Drollery, which are worse then the Smoke of Tobacco, and more fit for the Fire
to make Smoke of, then for the Study; I wish the Lovers of them to take notice
of this one Passage about such, in Mr. Philip Goodwin's Mystery of Drunkenness,
printed for Francis Tyton; it is in Page 50. Satan sends out his Books as
Baits, by which many are cunningly caught, with the Venom of which so many are
poisoned.

FINIS.

