His Majesty's LETTER FROM St. GERMANS TO THE CONVENTION, IN ORDER TO Settle
these Kingdoms: That was Refused to be Opened.
MY LORDS,
WE think Our Selves Obliged in Conscience to do all We can to open Our Peoples
Eyes, that they may see the True Interest of the Nation in this Important
Conjuncture; and therefore do think fit to let you know, that finding We could
no longer stay with Safety, nor act with Freedom in what concerned Our People,
and that it was absolutely necessary for Us to retire; We left the Reasons of
Our withdrawing under Our own Hand, to be Communicated to you, and Our
Subjects in the following Terms.

HIS MAJESTY'S REASONS For Withdrawing Himself from ROCHESTER. Writ with His
own Hand, and Ordered to be Published.
THe World cannot wonder at my with drawing my Self now this Second time. I
might have expected somewhat better Usage after what I writ to the P. of Orange
by my Lord Feversham, and the Instructions I gave him; but instead of an
Answer, such as I might have hoped for, What was I not to expect after the
Usage I received by the making the said Earl a Prisoner, against the Practice
and Law of Nations; The sending his own Guards at Eleven at Night to take
Possession of the Posts at Whitehall, without advertizing me in the least
manner of it; The sending to me at One a Clock, after Midnight, when I was in
Bed, a kind of an Order by three Lords, to be gone out of mine own Palace,
before Twelve that same Morning? After all this, How could I hope to be safe,
so long as I was in the Power of one, who had not only done this to me, and
Invaded my Kingdoms without any just occasion given him for it, but that did by
his first Declaration lay the greatest Aspersion upon me that Malice could
invent, in that Clause of it which concerns my Son. I appeal to all that know
me, nay, even to himself, that in their Consciences, neither he nor they can
believe me in the least capable of so unnatural a Villainy, nor of so little
common sense, to be imposed on in a thing of such a nature as that. What had I
then to expect from one who by all Arts has taken such pains to make me appear
as black as Hell to my own People, as well as to all the World besides? What
effect that has had at Home all mankind has seen, by so general a defection
in my Army, as well as in the Nation amongst all sorts of People.

I was born Free, and desire to continue so; and tho I have ventured my Life
very frankly; on several Occasions, for the Good and Honor of my Country, and
am as free to do it again (and which I hope I shall yet do, as old as I am, to
redeem it from the Slavery it is like to fall under) yet I think it not
convenient to expose my self to be Secured, so as not to be at Liberty to
Effect it; and for that reason do withdraw, but so as to be within call
whenever the Nations Eyes shall be opened, so as to see how they have been
abused and imposed upon by the specious Pretenses of Religion and Property. I
hope it will please God to touch their Hearts, out of his infinite Mercy, and
to make them sensible of the ill Condition they are in, and bring them to such
a temper, that a Legal Parliament may be called; and that amongst other things
which may be necessary to be done, they will agree to Liberty of Conscience for
all Protestant Dissenters; and that those of my own Persuasion may be so far
considered, and have such a share of it, as they may live peaceably and
quietly, as Englishmen and Christians ought to do, and not to be obliged to
Transplant themselves, which would be very grievous, especially to such as love
their own Country; and I appeal to all, who are considering men, and have had
experience, whether any thing can make this Nation so great and flourishing as
Liberty of Conscience, Some of our Neighbors dread it.

I could add much more to confirm all I have said, but now is not the proper
time.

Rochester, December. 22. 1688.

BUt finding, That, not taken to be Ours, by some; and that the Prince of
Orange and his Adherants did maliciously Suppress it, We thought fit sometime
after, to renew the same; and likewise to Write to such of your number, as were
of Our Privy Council, in the Terms following.

HIS MAJESTY'S LETTER TO THE Lords and others of His Privy Council.
JAMES R.

MY LORDS, When We saw that it was no longer safe for Us to remain within Our
Kingdom of England, and that thereupon We had taken Our Resolutions to withdraw
for some time; We left to be communicated to you and to all Our Subjects, the
Reasons of Our withdrawing: And were likewise resolved at the same time to
leave such Orders behind Us to you of Our Privy Council, as might best suit
with the present state of Affairs: But that being altogether unsafe for Us at
that time; We now think fit to let you know, that though it has been Our constant
Care since Our first Accession to the Crown, to Govern Our People with that
Justice and Moderation, as to give, if possible, no occasion of Complaint; yet
more particularly upon the late Invasion, seeing how the Design was laid; and
fearing that Our People, who could not be destroyed but by themselves, might by
little imaginary Grievances, be cheated into a certain Ruin: To prevent so
great Mischief, and to take away not only all just Causes, but even pretenses
of Discontent; We freely, and of Our Own Accord, redressed all those things
that were set forth as the Causes of that Invasion: And that We might be
informed by the Council and Advice of Our Subjects themselves, which way We
might give them a further and full satisfaction, We resolved to meet them in a
Free Parliament: And in order to it, We first laid the Foundation of such a
Free Parliament, in restoring the City of London and the rest of the
Corporations to their Ancient Charters and Privileges; and afterward actually
appointed the Writs to be issued out for the Parliaments Meeting on the 15th.
of January: But the Prince of Orange seeing all the ends of his Declaration
answered, the People beginning to be undeceived, and returning apace to their
Ancient Duty and Allegiance; and well foreseeing, that if the Parliament
should meet at the time appointed, such a Settlement in all probability would
be made, both in Church and State, as would totally defeat his Ambitious and
unjust Designs, resolved by all means possible to prevent the meeting of the
Parliament: And to do this the most effectual way, he thought fit to lay a
restaint on Our Royal Person; for as it were absurd to call that a Free
Parliament, where there is any Force on either of the Houses, so much less can
that Parliament be said to act Freely, where the Sovereign, by whose Authority
they Meet and Sit, and from whose Royal Assent all their Acts receive their
Life and Sanction, is under actual Confinement. The hurring of Us under a Guard
from Our City of London, whose returning Loyalty We could no longer Trust, and
the other Indignities We suffered in the Person of the Earl of Feversham, when
sent to him by Us; and in that Barbarous Confinement of Our Own Person, We
shall not here repeat, because they are We doubt not, by this time very well
known; and may, We hope, if enough considered and reflected upon; together with
his other Violations and Breaches of the Laws and Liberties of England, which
by this Invasion he pretended to restore, be sufficient to open the eyes of all
Our Subjects, and let them plainly see what every one of them may expect, and
what Treatment they shall find from him, if at any time it may serve his
purpose, from whose hands a Sovereign Prince, an Uncle, and a Father could meet
with no better Entertainment. However the sense of these Indignities, and the
just apprehension of further Attempts against Our Person, by them who already
endeavored to murder Our Reputation by Infamous Calumnies (as if We had been
capable of supposing a Prince of Wales) which was incomparably more Injurous,
than the Destroying of our Person It Self; together with a Serious Reflection
on a Saying of Our Royal Father of Blessed Memory, when He was in the like
Circumstances, That there is little distance between the Prisons and the Graves
of Princes (which afterward proved too true in His Case) could not but
persuade Us to make use of that, which the Law of Nature gives to the meanest
of Our Subjects, of freeing Our Selves by all means possible, from that unjust
Confinement and Restraint. And this We did not more for the Security of Our Own
Person, than that thereby We might be in a better Capacity of transacting and
providing for every thing that may contribute to the Peace and Settlement of
Our Kingdoms: For as on the one hand, no change of Fortune shall make Us forget
Our Selves, so far as to Condescend to any thing, unbecoming that High and
Royal Station, in which God Almighty by Right of Succession has placed Us: So
on the other hand, neither the Provocation or Ingratitude of Our Own Subjects,
nor any other Consideration whatsoever, shall ever prevail with Us to make the
least step contrary to the True Interest of the English Nation; which we ever
did, and ever must look upon as Our Own. OUR WILL and Pleasure therefore is,
That you of Our Privy Council, take the most effectual Care to make these our
Gracious Intentions known to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in and about Our
Cities of London and Westminster, to the Lord Mayor and Commons of Our City fo
London, and to all Our Subjects in general; And to assure them, that We desire
nothing more, than to return and hold a Free Parliament, wherein We may have
the best opportunity of undeceiving Our People, and showing the Sincerity of
those Protestations We have often made of the preserving the Liberties and
Properties of Our Subjects and the Protestant Religion; more especially the
Church of England as by Law Established, with such Indulgence for those that
Dissent from Her, as We have always thought Our Selves in Justice and Care of
the general Welfare of Our People, bound to procure for them. And in the mean
time You of Our Privy Council, (who can Judge better by being upon the place)
are to send Us your Advice, what is fit to be done by Us toward Our Returning,
and the Accomplishing those Good Ends. And We do require you in Our Name, and
by Our Authority, to endeavor so to Suppress all Tumults and Disorders, that
the Nation in general, and every one of Our Subjects in particular, may not
receive the least prejudice from the present Distractions that is possible. So
not doubting of your Dutiful Obedience to these Our Royal Commands,

We bid you Heartily Farewell. Given at St. Germans en Lay the 4/14 January
1688/9. And of Our Reign the Fourth Year.
Directed thus to the Lords, and Others of Our Privy Council of Our Kingdom of
England.

ALl which, We sent with a Servant of Our own to be delivered, as it was
Directed; but as yet We have no Account of it.

We likewise Directed Copies to several of you, the Peers of Our Realm;
believing that none Durst take upon them to Intercept, or open, your Letters;
but of these likewise, We have no Account.

But We cannot wonder that all Arts are used to hinder you from knowing Our
Sentiments, since the Prince of Orange, rather chose, against all Law, to
Imprison the Earl of Feversham, and to drive Us away from Our Palace; than to
receive Our Invitation of coming to Us, or Hearing what We had to propose to
Him; well knowing, that what We had to offer, Would Content all Reasonable Men;
and was, what he Durst not Trust you with the Knowledge of.

We think fit now to let you know, that whatever Crimes shall be Committed, or
whose Posterity soever shall come to Suffer for those Crimes, We are resolved
to be Innocent.

And therefore do Declare to you, that We are Ready to Return, (when Safely We
can) and to Redress all the Disorders in Our Kingdoms in a Free Parliament,
Called according to Law, and held without Constraint: More particularly, To
Secure the Church of England, as by Law Established; and by the Advice of that
Parliament, give such Indulgence to Dissenters, as Our People may have no
Reason to be Jealous of. We will likewise by the Advice of that Parliament,
Heal all the Divisions, Cover with Oblivion all the Faults, and Restore the
Happiness of Our People; which never can be Effectually done by any other
Power; and which We expect you will seriously and speedily Consider: And so We
bid you heartily Farewell. Given at St. Germans en Lay, the 3d. of February
1689. And of Our Reign the fourth.

The Letter to the Commons was of the same Tenure.


