THE JEWS CATECHISM. Which was lately Translated out of Hebrew into Latin. By
the Eminently Learned LVDOVICVS DE COMPEIGNE DE VEIL.

(...)

Plato. LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Harris, at the Stationers Arms in the
Piazza under the Royal Exchange, in Cornhill. 1680.

TO THE READER.
HAving the Happiness of being Intimately Acquainted with the Learned Author of
the Latin Translation of this Excellent Catechism, I was the more easily
Inclined to undertake to Translate it into English (omitting some few Passages)
As all Scholars are Obliged to that Worthy Gentleman for his Latin Translation,
so I doubt not but those Virtuous Persons, who shall peruse my English, will
kindly Aceept the pains I have taken herein, though it comes so short of the
Eloquence of the Latin. The Book contains an Accurate Description of a great
part of a Christians Duty, though the Author of the Original was not a
Christian: But certainly He was not such an Enemy to Christianity as All the
Socinians are: And His Catechism is much more to be Valued than CRELLIUS's
Ethics. The Socinians so Impudently usurping the Name of Christians; And yet
Denying the LORD that bought them, are certainly to be ABHORRED by all those
that Love the LORD JESUS in sincerity, as JUDAS's Disciples, who Betrayed Him
with a KISS. If this shall be seen by any of the English Students of the
Cracovian Catechism, I desire they may be prompted to Consider that the
Foulness of their grand Errot (if it be an Error, as I conceive they often
Doubt it is) cannot be Surpast by any thing but by the Brightness of his Glory,
Whom they so horridly Blaspheme by Denying Him to be the Only True, and Eternal
GOD, Grieving His Holy Spirit, even by Asserting that DIVINE Worship is Due
unto Him, whilst they Assert also that He is no other than a Mere MAN,
involving themselves in the greatest Guilt of the grossest Idolatry, which
carries the greatest Opposition to the Spirit of Our Blessed LORD. There Is more
Hope of Converting a JEW than such an Apostate, one that has in effect
Renounced His Baptism, viz. By Denying Two of the Three PERSONS in Whose Name
He was Baptized. Socinianism, and all other Haer^sies we shall Avoid, if we
truly, and constantly Follow the Rules laid down in this Catechism, which we
may do Through CHRIST Enabling Us. When once the Generality of those that have
Named the Name of CHRIST shall by the Assistance of His Holy Spirit perform
those Duties which the JEWS themselves Acknowledge to be incumbent upon All
Mankind, Then shall come to pass that Saying of the Evangelical Prophet, The
Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the LORD as the Waters cover the Sea.

Reader Farewell: And say with me from the Bottom of thy Heart, COME LORD JESUS
THE PROAEME
IT has been of old the Practice of the Jews as it were to Hedge in the Law,
and to reduce it all to certain Heads: So that the Fundamental Points thereof
might be always in every man's Mouth. This course was strictly observed by the
Prophets of whom some contracted the whole Law within the compass of Eleven
Articles, others of Three, and at length one of them comprised the Sum, and
Substance of all the Law in this one Doctrine, to wit, that which we read Hab.
2.4. The Just shall live by Faith. Now therefore, when by reason of our
manifold sins we are oppressed with such a multitude of Calamities, it is more
requisite then ever, that we should comprize in some few, and those very brief
and weighty Sentences, or forms of words, the Power of the Law, the
Reasonableness of Religion, the right way of Exercising True Charity, and the
Institution of good Manners which was in force two thousand Years before the
Law; That any young man though not very wife, yet not being altogether a Fool,
might Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, to have his mind thus Instructed to yield
a due, and constant Regard to the Law of GOD. And would to God those our
Masters who are the Rulers in the Synagogues of the Jews dispersed far, and
wide on the face of the Earth, would effectually resolve so to explain what is
Truth, and Right by their Precepts, and Admonitions, that at length all both
young, and old, might attain to a competent understanding of the Divine Nature,
and also of the true Rule of living a Sober, and Godly Life. Thus it would come
to pass that all their Scholars would make a large progress in the way of the
most sublime Knowledge, and true Wisdom. Children also, persons weak, and slow
in their apprehensions, who are not in any capacity either by conversing with
Doctors, persons of profound Learning, or with the Books they have published, to
penetrate into the Depths of the Holy Law, and of the Doctrine concerning good
Manners, yet even they may attain to some perception of the Truth, if any man
expound it unto them after such a manner, as we are now speaking of. Having
these things upon my Thoughts, and chiefly considering the Glory of God, I the
least, and unworthiest of men Abraham Jagel, etc. come forth from the midst of
a Multitude enflamed with Zeal for the LORD, our GOD, and apply my mind unto
writing. Nor do I make it my business to express my self in a lofty strain, or
in any subtle, and curious form of words, but that my Language may be plain and
easy to be understood like to common talk in familiar conversation. And I have
diligently collected the words and deep sayings of wise men, which they have
left in writing scattered here, and there, concerning the Fundamental Points of
the Law, not thinking it worth my labor to give an account of the several
Authors of those wise Sayings. For I studied to deliver a Discourse both clear,
and concise concerning that way, which will bring those that persevere in it,
to obtain the Laurel of the Age to come; and they shall also attain great
Renown in this present Age, even whilst they remain in the number of the
Living: This I have done that my Discourse by reason of its Brevity may be the
oftener in the mouths of Children, and may be the more easily learnt of them; so
that as they grow in years, they may grow in the Fear of God, and be detered
from all Wickedness; and that those of riper Age, may never swerve from the
Right Way. This small Work I have entitled, The Good Doctrine: For a Good
Doctrine I deliver unto you, which I have not drawn from the Rivulet of mine
own Mind, but from the Fountain of Wise Men, to whom the Great God communicated
his Secrets. Since th^se things are so, let no man desert my Precepts, but let
every one that is Learned add his own Instructions to mine, and expound them to
Children, and exhort them constantly to adhere thereunto, nor let him cease
from this Labor, till they shall be fully and perfectly exercised therein, yea
till they shall be able to repeat them all without book from the beginning to
the end. Then they shall perceive what it is to Fear, and Love God, then they
shall arrive to a right understanding of the Doctrine delivered by Holy Men,
concerning a pure Virtuous Life; finally then their Minds shall have a true
comprehension of the Power of the Divine Law. Now, O Lord, Our God, Remember me
for good, according to the Goodness, and Integrity of my Undertaking, for so I
shall never be put to shame, and confusion in this World, or in that which is
to come: But thou will give me my Portion with those that have turned many unto
Righieousness. For these are they that shall shine as the Brightness of the
Firmament For ever, and ever. May this, may this be thy Good Will, and Pleasure.

THE JEWS Catechism.
Scholar. GOD prosper you.


Master. God be Gracious unto you: But hear my Son, who are you?


Sch. I am yours, and I fear the Lord of all things, the Maker of the Heavens;
and I thank him from the bottom of my Heart that he has made me a Man, and one
of the Seed of Israel.


Mast. God be Gracious unto thee, my Son; tell me now, I pray thee, to what end
has God made thee of so Excellent a Nature?


Sch. Surely he has created all things for his own Glory: He has made me for
this end, that I should be the Instrument of his Honor, that I should Worship,
and Revere his Godhead, and that I should freely without a Servile Respect to
any Reward perform all those Actions, which are pleasing unto Him; Though one
day we shall receive a Reward, when enjoying the Sight of God, world without
end, we shall live such a Life, as shall forever abound with the greatest, and
purest, and indeed with the only True Delight, and Satisfaction.


Mast. Upon what grounds shall Man that is born of a Woman aspire to that
Tranquillity of Mind, and the Possession of Eternal Felicity, which is expected
to be enjoyed in the World to come?


Sch. If he will wholly Rely on God by a True Faith, and sure Hope, and take on
him the Yoke of the Divine Law, which Moses delivered to the Children of
Israel: This way he will become Just, and Acceptable to God, and at length
obtain Eternal Life.


Mast. What is the main Prop, and Foundation of Faith, and the Law?


Sch. That there is a God Infinite in Goodness, and Infinite in Power, and
Majesty, who Made the whole World of Nothing, and made it for his own Pleasure,
and that there is none, who can hinder God, but that he may even now change
e^ther all the parts of the World, or some of its parts.


Mast. Is there any thing amongst the Jews that may put us in mind of this.


Sch. Yes surely, the Observation of the Sabbath: This is a Sign, or Token
betwixt God, and the Children of Israel, whereby they are to call to mind that
Heaven, and Earth were made in Six Days, and that God rested the Seventh Day,
and Hallowed it, and so by the Sacred Rites of this Day consecrated the
Children of Israel, and set them apart to be his Peculiar People; that he would
have this to be the Pillar of the Israelites Faith; that he has laid this as
the Foundation of his Law.


Mast. Explain to me now, I pray thee, what is that Faith, of which thou have
here shown me the Basis, and Foundation?


Sch. Faith is the Gift of God, whereby our minds are so affected that we
sincerely Believe all things, which God has taken care to Declare unto us by
his Prophets.


Mast. What are those which they have declared to be Believed by us?


Sch. Truly they are very many: But there are Thirteen Articles, which it is
necessary that every man should Believe, that is joined in communion with the
Israelites. Moreover it is necessary that his Belief of these Articles be known
and manifest to all men: And whosoever shall deprave but one of them, he is
declared to have deserted the Synagogue, and to have renounced his Religion,
neither shall he be any more called an Israelite.


Mast. Recite these Thirteen Articles, these Foundations of Pure Religion, show
plainly what they are.


Sch. This is the First, that we Believe that there is a God, the First
Efficient Cause, And the Vltimate End of all things: That All things high, and
low were Created, and are continually Sustained By Him: That All things have
received their Being at his Pleasure Alone, and at his Pleasure Alone they
Perish: And that the Divine Essence is not diminisht by their destruction, nor
in the least altered since its Fullness, and Perfection is of It self Alone,
neither has he need of any other Being: For God Is Light, Power, and Eternal
Life; Dominion, and Empire belongs to Him Alone, because He Alone TRULY IS, and
enjoys Royal Honor and Majesty.


Another is this, That this God who Made All things in Heaven above, and in
Earth beneath, is ONE, SIMPLE, or UNCOMPOUNDED, so that nothing can be found
within, nor without That there were Many Worlds created by God is an Assertion
common amongst the Jewish Writers; which our Author here lays down as a thing
not to be doubted, Annotante Ludovico de Compeigne de Veil.
any World, which is SIMPLE, or UNCOMPOUNDED, in like manner, as GOD has the
Attribute of SIMPLICITY. This is that which we find written Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hear O
Israel, the LORD Our God is One LORD.

The Third Fundamental Article is, That God being ONE whose Essence admits of
no Kind of Multiplicity, or Composition, is neither a Body, nor can be included
within any Body: Agreeable to this is that Saying which we find written, Deuteronomy.
4.15. Ye saw no manner of Similitude.

The Fourth is, That nothing could Be Before this GOD SIMPLE, and INCORPOREAL,
But that He is the First, and the Last, as it is written, Isa. 44.6. I am the
First, and I am the Last, and besides me there is no God: which the Great
Prophet thus expounds, Deuteronomy. 33.27. The Eternal God is thy Refuge; that is to
say, the Place of Refuge, in which the Israelites should acquiesce, and repose
all their Hopes, and all their Possessions, is the Eternal God, whom nothing
may be Compared, or Lik'ned unto. Hence the same Prophet presently after poures
forth these words; Happy art thou, O Israel, who is like unto thee, O people
saved by the LORD, the Shield of thy Help.

The Fifth is, That to the Eternal God, the only Creator of All things, to Him
Alone is Due Worship, and Veneration, and to none besides Him, because All
things were Created, and He is the Creator: That it is not Lawful to Pray for
any thing to any Created Nature, but we must still implore his Aid, who has the
Sovereign Power, and Dominion over All things without exception: Whosoever
Honors as a God either by Sacrifices, or any Sacred Rites, or by Prayers, and
Supplications, any King, or Angel, or any Power, whether Caelestial, or
Terrestrial, that he shall be accursed, and given up to most horrid Torments.

The Sixth, That the Infinitely Good and Great God of his singular Benignity,
and Good Will, has chosen out of Mankind sometimes one, sometimes many fit
persons, as it pleased him, them he Inspired with the knowledge of his Mind,
discovering unto them things to come, that by them the desires, and actions of
other men might be directed to true Godliness, and Honesty.

The Seventh, That Moses did far excel in the Gift of Prophecy all the
Prophets in all Ages: That all the Prophets that went before him, even the
Patriarchs themselves, and those that lived near the same time, were inferior
to Moses in the Excellency of Prophecy: That He it was whom the God of Jacob
esteemed a fit person by whom he would give a Just Law to the Israelites, to
cherish, and refresh their Souls: Moreover, that Moses arrived to that Degree
of the Knowledge of God, which no other man could ever approach unto.

Mast. Do thou know how many ways the Prophecy of Moses differs from the
Visions of the other Prophets?


Sch. In four respects: First, That God spoke not to any other Prophet, but by
an Angel, or Messenger separate from a Body; and he afforded His Presence to
Moses, when he made known his Mind unto him, as we find it written, Number. 12.8.
With him will I speak mouth to mouth. Secondly, That the Spirit of Prophecy
did take hold of every other Prophet in Visions by night, or by day whilst he
was in a kind of Slumber, that all his Senses were in a manner stupefied, which
indeed those words of Scripture do plainly declare, v. 6. I the Lord will make
my self known unto him in a Dream: But of Moses we find it written, v. 7. My
Servant Moses is not so -- with him will I speak mouth to mouth. Thirdly, That
at the Breathing, of the Divine Spirit the strength of the other Prophets
failed them, and their Senses were benumbed with horror: but Moses talked with
God, as one man is wont to do with another, without any Trembling or sudden
decay of strength. Lastly, That Prophetic Visions were not given to other
Interpreters of the Divine Will at what time soever they were pleased to
receive them, but when God according to his Secret Will was pleased to give
them, and when they were duly prepared for them; but Moses was always prepared,
and when he would he was Inspired with the Divine Wisdom, which we may clearly
understand by that place of Scripture, Number. 9.8. Stand still, and I will hear
what the Lord will command concerning you.



Mast. I hear what thou say, and do fully approve it. Now I would have thee
return to the explication of the other Fundamental Points of the Law.


Sch. The Eighth is, That all the Law from the first words, In the beginning,
to the last, In the sight of all Israel, was written by Moses, as God had
Dictated it unto him: and that there is no Distinction to be made betwixt these
words, Exodus 20.2. I am the Lord thy Lord; And those Genesis 36.12. And Timna was
Concubine, or any other of the like kind: that the Law is every way like it
self: that every Verse, and every single Word is equally the Word of God.


The Ninth, That nothing must be added to, nor diminisht from the Law of Moses,
no, not so much as one word, or letter, because it is expressly written, Deuteronomy.
12.32. Thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it. For herein consists
the Perfection of any thing that naught can be added to it, nor taken from it:
But the Law is absolutely Perfect, which the Royal Prophet declares in express
terms, Psalm. 9.8. The Law of the Lord is perfect: wherefore it does not Admit
of any Addition, or Diminution.

The Tenth, That the Infinitely God and Great God does Behold the Actions of
all men, and his Eyes are always upon them, which this Divine Oracle does
expressly declare, Jer. 32.19. Great in Counsel and mighty in Work, for thine
Eyes are open upon all the ways of the Sons of men: And that other Text of
Scripture, Amos 4.13. And declares unto man what is his thought. For if he
knew the thoughts of man, how much more evident is it that He knows his Actions?

The Eleventh, That God deals with every man according to that kind of Life,
which he leads here upon Earth; to those, who keep his Commandments he gives
great Rewards, and infflicts great Punishments on those that Disobey him,
sometimes in this World, sometimes in that which is to come, and sometimes in
both, according to their several works whether good, or evil: but that the
chief Rewards, and the sharpest Punishments are deferred till they come to the
other World.

The Twelveth is, --

The Thirteenth is, that at a set Time known only to God, it will come to pass
that all the Dead shall Live again, that he who does not Believe this, has no
Communion in Religion with the Jews; for we have it thus written in the Prophet
Isa. 26.19. Thy Dead men shall Live, together with my Dead body shall they
arise. Awake, and sing ye that dwell in the Dust. Dan. 12.2. And many of them
that sleep in the Dust of the Earth shall Awake. But they are Righteous men,
who shall be Judged fit for the enjoyment of this so great and desirable Good.
I pray God we may be of their number, that God may give unto us Eternal Life,
that we may be raised from the Dead, and live in his Sight.

Mast. But what is the reason that thou judge the Beginning or Origin of the
World, to be the Root and Foundation of the Law, rather than one of those
Thirteen Articles of Faith?


Sch. Because where this is Believed, that the World had a Beginning, we may
easily infer the Possibility of Prophecy and Signs and Wonders, and the
Gathering together of our People, scattered far and wide on the face of the
Earth, and the Resurrection of the Dead, and of all things else that are
contained in the Articles of our Religion. And every one may give a ready
Answer, if he should be asked, why God has done this or that, or will do it, in
such a Manner, to wit, As He Willed or Decreed to Create, or Frame the Whole
World after this Manner, rather than any other; so he Willed and Decreed to
Effect all these things, about which Debate in such a Manner, as seemed Best to
his Infinite Wisdom. Therefore when in the Law there is a Precept given touching
the Sabbath, which puts us in mind of the Creation of the World, it is said,
Exodus 31.17. It is a Sign, between me and the Children, of Israel for ever.
The sense of which is this, This Sign is the stable Foundation and Support of
the Covenant made between me and the Children of Israel, in whose hearts my Law
is written, by which they are Distinguished from all other People and Languages.


Mast. The nature of Faith being thus Expounded, together with all those things
that Depend on it, I would have thee now to explain unto me what that Hope is,
which is joined with it, by whose help men may arrive to the enjoyment of the
Sovereign Good in the World to come.


Sch. Hope is a Divine Gift or Endowment, whereby our Mind becomes so Pure, and
grows up to such an Height, that those Delights of the Spirit, which are the
Ultimate End or Satisfaction of all our Desires, we are Confident that we shall
attain unto, not by our own Righteousness or Good works, but by the Infinite
Mercy and Goodness of God toward us. And that whatsoever we shall Really have
Need of, as to this present Life, we shall receive in Abundance from the
Providence of God. For he gives with a liberal hand to all living creatures
whatsoever their Nature requires. Let all Men therefore look up and trust in
him, that gives Food to every living Creature in his due time, even to the
vilest and most contemptible Worms and Flies.


Mast. How must we behave our selves toward God, that we may receive such
blessings from him?


Sch. As a Servant toward a Master, as a Child toward a Father; either of
them if he expect any good thing from his Governor, labors with all his might
that he may yield due observance unto him both in word and deed, both of them
beg the good things they expect most earnestly and humbly: And it is most fit
and just that we, whether as Children or Servants, should daily perform those
Actions which are most acceptable to God, that our Conceptions should be right
and orthodox, that our Works should be pious, that we should make our
Supplications, and pour forth our Prayers unto God; for he will hear our
Prayers and grant our Requests. Hope therefore is the common Basis or
Groundwork, which with the Divine Assistance is useful to us in the building
up of all other Virtues. Hope fills the Mind with Peace and Tranquillity, and
cherishes the Body with the purest and most lasting pleasure. Hope conduces to
the Study of the Law, and to Civil Conversation; for whosoever puts his whole
trust and confidence in God, the grace and favor of God encompasseth him about
continually; his Feet shall not slip as those Men that are falling, being
always in slippery places, who put their trust in any other thing but in God.
This is that which the Anointed of the God of Jacob speaks, Psalm. 37.3, 4, 5.
Trust in the Lord and do good, so shall thou dwell in the Land, and verily thou
shall be fed. Delight thy self in the LORD, and he shall give thee the desires
of thy heart. Commit thy way unto the LORD; trust also in him, and he shall
bring it to pass.


Mast. What shall his hope fail him that trusts in any other thing but in God?


Sch. Yes surely, on whatsoever other thing a man relies, he relies on a broken
Reed; for if he trust in his great Riches, they suddenly get wings and fly
away. And they are always subject to innumerable casualties, and are often lost
by some sudden chance. Now if he trust in his rare Knowledge and excellent
Learning, lo a short Sickness weakens his Brain, and all his artificial subtle
Knowledge comes to nothing. If in the multitude of Children, Friends, and
Kindred, if in a faithful Wife, their Soul and Spirit is in the hand of God; it
may come to pass that in a moment they may die, and so he is deprived of his
support: and the same persons it may be whilst they live, for a small offense
take up a great prejudice, and become Enemies. Besides, if he be reduced to a
poor Condition, if he labor under any Disease, so that he cannot perform any
business, nor provide Food and Raiment for his Family at home, he finds nothing
but brawling and contention, and all his Friends and Acquaintants at once fail
him; Prove. 19.7. All the Brethren of the Poor hate him; how much more do his
Friends go far from him? Moreover he becomes an Alien in the sight of the
Man-servants and Maidservants born in his House; for this was the Complaint of
Job overwhelmed with Calamities, Job 19.17. My Breath is strange to my Wife,
though I entreated for the Childrens sake of my own Body. It will be as great
folly for any man to trust in his Bodily Strength, which some Disease may
destroy in a moment. The Gout does but seize on some one Joint, and presently
it keeps a Man at home in sadness and solitude, and will not permit him to put
his Foot without the door. But it is not so with him who has his whole
dependence upon God, for he will stand in awe of the Divine Majesty, but will
not be awed by any thing else; he will yield Worship and the most humble
Subjection to God alone. All his Hopes or Possessions are placed in God, and he
will have a care that he give not that Affection which is due to God only, to
a Creature like to himself. He will associate himself, and consult with Men how
they may have Communion in Worshipping the Creator, as they ought to do; but he
will not be moved at their discord or dissension upon any occasion whatsoever,
and his thoughts are advanced to such an height by his confidence in God, that
he draws off his Mind from the frail and perishing things of this present
World, and fixes his whole intention upon the study of the Law and pure
Religion; and this he does for the love of Piety, not fear of Punishment; and
that he may pass over his Life in true peace and tranquillity of Mind, and may
obtain in the other World, the most perfect and everlasting Joy and
Satisfaction.


Mast. How ought a man to be thus qualified, that he may attain to the highest
degree of this Virtue?


Sch. Whoever aspires to this height, it is necessary that he observe, and
always keep in his mind these five things. First, that the infinitely good and
great God does night and day, take care and provide for the Sons of Men. And
this is that which we find written Psalm. 121.4. Behold, he that keeps Israel
shall neither slumber nor sleep. He must have as great a confidence in God as
can be, and his Heart must never fail him.


He must also remember that the Mercy of God does infinitely exceed the Mercy
of all those Men, who have any tender concern for us, and that he takes care of
our Affairs both in private and in public. And moreover that, all the kindness
and good offices of other men toward us, do proceed from the love of our
merciful God; for he it is that moved the hearts of men with compassion toward
us, and stirs them up to use all diligence in providing for our safety and
welfare. He disposes all things in a wonderful contexture and dependence of
Cause one upon another; neither is it our Merit that we are so well provided
for, but the mere Benignity and Free Mercy of God. From whence we may
understand, that whatsoever happens to any of us, whether a small matter or a
great, it is appointed and determined by no other than the Great Ruler and Lord
of All things. And also that All our Hope is to be fixed in God, and that we
have no Expectation from any other; for if any ones Hope depends upon another,
he does as if he should trust with a double mind, which surely is a very great
wickedness, because he joins with the Aid or Assistance of Almighty God the
Assistance of Man, who first consists of Flesh and Blood, and after that is
turned to Worms and Corruption. Therefore it is written Jer. 17.25. Cursed be
the man that trusts in man, and makes Flesh his arm, and whose heart
departs from the Lord. Moreover, he must have a Mind Chaste and Pure, and
firmly and constantly bent to do that which the Creator commands for the Honor
of his Name; and as earnestly resolved to avoid whatsoever he has forbidden.
We who put our Confidence in God, would have him to be Present with us, and
really to Assist us at all times, and in all places. It Is therefore fit and
just, that we should addict our selves to do his Will, as we are wont to do our
own; yea to renounce our own Will when it stands in competition with his.
Whosoever shall most diligently observe this course of Life, God will give them
all that they shall desire of him, and whatsoever they would have he will bring
it to pass. But those who contemn the Word of God, and are refractory to his
Commands, shall be branded with a Mark of Eternal Infamy. For this is that
which we find written Job 27.8, 9. For what is the hope of the Hypocrite,
though he has gained, etc. will God hear his Cry? etc.

Lastly; we must exercise the whole strength of our Soul in imploring the Help
of God, who never fails to assist them who call upon him, if they call upon him
from the bottom of their heart. For this is the scope and drift of that saying
of the Psalmist, Ps. 10.17. Thou will prepare their heart; thou will cause
thine ear to hear. Three times in a day at least, at Evening, Morning, and
Noon, with bended Knees, with Hands lifted up to Heaven, and high aspiring
thoughts, thou ought to make Prayers and Supplications unto God, and before
thou make thy Prayers and Supplications, to praise, extol, and celebrate the
Divine Majesty with Hymns and Odes, and those Psalms which the most sweet
Singer in Israel, and those Men of the great Synagogue did compose. Thou must
not add any thing to them, nor make the least alteration in those Forms of
Prayer, which have been constituted and appointed for our use by wise and holy
Men; for if here thy Tongue falter in any thing, thou art involved in the guilt
of a grievous error. Now whatsoever shall befall thee, whether it be Prosperity
or Adversity, receive it cheerfully from thy Creator, and give him thanks for
the same, and set forth his Praise, and glorify his Name; according to that
which we see written Psalm 116.13. I will take the Cup of Salvation, and call
upon the Name of the LORD. Ver. 3, 4. I found trouble and sorrow; then called I
upon the Name of the LORD. Therefore let this be always in thy mouth; Such is
the Mercy of God toward us, that whatsoever he does unto us, he does it for
our good. And thou must give thanks to God always, and in all places, for all
the Conveniences of this Life, for thy Meat and Drink, and for all things that
thou enjoyest, using those Forms of Thanksgiving which our Doctors have
composed.

Mast. Thou have said enough touching the nature of Faith and Hope; tell me now
(I pray thee) what other thing is necessary for the conpleting of true Virtue,
by which our Souls may attain to the Fullness of Eternal Joy.


Sch. There is another Affection of the Mind: this is called Love or Charity.


Mast. How do thou define or express the nature of this Affection?


Sch. Love is a Divine Gift or Endowment, which when the LORD our God has
conferred on us, we love him as it is most fit and just, with a Love answerable
to his Infinite Excellency and Perfection, and to his exceeding great Mercy and
Goodness toward us. By this Affection we are engaged to take the Yoke of the
Law upon us, and to observe all the Divine Precepts. By this we are constrained
to study the good of all men, as Creatures made after the Image of God, and to
help them upon all occasions according to the utmost of our power; for this is
a great part of the Law. Be sure thou never do to another what thou would
not that any man should do unto the.


Mast. But to love and to fear are two contrary things, and repugnant to each
other; how can it be then that they who Fear God, and stand in Awe of him,
should also love him?


Sch. When a man deeply considers, and most seriously meditates on the Frame
and Making of so many, and so great, and so admirable Creatures; hereupon he
presently apprehends, that the Force and Efficacy of the Divine Wisdom is
Infinite, which he worshippeth, praises, magnifieth, and so he vehemently
desires to have some, Inspection into the Divine Essence, most Powerful and
Excellent. Those words of David, that most Religious King, have respect to this
truth, Psalm. 42.2. My Soul thirsts for God, for the living God; therefore he
applies his Mind to the thoughts of those things, and presently he draws off
his Mind from them; he fears, he trembles, he perceives himself being of a
Nature low, vile, obscure to force up his Understanding weak and imperfect, to
the ContemplatIon of a Mind most high and infinite in all Perfection; of which
very thing David speaks thus, Psalm. 8.3, 4. When I consider thy Heavens, the
work of thy Fingers, the Moon and the Stars which thou have ordained: What is
Man that thou art mindful of him? So it comes to pass, that a man at once Fears
and Loves the Divine Majesty, and strictly observes those two things which the
Law prescribes, whereof one seems to be contrary to the other, to wit this,
Deuteronomy. 6.5 Thou shall Love the LORD thy God with all thy heart, etc. And that
chap. 10. ver. 20. Thou shall Fear the LORD thy God, him shall thou serve, and
to him shall thou cleave. For this Fear mixed with Love brings us to a sincere
Union with God. For by these Affections we are induced to imitate Gods way of
dealing with his Creatures; he shows himself in the Government of them full of
Kindness and Benignity, Just and Faithful, (but these varieties of Affections
are only in the effects, for no Passion or Affection, properly so called, can
be attributed unto God) therefore we must endeavor most earnestly to have our
Minds endued with the like disposition, and by these steps to ascend to the
true Holiness, as it is written in the Law, Lev. 19.2. Ye shall be holy, for I
the Lord your God am holy.


Mast. Is any other thing necessary for the obtaining of the Sovereign Good or
true Happiness besides this twofold Love, of which thou have spoken, viz.
toward God and toward Men?


Sch. On these two depends the whole Law; for that Deuteronomy. 6.5. Thou shall Love
the LORD thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy
Strength; contains all those Precepts commanding and forbidding, which declare
what is the Duty of Man toward God. And this Lev. 19.18. Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self, in like manner comprises all those Precepts, which
pertain to the Duty of every Man toward all other Men, concerning their lawful
Commerce or Commutation of their Goods, and the avoiding of all Deceits,
Capital Judgments, the Right of Marriage and Inheritance; which things the
Divine Law contains as it has respect to Human Society. There Is nothing
therefore which brings us into the favor of our Almighty LORD and Master, but
the observance of those two Precepts, on which depend the Six hundred and
thirteen.


Mast. Is it necessary that we should employ all our Heart, and all our Mind,
and all our Strength, in the Exercise of our Love toward Men, which is
contained in these words, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, in like
manner as we ought to do in the Exercise of our Love toward the Immortal God?


Sch. Those two Loves being as it were two Pillars to support the Law, the
Exercise of them must needs be of equal necessity; but our Love toward God
does without all doubt require the whole Heart, and Mind, and Strength; which
is the same as if thou should say, That to this end that we might rightly
observe the Commandments of God, that we may reject and cast out of our minds
all vain Thoughts and false Conceits, it is necessary that our Heart be
enflamed with the Fire of Divine Love, and that it be affected with a certain
kind of Fear and Reverence, so that rather than we would be disobedient to the
Admonitions and Precepts of God, we would choose to have our Lives taken from
us, so far should we be from doing any thing contrary to the Divine Law, for
fear of the Loss of our Estate. In a word, that if we be in danger to be
deprived of our Lives, our Fortunes, and all things which in this Life are most
dear unto us, this our Love toward God should restrain us from doing any thing
contrary to the Commandmets of our LORD and Governor. Therefore our Love
toward Men also requires our Heart, and Mind, and Strength.


Mast. Thou must needs give some light to those thy last words, and expound to
me how far those three (Heart, Mind, and Strength) are required for the due
performance of our Love toward Men.


Sch. As for the Heart it is required that we do not conceive the least hatred
in our Heart against any Man, of which the Law speaks expressly, Lev. 19.17.
Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine Heart. For that Hatred which is laid
up in the depths of the Heart, for the most part proceeds from Envy; which
Hatred carries in it far greater Bitterness, than that which has its rise from
an injury received, from any Wrangling or Contention, or any other thing of the
like nature. For the cause of this kind of Hatred being removed, that Hot Freth
is presently taken away also, and so there is a remedy for it. But there can no
remedy be found out for that Hatred which proceeds from Envy; that is always
stirring up of Strife, and loathsome Brawlings and Contentions; that destroyed
the second Temple, which was not as the first, defiled with Idolatry, Whoredom,
Adultery, Incest, and Murder; that has expelled the Remnant of the Jews from
their own Borders, and those Israelites which are yet in the World, it keeps
even to this day in Captivity and Exile. Moreover, this was it which caused the
Expulsion of our People from so many places; this was the cause of all the
Calamities, Miseries, and Distresses, which we have suffered from the beginning
of that most grievous Captivity to this very day; and this still breaths forth
a Smoke so thick and so loathsome, that it threatens an Universal Destruction.
And that Hatred fixed in the Heart is called Hatred without consideration,
(Odium Temerarium;) for it seizes on a Man's Heart from no other cause but mere
Envy: but this is the most grievous and abominable of all the several kinds of
Hatred, because in it there is double Iniquity, Propense Malice, which urges to
destroy a man; and Malignity or Ill Will, whereby the Heart is infected or
poisoned. Therefore these words are included in the Commandment, with all thine
heart; for that is not only a Man's Duty to be free from the guilt of all such
Inhumanity, but also to love every man truly and heartily, to have a perfect
abhorrence from all kind of Envy, Strife, and Contention. This is to Love with
all thine Heart. There is another kind of Hatred, when one man has in his mind
an Aversion to another not from Envy or any private Grudge, but upon account of
the cross Manners and ill Disposition of that man to whom he has an Aversion;
for the Likeness in Manners does of it self beget a mutual Affection between
men; so on the contrary the Disagreement in manners and natural inclinations
begets Hatred; which is not so bitter as that Hatred which we have already
spoken of, but yet it is no easy matter to root it out, therefore we are
admonished that we keep our selves far from it. For that (with all thy Mind)
implies this sense, If any ones manners do not agree with thy Genius, however
thou ought to bear with him, and to love him; for God surely is worthy, for
whose sake thou should do this. The third kind of Hatred is that which
proceeds from the immoderate desire of Riches; and to this are those words to
be referred, and with all thy Strength. Under this kind of Hatred is
comprehended that which Workmen (especially if they are of the same Trade) are
apt to conceive one against another. For Artificers for the most part hate
those that addict themselves to the same Art, which we are forbidden to do. And
indeed if any Artificer think with himself, that all gifts or endowments,
riches and honors, come from the ONE True God, nor can that be the portion of
one which he has decreed to bestow on another, he will be so far from hating
those of his own Profession, that he will rather love them the more, as those
that are like him in their course of life. If it so happen that any difference
or contention do arise between two men, they may go to Law and plead their
Cause, and when the Judge after a full hearing has determined the
Controversy, they should each of them lay aside the person of an Adversary.
For the whole Company of the Israelites are like the Body of one and the same
distributed into its several parts; but it would be a great madness, in case
one Member should by some accident be the cause of some pain to another, for a
man in revenge to the part or member offended, to hurt the other part. In like
manner, if one man offend another, the person offended ought not to revenge the
injury nor to retain any bitter resentments of it; but presently to forgive the
Offender, and to pray unto God to be merciful to him. This was our ancient
Father Abraham's way, as we find it written Genesis 20.17. So Abraham prayed unto
God, and God healed Abimelech. Moreover, let every man think seriously of this,
that we who never pass over one day, wherein we do not commit some Offense
against God, do nevertheless find that he is still merciful and gracious unto
us. Wherefore if we are his Children, as it is written Deuteronomy. 14.1. Ye a^e the
Children of the LORD your God. If it be our duty to be like to him, we ought
surely to be as he is, ready to pardon, and slow to anger; for whosoever is
averse from wrath, that is, the desire of revenge, his sins are forgiven him;
God deals with him as he does with those men that have trespassed against him.
We must also endeavor upon all occasions to convince one another with such
words, as are most apt to turn away 2 man's mind from all iniquity, lest we
should so carry our selves, as to incurr the guilt of the sins that another man
has committed in thought, word, or deed. In this threefold way of acting we
should do what we can for the good of one another; for this is the meaning of
that passage in the Law, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Whatsoever
things are pleasant and delightsem unto thee, these thou ought to endeavor
as much as in thee lies, to procure for all those persons that are of thine
acquaintance, to reconcile Man and Wife that have been at variance, to preserve
the peace of thy Country. This is that which we find written Psalm. 34.14. Seek
peace and pursue it. These same persons thou ought also to serve with thy
thoughts, that is to say, to desire most syncerely that they may be really
advantaged by thee; and thou ought as constantly to pray unto God for their
prosperity as for thine own.


Mast. Thou have discoursed at large of those two places, wherein all the Law
is contained, and consequently our whole duty toward God and toward Men. It
remains that thou should now declare what, and how many, are those Seeds of
Sin, which we ought with all possible care to avoid, lest they hinder us from
the attainment of the chief Object of our Hope, the Sovereign Good, or the
only True Happiness.


Sch. The Seed of Sin is threefold, Obstinacy or Wilfulness, Imprudence, and
Rebellion.


Mast. What is that which thou call Wilfulness?


Sch. The Heart and much of every man is evil from his Childhood; he cares for
nothing but what he conceits will be for his own end, being prone to Lust, and
wholly addicted to the satisfaction of his own Inordinate Will; he is so
eagerly desirous of Temporal Pleasures, that he does not distinguish between
those that are Lawful, and those that are absolutely Sinful, so that he may
fulfill his sensual desires. When a man does any thing merely to enjoy his
pleasure, and having a perfect knowledge that what he does is contrary to the
Law of God, yet nevertheless gives way to his inclinations; this is said to be
done obstinately or wilfully.


Mast. But what is that which thou call Imprudence?


Sch. Of this I may rightly say there are two kinds. One consists in the fact
or thing done; as if a man being ignorant that such a thing is unlawful to be
done, undertakes to do it because he thought that the doing of it was lawful;
For who can understand his Errors? The other is, when any man through
Incogitancy or want of Consideration gives up himself to affect such things,
which are not in their own nature exceeding wicked; but yet it is a part of
Virtue to abstain from them. Of this kind are the desires to commit a sin, the
speaking of idle words, the taking of too much pleasure in things lawful, and
the like; for all these do as it were make a man abashed at the thought of God
his Creator, so that he cannot with any intention apply his mind to the
Contemplation of him, nor yield unto him that Worship and Reverence which he
requires. Their nature and tendency are such, that they insensibly bring a man
to a Habit of wickedness, and involve him in these seven Vices which God hates
and abominates, and which cast a man down from the state of a sound mind, and
at once deprive him of Life in this World, and in the World to come.


Mast. What are these seven abominable Vices?


Sch. These are as it were seven Bodies of the Tree of Perverseness or Iniquity,
grown up to a great height, from whose Branches all sorts of wickedness spring
forth. And indeed in the beginning they seem to be light and of little moment,
that a man should have any great care to avoid them; but afterward they most
grievcusly oppress a man that yields obedience unto them, and such is their
horrid force, that it can hardly be, but that he whom they have once depraved
becomes incorrigible, for they stain the Soul with the deepest Tincture of
Impiety. Wherefore whosoever to keep his mind in a good temper, must with all
diligence endeavor to avoid those vices, Sloth, Pride, Gluttony, Lust, or the
inordinate desire of Corporeal Pleasures, Anger, or the desire of Revenge,
Covetousness, Envy; to which some vices the Prophets attributed seven other
names, to wit these, Evil, Uncircumcised, Unclean, Enemy, the Stumbling
Block.etc.


Mast. Those things which thou have now spoken of need some explication;
wherefore declare the force and nature of every one of these seven vices, and
show how those Names which thou laidst down but now, do answer to those Names
or Appellations which the Prophets impes'd on the same Vices.


Sch. Sloth is a vice which so affects a man, that wholly neglecting his duty
to keep his Mind in a right temper, he sits idle and careless, and turns his
thoguhts to vain frivolous Objects, from meditating on the Law of God, from
observing his Precepts, and doing the works which he enjoins us unto. This is
the Fountain of all Vices, and therefore it is called Evil. For this is the
meaning of that passage in the Law, Genesis 8.21. The imagination of man's heart is
evil from his youth. Such a Creature is Man, he would rather give up himself to
idleness, than take any pains to render his Nature perfect and accomplished,
neither does he rightly understand wherein the Perfection and Accomplishment of
his Mind does consist. And that man is possessed with this vice, who loves to be
perpetually playing at Dice or Cards, or to be at some other sport; for this
does not contribute any thing to the advantage of the Commonwealth. Whereas a
man's Life is not given him but for this end, that he may spend it in mediating
day and night on the Law of God, and in the Exercise of Charity, or in
Merchandising, or in the management of some Mechanic Art, or in doing some
other work which may conduce to the Conservation of the World. A Gamester
therefore is in the number of those men, which are not fit to bear to Office of
a Judge.


Pride is a Kingdom without a Diadem; thou may see a man carrying himself in
a lofty manner, as if it were beneath him to hear, or see or take any notice of
what is said or done in his presence. But why should Man arrogate so much to
himself, who shall one day be turned into Worms and Corruption, who fades like
a Flower, and like Smoke vanishes away? Therefore the man that is possessed with
this vice is called Uncircumcised. Hence is that of the Law, Deuteronomy. 10.16.
Circumcise the foreskin of your heart. At first Pride stirs up Hatred; all men
reject and abhor it, for there may be some suitableness or agreement with other
things, but with Pride it is impossible there should be any. From dislike or
hatred it comes to pass that men relinquish Society, and keep themselves at a
distance from one another, and from hence proceeds ruin and desolation. By
this it is manifest, that a proud man is the destruction of a Body Politic,
and the disorder of the World. If a proud man be so odious to us here below,
sure he is much more odious to the blessed Spirits above; for whosoever is
abhorred of all other men, God also is displeased with him.

He is said to be a Glutton, in whom there is an insatiable desire of Feasting,
that the later Feasts may be more sumptuous than the former; for it is a
vehment desire or longing in the bowels of wicked men, who have frequently such
Speeches as this in their mouths, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow weshall
die; for they live to eat, not eat to live. In the mean time the Belly of such
wicked persons is extreme needy; for not one of them when he goes out of this
world, has obtained the half part of the things he had desired and longed for.
Such a man is called unclean; for in as much as we read Psalm. 51.12. Create in
me a clean heart, O God, it is manifest that there is something unclean. But
this vice is as it were a stream of filthiness, from whence Pollutions
continually flow. This overwhelms a man with all manner of Impurities.

Now by Lust we are to understand an unbridled desire of Corporeal Pleasures;
this is an extreme and exceeding great wickedness. It Is called Enemy, for those
words may have some meaning that refers to this vice, Prove. 25.21. If thine
Enemy be hungry, give him bread to eat; and if he be thirsty, give hive water
to drink. For this wicked desire is a man's greatest Enemy; it brings death to
his Soul, because it forces him to commit such horrid impieties, which enkindle
the wrath of the Divine Majesty against him. A man given up to his Lust is
hated of God; for God is holy, and all wantonness and impurity is an
abomination unto him. This man is also hated of Men, for all have an Aversion
to such a man, who has no regard of his own or others Honor and Reputation.
These words may therefore be thus interpreted, If the ravenous Appetite of this
Enemy should excite thee to wickedness, see thou satisfy him with the Bread of
the Divine Law, and the Drink of true Repentance, and of the Fear of God; this
way thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head, and shall receive an ample
Reward. Briefly and pertinently spoke the wise men of old, If thou meetest with
any lewd obscene fellow, constrain him to go with thee to the School which is
appointed to expound the Divine Law. God will give thee a reward, who is most
bountiful in his Gifts.

Anger is a burning desire of revenge, whereby a man is as it were all in
flames. This is called a Stumbling Block; for of this the Prophet spoke when he
said, Isaiah 57.14. Take up the stumbling block out of the way of my people.
The mind of a man that is enraged and full of Anger, runs violently upon that
which is hurtful, and should be avoided as a Ship that is dashed upon a rock.
If a man be not slow to anger, patient, and long-suffering, he renders his own
Life, and the lives of others, very miserable.

Covetousness is a vast desire deeply fixed in the heart of heaping up Riches.
This stands in opposition to Liberality as a hard rock in the heart of a Man;
the rock yields not a drop of water, nor is moved out of its place by the
violence of the winds; so a covetous man he hearkens not to those that advise
him to relieve the necessities of the Poor, or to do any Office of Charity,
that may tend in the least to his detriment. For he is of such a mind, that
Riches are much more dear to him than his Soul and Body. And for this cause he
is called a Stone. Hence it is that the Prophet speaks, I will take away the
stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh, Ezech.
36.26.

Envy is such an ill disposition of the Mind, whereby a man is so affected that
he grieves for the Prosperity of others, and rejoices in their Calamity. Such
a man is like a Basilisk, which horrid Monster breaths forth poison, whereas it
gets nothing thereby. And a Basilisk sends forth from his eyes poison generated
in its heart; so that the eyes of the envious man discover the flame that his
Heart has conceived.

Lo these seven Trunks or full grown Bodies of Iniquity, which when thy Soul
shall be all fastened unto, though it be through imprudence and ignorance of the
mischievous nature of them; nevertheless thou shall by little and little be
drawn aside, so that thou shall incur the guilt of the most horrid Impieties,
and break that Silver Cord, and that Bond whereby Mortals are joined to the
Immortal God; for so it is that one sin flows upon another.

These vices do of themselves infect and poison the Soul, and at length they
involve it in the guilt of those Impieties, which are the greatest abomination
unto God. For as it is written Prove. 6.16. Six things does the Lord hate, yea
seven are an abomination unto him.

By which words we may understand this, that whosoever has his Soul possessed
with those seven most horrid Vices which I have reckoned up, he will be induced
to these six most abominable Impieties, which are so odious unto God, and to do
those four primary Mischiefs, whose Cries for vengeance pierce the Heavens,
till they deprive the guilty person of his Life both in this and in the other
world.

Mast. What are those six most aboninable wickednesses or impieties, which are
so odious unto God?


Sch. The first is, if a man shall most impudently take up such a conceit, that
he shall attain Eternal Life, although he omit the performance of those
Commandments, which God has absolutely and indispensably joined him unto.
Another is this, If he distrust the Goodness and Mercy of God, and so conceits
that now after he has committed so many crimes, there is no hope left for him,
that the Divine Majesty has no hands to be stretched out to those that return
into the Paths of Righteousness, that he has no compassion for those that have
been heinously wicked. But if a man be guilty of all manner of wickedness, and
with a broken Heart and contrite Spirit beg pardon of God, he will find him to
be a God merciful and gracious, and easy to be entreated. For God desires not
the death of a Sinner, but rather that he turn from the ways of Sin and
Corruption, unto soundness and integrity of Life. Is there any of us that has
been guilty of so many, so great, and so heinous Offenses against God as
Manasses was, who made it his business to inflame the wrath of God? but even of
him we find it written 2 Chronicles. 33.13. And prayed unto him, and he was
entreated of him, etc. The third is, when a man resists the truth known, and
perceived fully that he may pour out his mind upon sin, and vanity and be
wholly addicted to a licentious course of life. The fourth is, To envy another
for the Gifts which God has bestowed on him, as Cain envied Abel because God
had respect to his Offering.


Mast. But how does this kind of Envy differ from that which thou have put in
the number of the seven Vices, which are so abominated of God?


Sch. The difference is, that this Grief or Sickness of Mind does arise from
the Observances of those Spiritual Advantages, which a man sees by the Divine
Bounty to be conferred on others for their well-doing. Of this nature was the
ill will of Cain against Abel; for when a man envies another in such manner, he
has a foolish conceit that he comes not behind any one in good works, and yet
he has not received the same reward with others, that so the Supreme Judge has
respect of persons, he grieves that he has lived so well, and bends himself to
the destruction of another, who is more beloved of God than himself. In this
manner Saul envied David. But that Envy we have formerly spoken of, is the
Grief which a man conceives when he sees another man grow Rich or Honorable,
etc. And for the most part this kind of Envy falls upon the Spirits of Women,
and persons of weak understanding; neither does it like this, urge a man to
commit the most horrid wickedness.


Mast. I have heard thy distinction, and most heartily approve it; it remains
that thou explain the other two most abominable impieties above mentioned.


Sch. The Fifth is, if any man remain stubbornly and pertinaciously in his own
Opinion, even then when men in the highest Authority dissent from him, he is
every where called an Old Rebel. He deliver his own Sentiments to be followed
by others; of this man we find it written Deuteronomy. 17.12. And the man that will do
presumptuously. The Sixth is, For a man to be deliberate, and to be fixed in
his resolution, that he will never repent, but that he will die in his sins.


Mast. But what are those four primary Mischiefs, which cry aloud unto God for
vengeance?


Sch. The first is if one man kill another willingly and knowingly, for the
Altar it self affords no safety to a Murderer; for it is written in the Law,
Exodus 21.14. But if a man come presumptuously upon his neighbor, to slay him
with guile, thou stalt take him from mine Altar that he may die. To the same
effect is that spoken in the Law, Genesis 4.10. The voice of thy Brothers blood
cries unto me.


The next is, to defile another man's bed, of which sin it is written Prove.
6.28, 29. Can one go upon hot coals, and his feet not be burnt? So he that goes
in to his neighbors wife. Whosoever touches her shall not be innocent.

The third is, the oppressing of the Poor, the forcing the hungry and needy to
weeping and wailing; concerning which thus speaks the Divine Oracle, Psalm.
12.5. Now will I arise, says the Lord.

The fourth, to defraud the Hireling of his wages, for that is the same as to
deject his Spirits, and make his heart to fail him. To this pertains that of
the Law, Deuteronomy. 24.15. For he is poor, and sets his heart upon it. He that is
addicted to these horrible Crimes, and to these seven Vices which are so hated
of God, he presently entangles himself in Rebellion, the third stock or
complication of Iniquity; that is to say, he knows his Lords will, and of set
purpose acts that which is most contrary unto it. There remains no safety, no
hope for such a man; for what, how shall he escape, who when he understands
what his Lord would have him to do, does the contrary with all his might?
Surely his Lords wrath shall burn against him; he will break a Rod of Iron over
him; he will bring him into judgment, nor will he suffer him o go unpunished.

Mast. What, does not Repentance profit a man that has been guilty of
Rebellion, which proves a Sovereign Medicine for Impudence and Obstinacy?


Sch. Doubtless there is great virtue and efficacy in Penitence, Affliction of
Mind, Prayer, and Good Works; there is no Sin but what will be forgiven him that
rightly performs these Duties, and the Hand of God is always stretched forth,
to receive those who return into the Paths of Righteousness. But there is
somewhat more required of him that is stained with the guilt of Rebellion, he
must retain those excellent Advocates to plead for him, the continual
Meditation of the Divine Law, and the most earnest study of Goodness and
Righteousness, by whose help his Prayer and Penitence becomes acceptable to
God. His Wickedness and Concupiscence keep him at a great distance from God,
and hinder the access of his Prayers. Now he that will be cured of the Sickness
of his Soul, should take the same course with him who labors under any
Distemper of Body, for he goes to the Physician, of whom he may learn what he
must do to recover his Health. In like manner he that is sick in his Soul,
should apply himself to some wise man, that has the skill to show him how he
may be cured. But since the Medicine of the Body is so prepared, that it is
contrary to the nature of the Disease; it follows that the Physician of the
Soul must also seek out such Remedies which resist the nature of Concupiscence,
which is predominant in a diseased Soul.

Mast. Tell now, I pray thee, what are those Studies and Inclinations, which
are opposed to those seven Bodies of Iniquity, which at first footh and
flatter, but at length insult and domineer intolerably.


Sch. To Sloth is opposed Diligence, to Pride Humility, to Gluttony the
Macerating of the Body by Fasting and Abstinence from delicate Meats, to Lust
the despising of Sensual Pleasures, to Wrathfulness Lenity and Patience, and a
certain kind of hardness of Sense, rendering it unapt to take Impressions from
the sharpest Reproaches; to Covetousness Beneficence and Liberality, to Envy
Benevolence or good will to all men. But now it is necessary that thou spend
much time in bending thy mind with all thy force to that temper and
disposition, which is most contrary to Lust, till a long continued practice
shall apply thy mind to this side, and thou shall perceive thy Physic works
too much, and that thou art in a tendency to the other Extreme, and so thou
must go back a little, and fix thy self in the laudable Mean which lies betwixt
two Extremes, by the advice and persuasion of that wise man, whom thou shall
make choice of to be thy Spiritual Guide and Instructor.


Mast. Is there any thing besides those several things which thou have now
reckoned up necessary for our assistance in combating our Enemy. Concupiscence,
which is always burning and urging us to commit wickednese?


Sch. Yes surely, it is necessary that the Mercy and Grace of God help and
strengthen us, and deliver our Souls from the power of Hell, which will be ever
present with us, if we pour out our Prayers unto God with our whole Hearts, and
give up our selves entirely to the study of true Virtue and Godliness; for God
draws nigh unto them who call upon him, and he never denies his Assistance to
those whose Endeavors are good and upright. Thus he will give Fortitude to
resists Sloth and Idleness, he will endue us with the Fear of his Infinite
Majesty to subdue our Pride, he will give us Temperance in opposition to
Gluttony, a wise and solid Mind in opposition to Lust, a sound Judgment and
Knowledge of the proper use of Riches in opposition to Covetousness, universal
Kindness in opposition to Envy. Moreover, he will fill us with the fruit of
those Virtues, which at once delights the Soul, cherishes the Limbs, yea and
heals with its Balm every Malady of the Body, so it will come to pass, that we
shall enjoy great peace and tranquillity, and even in this Life we shall have
some fore-taste of the pleasures of the World to come; and after Death we shall
be advanced to the high and Illustrious Dignity of Holy Men, and together with
them shall live for ever in Paradise, in the full enjoyment of all manner of
Delights and Satisfactions.


Mast. But I pray thee, what is that so sweet and pleasant fruit?


Sch. Love, Joy, Peace, Diligence, Innocence, Chastity, Continence, Sanctity,
Meekness, and that Fear of God which arises from the knowledge of the
Excellency of the Creation, and the observance of the Divine Wisdom in
governing the World; and also true Piety and Devotion, and finally the
Inspiration of the Divine Spirit. For when we shall be taken off from the Wine
of the Earth, and from all obscene pleasures, then God will communicate his
secret unto us, and that Power which will bring the Heart into an excellent
frame, and at once illustrate Delights, satisfy the three parts or faculties
of the Soul, and will impart unto us those three Gifts, which are the root and
principle of the Persuasion, or lively sense of the Truth, and the foundation
of the Law; from whence it comes to pass, that even whilst we are enclosed in
this earthly, obscure, darksom Body, we behold the heavenly light; neither do
we like those that are blind and walk in darkness.


Mast. The words thou have spoken need some explication; and first what are
those three parts of the Soul?


Sch. Wit or Understanding, Will, and Memory.


Mast. But which are those three Gifts on which the persuasion or lively sense
of the truth depends?


Sch. Faith, Hope, and Charity, of which I spoke but now.


Mast. But what? is it of any mom^nt whether a man apprehend those things as
thou do now, my dear Scholar, only by what he has heard, or whether he have
a clear knowledge and comprehension of them, after those three Gifts are
communicated to the Soul, which thou spokest of but now?


Sch. I am not able to give an Answer to this Question, for a Blind man cannot
judge of Light; but I am of this mind, that the knowledge of these things which
are certain, and grounded upon experience, is far more excellent that that
which is only gotten by hearing them discoursed of: Even so as if it should be
said to any one, Believe that there are an hundred Pieces of Gold in that
Purse, which thou art not permitted to see or touch, but they are provided for
thy use, to supply thy necessities; he should not be so well dealt with, as if
it were granted to him that he should see the Money, and take out part of it
for his present occasions, and look upon it, and make use of it at his
pleasure; for then indeed he would have a certain knowledge that the Money was
laid up for his use. Wherefore I apply my self to you, most wise and learned
Sir, that I may be directed by your Precepts and Instructions, and may be well
grounded in your Principles. Show me, I pray you, the right way how I may yield
sincere obedience to the will of my Creator. Teach me how I may perceive the
Infinite Excellency of my Creator, my King, and my God, so far as it is
possible, for a Man born of a Woman, being of so weak understanding whilst he
remains in this world, use your utmost endeavor that no sinful Affections, nor
any defect of Knowledge, may call me back from those holy purposes and
intentions, for I was born to this end, that I might persevere in the
performance of them.


Mast. I pray God, by whose providence thou art come hither, to make thy coming
prosperous unto thee; happy is the Woman that brought thee into the world.
Surely thou will be a comfort to thy Parents; thy speech has filled me with
joy. And I doubt not but one day thou will make thy self an example of the
highest virtue in Ephrata, and illuminate Judaea with thy Instructions. Now
therefore I desire that thou would hearken diligently to my words, and lay up
my precepts in thy heart, and never depart from them; for if thou will give ear
to me with all possible attention, I shall furnish thy mind with such counsels
as shall most certainly conduct thee to the paths of true wisdom.


Sch. Speak, Sir, for thy Servant hears. I have firmly resolved to observe
your directions; I will keep my feet from every evil way, that I may follow
your Instructions, for my Mind thirsts most vehemently after your precepts.
Do your endeavor then according to the uprightness of your heart, to bring me
to that good way, where I may be quiet from fear of evil.


Mast. Mind this in the first place, my beloved Scholar, that the Fear of God
is the root and principle of all Divine Notions and Doctrines; in which as in a
large Treasury they are all virtually contained. But that he who has not this
fear in his heart, is not fit to be admitted into those Schools that are
appointed for the Exposition of the Divine Law, lest he add sin to sin. For so
it is, that whosoever has the true fear and reverence of God, the doctrine of
the Divine Law will be unto him as a wholesome Medicine. But on the contrary, to
him that is void of this Godly Fear, it proves to be deadly poison; for such a
man is more cruel than the wild Beasts, as one that abuses the knowledge of the
Divine Law, and makes it the instrument of Malice and Deceit. Wherefore have a
care that thou turn not from the right way, turn not to the right hand nor to
the left, from the way of that fear we have mentioned, Deuteronomy. 6.18. Thou shall
fear the Lord thy God. Now in this point of the Law it is to be understood,
that we must reverence the Disciples of wise men, for they will hold forth a
Light to thy mind, they will bring thee up in the right way, and instruct thee
how to perform every duty, according to the Rule of the Divine Law, which they
will clearly expound unto thee. Secondly, learn this, of which I would have
thee fully persuaded, Whosoever is approved of Men, has a good sign that he is
acceptable to God; for he has the Fear of God before his eyes both in private
and in public. Wherefore every man ought to devote himself to this Fear, and
to behave himself so, that he may be beloved of all Men, and be the delight of
his Brethren. Have a care that thou yield not such respect to any man, which
may make thee to forsake the Truth; disregard all things in comparison of this,
for God is holy, and his seal is Truth. Now whatsoever it shall please God the
Creator to dispense unto thee, let that satisfy thee, whether it be little or
much. Take this for certain, that he is the rich man who lives cheerfully,
being always content with his own condition. But he that abounds with wealth,
if he be often vexed and disturbed, and sollicitous about the getting of more,
he is in no wise to be accounted a rich man.


Devote every action to the glory of God; let all things have reference to the
honor of the Almighty Creator; by the continual changes and alterations
incident to this life, be stirred up to the contemplation and acknowledgment of
thy Creator, going, lying, rising. As for instance, when thou take thy Meat,
think with thy self that thy Meat is so prepared for thee by the infinite
wisdom of God, that it has such a quality, that it is turned into the substance
of thy body. When thou go to bed, consider that it is by the Divine Bounty
that we Mortals enjoy our sleep, which gives rest to our Bodies, and renews
their strength, that we may be more able to perform the solemn Worship of God,
and to do the works of our vocation. Reflect in like manner on the other
Functions of the Body, for which be thankful and give glory to God. Thus
whatsoever thou do, thou oughtst to do it with reference to God, who will
continually provide for thee, and prosper thee in all thy affairs; he will make
all thy ways straight, he will keep thy feet from every path, that would lead
thee aside to the right hand or to the left.

Moreover, in all that thou coest, whether in public or in private, see thou
most strictly and carefully observe the Laws of perfect Chastity and Modesty;
for Wisdom always accompanies those that are of a clean heart.

Take heed to thy self, and use all diligence to avoid the company of wicked
men, for every one is led by his Companion to vice or virtue, and God
abominates all works of iniquity, and all vicious persons. Have a care
therefore that thou never join thy self in counsel with such men, nor tread in
their steps, whose feet are swift to do mischief. And be confident of this,
that if thou have any familiar intimate conversation with them, although thou
do not imitate their practices; nevertheless God will disappoint thy
undertakings, and both the Love and Holy Fear of the Divine Majesty will at
once slide out of thine heart, and all thy ways shall be full of windings and
turnings, and inexplicable difficulties. Fly from sin, avoid all vice and
impurity, and whatsoever has any appearance thereof. Be vigilant and
circumspect continually, that thou may not fall under the suspicion of any
abominable practice. Study to oblige every man, and be not backward to those
that stand in need of thy help, according to thy power, so that thou do nothing
contrary to the Law of God. For if it come to pass that any man, thy Father,
thy Mother, thy Teacher or Instructor, yea thy Prince, though he be the most
potent Monarch in the world, should command thee to do any thing contrary to
the Law of God, do not obey him, not give ear unto his words; let not the
Authority of any man prevail with thee as much as the Divine Majesty. But let
the Power of God and his dreadful Tribunal beget in thee far greater terror,
than the Edicts or fierce Threatenings of any King. If thou shall lead thy life
according to these precepts, God will meet with thy expectations, and defend
thee from the snare that any one has laid for thee, and from every evil
accident: thou shall overthrow great and strong Lions, Serpents, and Draggons
thou shall tread under thy feet, and be delivered from all dangers. Now because
thou art so desirous to perceive the secrets of the Divine Law, see thou come
every day to my House; I will not grudge to instruct thee all the day long, how
thou may attain to the perfection of true Virtue and Godliness. Go to then
my Son, prepare all the faculties of thy Soul, and from the bottom of thy heart
with the most ardent devotion pray unto God, that he would open unto thee the
Gates of Knowledge and Wisdom. Get the knowledge get the knowledfe of God; this
is the only thing in which thou may glory if thou will glory in any thing,
Fear God and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole Duty of Man.

FINIS.

