His Majesty's GRACIOUS DECLARATION To all His Loving Subjects for Liberty of
Conscience.
JAMES R.

IT having pleased Almighty God not only to bring Us to the Imperial Crown of
these Kingdoms through the greatest difficulties, but to preserve Us by a more
than ordinary Providence upon the Throne of Our Royal Ancestors, there is
nothing now that We so earnestly desire, as to Establish Our Government on such
a Foundation, as may make Our Subjects happy, and unite them to Us by
Inclination as well as Duty; Which We think can be done by no Means so
effectually, as by granting to them the free Exercise of their Religion for the
time to come, and add that to the perfect Enjoyment of their Property, which
has never been in any case Invaded by Us since Our coming to the Crown: Which
being the two things Men value most, shall ever be preserved in these Kingdoms,
during Our Reign over them, as the truest Methods of their Peace and Our Glory.
We cannot but heartily wish, as it will easily be believed, that all the people
of Our Dominions were Members of the Catholic Church, yet We humbly thank
Almighty God, it is, and has of long time been Our constant Sense and Opinion
(which upon diverse Occasions We have Declared) that Conscience ought not to be
constrained, nor People forced in matters of mere Religion: It has ever been
directly contrary to Our Inclination, as We think it is to the Interest of
Government, which it destroys by spoiling Trade, depopulating Countries, and
discouraging Strangers; And finally, that it never obtained the End for which
it was employed: And in this We are the more Confirmed by the Reflections We
have made upon the Conduct of the four last Reigns. For after all the frequent
and pressing Endeavors that were used in each of them, to reduce this Kingdom
to an exact Conformity in Religion, it is visible the Success has not answered
the Design, and that the Difficulty is invincible; We therefore out of Our
Princely Care and Affection unto all Our Loving Subjects, that they may live at
Ease and Quiet, and for the increase of Trade, and encouragement of Strangers,
have thought fit by virtue of Our Royal Prerogative, to issue forth this Our
Declaration of Indulgence; making no doubt of the Concurrence of Our Two
Houses of Parliament, when We shall think it convenient for them to Meet.

In the first place We do Declare, That We will Protect and Maintain Our
Archbishops, Bishops, and Clergy, and all other Our Subjects of the Church of
England, in the free Exercise of their Religion, as by Law Established, and in
the quiet and full Enjoyment of all their Possessions, without any Molestation
or Disturbance whatsoever.

We do likewise Declare, That it is Our Royal Will and Pleasure, That from
henceforth the Execution of all and all manner of Penal Laws in Matters
Ecclesiastical, for not coming to Church, or not Receiving the Sacrament, or
for any other Nonconformity to the Religion Established, or for, or by Reason
of the Exercise of Religion in any manner whatsoever, be immediately Suspended;
And the further Execution of the said Penal Laws and of every of them is hereby
Suspended.

And to the end that by the Liberty hereby granted, the Peace and Security of
Our Government in the Practice thereof, may not be endangered, We have thought
fit, and do hereby straightly Charge and Command all Our Loving Subjects, That as
We do freely give them Leave to Meet and Serve God after their own Way and
Manner, be it in Private Houses or Places purposely Hired or Built for that use;
so that they take especial care, that nothing be Preached or Taught amongst
them, which may any ways tend to Alienate the Hearts of Our People from Us or
Our Government; And that their Meetings and Assemblies be peaceably, openly,
and publicly held, and all Persons freely admitted to them; And that they do
signify and make known to some one or more of the next Justices of the Peace,
what Place or Places they set apart for those uses.

And that all Our Subjects may enjoy such their Religious Assemblies with
greater Assurance and Protection, We have thought it requisite, and do hereby
Command, That no Disturbance of any kind be made or given unto them, under Pain
of Our Displeasure, and to be further proceeded against with the uttermost
severity.

And for as much as We are desirous to have the Benefit of the Service of all
Our Loving Subjects, which by the Law of Nature is inseparably annexed to, and
inherent in Our Royal Person: And that none of Our Subjects may for the future
be under any Discouragement or Disability (who are otherwise well inclined and
fit to serve Us) by Reason of some Oaths or Tests, that have been usually
Administered on such Occasions: We do hereby further Declare, That it is Our
Royal Will and Pleasure, That the Oaths commonly called, The Oaths of Supremacy
and Allegiance, and also the several Tests and Declarations mentioned in the
Acts of Parliament made in the 25th and 30th years of the Reign of Our late
Royal Brother King Charles the Second, shall not at any time hereafter be
required to be Taken, Declared, or Subscribed by any Person or Persons
whatsoever, who is or shall be Employed in any Office or Place of Trust either
Civil or Military, under Us or in Our Government. And We do further Declare it
to be Our Pleasure and Intention from time to time hereafter, to Grant Our
Royal Dispensations under Our Great Seal to all Our Loving Subjects so to be
Employed, who shall not take the said Oaths, or Subscribe or Declare the said
Tests or Declarations in the abovementioned Acts and every of them.

And to the end that all Our Loving Subjects may receive and enjoy the full
Benefit and advantage of Our Gracious Indulgence hereby intended, and may be
Acquitted and Discharged from all Pains, Penalties, Forfeitures, and
Disabilities by them or any of them incurred or forfeited, or which they shall
or may at any time hereafter be liable to, for or by reason of their
Nonconformity, or the Exercise of their Religion, and from all Suits,
Troubles, or Disturbancs for the same: We do hereby give Our Free and Ample
Pardon unto all Non-conformists, Recusants, and other Our Loving Subjects, for
all Crimes and Things by them committed or done contrary to the Penal Laws
formerly made relating to Religion and the Profession or Exercise thereof.
Hereby Declaring, That this Our Royal Pardon and Indemnity shall be as Good
and Effectual to all Intents and Purposes, as if every Individual Person had
been therein particularly named, or had particular Pardons under Our Great
Seal, which We do likewise Declare shall from time to time be Granted unto any
Person or Persons desiring the same: Willing and Requiring Our Judges,
Justices, and other Officers, to take notice of and Obey Our Royal Will and
Pleasure herein before Declared.

And although the Freedom and Assurance We have hereby given in relation to
Religion and Property, might be sufficient to remove from the Minds of Our
Loving Subjects all Fears and Jealousies in relation to either; yet We have
thought fit further to Declare, That We will Maintain them in all their
Properties and Possessions, as well of Church and Abby-Lands, as in any other
their Lands and Properties whatsoever.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Fourth Day of April, 1687. In the Third
Year of Our Reign.
By His Majesty's special Command.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb; And
Reprinted at Edinburgh by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His Most
Sacred Majesty, Anno DOM. 1687.


