JOYFUL NEVVES FROM The Princes Fleet at Sea; containing a Narrative of the
several Fights and Engagements, between the two Navies, the Bristoll Men of
War, and the London and Yarmouth Merchants, since the first of April 1649.
With the Resolution of the Princes Seamen touching the Parliament and Army and
two of them adjudged to die, and to be hanged up at the main Masts, for
declaring against the proceedings of prince Rupert. As also the manner how they
were rescued from him by the rest of the Mariners. Likewise, a great Victory
obtained by Col. Jones in Ireland, against the Marquess of Ormond. And the
proposals of the Lord Inchiquins Army, to be sent to the parliament of England.

Published by Authority.

woodcut of ships at sea

April ^2. London Printed for R. Williamson, 1649.

JOYFUL NEWS From the Fleet at SEA, And a Narrative of the several Fights
and Engagements between the two Navies, since the first of April, 1649.
SIR,
SInce my last of the second of this instant, we have received certain
information of the further proceedings of the Princes Fleet, and that they have
(...) the Navy into three Squadrons; the first commanded by Prince Rupert, who
is to guard the Irish Seas, and to attend the motion of Col. Jones Governor of
the City of Dublin for the Parliament of England; the second, by Prince
Maurice, who with 20 Sail is to attend the motion of Captain Moulton in the
Western Riding; the third by Captain Jerden, designed for the Lands-End, to
attend the motion and coming out of the parliaments Summers Fleet; all which,
though numerous in shipping, yet weakly manned, and dare not engage, unless
with great advantage, the Seamen begin to moulter in their affections, and show
a great dislike of the proceedings of their Officers; for diverse who have
escaped at their coming into Creekes, do declare, That they begin to languish
for their late perfidious Revolt, and would fain make a recantation, and that
if once they could have the opportunity to come ashore, are unanimously
resolved to desert the princes service: however, if they cannot purchase their
liberty one way, they are resolved to faciliate it anothe; and that upon a near
Engagement with the Parliaments Fleet, it is believed they will take the same
resolution as the Land Soldiers have formerly done, and (upon good articles
and conditions) deliver up their Officers to mercy, etc.

Some action has lately happened between diverse Merchants, and prince Manrice
his ships, and much hurt done on both sides; but after some dispute, and
several boardings, the Victory fell to the Merchant Men of War, who sunk two
of the revolted ships, wherein was 50 piece of Ordnance, and chased the rest
above seven Leagues, but by reason of a storm, they were forced to desist from
further pursuit, and to leave them to the mercy of the raging Billows.

These ships are said to be bound for London, Lyn, and Yarmouth, who hold
conjunction together for the safety and preservation of their Merchandise.

Since which time we have received other joyful intelligence from the
Maurician Fleet, and it is likewise confirmed by two men of War who last night
cast anchor in this Harbor: they purport, that upon their crossing the Western
Channel, they were set upon by six of the princes ships, who gave them 12.
broad sides, but were answered again with another Volley from the Sons of Mars,
and after a hot conflict, became victiorious, killing many of their men,
chasing the rest, some taking their pursuit without a Mast, others without a
stern, and their Sayls all rent and torn. But by reason of the distempers of
the Sea, and the dangerous breaches they had received from the Enemies round
shot, were forced to strike in here for refuge, for the repairing and new
rigging of their ships. Those who have been in action with them, report them to
be as cowardly an Enemy, as ever engaged upon the Neptune Seas, and that 30 of
the parliaments ships well manned, will (in all probability) soon expel the fury
of 60 of theirs.

We hear that Capt. Moulton is in a defensive posture, and that he sails
sometimes within sight of the princes Fleet, but declines engagement at present.

We likewise hear of a great insurrection arising in prince Ruperts Squadron,
the manner thus: two Seaman speaking some words touching the unjustnesse of
their cause, and the unlawfulness of their engagement, being overheard, were
brought before the prince, and (according to Martial Law) were adjudged to die,
and to be hanged up at the main Mast, but the Seamen hearing thereof,
unanimously rescued him from the power of the Marshal; other Captains were
summoned, to see the princes tyranny performed, but their Mariners likewise
jointly resolved not to execute the same.

Bristoll 7. April, 1649.

The COMMONS of England assembled in parliament taking into their serious
consideration, the great prejudice and apparent danger that might befall this
City and Nation, if the four Aldermen formerly committed to the Tower, viz.
Alderman Bunch Alderman Langham, and -- and the late Lord Major should be
continued any Office, or public employment, after mature deliberation in
reference thereunto, Ordered, that the said four Aldermen, and the late Lord
Major Reynaldson should be disabled Aldermen of the City of London, or bear any
Office or Employment in this Commonwealth, and that the Common Council do
proceed to the election of new Aldermen in their steads.

And upon information given, that there was matter of proof sufficient for
convicting Major Genesis Brown, now prisoner to the parl. the House spent some
time in debate thereof, and at the last came to this Result:

Resolved by the Commons of England assembled in parliament, That the said
Major Genesis Brown shall be forthwith brought to his Trial.

Resolved. etc. That a Charge be drawn up against him, for the convicting him
of such crimes and misdemeanors, as shall be exhibited and made good upon
matter of proof; it appearing that there is sufficient testimony and witness,
viz. 1 That he has been a great Instrument in abetting and promoting the last
Rebellion in Kent, Essex, and several other parts of this Nation. 2 That there
had been several levyes of money, and that he had received the sum of 10000,
li. for the better faciliating and carrying on of that trayterus work and
design, against the Parl. and people of England, etc. For these, and many other
crimes and misdemeanors, he is adjudged (in the name of the Commons of England)
to be brought to a fair and legal trial, but the time and place not yet
prefixed.

The honorable Court of parl. have also taken into their serious consideration,
the manifold hardens and oppressures of the people of this Nation, and have
debated a way for the prevention thereof for the future and have ordered a
Declaration to be brought in consisting of several particulars touching
Religion, the composing of all differences, the redressing of grievances, the
easing of the people from all burdens and heavy oppressures, and the settling of
this distracted church and commonwealth, as it shall stand enacted and
confirmed for the future; and to the end that the people of this Nation may
receive a little glimpse of their future freedom, I shall here insert the chief
heads of the groundwork of their Declaration, viz. 1 That the Ministry of the
Gospel shall not have their Tithes taken away, until another way be provided for
them as a sufficient maintenance. 2 That the Government to be established in
England, shall be the presbyterian government, and to be erected in such a
manner, that the purity and splendour of the Gospel may shine forth through out
all corners of this Nation. 4 That a way shall be provided for admission of all
such churches as tend to godliness, and the advancement of the sacred Word of
Jesus Christ, and to be without disturbance. 4 That all such Ministers, or
other persons whatsoever, who shall endeavor to promote sin, and dishonor
the truth, shall be suppressed, and proceeded against according to the penalty
of their Crime or Fact. These, and other particulars, are now in debate, which
will suddenly be of maturity for the public view. The commons have also
ordered that the committee of the Army be required to bring in an Act, with
certain Rules how to take off the Monster of Nature Eree quarter, and all other
charges from the people, and therefore resolved, that a committee should be
nominated to advise with his Excellency, and the Officers of the Army, in
relation thereunto.

Letters from Chester say, That renowned Col. Jones is marched forth into the
field with 3000 Horse and Foot, and has fallen upon some of the Enemies
quarters within 20 miles of Dublin, put many to the sword relieved two castles,
who were in great distress, and even at the last gasp of being devoured by the
barbarous and bloodthirsty Rebels; After which he marched up further into the
Country, whose endeavors and motion being crowned with prosperous success,
returned again to the City, with some provisions and necessaries for the relief
of his Soldiery, and the distressed Inhabitants thereof: From whence we also
hear, that the Lord Inchiquins Briggade, consisting of 4000 Foot, and 2500.
Horse, decline engagement with Ormond against the English, and that there are
diverse proposals in a preparative way to be presented to the parliament of
England, consisting of several Branches touching a^ Act of Oblivion, their
joining with Colonel Jones, and their reception into future pay; All which
will prove Isntrumental motives, for reducing that Kingdom from tyranny and
oppression, and restoring of it, to its just liberty and freedom.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

TH^O: JENNINGS.


