A LETTER OF ADVICE TO HIS EXCELLENCY The LORD General Monck, TENDING To the
Peace and Welfare of this NATION.

Printed in the Year, 1659.

May it please your Excellency,
It Is not out of any fear or distrust of your good intentions to the public
good, that I assume the confidence, to excite you thereunto, your own
inclinations I hope, though wrapped up in ambiguous expressions, fixes on the
same thing: I must ingeniously confess my affection and zeal to your person,
whom I infinitely esteem, is the only Motive of this Address unto you*

You cannot be insensible or ignorant, my Lord, how our expectations have been
wearied (by those ambitious and self-interessed persons, who have too long sat
at the Stern of Government) with promises of an immunity of our Privileges and
Liberties, and a firm and glorious establishment of the Commonwealth; and yet
to our Misery, and anxiety of soul, We have been so far from enjoying the
Fruits thereof, that our Slavery and oppressions are become more intolerable
then the Egyptian bondage; the specious and smooth pretenses of those cunning
Sophisters, whereby they have deluded many thousand persons, was nothing else
but a vizard to disguise the cruelty of their wicked proceedings, their actions
have always run counter to their Protestations; and that pretended Liberty,
which they so soothed up and inflamed the vulgar withal, has proved nothing
else but an imaginary Chymera.

My Lord, It is now perspicuous and evident to all the World, unless to those
who are wilfully blind, that they never intended the public welfare, or any
settlement in Church or State; but to carry on their own ambitious designs and
private ends; the Foundation whereof, they have laid on the ruins of many
Ancient and Honorable Families.

My Lord, It is not my intention, nor do I think it absolutely necessary to rip
up and lay before your eyes, all the particular Grievances of this miserable
Nation, they are so many and so prodigious, that I should (seemingly) render my
self guilty of notorious falsity to dilute them; I will leave that therefore to
those, whose sufferings and unsupportable Oppressions, will cry loud in your
ears, and penetrate your soul, which I hope will be so prevalent with your
goodness and clemency, that you will speedily put a period to this tyrannical
Power, and convene a Free Parliament, unto whom all public Grievances may be
freely and amply propounded and redressed.

My Lord, God has given you that power now, whereof you may make a ^ery good
use, which certainly if you neglect to do, your own ruin will infallibly
follow: the Sword is now in your hand, it behooves you therefore speedily to cut
off the head of that monstrous beast, that has violated both Church and State,
and rooted up both our Liberties and Privileges, never think or imagine your
self securely seated in their favor, by the services and obligations they have
received from you; let the Examples of others, be a caution to you for that;
and assure your self, if you destroy not them, they will ruin you; and your
only security depends upon their destruction; this must be the first thing you
are obliged to do, in which you happily open a way for the calling of a Free
Parliament: In doing whereof, give me leave to mind your Lordship of two or
three Particulars of high concernment.

First, Let there be an especial care taken in the Elections, that the persons
be prudential and honest, and of considerable Fortunes.

Secondly, That they be unbiassed, and un-interess'd in the late Kings, Queens,
Bishops, or any other Lands, or otherwise.

Lastly, That they may freely Debate, freely Vote, without searing the
obstructing or menacing of an Army; this is the way to make it a happy
Parliament, and us a flourishing People.

My Lord, I have so high an opinion of your courage and heroical spirit, that I
believe you dare attempt a more hazardous enterprise then this, for the
dis-enslaving your Country; wherein I must confess I cannot apprehend you
expose your self to the least danger: several parts of the Nation have already
declared for a Free Parliament, which if countenanced by so great a person as
your Self, no doubt but they will venture their Lives and Fortunes, for the
effecting thereof; and more then this, you are ascertained of the Assistance
and Conjunction of the powerful and populous City of London, whose Declaration
you have already seen, and whose Fidelity you need not doubt, and who are
resolved never to own this Arbitrarie and tyrannical power.

I need not tell your Lordship, I suppose you are already sensible of it, how
the eyes of all people are fixed on you; and the great hopes they have already
conceived of your Lordships good intentions, have chained their Affections to
you: it is on you Sir they look as their DELIVERER; and certainly it is in your
power to make this a happy, or continue it a miserable Nation.

My Lord, Give me leave to tell you the Advantages will accrue unto You, by the
accomplishment of so glorious a Work, as the Establishment of this Nation: that
sublimitie of grandeur You have raised your self to by your Sword, You need
never fear a diminution of, the just and lawful Power you Erect, will not only
confirm and settle You in it, and your Posterity after you, but gratify You
with the highest Reward You can expect or imagine, as a Testimony of their
deep resentment of Your real worth and merit: the Memory of Your Person will
be Reverenced by succeeding Ages, and Your Name and Actions Recorded in the
Annals of Fame, which neither Time nor Malice will be ever able to obliterate.

Thus my Lord, I have briefly given You my ADVICE very faithfully, without
flattery or fraud; God Almighty will bless You in the Management of it, it is
the prayer of all good People, and of Me in particular, who am

My Lord Your Lordships most faithful Servant, T. J.


