By the King, A PROCLAMATION. To Restrain the Spreading of FALSE NEWS.
JAMES R.
ALthough since Our Accession to the Crown, We have Graciously extended Our
Royal Mercy and Clemency to Our Subjects by several General Pardons, one
whereof was lately Published; Yet We are sensible that diverse evil disposed
Persons, being not Reformed or wrought upon by such Our Grace and Favor, do,
notwithstanding, make it their Business by Writing, Printing, or Speaking, to
Defame Our Government with False and Seditious News and Reports, thereby
intending to amuse Our loving Subjects, and, as far as they are able, to create
in them an universal Jealousy and Discontent, especially in this time of
Public Danger, threatened by the intended Invasion upon this Our Kingdom, and
consequently to alienate the Hearts of such of Our loving Subjects from Us, who
otherwise would readily yield unto Us that Aid and Assistance, which by their
Natural Allegiance they are bound to do: And whereas by the Ancient Laws and
Statutes of this Realm, great and heavy Penalties are inflicted upon all such
as shall be found to be Spreaders of false News, or Promoters of any malicious
Slanders and Calumnies, in their ordinary and common Discourses, or otherwise,
and more especially upon such who shall utter or publish any Words or Things to
incite and stir up the People to Hatred or Dislike of Our Person, or the
Established Government* Notwithstanding which, there have been of late more
bold and licentious Discourses than formerly, and Men have assumed to
themselves a Liberty, not only in Coffee houses, but in other Places and
Meetings* both public and private, to Censure and Defaine the Proceedings of
State, by speaking evil of Things they understand not: We therefore considering
that Offenses of this nature proceed from the restless Malice of evil Persons,
or from the careless Demeanor of others, who presume too much upon Our
accustomed Elemency and Goodness, have therefore thought fit by this Our Royal
Proclamation, by and with the Advice of Our Privy Council, straightly to
Forewarn and Command all Our Subjects* of what Estate or Condition they be,
that they presume not henceforth, either by Writing, Printing or Speaking, to
utter or publish any false News or Reports whatsoever, or to intermeddle with
the Affairs of State or Government, or with the Persons of any of Our
Counselors or Ministers in their common and ordinary Discourses, as they will
Answer the contrary at their utmost Perils.

And because all Bold and Irreverent Speeches touching matters of this high
Nature, and all Malicious and False Reports tending to Sedition, or the
Amusement of Our People, are punishable not only in the Speakers, but in the
Hearers also, unless they do speedily reveal the same unto some of Our Privy
Council, or some other of Our Judges or Justices of the Peace; Therefore that
all Persons may be left without Excuse, who shall not hereafter contain
themselves within that modest and dutiful regard which becomes them, We do
further Declare, That We will proceed with all Severity and Rigor against all
such Persons who shall be guilty of any such malicious and unlawful Practices
by Writing, Printing, or other Publication of such false News and Reports, or
who shall receive or hear the same, without revealing or giving Information
thereof as aforesaid, in due time; We being resolved to suppress the said
Enormities by a most strict and exemplary Punishment of all such Offenders as
shall hereafter be discovered* And We do hereby straightly Charge and Command
all and singular Our Judges, Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, May^^s, Bailiffs,
and all other Our Officers and Ministers whatsoever, to take effectual Care for
the speedy Apprehension, Prosecution, and severe Punishment of all such Persons
who shall at any time hereafter be found Offenders herein.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 26th day of October, 1688. In the Fourth
Year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to
the Kings (...) Majesty* 1688.


