A Just and Solemn PROTESTATION OF THE Freeborn People of England, and Free
Citizens of London, against a Clause in the late Ordinance to deprive them of
their Free Elections, and enslave them.
WE the Freeborn People of England and Free Citizens of London do Protest
and Declare, that it neither is, nor ought to be in the power of one or both
Houses of Parliament to make or declare New Treasons (of things not treasonable
in their own Nature) to carry on the private Designs of any prevayling Faction
in the Houses and Army* and by color thereof to deprive us of our Lives,
Liberties, Officers, Estates, and Franchises at their pleasure, it being
contrary to Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, the Fundamental Laws of the
Land, the Solemn League and covenant, and their own Declarations all this
Parliament till of late, and the highest pitch of that Arbitrary and Tyrannical
power they and we have so long protested and fought against, which we neither
may nor can submit to. That it is one of the undoubted Liberties and Customs of
the City of London confirmed by Magna Charta c. 9. and sundry other Acts of
Parliament since, that they may freely Elect such Citizens for the Mayor,
Aldermen, Common Council men, and other public Officers of the City, as they
shall think meetest and ablest to discharge those places; and the Statute 3. E.
1. c. 5. directly En^cts; That all Elections ought to be free, and that no
great man nor other by force of Arms or Menacies shall disturb any to make free
elections: which Sir Edward Cook in his Comm^ntary on this Statute (printed by
order of this present Parliament) proves to be the common Law of England, and
Subjects Birthright. And therefore we can no ways submit to the late sudden
Ordinance (contrived by the practice of pre-ingaged Members and Officers in the
Army) of 17. December, 1647. in this particular clause* That no person whatsoever
who has entered into that late Engagement in or about the CITY OF LONDON,
adjudged TREASONABLE by both Houses if Parliament or shall for the space of one
whole (by the same reason they might have added 20 yearts) to be accounted from
the 25. of December 1647. be elected, chosen, or put into the office or place
of Lord Mayor of the CITY OF LONDON, or of Alderman, Sheriff, Deputy of a Ward,
or Councelmen of the same City, nor shall have voice in election of any such
Officers. And all such persons ARE HEREBY MADE INCAPABLE, and be declared so to
be OF ANY OF THE SAID PLACES. And if any election shall be made of any such
person THE SAME IS HEREBY ORDAINED TO BE NVLL AND VOID. And the Lord Mayor of
the City of London for the time being, is from time to time to give special
order, that this Ordinance be published at all Elections* and that the same be
strictly and punctually observed. And therefore we do in all humility (in
vindication of our own just Rights) protest against it, as an high violation
of, and Encroachment upon our undoubted Liberties and Freedom* and a
mischievous-Plot, of the confederated Independent Party in the Houses, Army and
City, to raise up New Combustions and Discontents between the City and Houses;
to deprive us of our ancient Freedom in the Elections of our City Officers now
at hand, to bring in a new pack of Independent Aldermen, Common Council men and
other Officers to overtop and ruin the City, and put by those faithful Aldermen
and Citizens from bearing office, in whom we most confide; which they formerly
endeavored, and in part effected by impeaching and imprisoning our late Lord
Mayor, and faithful Aldermen and Citizens, upon false pretenses and endevors to
bring up the Army to quarter in the City at this time, and the late ridulous
plot discovered to and by the Speaker. And we do further avow and protest, that
this Engagement in the City, declared by these confederates power (whiles the
Houses were under the Armies Force and Wardship) to be Treasonable by this, and
a former repealed O^dinance, is in our judgments, no ways Treasonable, but
agreeable in all things to our Solemn League and Covenant, wherein both Houses
engag^d us; and nothing like so Dangerous or Treasonable, as the many late
printed Engagements of the Army; or that Engagement of the Speakers and Members
of both Houses to and in the Army, who contrary to their trust and duty
withdrew themselves from the Houses to the Head-quartees, and subscribed that
Engagement, to live and dye with the Army, etc. and engaged them to march up to
London and Westminster against both Hou^es then sitting and the City, in a
Warlike manner, against the Houses Votes and Orders: and thereby levied actual
war against them, and the King too, whom they had forcibly seized, and then
kept prisoner from both Houses. For which cause (having no other means to right
our selves herein) we humb^y appeal to all indifferent, and dis-ingaged M^mbers
of both Houses, and all the free-people of England (the only competent Judges
in this case) whether this forced Ordinance thus procured without once h^aring
of us, what we could object against it, ought to forejudg us of our
unquestionable Rights and Privileges in Elections? And whether those
pre-engaged Members of the House and Army, (by the rules of their own Law, and
justice toward us) ought not first to be suspended the Houses and Army, and
disabl^d from bearing any Office (for the time limited in this Ordinance) in
them, or in the Commonwealth by reason of their said Engagemen^s; before we or
any other Citizens, or freeborn people of England, be disabled and suspended
(without any conviction, proof^, or particular designation of our names and
persons) from being elected Aldermen, Common Council men, Deputies, Sherifs, or
other Officers in the City, or bearing any office whatsoever, though we have
been as faithful to the Parliament, and hazarded our lives and est^tes as far
as any Contrivers of this Ordinance in their defense and service. And til this
be descided judicially by them upon full bearing, we resolve, by Gods
assistance, to enjoy and maintain the freedom and free choice we and our
ancestors ever used, in our elections to all the foresaid Offices,
notwithstanding, this or any other Ordinance; being yet nevertheless always
ready to obey both Houses in all their just Commands and Ordinances, not
destructive to our Privileges, Covenant and Obligations, to the National and
Common Freedom of the Kingdom and City, which we neither can, nor dare betray,
to humor any mortals, or prevailing faction whatsoever, especially in this
iuncture of affairs, when we are in greater danger of arbytrary Tyranny and
Slavery (against which we have so many years struggled to the expense of our
estates and blood) then at the very beginning of our Wars, and that from these
who most pretend to make us Freemen.


