HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms

IMPRIMATUR,

MARCH, 31, 1686. MICHAEL JEPHSON.

To the most Reverend Fathers in God, William Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
Primate of all England and Metropolitan, and John Lord Archbishop of York,
Primate of England and Metropolitan.
JAMES R.
MOST Reverend Fathers in God, We Greet you well.
Whereas the bold abuses and extravagancies of Preachers in the Pulpit, have
not only by the experience of former Ages been found to tend to the Dishonor
of God, the Scandal of Religion, and Disturbance of the Peace both of Church
and State but did also (through the Licentiousness of the late Rebellious
times) much increase, to the Inflaming Fomenting, and Heightening of the sad
Distempers and Confusions that were then among us: And whereas even at this
present (notwithstanding the merciful Providence of God, so signally manifested
in Restoring Our Royal Family, and the Lawful Government of these Realms, and
putting an end to the great Rebellion, and notwithstanding the Pious care and
endeavors of Our late Dear Brother, and Our Self ever since, to Govern Our
Realms in Peace and Tranquillity) it may justly be feared that in sundry parts
of this Realm, there want not men of unquiet and Factious Spirits, who instead
of Preaching the pure Word of God, and building up the People in Faith and
Holiness, will (if they be not restrained) make it a great part of their
Business to beget in the minds of their Hearers, an evil Opinion of their
Governors, by insinuating Fears and Jealousies, to dispose them to Discontent,
and to season them with such unsound and dangerous Principles as may lead them
into Disobedience, Schism, and Rebellion: And whereas also sundry young
Divines, and Preachers, either out of a Spirit of Contention and Contradiction,
or in a vain ostentation of their Learning, take upon them in their popular
Sermons, to handle the deep Points of God's Eternal Councils and Decrees, or to
meddle with the Affairs of State and Government, or to wrangle about Forms and
Gestures, and other fruitless Disputes and Controversies, serving rather to
amuse than profit the Hearers; which is done for the most part, and with the
greatest Confidence, by such persons as least understand them: We out of Our
Princely Care and Zeal for the Honor of God, the Advancement of Piety, Peace,
and true Religion, and for the preventing for the future, as much as lies in
Us, the many and great inconveniences and mischiefs that will unavoidably
ensue, if a timely stop be not given to these and the like growing Abuses; Do,
according to the Examples of several of Our Predecessors of Blessed Memory, by
these Our special Letters straightly Charge and Command you, to use your utmost
Care and Diligence that these Directions, which upon long and serious
Consideration, Our late Dear Brother thought good to give concerning Preachers,
Anno 1662.
and which we upon like Consideration have Approved and caused to be Reprinted,
and here with sent unto you, be from henceforth duly and strictly observed by
all the Bishops and others concerned therein within your Provinces. And to this
end Our Will and Pleasure is, That you forthwith send them Copies of these Our
Directions, to be by them speedily Communicated to every Parson, Vicar, Curate,
Lecturer, and Preacher in every Cathedral, Collegiate, and Parish Church within
their several Diocesses: And that you earnestly Require them to employ their
utmost endeavor for the due Observation of the same, whereof We shall expect a
strict Account, both of you, and every one of them: And these our Letters shall
be your sufficient Warrant and Discharge in that behalf.

Given at Our Court at Whitehal the Fifth day of March 1685. In the Second Year
of Our Reign. By His Majesty's Command, SVNDERLAND P.

DIRECTIONS Concerning PREACHERS.
I. THat no Preachers in their Sermons presume to meddle with Matters of State,
to Model new Governments, or take upon them to Declare, Limit, or Bound out the
Power and Authority of Sovereign Princes, or to State and Determine the
Differences between Princes and the People; But that upon all good Occasions
they faithfully Instruct the People in their Bounden Duty of Subjection and
Obedience to their Governors, Superior and Subordinate of all sorts, and to
the Established Laws according to the Word of God, and the Doctrine of the
Church of England, as it is contained in the Homilies of Obedience, and the
Articles of Religion set forth by Public Authority.

II. That they be Admonished not to spend their Time, and Study in the Search
of Abstruse and Speculative Notions, especially in and about the deep points of
Election and Reprobation, together with the Incomprehensible manner of the
Concurrence of Gods free Grace, and Man's free Will, and such other
Controversies as depend thereupon: But howsoever that they presume not
Positively, and Doctrinally to Determine any thing concerning the same.

III. That they forbear in their Sermons ordinarily and causlesly to enter upon
the Handling of any other Controversies of less Moment and Difficulty: But
whenever they are occasioned up Invitation from the Text they Preach upon, or
that in regard of the Auditory they Preach unto, it may seem Requisite or
expedient so to do; That in such cases they do it with all Modesty Gravity and
Candor, Asserting the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, from
the Cavils and Objections of such as are Adversaries to either, without
Bitterness, Flailing, Iearing, or other unnecessary or unseemly Provocation.

IV. That for the more Edifying of the People in Faith and Godliness (the
aforesaid abuses laid aside) all Ministers and Preachers in their several
respective Cures shall not only diligently apply themselves to Catechize the
Younger fort according as in the Book of Common Prayer is appointed; But also
shall in their ordinary Sermons Insist chiefly upon Catechetical Doctrines
(wherein are contained all the necessary and undoubted Verities of Christian
Religion) Declaring withal unto their Congregations what Influences such
Doctrines ought to have into their Lives and Conversations, and stirring them
up Effectually, as well by their Examples, as their Doctrines, to the Practice
of such Religious and Moral Duties, as are the proper Results of the said
Doctrines, as Self-denial, Contempt of the World, Humility, Patience, Meekness,
Temperance, Justice, Mercy, Obedience, and the like; And to a Detestation and
Shunning of Sin, especially such Sins as are so rife among us, and common to
the Age we live in; such are those usually Styled the Seven Deadly ones, in
short, all kind of Debauchery, Sensuality, Rebellion, Profaness, Ath^ism, and
the like. And because the late Licentious Times have Corrupted Religion even in
the very Roots and Foundations. That where there is an Afternoons Exercise, it
be especially Spent either in Explaining some part of the Church-Catechism, or
in Preaching upon some such Text of Scripture, as will Properly and Naturally
lead to the Handling of some thing Contained in it, or may Conduce to the
Exposition of the Liturgy, and Prayers of the Church (as Occasion shall be
offered) the only cause They grew into Contempt amongst the People being this,
that they were not Understood, That also the Minister as often as Conveniently
he can, Read the Prayers himself; and when he cannot so do, he Procure or
Provide some fit Person in Holy Orders, who may do it with that Gravity,
Distinctness, Devotion, and Reverence as becomes so Holy an Action: And
whenever by Reason, of his Infirmity or the Concurrence of other Offices, the
Time may seem too short, or he unable to Perform the Office of both Prayers and
Sermon at length, he rather shorten, his Discourse or Sermon, then Omit any
thing of the Prayers, lest he Incur the Penalty of the Act for Uniformity,
Requiring them to be Read according as the Book Directs.

V. And further Our Will and Pleasure is, That all Ministers within their
several Cures, be enjoyed publicly to read over unto the People, such Cannons
as are or shall be in force, at least once, and the Thirty nine Articles twice
every year, to the end they may the better understand, and be more thoroughly
acquainted with the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, and not
so easily drawn away from it as formerly they have been.

VI. Since Preaching was not Anciently the work of every Priest, but was
restrained to the choicest Persons for Gravity, Prudence and Learning; the
Archbishoys and Bishops of this Kingdom are to take great care whom they
License to Preach, and that all Grants and Licenses of this kind heretofore
made by any Chancellor, Offieial, Commissary, or other Secular Person (who are
presumed not to be so Competent Judges in matters of this nature) be accounted
Void and Null, unless the same shall likewise be allowed by the Archbishop or
the Bishop of the Diocese, and that all Licenses of Preachers hereafter to be
made or granted by any Archbishop or Bishop, shall be only during Pleasure,
otherwise to be void to all intents and puryoses as if the same had never been
made nor granted.

VII. Lastly, That for the better observing of the Lord's Day too much neglected
of late, they shall, as by often and serious Admonitions and sharp Reproofs,
endeavor to draw off People from such Idle, Debauched and Profane courses as
dishonor God, bring a Scandal on Religion, and Contempt on the Laws and
Authority Ecclesiastical and Civil, so shall they very earnestly persuade them
to frequent Divine Service on the Lord's Day, and other Festivals appointed by
the Church to be kept Solemn; And in case any Person shall resort unto any
Taverns or Alehouses, or use any unlawful Sports and Exercises on such days,
the Minister shall Exhort those which are in Authority i^ their several
Parishes and Congregations, care^^^ly to took after all such Offenders in any
kind whatsoever, together which all those that Abett, Receive, or Entertain
them, that they may be Proceeded against according to the Laws, and quality of
their Offenses, that all such Disorders may for the time to come be prevented.

By His Majesty's Command. Sunderland P.
Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 5th. day of March, 1685. In the Second
Year of Our Reign.
DUBLIN, Joseph Ray, for Robert Thornton at the Leather-Bottle, in Skinner-row,
1686.


