THE SPEECH AND DECLARATION OF John James, A Weaver, in the Press-yard, At
Newgate, on Sunday last, to the Fifth-Monarchy-Men, and others; Concerning His
Sermon preached at a private Meeting in White-Chappel, taking his Text out of
the Psalms of David, whose words are here inserted.

And The manner of his Trial before the Lord Chief Justice Foster, at the
King's Bench in West minster Hall; with the Sentence pronounced against him to
be Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered, for preaching maliciously and traitorously
against the life and safety of our Sovereign Lord the King, and against the
Peace and Government of this Realm.

(...) powers. etc.

LONDON, Printed for George Horton, 1661.

The Speech and Declaration of John James in the Press-yard at Newgate, on
Sunday last.
When the Christians in the primitive Times had their private meetings, the
Church was hidden, and it was death for any to profess Christ openly; then
Cellars, Garrets, and Woods, were their places of Assembly; but who reigned
then, Nero? Blessed be the Name of God for ever more, we have the word preached
amongst us faithfully, we need not go into Corners and Holes to hear the Word
of our blessed Lord and Savior taught; it abounds, through the great hand of
Providence, in a most miraculous way, to all Liege and Loyal Subjects, and the
Conduit-pipes of Heaven we see apparently opened, from whence descends the
Fountain of Living Water, God in his great mercy continue the powerful
influence thereof: And if there be some (as I suppose too many) that have a
design to sore high beyond their Capacities and undertakings, let them learn
that good and Christian Lesson of the holy Apostles, Submit your selves to the
Higher powers, etc. Blame me not therefore, I beseech you, though I urge this
with tenderness to tender Consciences; for I verily believe Ananias the
Button-maker, Plash the Cobbler, or any others of that fraternity, never did
more injury to poor Souls then the deluding Foxes of this Age; as is too
manifest in these days, by the delusion of a Generation of men, whom I dare
not call Loyal Subjects; witness the actions of a people that walk and go under
the name of Fifth-monarchy men, whose principles to Monarchy are both dangerous
and pernicious, as appears by their results at their meeting places; touching
which, in reference to the following Discourse, the Reader may be pleased to
take notice, that in one of their private Conventicles at White-Chappel, on
Saturday October 19, 1661. John James a pretended Preacher to that Society, a
Silk Weaver by Trade [mind that] took his Text out of the 8th. Psalm and second
verse; the words these, Out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings have thou
ordained strength, because of thine enemies, that thou might still the enemy
and the avenger. From whence he raised several Doctrines, which alluded to
Seditions and Rebellions, as appeared by the testimony of some witnesses, who
being then present, departed the place, and acquainted the next Justice of
Peace with it; upon which information, the said Justice sent for some Officers,
and immediately came to the place where this Convinticle was, where they found
the aforementioned John James in the full height of his Seditions exercise; and
making their approach near him, they commanded him to come down he boldly
answered, he would not, unless they pulled him down; whereupon an Officer took
hold of his Coat, forcing him to decline his station; and was thereupon carried
before the Right Worshipful Sir John Robinson Lieutenant of the Tower of
London, where was laid to his change many traitorous expressers, uttered in his
private Conventicle against the present Power and Government; for which, the
Lieutenant told him he would stretch for it: And in order thereunto his
Mittimus was made to be sent to Newgate, where he remained till the 19th of
this instant Novem. being Wednesday, from whence he was carried to the Kings
Bar in Westminster Hall, and there arraigned for preaching maliciously and
traitorously against the life and safety of our Sovereign Lord the King, and
against the peace and Government of the whole Realm, etc. But this is
observable, that upon his coming to the Bar, and being commanded to hold up his
hand, according to the ancient Law of England, he yielded obedience thereunto,
but with his Glove on, which the Court perceiving, he was commanded to pull it
off, saying, That he he^d up his hand as a testimony, that he was there
present, to answer what that Honorable Court had to lay to his charge etc. But
to evade circumstances:

The Charge of High Treason being read, wherein he was accused, to Act, Plot,
and Conspire, against His Royal Majesty's Sacred person, to be instrumental of
levying a New War, and that be should say, That if ever they could get the
Power into their own hands (which God forbid) that they would cast of all
Monarchy, and perfect the work formerly began thoroughly.

This and much more was made apparent and attested by several Witnesses;
amongst whom, Mr. Tipler a Tobacco-pipe maker, made Oath, That he heard the
said John James publicly declare at his private Conventicle in white-chapple,
That the Cup of Iniquity was filled more fuller by the blood of the Saints at
Cherring-Cross a twelve month last, and by the blood of the Saints in
Scotland, to wit, the Covenanters, then it had in many years before, and that a
sudden ruin and destruction would befall the Authors thereof.

Thus did this sad Soul justify those Bloody Murderers, who for their horrid
impieties were executed for their most notorious and wicked Treasons, and
seemed to justify himself, pleading innocence: But this, and much more being
fully proved by several Witnesses, before the Lord Chief Justice Foster, and
the rest of the Justices of that Court, he was brought in Guilty of High
Treason, which he seemed very obstinately to evade; for when it was demanded by
the Honorable Court, Who he would be tried by. He answered, By the Laws of
God. The Lord Chief Justice told him, He must answer according to Law,
otherwise he must be recorded for a Mute. The Clerk then telling him, he must
answer, By God and his Country, he desired to know what the meaning of that
was; it was answered, That by God was meant the Laws of the Land, and by
Country, twelve Middlesex men for his Jury, honest, and just, to deal
impartially between the Kings most excellent Majesty and the charge against the
Prisoner at the Bar. whereupon he (...), that he was satisfied: And the Jury
going out, (...) them to be tender of spilling of Innocent word but finding the
evidence of the Witness so clear and apparent, he was brought in Guilty of High
Treason, and soon after received Sentence to be Drawn. Hanged, and Quartered.
In order whereunto he was sent back to Newgate where on Sunday morning last,
diverse of his Acquaintance came to see him in the Press-yard, condoling his sad
condition; but he seemed not at all to be daunted, declaring, That what he
spoke in the meeting, the Spirit of the Lord was upon his heart to reveal it:
And being taxed in his Charge touching some particulars concerning that
notorious Regicide and wicked Usurper Oliver Cromwell, he said, That he was as
much against his power, as he was again this present Government.

The truth is, he fancied no decency in the Church, without order or form, and
as much as in him lay, would have eclipsed the Glory thereof, and laid its
splendour in the Dust, which all the Reformed Churches in the Christian World
have formerly stood amazed at the Government thereof: The Lord in his mercy
open the hearts of our Gracious Sovereign, Parliament, and Council, to reform
these things both in Church and Kingdoms, that God may have his both in settled
in peace and quiet, and his people may come to his Temple with joy and gladness.

FINIS.

