THE Resurrection of Dead Bones, OR, THE CONVERSION OF THE JEWS. In a
Treatise, Wherein are clearly demonstrated the places where, and manner how the
Ten supposed lost Tribes of Israel do at this day subsist.

With a Description of the future glorious estate of the Twelve, at the
incomparable Union of Judah and Ephraim; which must shortly be in reference to
its completing the whole mystery of man's Redemption, and real establishing of
the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, after the Jews Conversion.

Written by J. J. Philo-Judaeus.

2 King. 17 6. In the ninth year of Hoshea, the King of Assyria took Samaria,
and car^ied Israel awa^ into Assyria, and placed them in Halath, and in Habor
by the river of Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes.

Hos. 3 4. For the children of Israel shall abide many days without a King, and
without a Prince, and without a sacrifice, etc.

Romans 11.25 (...).

(...).

London, Printed for Giles Calvert. 165^

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THe holy Scriptures do often declare how it has pleased the almighty God in
former ages, as well as at this day, to cast off his own peculiar people,
because of their vile prevarications: But we do never find (Christian Reader)
that the Lord did ever cast away any of his people. The ten Tribes of Israel
(which are the chiefest subject of this Discourse) were cast off, when the
service of God became a weariness to them, and they chose rather to follow
after Jeroboam the son of Nebat that enticed them to sin, then to go up to
Jerusalem to seek the living God. The two Tribes were cast off for the space of
seventy years in Babylonish servitude; but more perspicuously when Titus the
Roman General carried them away captive, for crucifying their King; by which
means they are, according unto that place Deuteronomy. 32.26. scattered even at this
very day throughout the four corners of the earth: And thus cast off shall be,
until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in; and at whose reception the
promises made by the Amen, the faithful Witness that cannot lie, will be
completed.

Which time and season of Isreal's restoration cannot be far off, by that
security in which the generality of our age do indulge themselves, quieting
their consciences with some formal and civil conversation, having no respect at
all to the nature of true grace, which is always going forward toward
perfection, and longing for the conversion of others. But also many scoffers
there now are, saying, When will the Jews be called? and, Where is the prom^se
of his coming? who likewise shall have their reward.

Now to such as long for the appearing of Christ, sure I need not use many
expressions to excite them to use their whole strength in helping forward this
so long expected Conversion of the Jews. Only this: Inherit a kingdom; -- For I
was a stranger, and ye took me in. And the Apostle says, it shall be life from
the dead.

This should make believers, with whom Jesus Christ is accounted precious, to
gird their loins like men, to put on the whole armor of Christ, and to stand
upon their watch; as that when the Hebrews shall by providence come into this
Nation, they may see such a luster and beauty in your conversation, and such
liveliness in your affections, as it may allure them to embrace your faith. And
then both Judah and Israel will be ingrafted again into that Olive Tree, whose
root is Christ, the same who their fathers ignorantly slew, and whom they have
for above this sixteen hundred years withstood, that through their neglect
salvation might arrive to us Gentiles.

Now God being able to raise up these dead and dry bones, has promised them,
to uphold them in their greatest calamity, -- That as they were a terror, so
they should again be a terror to all the Nations of the world. Which I am sure
they have never as yet been since the days of Solomon; and no Scripture shall
pass away, no not one iota without effect. But as it* behoved Jesus Christ our
Savior, and their Redeemer, to suffer the things he did, before he entered into
glory; even so necessary is it that Israel should be called before his coming
to judge the world, as that it must bring to pass the Lords own words, Mat. 23.
ult.

For I say unto you, ye shall not see me henceforth, until you shall say,
Blessed is he which comes in the name of the Lord. Until their hearts be
melted, Jerusalem must be trodden down of the Gentiles. And therefore let not
men distrust, because they seee not a present change in them. For this is no
more a mystery to the faithful, then Gods giving of Abraham a son in his old
age, was to him. Concerning which one speaks well, Quod non natura, sed Dei
promissio Saram fecit matrem: How that according to nature Sarah could be no
more a mother, but it was Gods promise that made her one. So according to
humane censure Israel is past recovery; but according to the supernatural
promises of God, they were never so near their restoration as now, because
they are fallen into the greatest desolation.

I might produce the story of Lazarus, where the Lord showed his almighty power
in weakness, that no flesh should glory in his presence. And therefore when the
Lord sees that there is no man to help, his own arm will raise and put life
into these dead and dry bones of Israel. The verity of which (Christian Reader)
I hope to have proved in this Discourse. And therefore having understood of one
Seigneur Gomegius, (by whom I did formerly send a Letter Suasory) of a famous
Jew in the Town of Alcasar de Sal, by name D. Ascher F. R. Mardochei, who
writes to be informed what our belief is concerning their brethren the lost
Tribes of Israel, (Which thing being desired by a worthy Gentleman) I have
promised to send so much of this Discourse about the ten Tribes, as may tend to
humble them (if the Lord will) and to excite their affections to embrace our
Messiah, besides whose Name there is none under heaven whereby we can be saved
from the wrath to come.

It is thought that the Apostle did win many of the Heathen by an holy guile;
and I believe the Jews must be won by Love.

So (Christian Reader) I desire thee to censure me modestly: For that if any
thing in this short Treatise shall seem incongruous to thy riper years and
better judgment, I do here promise that I shall take great delight in being
convinced.

And in the mean while I desire thee to remember desolate Zion in all thy
approaches to God, as thou do expect a continual benediction from
God-Farewell.

Thine to serve thee as he may, J. J.

EPISTOLA M. D. ASCHERI F. R. MARDOCHEI.
OMnibus Hebraeis per totum orbem in dispersione, salutem. Mifratres, been
creditis, quomodo vestros patres male tractabantur annis quadringentis in
Egypto; quoaduscunque Dominus Deus eorum gemitum audiebat. Vos vero eorum filii
servitutem passi fuere spiritualem, ter quadringentis annis and insuper, necdum
liberati eritis, tamdiu negligitis Dominum vehementer supplicare, qui ne procul
sit ab unoquoque invocante. Nonne ista optatio maledicta vestra satisque satis
descendit in gentem Hebraeorum? Sanguis ejus super nos, and super filios
nostros! Apud nos hodie restat quiequam vestrae gentis [honoratissimus propter
fidem ejus] qui assidue pro vobis orat, ut Dominus Deus ipse jam loqueretur sat
est, ut vos adhuc credatis in illo qui non vidit corruptionem Jesus de
Nazareth, quem patres vestri inique tanquam ignare occiderunt; qui cum
incarnatus fuit, (secundum illam praedictionem Moysis Deuteronomy. 18.15.) multis
modis tanquam Moysen vestrum optimum Prophetam; per cujus legem non potestis
justificari, a caecitate cordum vestrorum.

Iterum patres vestri resistiterunt illum, sicut olim Moysen, ipsi atque vos
miseri aestimantes ejus Impostorem. Nonne nunc impleta fuit isthaec prophetia
Isa. 53. v. 12. Et cum sceleratis reputatus est? Paupertas ejus parentum
scandalum fuit vestris patribus. Vid. idem caput: Non est species ei, nec
decor. Et paulo post, Nec reputavimus eum. Eam humilitatem in ejus
conversatione ne omnino patres vestri afficiebant. Vid unum exemplum Zach. 9.9.
Jesus Rex vester, qui potens fuit in opere and sermon, coram Deo and omni
populo, magnus in benefactis, multos curavit a languoribus, spiritibus malis,
caecis multis d^navit visum, and mortuos resurgit. Vid. Isa. 42. v. 7. Qui cum
moriturus fuit, quasi agnus coram Todentese, obtumescet and non aperiet os
suum. Circa quod tempus omnia oracula Ethnicorum cessabant responsum dare, and
velum Templi scissum est in duo, a summo usque deorsum, and tunc illum
invenerunt, and crederunt, qui non quaesierunt.

Omnia haec e contra patres vestri (O Judaei) viderunt, at non corda habuerunt
in illo credere, necdum vos miseri, sed in revera erant isti contemptores. Vid.
Habac. 1. v. 5. Atque vos similiter usque in praesentem diem.

Nos Christiani credimus auroram vestram evangelicam appropinquare: sin
diligenter Scripturas scrutamini, perspicue videbitis vestram miserrimamque
conditionem tenebrosam; and tanto prope tempus sit vestrae redemptionis, quanto
alterutroque conversatis de fide Christiana. Denique vehementer desidero, ut
hoc libellum maxim de december Tribubus significans, publicatur and legatur in
omnibus vestris Synagogis; atque nos interdum orabimus nostrum and vestrum
Elohim corda vestra obdurata aperire, and oculos vestros illuminare, ut
aspicietis in illum quem confixistis, and plangatis eum quasi planctum super
unigenitum.

Atque it a precatur humilis Author, J. J. Philo-Judaeus.

On the Author.
ADamion medany bray Jehuds doozey audack kabilai
Na choggea, ke Paderan Gusta lubim colloomes baddas
San gouste bin Jausep nike haran san shoocorey cohoddaw.
Wise men do marvel why thou love the Jews,
Invalid Nation, sick through th'worlds abuse:
Whose fathers deemed the Egyptian bondage sore,
But thou believ'st their present bondage more;
And when thou read'st of Joseph's diligence,
Thou did affect such glorious providence.
R. B.
In Authorem.
Hic juvenis been scit, quae sunt mihi dicere nova:
Quod petit ex Domino, plura futura sciet.
Syrii nec Graeci, Perses, nec Tartari gentes
Quos loquitur, vero sunt, Hebraei digni pati.
Qui Lebanon stetera^t, habita^t nunc vallibus imis
Heu! nunc imple^tum est, O scelerate nefas,
Haebrei tum vellint, Christo dare cuspide vulnus,
Mox hunc spectabunt, magno dolor Regem.
Israel, optatus, periturus, prope juvandus,
Dixit; and interea, O! cum precibusque rogo.
Guil. Wadring' St. Ph.
The lost Sheep returned.
EXODUS 4.31. And the people believed; and when they heard that the Lord had
visited the children of Israel, and that he had looked upon their afflictions;
then they bowed their heads and worshipped.


JERUSALEM, once the Metropolis of Judaea, where that famous warrior, King
David, and after him his most prudent son King Solomon did reside, called the
perfection of beauty, and the joy of the whole earth; and unto which did resort
the most noble families of all the then known world. And above all, she did
chiefly excel in her pure worship; without the which there was no soul under
heaven accounted happy. Which said City is now (after many overturnings)
according unto that place, the chief residence of a Turkish Infidel; called the
languishing Zion, and the byword of Nations; and to the heartbreaking of the
Israelites, has for its religion erected in it the abomination of desolation
spoken of by Daniel the Prophet.

Now although I do conceive this to be no news to any one that can but well
read English, yet I was willing in the beginning of my Discourse to insert it;
because that notwithstanding we have in this latter age seen so many and so
great examples of the almighty power of God in the change of our Government,
and such unlooked for alterations, yet there are some men amongst us, that
(notwithstanding the testimony of holy Writ) do believe that the present sad
estate of Judah will never change for better; and that our faith concerning the
return of (supposed) lost Israel is grounded upon an uncertain and sandy
foundation. I shall therefore by that help which by almighty God to me is
given, and to the furthest extent of my own ability,

First, lay down their two grand objections against them.

Secondly, I shall lay down these two Propositions.

1. That the Jews shall be called and converted to the Christian religion. 2.
That not only the two Tribes, but in the same manner those remaining in the
world that are of the other ten Tribes, and whose present being I doubt not but
to make known to all that read this.
And in the next place, (as indeed is the most sure testimony) I will make this
good and infallible, 1. By the Divine oracles. 2. By the consent of some
ancient Fathers, and modern late writers. 3. I shall (to make sure work) bring
several strong confirmations from the present faith and hope of Israel, as
their Gemara does at this day hold it forth; as also from the good and hopeful
expressions that I my self have by way of converse received from some able
native Hebrews here in London: And then by way of humble submission to more
ripe and knowing wits, I shall lay down my weak opinion how this Jewish
conversion must be accomplished: And lastly I shall use all the strong motives
that my weak capacity will afford me, by the which I would excite all my native
Countrymen to use much study in the safe-guarding and bringing home this poor
straid sheep of Israel.


The first objection is by a sort of men more rationable then the other sort,
such as the Father terms moralized and well disposed Christians, which (ut ipsi
volunt) do speak and act according to truth; and for my part, I do believe it
is only out of dark zeal. But for a more apt and infallible definition, let us
but nominate them, as Origin well spoke; Ii sunt qui accipiunt isthaec verba
secundum literam quae occidit, etc. Such they are as do only take the literal
part of Scripture for the true sense thereof; who I am sure would be very
unwilling to receive that sentence in the 3. of John, v. 18. in the same
manner. But thus they object, That the Lord sent them this certain sign of his
displeasure by the mouths of the Prophets, that violence shall take hold of
you, and I (says the Lord) will consume you utterly, so that none of you shall
remain. So now where the Lord does seem to give his people bills of divorce, and
to root them out from among the rest of the world; there these men take it for
a firm consequence, that those cannot be capable of a Christian conversion,
whom the Text says shall not have a being.

To this I answer: When God does by his servants pronounce his sentence of
judgment against a Nation, City or Family, it is not always an act of his
absolute decreeing will; for if so, there had been no more hope for Israel; and
if God had absolutely and irrevocably decreed the destruction and utter
desolation of Niniveh that great city within forty days time, He would not have
repented him of the evil which he had determined against it. So in Hos. 8.11.
the Lord says, How shall I deliver thee up, Ephraim, etc. My repentings are
kindled together. Here now God had threatened to cut Israel off from the land,
and to make them a spoil for the enemy: but he cries out, How shall I do it?
As if so be the Lord had no will nor pleasure in the doing of it. God did
always delight in mercy more then in sacrifice. And therefore on the contrary I
answer, That these expressions of God are part of his declarative will, wherein
I see much of divine wisdom, how that God does oftentimes work mightily upon
the spirits of his own people by way of terror. So that if a man do scan many
of the Lords expressions, he shall perceive them to be no other then
conditional; much like unto the blessings promised for holiness, and curses
threatened for sin and disobedience, Deu. 28. And we often find many good
actions produced in men by the Lords displaying his banner of justice over
their heads; and that both in the inward and the outward man: As for proof,
this produced much even in Ahab that ungodly King, who before he met with his
enemy the Prophet (as he called him) went on in an arrogant way devising
mischief against the people of God; but no sooner came this word to Ahabs
ears, Thus says the Lord, but it made his haughty naughty heart to stoop; for
the Text says, that he walked softly. As also such was that power which did
accompany the preaching of Jonah, that it caused the heathen King to call for
the most solemn Fast that ever we do read of in the Scripture.

But above these, we may behold the great wisdom of God in those great effects
which the threats of the Lord have produced in the hearts of many men: For it
made Manasseh that ungodly King to pray earnestly, and to beg pardon of the
Lord for all his grievous transgressions; And such was the story of Nathan,
that it made David to grow more watchful. I will but make mention of one more,
and then I hope that all objectors of this sort will be satisfied: and that is
Hezekiah, to whom the Lord did send Isaiah the Prophet to tell the King, that
he should die and not live. Now do but mark the force of these words, although
delivered to him by the mouth of a mortal man; it follows immediately, that he
turned his face to the wall, and prayed; and upon this the merciful and only
wise God prolonged his days in the land. B. Augustine writing on this place,
affirms that novit Dominus mutare sententiam, si peccator noscit emendare
vitam. So that God, notwithstanding his first message sent unto the King (
Austin says) was ready to forgive him, and to alter the sentence, upon this
condition, that he would grow more fervent in holiness. For as our natural
parents are careful to discern the temper and constitution of their children,
whereby they become very skilful to educate them after various manners; some
will take learning of any other art sooner by way of persuasion, whereas some
will not without often chastisement and reproof: So our spiritual Father, that
omniscient and mighty discerner of the hearts of all men, does use the most
wise and best way of dealing toward his children; for some he does woo and
draw as with cords of a man, and bands of love; and others he does threaten, as
he did the Israelites, only that they might turn to him: For the Lord has
sworn that he would have no man to perish, nor no hard heart to be cast away,
but that all might know the truth: This makes a Rebel oftentimes become a
trusty humble subject under the Lord of mercy.

The second Objection it by a sort of people that have been very potent amongst
us here in England, until now of late; men of most wide fancies, like unto
those termed Quakers. They do now object and say, That what was promised is
already fulfilled; and that some Jews there were which did believe in the name
of Christ, and were saved. And these men being, as they imagine, super-humane
and super institutiones, do affirm that the end of the world is usque ed finem,
even at the very doors.

But to answer this, I shall do it negatively^: For, to say, that which was
promised concerning Israel, is already happened, is false. By the Scripture in
Rev. 14.6. it is written, That an Angel did fly through the midst of heaven,
having the everlasting Gospel for to preach unto them that dwell on the earth,
and to every nation, kindred, tongue and people. Now the blessed Apostle S.
Paul, to show (as it were in a mystery) the glorious estate of his Countrymen,
he says, it shall not come until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in. Which
if I do make clear not as yet to have come to pass, then I hope there is no man
so Momus-like, that will deny but the Jews may as yet be called. But first, we
may be convinced by that blessed and thrice happy conversion of so many blind
Heathens in America, that did never so much as hear of a Jesus Christ nor the
Gospel before; and as I am certified, their number of converted ones daily do
increase. So that we must not clip nor diminish the word of God which I
mentioned in the Revelations, where the Angel preaches unto every kindred and
tongue, I dare not exempt the very Cannibal-Indians, called (...) or
man-devourers. Yea surely, before these men's day of judgment comes, the Gospel
will be made known by one means or other; although for the present the most
part, as is supposed, of this new American world remains in total obscurity.
It may be that the instruments that the Lord will make use of for their
conversion, are (some of them) yet unborn: And therefore the Prophet Isaiah
says, And the Isles shall wait for thy Law. They do grope in the dark as yet,
and God knows when their time is covenient; the Lords ways are unsearchable.
And therefore an old Portuguise could take notice of the great wisdom of God,
that even against wind and stream the Lord did carry one of their Carracks
being bound for Carthagena to load with bars of silver, unto a Barbarian
Island, to which they never deemed to have arrived, who by this means are now
become joyful hearers and doers of the world of God. So that the Isles must
wait Gods time, and he will teach them his statutes.

Now some perhaps will say, But does not the Apostle write, that the Gospel
has already been preached unto all the world? It is true, that so far as men
were to be found, I do believe the preaching of the Gospel did then extend it
self. But further to clear this, we do find this recorded: That although
Thomas the Apostle chose Parthia; Matthew, Ethiopia; Bartholomew, India,
wherein to preach glad tidings; yet the middle India being inhabited of many
rude and barbarous nations, did not receive the least knowledge of the
Christian faith, until the good reign of Constantine the Great, which was
almost 300 years after St. Paul's writing: And therefore it is true, and well
called the whole known world. But for this part of the world (by some called
the New-world, considering its large bounds) was never known unto any Age that
we can read of, until some hundreds of years since Christ. And therefore our
best Geographers call a great part of it Terra incognita. But above all these
things I should think that this joyful news from near that most excellent
Nation of China, namely from Formosa, that rich East-Indian Island, of many
thousands of them their forsaking the worshipping of idols, and their happy
conversion to Christian faith, should take men off from those vain words, that
the day of consummation of all things is at hand: If God do this by the
Heathens, do you think that God will not do much more for his ancient people,
although for the present many of them heathenized? Shall Israel despair,
because God bath hidden his face a while in the cloud?

Perhaps some curious Momus may repine and say, that the conversion of those
near China to the faith, was instrumentally accomplished by the Popish faction;
and therefore they are in no better condition then when they did worship the
Devil and his, suggestions. To this I shall only use the Apostle S.Paul's
moderate answer in such a case; That whether in truth or in pretense, so Christ
be preached, I do rejoice, yea and I will rejoice. But that this Conversion of
the Formosan Indians was not to the Popish, but the Reformed Christian
religion, it is thus testified by Alvarus a Jesuit himself, in his Relation of
China, par. 1. chap. 2. (printed at Rome, 1643.) Molto sent convertin ma alla
feed Calvinistica, etc. that is, Many were converted (speaking of Formosans,)
but (says he) to the Calvinistical faith, induced by Holland- Ministers, and
lived virtuously. Thus affirms Alvarus the Jesuit. He that is one of the
chosen and faithful servants of God, although Christ be preached to the
Infidels by dissembling Jesuits, yet will joy and be glad abundantly; and
would beg of God that he would in this self-seeking age raise up the affections
of his Saints and servants, to use the whole body and soul in the propagating
of the Gospel, and that they may thereby as well of Jews as Gentiles add unto
the number of the Church such as shall be saved. For, doubtless, let all the
Devils in hell contribute their whole strength to the impediting of this work
already begun in the Indies, yet God will never leave it until he has
performed all his promises made in the Scripture both to the Jew and Gentile.
Oh what great consolation should this be to those that cry, How long, Lord,
shall be the desolations of thy Zion! when they have it confirmed to them, that
such secure and lofty Idolaters should by the mercy of God be brought so
humble, as to see their own baseness and be ashamed of their own doings, and
now do begin to worship the true God that made the heaven, the earth, and the
sea, with all that therein are. This is that Imperial Monarch, who does account
of all the world but as slaves in comparison of them: This is that potent
people, that entitle themselves in their regal denominations, Lord of the
world, and son of heaven: This is that most curious people, from whom this
Western world received their art of Printing, Needle Work, and other rare
Sciences; and now do receive from us that most excellent and supernatural
science to know the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent. And
this is a mercy indeed, which should make us to cry out with the Apostle, Oh
the depth of the riches of the love of God, how unsearchable are his ways, and
his judgments past finding out. And that the Lord should so far prefer mercy
before his judgment, that he did not to this people as he did to Tire and
Zidon, and other lofty places and nations; but in stead of overthrowing these
careless livers, declared unto them the glad tidings of repentance, and
remission of sins. Therefore whosoever it is that does determine seasons and
times, I desire him to look to it; for although God do reveal himself in great
measure in these our days, yet there were never more deceitful suggestions in
the world then are now; according to the prediction of our blessed Savior,
that such days would come. But in so doing a man does rob God of his
prerogative, which to him does alone belong to know the times and seasons, and
to know the approach of that great and terrible day of the Lord, who shall then
unmask all false Prophets, and separate the sheep from the goats.

But to the main business in hand, it now stands me in stead to prove the
calling of the Jews to be a sound truth, and no fancy. And first for
Scripture, in Dent. 32.26: I said I would scatter them into corners; and make
their remembrance to cease from among men, etc. Now here by this men will
generally grant, that Israel is dispersed and driven into far countries: Now
for their return, I will first cite that place in Jer. 16. Behold, I will send
for many fishers, says the Lord, and they shall fish for them; and afterward
I will sexd for many hunters, and they shall hunt for them, from every mountain
and from every hill, and out of the boles of the rocks. Now if this had been
spoken of the captivity under Nebuzaradan, they needed not this seeking and
hunting, living peaceably under the King of Babylon's yoke that he put upon
them; but without doubt it is meant by that last and cruel captivity under
Vespasian and Titus, of which Josephus so writes, that it makes me to tremble.
Then indeed they were fain to fly to the mountains; and in so doing they did
receive the counsel of our Savior, and their Savior, where he says, Then let
them that are in Judea flee into the Mountains. So that I do confess how that
since that time they have seen in what holes they might put their heads, but
now they shall know that their Redeemer lives; how Jesus Christ whom their
Fathers crucified; was so full of pity, that the did advise them (knowing what
sad days would come upon them) to take the safest course in such an evil time,
whereby doubtless many did escape, whose successors remain in some unknown (as
to the eyes of the world) places, where the Lords fishers and hunters will find
them out. And then it follows in the 30. of Jeremiah and the 17. For I will
restore health unto thee, and I will heal thee of thy wounds, says the Lord,
because they called thee an outcast, saying, this is Sion whom no man seeks
after

Here is a gracious promise for them; and oh that it might work upon us here in
England! for we, above all the barbarous Nations, do not regard them, but are
indeed suum cuique, every man for his own private ends, the Lord grant that
this be not one reason of our present divisions, as also of our former
miseries. It had fared better with the Arabians, those subt^le inhabitants of
Kedar, if they had done that which was their duty, and as the Lord commanded
them, which was to hide the Jews, and to be a covert unto them in the day of
slaughter, and not to have delivered and betrayed the outcasts into the hands
of the spoyler; but oh miserable, that we that pretend to have the greatest
knowledge of God in Christ, and to follow the actions of Christ which he did
upon Earth, that we I say should rather add to their affliction, and mocking at
their tribulation, should pass by, saying, This is Sion whom no man regards!
and if we do not here use the selfsame expressions, we tolerate and countenance
the same actions, like the proud Levite, who though he knew and saw the sad
estate of the wounded man, yet passed by, that is, he would not use any
possible means to help him out of his misery, nor we the Jews out of theirs: we
do exceed the Turk in his instant cruelty, he will, I am afraid, as concerning
this matter, arise up in judgment against us, and although he hate all Nations
himself excepted, and is termed by the Schoolmen, flagellum humani generis,
and that the Script^re in the seventh of Ezekiel, and twenty fourth verse, is
now, and not until now come to pass, while the Turk possesses their houses,
which indeed are those worst of the Heathen there spoken of, such as Alexander
called a bruit-like Nation, because that men were never able to conquer nor
civilize them, by reason of that unpassable sandy Desert of Zim, now Arabia.
Deserta, Yet, I say, this people show them more mercy and favor then we do,
and suffer them not only as sojourners to live peaceably amongst them, but have
given them one whole Town in the Island of S. Maura within the Hellespont and a
great part of Salonica: So that I am fully persuaded, that if it were not for
such good natured Catamites and Pagans, our Christian charity is so base and
horrid, that we would scarce leave a Jew upon the face of the earth. But in
Jer. 31.17. There is hope in thine end, says the Lord, and thy children shall
come again to their own border. Exitus acta probat: This is that Scripture
which is so often in their mouths; and this is that time which they long to
see, even to dwell again in their own border. Which thing I might fafely
consult about, for that I have good Scripture for it; as in Zach. 12.6. But I
will resign up my judgment in that business to the present Jewish faith, who
for very grief, because many of them live not to see those days, they will,
although decrepit with old age, both men and women even at this day, carry
their parents and friends bones with them, and there they will wait in their
own country until death do begin to seize on them, and then they will die with
such exceeding alacrity, that it causes admiration. But as in another place,
so the end is not yet; God has not as yet finished his whole work upon Mount
Zion; it is but yet a little while, and He that will come, shall come, and will
not tarry. Czek. 11.17, 19. Then, says the Lord, I will gather you from among
the heathen, and then none shall make you afraid.

Here in Europe, the Jews lie like the grape-gleanings of the Vintage: for
there the Lord finds one in that Town abased and scoffed at by all that meet
him; another in this place, it may be weary of his life, for that he sees not
the expectation of his years as yet to be revealed unto him. So in one part of
Asia, here a city or place, the inhabitants of which perhaps for the most part
are all Jews; and then in another place you shall have them prohibited, as in
Pera, Sestos, and in other places amongst the heathen. Now this being
considered, I believe how that all men will say, that these had need of an
all-seeing eye to gather them out of the secret places of the earth, and out of
the holes of the rock, there where the vultures eye has not perceived. Ezekiel.
34.16. I, says the Lord, will seek that which was lost, and bind up that which
was broken, and strengthen that which was sick.

Indeed, let us enquire after the Jewish present condition; for if ever Israel
was lost, it is now, especially when we remember how great a people they were,
and how small they now are in the view of those people who do deem the world to
be of little more compass then they know; but if they were fled to the
uttermost most parts of the sea, thither can and will the Lords arm help them
and release them. There is not so vast a difference by far between the heavens
and the earth, as there is between Gods knowledge and man's weak understanding.
And it is true, that men must seek and search for many things before they can
possess them: but where we read in the Scripture of the Lords seeking any man
or thing, it is meant that God will find or bring that back which in man's
capacity was lost. Now Bernard writing of Gods omniscience, says, Scrutari hoc
temeritas, credere vero pietas, etc. And therefore it follows, that the Lord
having found this scattered and lost sheep of Israel, he will in the next place
take it up and bring it home in his arms, and that with great glory to his holy
name; like the Prodigal that was loft, but is now found, that was dead, but is
now alive; which is the great cause of much joy amongst the Angels in heaven.
It had been better for us, if our predecessors had not driven them out of
England; doubtless the Lord will not leave punishing of us, until we do leave
remembering of their faults, freely to forgive them and to forget, even by
receiving of them again to inhabit amongst us: For is it not the Proverb,
Humanum est errare?

But perhaps some may say, Let them come where they will, they grow richer then
you can do, although you tax them highly. For this, I do confess that I find
one place where it is said in Ezekiel. 11.18. how that let Israel sojourn where
they will, being thither dispersed by the providence of God, and
notwithstanding the Lord was exceeding wroth with them, yet he promises for to
be a little sanctuary to them: but it is not here meant of an Italian fabric
built of wood and stone, only made for to shelter manslayers from the virtue
and righteousness of the law of God, which is, that he that sheds man's blood,
by man shall his blood be shed. But it is in short, that their God will be a
covert to them, and a hiding place for them, until his indignation be overpast:
He will provide either an outward Hester to help them in time of trouble, or
else his own arm will save them. And so the Father says well, At favor in
magno saepe dolor later:

So that if God had no more mercy nor respect to them then man, I do believe
where they would be driven away, by reason of that present incredulity and
God-mistrusting thoughts which are in the hearts of English Protestants. I
wonder what is become of our Public Faith, whereby our Nation did once submit
unto the providence and various dispensations that happened-amongst us. Now I
say, that if we are the people of God, and if we do love God, surely all things
(yea even the increase of Jewish riches) will work together for our good. But
were our Savior upon earth again here preaching amongst us, certainly he would
call us a faithless generation; for our actions as concerning this do testify
that we live in most flavish fear of the worlds inconstancy and mutability,
and are so perplexed at any outward cross far more then the degenerate Turks
are at this day. By this we may see, for all the specious and glossie pretense
of Christians now adays, the paucity of Job-like, or Micah-like spirits that
will trust God with their lives as well as their estates. This is now a great
sign of an hypocrite, when he dares trust in God no longer then he is showring
down earthly blessings on his head: but if the Lord do but hide himself in a
cloud a while, presently he distrusts God, and it is in vain to serve him, etc.

But, 3, says the Lord, I will strengthen that which was sick. Truly, was ever
any people sicker, is any sorrow like unto their sorrow? The whole head was
sick, and the heart also waxed feeble. The remembrance of former days is
enough even to deject them into an utter estate of mourning and lamentation:
What, we that once at whose making mention of the Nations trembled and shook,
and now to be servile and subject to the proud and scoffing wills of
uncircumcised infidels! Oh this is that which strikes deep into their
affections: She that was great among the Nations, and Princess among the
people, is now become tributary. Ah poor Israel, that now wherever thou art,
thou beholdest not any of the sons of men to smile; there is none that will
appear to comfort thee: And therefore with thy Countryman Jeremiah we may cry
out, Unto whom shall we liken thee? But be of good cheer; this is testified of
thee, that he which did wound thee will also cure thee; He only is able to bind
the brokenhearted, and he will strengthen the feeble knees. But for England, I
shall say nothing but hard-hearted, for I cannot otherwise call her: when
although our Savior speaking of the good downright Samaritan, which being only
for our example in this case, left this precept behind him, saying, Do ye
likewise. As if so be he should have said, You that think to have a share in my
glory, you will in your converse and in your comerce whilst you are in this
world, often meet with many of my poor sick despised (ountrymen; and therefore
be sure that you let no opportunity slip, but do as this man did, as soon as
you see them, have compassion on them. And as God shall show men mercy in the
day of blackness, even so let Christians show mercy to the poor ignorant Jews.
I am sure there never was more need then now, even when they are ready to
despair, their habitation is become desolate; so that she is called by the
Prophet but as a lodge in a garden of cucumbers, and that all men know to be
but very disconsolate. But in Amos 9.9. Thus says the Lord, for lo I will sift
the house of Israel with a sive, but the least grain shall not be lost.

God will not cast away the very poor of his flock. It may be they shall have
anguish of soul for a time in all nations, and be tossed and shaken to and fro,
as sometimes it would trouble any Christian heart but to know of their
troubles, how that on a sudden you shall have (by the instigation of some
malicious spirits) a decree come forth by one Prince or other, that within 2 or
3 days time all Hebrews shall be banished such a town or place; and then, oh
miserable! what wringing of hands, what sighs and sobs will come from these
poor creatures? what supplicating of Princes, giving all to the very clothes of
their backs, that they may have but a poor village to shelter them in? As now
the King of Poland will have them prohibited from coming or dweling any longer
in Vkrain. The Lord knows how ill gotten these riches are, merely for no other
end then to extort money or goods from them; which although many times they
scarce have, yet if not, they must expect banishment.

And next unto this will I adjoin that hellish sarcasm of a German Christian,
who some years ago boasted, That as the Heathens did act their tragedies in the
Theater with Christians and beasts; so the Nobles in some parts of Germany made
up their sports and pastimes by the abusing some Jews or other.

And thus let men brag over them, and use them as they will, yet their God has
said it, that he will not lose one of them; though a small grain, a microcosm
indeed, so little that proud looks take no notice of him. Like unto some
expressions of a Blade in the late wars, that when he has been shown a poor
Highlander to run toward a dike to save his life from out of the battle, he
would say that he was such a poor rogue not worth murdering, that he would
forbear to run him through. Even so are the Jews become despicable in the eyes
of many profane Christians; but the living God has sworn by himself, that he
will renew his covenant with them, and give them a heart of flesh ready to
receive any impression that may please him the Searcher of all hearts to put
upon it, although for the present ignorance and blindness has so overshadowed
their understanding, as that they are insensible of their condition, and of
their unbelief. This is that time which all good Christians should long to
behold; for then when God shall1 change their vile spirits, (though for the most
part ignorantly vile) then, and not till then it will be, that Israel will
loath himself for all his abominations, so that God will accept them for a
sweet smelling savor, and give such pleasant rest in their borders, so that
they shall be afraid of the nations no longer; but God will be a wall of fire
round about them, a God that never sleeps nor slumbers, but is the living God;
and now because he lives, he is able to know and to hear the groanings of his
people; and because he is the Lord, he changes not, and therefore both they
and we are not consumed nor cut off from the earth: for as Zanchy says, In Deo
nihil est quod non sit ipse Deus.

Now the Lord does and has promised, speaking of the idle Shepherds of his
flock, which did lead his people astray both before, in, and after the
captivity under the Chaldeans, that in that day (meaning their day of
restoration) he would set over them but one Shepherd, even my servant David.
This is that much desired time; for here by David we do understand Christ, as
it is often in Scripture-sense rehearsed. So that now when they shall accept
their Savior for their King, God promises that they shall never more be a
prey to the heathen.

Indeed to day, not only Turks and Infidels, but also many hypocritical
Christians do serve themselves of them, and prey upon them. But because of
these things, let not men affirm them to be utterly rejected, until they have
well and cautiously understood that blessed Apostle of our Lord S. Paul, who
cries out in Romans 11. after a strange manner, What then? has God cast away his
people? As if he should have said, (taking the Context immediately preceding)
What? because my Countrymen were a rebellious and stiffnecked people, and did
withstand and turn the deaf ear unto the former Prophets, has God therefore
utterly forsaken them? is there no more sacrifice for sin belonging to Israel?
He does thus answer himself, (...); as if he had said, No, it is impossible, or
it cannot be. For he shows the reason of it, because their stumbling was not
such as could cause a total falling away.

There are indeed some men, though but few here amongst us in England, who by
pinning their unusual charity upon old Father Origen's authority, do believe
that the redemption purchased by our Savior will at the last extend it self
even unto the damned: but the truth of this I will not dispute. But however, if
the Origenists do account of it as a sin to leave the Devils without hope, I am
sure it is a far greater sin for any to leave the Jews in a state of
despairing. No, they have indeed fallen with a great descent from their
original condition: but yet do but see in the second chap. of Luke, and there
old Simeon prophesies, that Behold this Child is set for the fall and rising
up of many in Israel.

Here the just man foresaw that Jesus Christ would be a stone of stumbling unto
many of them; but yet he should be laid a chief cornerstone tried and precious,
for the rising of many again in Israel; and though they fall, they shall arise.
And doubtless Jesus Christ is a stumbling block not only to many Jews, but
also to the curious sophisters of the world, whose wisdom the Apostle S. Paul,
writing to the Grecians, and not to the Jews at that time, said, God would
confound, (...); and therefore asks them by way of exprobration, What does
become of you smooth-tongued Corinthians? is not your wisdom mere foolishness
with God?

So that for all their present reproaches, God will at the last exalt his
people Israel above other Nations; He will (the Text says) yet choose the
foolish and despicable things of Jacob, and have mercy on the things that are
not; which are such, as mortal men, just wordlings and no more, dare not say
that they have a being. And of this sort are the ten Tribes, who in some sense,
nay carnal reason affirms not to be: Yet these nothings (as you say) God will
prefer before the worldly-wise, before the mighty and noble things of this
sinful age; and then will that promise be fulfilled in Jer. 19.22. how that
from that time forward they shall know, and that of a truth, that the Lord
their God is with them, and so to abide for ever. It may be now they know that.
God is with them, although it be but darkly or behind the vail: For though they
did in the wilderness perceive only in the daytime a thick cloud, yet they did
believe that their God was there as well as in the pillar of fire by night:
Israel has yet a little faith, though I fear England has less; and they have
so great assurance by what former mercies they have received from the Lord,
that shortly they shall not see as through a lattice, but as Job says, cum his
meis oculis, so with their very eyes they shall see the desires of their souls
accomplished. So in Jer. 30.11. For I am with thee, says the Lord, to save
thee; yea though I make a full end of all nations, yet will I not make a full
end of thee. Now here is a gracious promise, that God will be unto them as the
saving Angel that did hasten and pull Gods people out of the midst of fire and
brimstone which fell upon that wicked City. This is a faithful saying, That
although the Lord should scatter us with the rest of the Nations, and should
give us the fruits of our doings in fury, yet he will not destroy them:
alluding to the plagues of Egypt, that although they conversed one amongst
another, yet not one plague would seize upon them. It will be the same case
once more; and then what a terror will it be for all Jew contemners to behold
Israel in such felicity, and themselves in so great misery. Then will Zion use
this proverb again, How is the mighty man fallen, and the strong man become
feeble? Those which spoiled us, but were not spoiled: but now our Emanuel will
render them the deserts of their actions, even their cruel and bloody
persecution of us.

Oh that men would not be so wittingly guilty, as knowing and seeing the Lord
is for them, dare notwithstanding resist and obstruct them in their way to
happiness. Does not the Lord say, that although a woman possibly may forget her
sucking child, yet he will not forget them. Now this motherly remembrance here
spoken of, extends it self further then a bare memory, (because it is commonly
spoken of an inveterate malicious spirit, never to forget his enemy) but this
is of a contrary nature, so as to remember with tears and affections, with
bowels yearning and ready to forgive what is past, and to renew, yea many times
does increase the original love. And so the Jews (God says) are engraven on
the palms of his his hands; whereby we do note, that God is always to them a
present help in time of trouble; they are fastened as a nail in a sure place,
and as concerning their election, they cannot be moved.

But by the way I must give this caution, That no man from what I have already
written should suppose the Jews to be even now converted; and that because as
the good Prophet Moses knowing what great miracles there had been wrought
before them, said, Yet the Lord has not given you an heart to perceive, and
eyes to see, and ears to hear, unto this day. Which miracles as Moses then
thought to have been sufficient to persuade them to obedience, so now it may be
some think that all those strange miracles which were done by our Savior, and
have for many years together since been done by his Apostles in the eyes of the
Jews, might have been motives extraordinary to produce faith in him who came
to save them.

But as Moses well said then, so I may safely say now, that for all those
wonders that they have seen, yet God has not given them a heart to perceive.
And I will show you the chief reason of this present hardness; it is as yet,
because God has not through his son Jesus Christ convinced the Jews of their
righteousness; for I conceive that God has convinced most of them of sin
already: But when our Saviors words begin to take effect, that is, when he
comes, He will convince the world of righteousness; then let any man conclude,
that their conversion is even at the door.

Now for to unfold what I find nowhere revealed, I must use the Fathers excuse,
Nemo obligatur ad impossibilia. So that the manner of our Saviors convincing
Israel of their righteousness, we dare not meddle.

But we that have tasted of Gods mercy and goodness, can declare, and that with
admiration, after what an easy and sweet manner of arguing God by his spirit
has convinced us of the foolishness and vanity that is in our own
righteousness; and then secondly presented us us with the loveliness of the
righteousness of Christ, and thereby does enable dark souls to see the
necessity that there is of putting on, or in being clothed with his
righteousness, for that without it there can be no hopes of salvation. Now this
being as I suppose (by my own experience) the way which God uses toward us, I
will humbly submit to the will of God in his way (to us unknown) of dealing
with the Jews; but shall only beg to hasten it.

But, 2. that I may not be (...), or as it it used, beyond my business; I am
now about to prove the calling of the ten Tribes. In Deuteronomy. 28. it is said, that
if they would not obey the voice of the Lord, they should be cast forth into
all the kingdoms of the earth, and amongst a people which neither they nor
their fathers knew. Now to unfold this, you will all grant that they did
forsake and resist the voice of their Savior; and then I prove that this
Scripture was not fulfilled in their captivity under the Chaldeans, because
that Country was well known unto them and to their predecessors: And therefore
(notwithstanding a book of the improbability hereof already put forth) I do
believe with some Jews in Portugal, that many of their brethren are in that
part of America called Cochinchino; and my reason is this, because that except
this place of the West world, none could be exempted from the knowledge of
their Fathers; whenas in Solomon's, days people of all Nations (that is, known
nations) were made known unto him either by converse or by way of commerce,
both by sea and land. Now this place doubtless is not as yet known unto the
Jews, no nor the Christians, but since Columbus time.

And then the Lord threatens them further, that instead of worshipping of him,
they should worship wood and stone, a matter then the which nothing more rise
amongst the Indians, as also their Mosaical rites and customs in part still
retained by that unknown people of their descent. But this, as being a matter
in controversy, I dare not as yet affirm: however there are many of those
people sweet Christians, as I have often understood by godly people that have
been there; as also by some Le^ters of that worthy man in the Gospel, Mr.
Elliet, a man more to be commended then many in Old England, to whom God has
given gifts and graces, who will rather turn dumb dogs (as the Scripture calls
them) or else will creep into houses, being ashamed of public light; or else
like our painted Ladies, for fear will not endure a fiery trial, left men
should see their shame. And so by that means they draw many after them (silly
people) to follow their pernicious devices, although it conduce to the
destruction of them both. I say, this many now adays will do, before they will
go either to the East or West Indies to preach Christ either unto Jews or
Barbarians; mightily forgetting, or at least smothering that woeful
pronunciation spoken of by the Apostle for the neglect of Gospel Dispensation.
But to the main matter.

In Zeph. 3.10. From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia, my suppliants, even the
daughter of my dispersed shall bring mine offering.

Now out of this and from the next Scripture which I shall cite, I dare
undertake (if need require) to make good both my propositions, although I do
lay aside all those other proofs which I either have or shall put down for the
same intent. But being that I shall use many other, I will only run over these
two Scriptures; and first, From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia, (that is) all
such places beyond them, or rather on this side that vast river Bracina, and
also the river of Abagni, both of them springing forth out of that great
downfall of waters the Lake Colvez, from whose top to Gibralters Strait is
computed above 1700 miles English. So that from this I gather, that the Lords,
suppliants, dispersed ones here spoken of, are all those Jews which the Lord
shall at this day find in all the parts of Europe, and also in that part of
Asia which is on this side the Rivers aforementioned. Then what must all these
people do? Why now the words do plainly show it; they shall bring mine
offering. Now here for the verity of this matter, we have a sure and steadfast
foundation whereon to build our faith, even upon the promise of an Almighty
God, who speaks not here indifferently of in a permissive manner, as in
another place he bids the Prophet preach to them whether or no they will hear,
or whether they will forbear. But the Lord, as he is the absolute Sovereign
over all the world, so he does here determine and decree with himself that they
shall do his will, though he use much power with them; and that is to bring his
offering. He does not here mean one of their ancient Levitical offerings,
neither must it be understood of that kind of offering which they do use at
this present day: but it shall be that same which the Apostle St. Paul calls
(...), a rational or living sacrifice, acceptable unto God; which the Text
says must be such broken and contrite spirits as their poor brethren then will
be. And now shall that Scripture be fulfilled in Mal. 3.4. And then the
sacrifice of Judah and Jerusalem shall be pleasant to the Lord as in the days
of old; such as was the sacrifice of Abel, which was offered up in right
cousness, and therefore it was so well pleasing unto God, as that the Lord is
said to take great pleasure in the scent thereof. They shall now be convinced
that God abominates and detests all others, though it were whole rivers of oil,
or the fruit of the body; no, all must be now acted by a principle of faith in
Christ, all self-righteousness shall now be done away.

But where this holy and evangelical offering at this day is, I must strive to
show you, and that is from this following Scripture in the last of Isaiah and
the last ver. The Lord says, that those which escaped of them (which I do aver
to be the last captivity and bondage under the Romans) will I send to Tarshis,
to Pull and Lud that draw the bow, to Tubal and Jaran, and to the Isles afar
off, and they shall bring all their Brethren for an offering unto the Lord.

Now here is a plain contradiction to that Non est inventus, which is brought
into the Court of worldly Sophists by the multitude, That Israel are all lost
which were of those ten Tribes. For first I shall prove my affirmation, that in
these places do as yet remain some of Israel, or such as I am sure are truly
descended from the very same Hebrews, by that proximity, or (as I may say in
some sense) that identity of places that is given by various denominations: As
before you read they were planted by the river of Gozan and the cities of the
Medes, which doubtless are of so near affinity, as that Halath lies but on one
side the River, and Lud then so called on the other, bending more toward that
which our Geographers do now call the Mare Caspium. And if Alexander did
transport so great an Army over this river in two or three days time, then no
man surely will question whether they may not be carried over in so great a
space of time, being then at the Chaldean Monarchs pleasure, and ever since
under one or other unto whom they have (for ought I can understand) yielded
themselves, though perhaps against their wills, in the self-same subjection as
the Moors do in Barbados unto their fearless Masters.

But secondly, and that more clearly, the precedent Countries are now made
known unto us by our best and experienced Orthographers in history, thus.
Iberia, Sheirvan, part of Armenia major, and Natolia. But we who do much
honor that language, do speak thus: Tarsistan, Zubbaw, Mozendram, Bagdatan,
etc. in which latter place save one, there ever were the best (and as we do
still believe, are) the most curious handlers of the Bow, by some called
Hircania, who did (if you read in that famous Antiquary of the war between the
Persians and the Greeks) so bravely behave themselves, that they caused the old
soldiers of Alexander Magnus to fear the happy event of that war, so that for
some time the fight was dubious.

And hence it is that Gods offering must be brought. Which places the Holy
Ghost was pleased by the Prophet, in those days, to style Tubal and Jaran. But
then it is said, and from the Isles afar off. Now whether or no there may not
be some of them scattered amongst those several Islands, with the which neither
our Nation nor others for the present have any commerce, I shall not meddle:
But this I am assured of, that all along the Coast from the other side of the
Cape De bone Esperance, as in St. Laurence, Joanna, John de novo, Mohelia,
Cumro Islands, etc. here you shall find Hebrews enough, by the vulgar termed
Jews, although the most of them are of the other Tribes.

Now that any man may (having occasion thitherward) learn of them the verity of
my sayings, let him get the Persian tongue, which by the Hebrews as well as by
others is the most fluent tongue on that side the Cape; so that in the maritime
towns of the forementioned main land and islands, you shall meet with such of
that Nation as live in a more civilized fashion, and do still uphold part of
the Jewish customs; and in the villages and inland Country those more
barbarous; which I conceive by a long unaccustomed slavery among these people
are become heathenized, and almost mere strangers to the Covenant of their
fathers. So that we Christians may see how the Lord is pleased to give them a
slumbring potion for their sins, and almost has cast them into a total
lethargy; only because he is a jealous God, and will not have his honor given
to any other, nor his name blasphemed any longer, as also having respect unto
the Covenant which he made with Abraham his friend, his bowels do now yearn
toward them, as you shall plainly see in the 33 of Jeremiah: I will cause
(says the Lord) the captivity of Judah and the captivity of Israel to return,
and build them as at the first. Here is aurea sententia plena charitatis. This
is as clear as the sun; that although God suffered them both to be carried away
captive, the one long before the other: which first we do all grant did never
as yet return, and he did suffer them to be driven many degrees distant one
from the other, yea so far, as the Writers do affirm the ten Tribes to have no
share in that return of the Captivity from Babylon. And above all,
notwithstanding they are for the present at great variance one with the other
in the matter of their religion, as in the forms of their worship, yet the Lord
makes this distinction, that they shall both return; the Lord will blow his
trumpet, and then the North shall deliver up the slain.

Concerning which place I find Authors to vary; and therefore being willing to
honor one of our modern Writers, who relates of a sort of people that do
border near the Chinoise country, and are in subjection unto the Chri^ Tartar;
which speak a bastard Hebrew or Samaritan language, and do still uphold the
Circumcision, and speak of the Tribes from whence they came. So that I do
humbly think they are people to whom this place relates,

1. Because it is said, the North shall deliver them up; which place is the
most Northern part of that great Empire of Tartary. As also they being called
the slain of the Lord: which may well be cited, by reason that most men in the
world, I am confident, think them so to be. And the South shall deliver up
those that were ready to perish. This I conceive does relate unto Presbyter
Jehans country, in the Seaport-towns of which, and so along that coast of
Africa, which the Lord does call the rivers of Ethiopia, are many poor Hebrews,
whom though the Abissines do respect, because of their circumcision, above
others, yet in regard of their souls health they are ready to perish, being
they are not left to themselves in that matter to be excused, that when the
Emperor does show himself to the people, they must all adore him as God himself.

But by the way the Reader may take notice that it has pleased God to ordain
the house of Judah to have the first return of grace and mercy; and when the
Lord shall in his do time open the eyes of our Western Jews, we shall not need
to excite them to seek Israel; for at this day they do harp much upon that
place in the last of Isaiah, so that they believe then they shall immediately
find their brethren even there where their God shall direct them; and so they
shall, as the Text says, both return. Certainly God that knows all things,
knows into what corner every one of them is driven. And when we do read in
another parallel place, that they shall be sought, and here they shall be
brought: let us but seriously consider how the Assyrians, Babylonians, Medes
and Persians, ( Cyrus only excepted) thirsted and used all their art to
extirpate them, the Grecians hated them ( Ptolomaeus only excepted) and did
them what mischief they could; and the Romans were so far from pitying them, (
Titus and Vespasian only excepted) that they would not suffer their
remembrance. Here were Jobs three Comforters, although but miserable ones.

Cyrus indeed to Israel was a friend;
But like the rest, his friendship had an end.
Ptolomaeus, like Agripps, almost could
Release the Jews, but did not when he should.
Titus the Roman nothing did but weep'd,
Nor ever spared the Jews until he sleep'd.
And lastly, that England might make the seventh brother in cruelty, it forbad
any manner of fellowship with them, so as not to give them a being for their
money, and that is worst of all, because we suffer any runagates to inhabit
amongst us, either of French, Dutch, Spanish, or other, provided they do
nothing contrary to the law of the Land, which the Jews do in all places
quietly submit themselves unto. I say, let us but think on these overturnings
and calamities which have befaln them, and I believe we shall all confess these
will want and stand in need of the Lord to be their friend: And though men
either will not, or cannot seek them, so as to find them, yet the allseeing God
will command the four quarters of the earth to give them up.

I am certified by an honest Christian Jelphylin, who by credible testimony
has been a man of good fashion, (and that by my having a little skill in one
of the Eastern tongues) of one whole Town in Persia, that the Inhabitants are
all Israelites; who by their own report, and by the judicious opinion of worthy
men that have traveled that way, are part of the ten Tribes carried away by
Salmanazzer, and there by him seated; and I do the rather believe it, for that
in external worship of the true God they come far short of the two tribes and
live more profanely in their conversation, having lost all their old laws and
customs which were left their fathers by Moses the servant of the Lord, and
indeed much corrupted in speaking and pronouncing of the Hebrew tongue; and at
this day they do live under the Persian Monarch in the most barren and
scorching place of that sandy Country. Which makes me use that expression of a
worthy Gentleman, who when he came into this place, writes thus upon it:

He that in this place thinks to find good cheer,
Camelion-like may fill his mouth with air.
But to make my affirmation more serious, I shall enlarge upon this place,
because the aforementioned places for the most part lie on the one side of the
River Gozan; but this Town, formerly Halath, with other remarkable places, lie
on the other side, as I shall make appear by the meaning of the Prophet in the
latter part of the verse following, Isa. 11.11. And it shall come to pass in
that day, that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the
remnant of his people which shall be left from Assyria, and from Egypt, and
from Pathros, and frem Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinaar, and from Hamath,
and from the islands of the sea. And it shall come to pass, that is, it shall
undoubtedly be accomplished, or I will in no wise revoke my promise; a note in
Scripture Phrase pointing out, as it were, some extraordinary matter: In that
day, that is, when the adversaries of Israel shall have their mouths stopped,
when the ensign of him whom they ignorantly now call Rooth-noor-ally, shall be
lifted up in their sight; whose Motto shall then be so lovely, and his person
so precious to them, that so soon as the trumpet begins but to sound in their
opened areas, the outcasts of Israel will slock together with their whole soul
and affections to obey their holy King. [That the Lord shall set his] that is,
Jehovah or everlasting strength; by which name he was not known to Abraham,
Isaac or Jacob, not yet until the time of Moses, unto whom the Lord appeared in
this manner, and by which powerful name Moses was encouraged (though a man of a
stammering tongue and slow of speech; in Jeroms translation, altogether
uneloquent) to do the Lords message unto Pharaoh.

So that here we may take notice, that God who is no respecter of persons, does
sometimes make use of unlearned and ignoble persons to carry on very glorious
enterprises: By which powerful Name the Children of Israel were brought out of
their Egyptian bondage with an outstretched arm through the midst of the
Red Sea; and by which powerful name the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus
King of Persia to release the Jews from their Babylonish captivity, from which
to the Captivity under Vespasian and Titus is supposed near 600 years. And
lastly, by which powerful Name the Lord will set his hand again the second
time. So that you see when the Lord, and by what instrument he was pleased to
cause the Captivity of his people to return once before, who were then but a
remnant of the house of Judah. And though I am persuaded that this second
return mentioned in this place, shall be beneficial to both houses, yet I shall
endeavor to make clear that it does chiefly and primarily relate to the ten
Tribes; and that from the vast incongruity that there is between the places
where this remnant of Israel shall be found, and the Countries where these two
Tribes are dispersed at this day.

To recover the remnant] So that this word remnant does presuppose, that there
were of them once a far greater number, as also that there has been since a
grievous devastation and spoil amongst them, the certain effects of war, which
is the unwelcom fruit of men's pride and lust, and which in our age has almost
filled the whole earth with those Ilias malorum; and which has so lighted on
the head of Israel, and there remained for above two thousand years, being
before the Jewish captivity 133 years. So that we may well say of him as the
Orator said of Nero, Nominis postremus habetur. For the Hebrews, who are least
in sight, according to that prophecy in Hos. 8. Israel shall be among the
Gentiles as a vessel wherein is no pleasure; are also at this day by most of us
Gentiles looked upon and accounted of as the vilest and lowest people of the
world, and therefore scarce worth the discussion of our times, nor the
pre-eminence of Musselmen, or rather Dooz oglanraz-Kerry, Sodomitical
Catamites. Yet however the world esteems of multitudes, and with the mighty say
a confederacy; the great God, as it does evidently appear, has from age to
age, and at this day does respect the most despicable and low estate of men,
though but a remnant, agreeing with the Text, that are the remnant of his
people. Unto which truth I believe all men will assent, because the Lord is
said in one place, only to have known the Israelites among all the families of
the earth, that is, with such a peculiar love, or with such a measure of
benediction.

And from this we may clearly demonstrate, That in the most horrid wars and
most slavish bondage, which are both called by the Schoolmen, mortiferum and
stagnans sanguine; God will have his remnant whereon to bestow his mercy, and
whereby (though a remnant) to magnify his almighty power: As may be well noted
out of that Excidio horribili, the last siege of Jerusalem; that
notwithstanding the destruction of so many 100000 of Jews, and yet mote, that
there might remain but so small a handful, it is reported, that after this
grievous destruction, to make quick dispatch, the Roman soldiers sold unto the
Greeks twenty Jews for, a penny. But the time will shortly come, when this
pennyworth of Jews, and this other handful of Israelites (to whom I will bend
my discourse) shall sprout up into a great tree, yea so great, as all the
Nations of the world will fly to it for shelter and advice.

But again, The remnant which shall be left] Which being in the future tense,
learns us thus much; That for all those annual homicides and slaughters that
have been made of the miscarrying Israelites since their captivity, and their
present sufferings in the aforementioned places, the Israelites being at this
day in Persia as usual an object for the bastinadoes of the Cowelhasha's, as
the Jews are in Turkey amongst the Ianizaries; yet these words (shall be left)
do imply that there is yet a succession of them, and that in the same place.

Alike nature with the Phaenix, of whom the Writers say, that out of its ashes
in the same place arises another: So, when the Lord does but breathe upon
bones wherein is no marrow, there will not only be added sinews and flesh, but
to the admiration of the Nations, from these helpless remnant there shall arise
an exceeding great Army.

Which shall be left from Assyria] At this day called Arzyrum; into which
Empire the ten Tribes were brought, some by Tiglithpelezer, and the rest by his
son Shalmanaasser.

But since which time, Rabbi Benjamin Ben-Jonas in his discourse of this
Captivity says, that some of these Israelites did after time associate with
some of their neighbors of Turquestan, and with them went into Egypt* where to
this day many of their succeeding generation may be found; as in Pathros, in
the upper Thebais, and in many other places. Which cannot be truly said to be a
remainder of any of those Jews, which Johanan against the command of God
carried with him into Egypt; because it is in Jer. 44.7. expressly said, [it
being such a peremptory transgression,] that every man, woman, child and
suckling should be cut off, except those which did escape, which could not be
but by flying the kingdom of Egypt; whereas also these here spoken of were led
into Egypt out of this Province of Persia many years since that time, by them
whose brood we Christians call Turks.

From Cush and Elam] Which Cush some hold to be meant of a City on the Gulf of
Arabia, now by the Turks called Zeman; but of old, Cush, from Cush the son of
Cham. But I do rather suppose it to be that in Persia, which to day is called
Chusistan, as yet so from Cush who was the father of Nimrod, of whom it is said
in Genesis 10.10. that he made the beginning of his kingdom in the land of
Shinaar, wherein are seated these two Provinces of Cush and Elam. [And from the
land of Shinaar] whence we must expect good store of our Hebrew captives
return. [And from Hamath] which Hamath, though it be often taken for Antioch in
Syria, once belonging to Israel, until Rezin the King of Syria, not Assyria,
took it from them; yet I believe it may be that Town in Persia which to day is
called Hamadan, famous for the sepulcher of Queen Esther; and that from these
two reasons. First, because of its imediate coherence with the precedent
places, where I shall produce many hundreds of Israelites: For how can it be
probable that Shalmanaasser should place any of his Captives in such a City,
the inhabitants of which were all his life time implacable enemies to him? And
secondly, because I understand that until the year of the world 5245. the
Princes of this Town were styled by the names of Hameth-Cawn, or Prince and
Lord of Hameth.

But [from the Islands of the Sea] Of which intended Islands I dare no
otherwise speak then before; for except the Cannibal islands, I think there are
few or none in the Indies, but there are to be found this forlorn people. Only
as in relation to the aforenamed land of Shinaar, and other adjacent places, I
do thus seemingly versifie.

Jaroun, a Town well known in Chusistan,
But better known of old in Susian
By the name of Halath, when the Assyrian King
The Israelites his captives there did bring:
And there he made a general Rendevouze
Consulting policy the way to use
His armless, helpless slaves, where to bestow
Most for his profit, least his overthrow.
At last resolves a remnant here should lie
Of Zebulon, Dan, Ashur, Nepthaly:
And notwithstanding many conquests made
Of this great Monarch, every where decayed;
Though Rachel of her children was bereft,
Yet so far as there is a remnant left,
And such a remant as may now be told
A thousand households, well I may be bold,
Having so many virtuous witnesses,
And more to me my Authors presence is,
Who is an Armenee of the same land,
Nigh Ararat, where Noah's Ark did stand:
Who is a Christian of the Eastern Church,
And does the Nicene- Council Creed avouch,
Against all Popish cousenage, wit and art,
Who to that Church in no ways will convert;
Who once a man of worth and dignity,
But now made subject unto misery;
Who sees in this the providence of God,
For whom he loves, on them he lays his rod.
Who speaks of Damoan on the great hill side, Tais rus.

Where many hundred Hebrews now reside;
Which town of old the writers deem to be
That same called Habor, nigh Arax, says he:
Once named Gozan River, by whose stream
The Lord of Hosts will many captives glean;
For that the rest of Isreal's ten Tribes
Near this place are in Cities of the Medes;
They now are there, I speak in Scripture-sense,
The words are written in the present tense.
These are the people that were so admired.
Whose strength and wisdom was by all desired
Who yet do grope as in the darkest night,
Until the sun arise and give them light;
For all the candles of the world are vain,
When he begins all glory for to stain.
These are the bran^hes of that Olive tree,
Which broken were and scattered as you see:
Whose ancient splendour in Religion stood,
But now obscu^ed by that infectious flood
Of Mahometry, which surely will assuage
Before the birth of our long-look'd for Age,
In which the sound of war shall not be heard,
When bloody spears are broken into sheards.
In which the Jews obey their holy King,
And all their brethren for an offering bring:
In which the Jews and Gentiles shall agree,
Between the wolf and lamb no enmity:
In which the most ingenious Annotation
Must be revised by the Hebrew nation:
In which their glory will so bright appear,
As to astonish many hearts with fear:
In which the Christians like esteem will have
Of Jews Conversion, as the life from grave.
And doubtless, this time which I here speak of cannot be many ages hence;
otherwise I dare not, (yet as an honored Gentleman of this nation did advise
herein I do respect him) what I might more say, I will not say, lest some
seeking pates, might find an occasion. But we read, that in the Apostles time
the Lord was at hand, and their times were the last of times; surely then these
must be those novissimorum novissima, in which the Lord will be a swift witness
against all those that oppress. And did we but duly consider that place in Hos.
3.4. we might clearly behold the truth of God in his promises, which should be
a special help to our faith concerning future times.

For the children of Israel should abide many days without a King, and without
a Prince, and without a sacrifice, etc. Which truth is at this day confirmed by
the language of the whole earth, in that upbraiding sarcasm, [Beloved or
protected as a Jew] intimating thus much, that when abused, wronged or
prosecuted, they have no King nor Governor to relieve them, no, nor so much as
an unjust Judge, who for importunities sake will lend an ear to their
complaint. And thus according to the Scripture it has been many days with
them, that is, many years, or days without number. Yet because Gods
faithfulness is great, and his mercies sure ^^^cies, therefore he would not
leave Israel in ^^^pair, as that the house of Jacob should expect in vain. But
in the verse following, after they are prepared by affliction and humiliation,
there Elohim promises them a gracious return after such a term of days is
expired, best known to the Lord; only the Text says it will be in the latter
days, when they shall seek the Lord and David their king; which doubtless
cannot be now far off.

So that if we do believe the words of our Savior, that not one tittle of the
word of God shall fall to the ground; we ought as steadfastly to believe their
future estate promised in the 5. verse, as we now do in a perspicuous manner
behold their present doleful condition predicted in the 4. verse; or else our
faith appears to be very weak (if a true faith) because for the most part a
Christians faith should be the evidence of that which may in some sense be
invisible. So that they are blessed which have seen, and then believe: but the
Lord speaks in a superlative degree when he says, Blessed are they which see
not, and yet do believe. And that we may not content our selves with a bare
belief of this truth, (which I am persuaded many that are gone down to the pit
did believe) let us take notice of the beginning of their conversion, so as to
help them how and where to seek their King, who is not far from every one,
though a blind Jew that seeks him; which makes us believe that he cannot be far
from Israel: because since the crucifixion of their Lord and our Lord, it was
scarce known until of lace year, that any of the Rabbis would desire the
least conference in matter of religion with a Christian; but some small time
since they have to my knowledge sent some letters to some of our Nation, wherein
they have entreated and implored the assistance of our Teachers on this behalf.
But chiefly, as I suppose, from the counsel of a dying Rabbin, whose eyes the
Lord had opened to disclose unto his brethren the hardness of their hearts:
which, as I hear, the Lord did set home upon the hearts of four or five of
them, whereof one has since made a book, and it is the Vindication of our
Christian religion. And I hope there are some now living that do behold that
great Champion of Israel already to have taken in hand their noble and
excellently transcendent deliverance, and his breaking forth through the clouds
as a most mighty man of war, to break open the iron-gates, and to knock in
pieces the strong fetters of slavery, and to let the oppressed Israelites go
free. Which their Sun and Shield we may be confident will not stay his course
in one or two victories: but as our natural Sun that great luminary of heaven
is never at rest until it has refreshed all the dark corners of the earth, it
must run over Europe and America as well, as Africa and Asia; so this glorious
Son of God will never cease nor slack his arm until he has effected that
Christian freedom spoken of in the 8. of John, not only for Judah and Benjamin,
not only for the Jews in Europe, but also for all the families or tribes of
Israel; when this proverb shall be out of date, The Lord lives which brought
the Israelites out of Egypt: But now, The Lord lives which brought the
children of Israel from the land of the North, etc.

But when the Lord comes to be the God of all the families, that is, all the
Tribes of Israel, he faith, he will be their God, and they shall be his people.
Here is Gods omnipotency seen in taming the proudest hearts on earth: This
will break a way in the desert not only of sandy Persia, but of the ston^y and
solitary place of unbelief; for in Ezekiel. 37. says the Lord, I will make the
house of Judah and the children of Israel his fellows one nation, and they
shall no more be divided. Now here is a double promise, first a return of their
captivity, and then of their scepter; they shall now be a nation, which lately
were not a nation, and shall no more hear the voice of a stranger: the time is
at hand, when neither the might of the Chaldeans, nor wisdom of the Grecians
their mortal enemies, nor foxlike policy of the Romans, nor cruelty of the
English shall terrify them, but they shall have one King to rule over them all,
even Jesus Christ; and then Ephraim will say, what have I to do anymore with
idols? though as yet they do much defile themselves therewith in Persia and in
the Indies.

Now, I say, we may shrewdly conjecture of American Israelites: but of a
certain, for Merchants in the former Countries, there are none more numerous
then Hebrew merchants residing and trading continually in diverse Port-towns in
Asia, as also in diverse other Countries in the South by Lybia, and other remote
parts of Africa. And in the 39 of Ezekiel the Lord says, I will bring back
again the captivity of Jacob, and have mercy on the whole house of Israel. Take
notice I will do it, but when? why even then when they have born their shame.
Ah Lord, when will it once be? shall shame take hold on them for ever? They
have been many generations without a King, true Priest or Prophet: surely
Shiloh shall come and rejoice in their hearts, as well as he does already in
ours, and that in the administration of all his 3 offices. 1. as a King, when
the Lord shall reign over them in mount Zion henceforth and for evermore. Then
David my servant shall rule over them. Here is the Kings certain government: I
will rule in righteousness and in truth. And here is the peoples willing and
delectable subjection and obedience; not like the Grecians, who at this day
when need requires serve the Grand Signior, more out of slavish fear, then
with any love they bear to him or his people. But thus the Jews say, we will
call on the name of the Lord our God; is it not the day of Gods power wherein
they shall be a willing people, like soft wax, or like the servants of the
Centurion ready to obey the Lord, and receive any impressions which God shall
put on the souls of his people.

2. As a Priest, he will show them after what manner he did offer up himself
once upon the Cross for all men, and he will intercede with the Lord for them,
and so by his own merits he will blot out all their offenses and remember their
sins no more, but will make them a sweet smelling favor in the presence of the
Lord, by sprinkling their hearts with his own most precious blood, and in stead
of punishing them for their fathers cruelty toward him, he will save them for
his names sake.

3. As a Prophet, he will cause the law to go out of Zion, and his statutes out
of Judah; he will preach to them the glad tidings of repentance, He will
instruct them in all manner of Gospel and Christian (not Pharisaical)
righteousness; and point unto them, saying, This (my people) is the way that
leads unto life, walk in it. He will by this means convince them, though dead
in unbelief, when he shall make them to hear the voice of the Son of God, that
so by awaking from that deadly sleep of incredulity, they may, having ears,
hearken unto that powerful call of Jesus Christ, by which he raised Lazarus
from the grave; that so by their hearing, and doing of that whch they hear,
they may attain unto eternal life; and therefore doubtless God will have mercy
on the whole house of Israel. But I do desire that I may not be mistaken; for I
dare not affirm that meaning of the Apostles in the Romans, how that all Israel
shall be saved; nor this president to be of so large extent, as that the whole
twelve Tribes shall be saved, no, nor yet one whole Tribe; but thus I do
believe, that all Israel, the true Israel according to the spirit shall be
saved eternally: And thus far confident I am, the whole house of Israel, that
is, all the twelve Tribes as many as are then in the world remaining, shall see
the salvation of the Lord, and have the Christian faith amongst them as
plentiful as we have it. So that as amongst our selves we are none of us able
to distingnish who is a true child of God, who an hypocrite; even so God has
concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have mercy over all. For as
Chrysostom faith of understanding of the Word of God, Nil opus est
syllogismis; so the Apostle James, if he had thought that only two Tribes would
be called to the faith, why then did he write unto the other ten in this
manner, James to the twelve Tribes scattered abroad greeting? Certainly no man
dares deny but they are of Adam as well awe, and therefore they may safely
expect to have as much benefit (for ought I know) by the death of Christ who is
the true second Adam, as we: for we know, and that by woeful experience, how
that many times the name of a Christian profits a man nothing. So that if you
ask any man here in England, as he passes by, Are you a Christian? do you
believe on the name of Jesus Christ? his answer will be immediately, Why, do
you take me to be a Jew? Though it may be he is one of the prophanest wretches
living.

But let me tell such a man, that he comes far short of a Jew, although he
makes him far inferior to himself: No, the Jews do abhominate to do wickedly,
and to commit his crimes. Their chiefest sins are either of ignorance, or of
omission: but he is a mere Atheist in his practice, and lives without God in
the world, if knowing of God (as he pretends) yet notwithstanding does not
study to glorify him as God, but in his works does deny him.

But in Zech. 12.10. In that day I will pour upon the house of David and upon
the inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of prayer and supplication, and they
shall look on him whom they have pierced, and mourn over him etc.

In that day, that is, when Jerusalem shall be a cup of trembling to all the
Nations round about, and shall be like a torch of fire in a sheaf.

Now it is well known unto most men, who are at all skillful in the Scriptures,
that they never were as yet a terror unto any people since they were led away
captive by Nebuzaradan into Chaldaea.

But ever since that time they have been tributaries unto one or other; or else
by the good providence of God it may be they have had rest for a time, as they
have in some places at this day. But it was and is an unquiet and doubtful
rest; and at this time they are in bondage with their children under people and
nations which neither they nor their fathers have known; and therefore this
time is still for to come.

But secondly, God will pour out upon them the spirit of prayer; and this will
be as miraculous in their eyes, as it was amongst those in the Acts, which had
not so much as heard of the Holy Ghost; but yet it shall be so powerful a
spirit, that when the Lord has breathed it on their souls, it will make all
rough places plain, and the parched ground shall then bring forth pleasant
fruit. Indeed so long as the heart is rocky and stubborn, the aquaduct or
conduit-pipe thereof will be stopped, whereby grace should be conveyed to the
souls of poor sinners: but when the word of the Lord which is sharper then a
two-edged sword, shall beat upon this same that is harder then the nether
millstone, it does presently change its nature millstone, it does presently
change its nature even contrary to nature; like unto Moses his causing of water
to proceed out of the barren rock. This is part of those effects which the
terrible voice of a holy God produces in an unholy people; so as to think the
time past of formality too too much for to spend so vainly. And now all old
things will be done away, and all things will become new in their hearts; and
this will be the initial of the Hebrews regeneration. I am persuaded that those
which live to see these days of Isreal's glorious defense, will cry out, and
that with the same amazement as the Jews said of Paul; Was not this he! so,
Were not these they which did so hate Christ, and now they do preach Christ!
and as the primitive Christians were exceeding joy-full to hear that the
Gentiles had received the Gospel and were baptized, even so I doubt not but all
good Christians will rejoice to hear and to see what great salvation Israel
has obtained.

But thirdly, another sweet effect of this good spirit of God, is by causing
them to look upon him whom they and we have pierced. And though they shall do
this with an eye of faith, yet intimating as if they now beheld their King and
their daily expected Jesus suspending on the Cross, and their fathers nailing
of him, and themselves piercing and thrusting his sides through with the spears
of sin. And here is faith going out from them before repentance; for they are
persuaded and do believe that which they now deny; and then they begin to look
up Christward with tears in their eyes, resipiscentiam agentes, and mourn over
him with a bitter weeping and mourning, like unto the mourning of Hadradrimmon,
every family apart. It will be more then a tear-shedding lamentation, yea
rather it will be a heart-affecting and an-inexpressible sorrow, too
unconceivable for any but those who have tasted how gracious the Lord is: It
will be, as I conceive, that same sorrow which the holy Apostle deemed unlawful
to be repented of, because it is only a quick passage out of a barren Kedar
into a fruitful Canaan: No man can come to the Manziel of Goa, before he pass
the dangerous shoals of Quiloa.

And then they shall turn to the Lord with their whole heart; and then God will
make good that promise, I will, and you shall, and none shall then dare to
disquiet Israel any more. But the true worship of God in Christ will be
established amongst them, and then they shall be called the faithful and chosen
people, the true worshippers of the Father in spirit and in truth. And in Jer.
31. what sweet expressions do we find concerning their future estate; as in the
9 verse, says the Lord, With weeping and with supplications will I lead them
in the wilderness. God did not thus lead them, nay they were then for the most
part so far from entreating the Lord for any mercy, as that they did demand for
this thing and that vanity, and that in a murmuring manner; so that the Lord
did make a great slaughter amongst them for their many prevarications wherewith
they provoked the eyes of his jealosie to anger against them. And the Lord
promises further, that he will cause them to walk in a straight way wherein
they shall not stumble. Indeed formerly, so long as they did, or as any man
does walk loftily and proudly, they were, and any man is more apt to fall and
stumble then he which with the Publican uses to look low, and carry his heart
humble before the Lord; but it shall be otherwise. Now God having promised to
be their guide, and that in a straight way, surely there needs not the least
distrust for Israel to have concerning their Elohim and Adonai; and this is
great matter of hope and comfort to Israel, that when as in the days of old
God calling them the fewest in number amongst all the Nations, did yet love
them above all Nations with a peculiar distinct love. So though they themselves
do at this present day conceive that there is no people so scarce, (the
Aramaspi except) yet God does still own them, and does acknowledge Ephraim to
be his firstborn, and therefore he promises to be a Father to him.

But, 2. I shall clear it a little by showing you the consent of the Fathers in
believing of this truth.

And first, Augustine writes; Quomodo adhuc mors christi apud Judaeos
maledicta est, sed proculdubio Deus illuminabit oculos eorum, and salvos
fierent in die salutis. That is, that although the death of Christ unto this
day is held accursed amongst the Jews, yet doubtless in the fullness of time God
will open their eyes and bring them home to himself, even then when he shall
take away their sins, and put his law in their inward parts, then, and not till
then is their hour of salvation.

2. John Chrysostom says in his book which he wrote against the Jews in
respect of their cruelty unto Christ, and only in an affectionate way, about
pa. 73. That notwithstanding all those curses with which he had already out of
the word of God threatened them, yet says he, Tanquam talis est calamitosa
desolatio in domo Judaica Dei, nos Christiani expectamus eorum conversionem and
certam acceptionem. For the present, says he, there is great desolation made
amongst Gods ancient holy people, so that most men do for their blind and
ignorant (but horrid) offense committed against the Son of the everliving God,
despitefully handle them, yet says he, we Christians do believe that they
shall be converted and received again into the favor of God in Christ, and
therefore do we longingly expect and wait for it.

I might here show the great difference between the Christ-like and heavenly
affections of the Primitive Fathers, and the cold world-like affections of the
men of our days. But that shall be brought in its proper place.

3. Effrem Syrus, whom Jerome does so much extol in his Catalogue of the
Fathers, for so merciful a man to all such as he did not see in as prosperous a
condition as himself; so that Jerome terms him in one place (...), a man full of
Divine actions: Effrem the Divine, writing on the small continuance of the
persecution, in comparison of that everlasting crown of joy which all Gods
Saints and servants should possess after this miserable and frail life; did in
one of his Epistles to the Christians in Phaenicia, entreat them not like
others of the world but according to their profession to use all possible means
to relieve and succor the outcasts of Israel; saying, that notwithstanding
their hardness of heart, ((...)) they have the same hope as we have, although
for the present they possess not the same Christian faith; for how can they
believe in him of whom they have not heard, with such opened ears and hearts as
the Lord ere it be long will give unto them? Ambrose says, Quid pet is, O
Judaee? and Deus tribuet tibi panem aeternam; qui dat omnibus illum rogantibus,
quotidie dat, and semper dat. O Jew (says he) what is it thou would beg of
God; do but ask him, and he will give thee bread everlasting, who gives daily,
and always gives. Observe now when this Father had reckoned up those Nations
which had the least hope in, or knowledge of God, then he brings in the Jews
at the latter end of the barbarous Nations; and they lived not, neither do live
without God, yet he thought, and that judiciously, how that they were furthest
off Christ, because of the full calling of the Gentiles to be first
accomplished: and therefore says, Would the forsaken Jew but beg of God, and
the Lord would give unto him of that bread of life, which whosoever eats of
shall never hunger more.

Indeed this Father comes far short of Effrem in his charity toward Israel,
and writes as if so be the Jews had the least reason of all Nations to expect
any favor from the hands of the merciful God.

Jerome says in his book de Temp. Quod nec Judaei nec Christiani repent
benefaciunt nec convertuntur; ideo Judaei nondum Christiani sunt in nomine,
vero in re ipsa erunt: That is, how neither Jew nor Christian only by his
profession are suddenly (for the most) made new creaturesi and therefore
because the Jews as yet have not attained the names of Christians, yet let no
man doubt but that they will be converted and brought back into that true and
good old way in the which Enoch, Shem, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, and
Job with the rest of the Patriarchs walked, even according to the mind of God,
who though they lived so long before Christ came in the flesh, yet by Faith
they saw his day and were glad: even so although Israel will not see Christ in
the flesh, being he has already offered up himself upon Cross one Sacrifice to
serve for ever, yet as sure as the Lord lives who did once in their fathers
remembrance cause the Sun to stand still over Gibeon, and the Moon over Aialon,
which unto this day is a matter of great experience amongst the Jews, I say so
sure will the Lord persuade them, nay he will constrain them to believe that he
which for the present they call Ben-Ioseph, was that true Emmanuel Ben-David
who came and went up and down in the world doing good, being meek and lowly,
riding on an Ass through the streets of their old City Jerusalem. These things
they do now deny, but ere long they shall believe with joy unexpressible, and
cry Hosanna to the Son of David, as if he now were riding before them, bearing
palms in their hands, or rather grace in their hearts: saying with the
Samaritans, We have not only heard by the report and sound of the Gentile
Christians, but now our own eyes have beheld the salvation of our God. And as
we may find at this day written in great letters at Rome one of the notable
statutes of Lu. Aemilius, how that Omnes Dii peregrini e civitate ejiciantur;
so at this great restoration, they will throw away and detest not only out of
their present habitations, but also out of their hearts all strange and
contrary opinions, which for the present they do after various manners possess.
As in Persia they rely for the most part upon the belief and religion of the
Bramin Merchants, and so in the East Indies; but here in Europe they do give
far more earnest heed unto their present book which they call the Gemara, in
which are written those [secreta ac fines temporum] spoken of in the book of
Esdras, whom they now have in special request above others of the Prophets. A
name and matter (as they believe) which does surpass their old Talmud; and yet
they say, at the presence of their King it shall vanish and decay, expecting a
third edition which will be delivered unto them by the hands of Elias:
Alluding, as I suppose, unto that third part which the Lord says he will bring
through the fire pure and burnisht without the least dross amongst them. So
that in our days, to show and testify how that they are of those true Jews
indeed, and not of the sect spoken of in the Revelations, as we read in the
holy oracles, viz. in Haggai, that when such as had formerly seen the glory of
the first Temple, did now behold the glory of the second, they wept; and was it
not because God had ecclipsed their old splendour, seeing they would not hearken
unto the word of his power, they would none of his counsel, but despised all
his reproof, by striving to put the evll day far from them? I would that
Englishmen had but such Jewish eyes to perceive, and hearts to understand how
far short we come of our former nicknamed Puritanical glory, notwithstanding
all our talk of so many years reformation.

Truly it would be praiseworthy, that any ingenious hand would but take the
pains to show the world as it were in a glass, how far Christians in these
times do degenerate from that good old way in which the Primitive Churches did
go; how far short we come of them in our holy conversation, in our love unto
Christ, as also toward the brethren, in our self denial, in our zeal to do and
suffer for God, and in our longing after the Jewish conversion. Or rather, are
we not in these days become foolish in our vain conversation, undervaluing of
Christ, and haters of our brethren? Are we not to day the greatest self-seekers
throughout the Universe? Do we not shrink, if we only hear a whispering of a
persecution? And whom scarce amongst us do we find to have any bowels toward
this poor lost sheep of Israel? They could weep to behold the least deformity
either in or upon the outward Temple; but we have not a few tears to shed
because of those ugly monsters of sin which do inhabit in our souls, that ought
to be the temples of the Holy Ghost. Surely God will hear their mourning; and
as the voice of their cry did come up to heaven in the time of their Egyptian
slavery, so doubtless God will yet cause this voice to be heard as of old, I
have seen, I have seen the affliction of my people, etc. I say, the time when
this will be I dare not justly affirm, but the certainty of it I will affirm:
And therefore if the Lord do not this year, or at this time bring such a Rebel
home to himself, and show him his old vileness wherein (it may be) he has
walked for many years stubbornly, and kicked against free grace and the tender
compassion of a loving and patient God, yet we do not say it is impossible for
this man to attain heaven. Then let no man so foolishly conjecture and say,
that if Israel be not converted before such a time, they never will: for the
times and seasons are in the Lords own free disposing, and he does many times
make that his great day of vengeance an opportunity, which is the season of his
peoples highest calamity; and when according unto humane reason we think it is
too late, there is no time better in the eyes of the Lord.

Then this is great arrogance in them that are of this Epicurean faith: And
shall a wicked man, who lives under the means, because as yet a wicked man,
upon this account neglect the means? Shall he not rather consider how the Lord
works grace in the hearts of men by degrees, as something while babes, and
then in youth, and so upwards, until a man come to be a father in Christ? So
that if either Jews or Christians will have any thing of God, they must not
only beg, but wait for it, because blessed are all those that wait for the
appearing of the Sun of righteousness in their hearts by a lively faith. And
though the Jews do send forth never so many cries Eastward, yet having done all
they can, they must resign up their wills and affections unto him that is able
to help them, who has set the sea its bounds, and has purposed a time for all
things, and as it pleases him he will order a ransom for Israel and
deliverance for Judah. Now lest here should be any stumbling block laid, I do
many times distinguish the Tribe of Judah from the rest, because I do find in
many places of the Scripture where it pleases the Holy Ghost to write them
several: and that both the houses, in one place; in another, both the families
shall return; as also where it is said, I will make the two nations one nation,
and they shall be no more divided. For the text says, that Israel was carried
far from their brethren, and that there they remain unto this day. It is
written in the present tense.

Only that there may be no want of encouragement for any of Gods people, to
hinder or despair in their seeking of them, and that therefore does belong so
sweet a promise to these in a far country, I will bring one place of Scripture
more, that I know not how to escape, because of the good tidings that it bears
in the front of it. Deuteronomy. 4.29. But if from thence thou shall seek the Lord thy
God, thou shall find him, if so with all thy heart and with all thy soul, etc.
But if from the place where thou sojournest in thy captive estate, even from
Tubal and Jaran, even from the cities of the Medes, thou shall seek or
diligently enquire after the Lord and thy God, casting far from thee those
false gods which thou do now worship, being no other then the works of men's
hands, and so call upon the Lord that brought thee out of Egypt with a mighty
arm, whom the meek Prophet Moses (out of his tender and loving compassion)
names thy God, O Israel; though for the present thou do worship such as
neither see, hear, eat, nor smell:

Now I say, if when God shall put into Isreal's heart to consider his vile
abominations, and to cry unto him with all their heart, he does here promise to
be found of them. And now that you may take notice of the moving cause of this
his loving kindness, it is in the next verse; For the Lord thy God is a
merciful God, he will not forsake thee, etc. This is that which makes drooping
Jacob to hold up his head, and to possess a little strength and hope wherewith
he is able to undergo all the afflictions which a tender and loving Father
lays upon him. And therefore they will use this expression, It is good for us
that we are afflicted.

But 2. for Calvin and those great writers about his time, they were but in the
dark as concerning the restoration of Jacob; but only amongst other matters
did lay it down as a part of their belief, how that the Jews in the last days
should be made a most glorious nation. And so Proston and Perkins, with the
most of our times speak carelessly of it, as if it were a matter of
controversy. And therefore you may observe that on the Lords day, in public
prayers, some Ministers will use some few expressions concerning them by way of
petition, which they conceive to be enough, as declaring that they are of the
same judgment. Yet I am confident that many of you do not care to have them
inhabit amongst us: but if a little trouble in the flesh come, or when a small
matter of that root of evil has been demanded, which might accrue to their
transportation over into England, you have passed that ancient, but sarcacious
censure on them, That they were a noisome and a burdensome generation. I shall
pass this by, because we say, Sat verbum sapienti.

But thirdly, I shall prove the verity of my Proposition from the present faith
and hope of Israel. And 1. From their words. 2. From their actions: 3. From
their sufferings.


For the first, there is not a Jew scarce living but will tell you that they
shall be a better people, and that their God has hid himself from them for a
while; but yet they will trust in him, though he kill them. So that in all
their daily devotions they do justify the Lord, in the beginning of their
exercise, in all his proceedings toward them, and condemning themselves for
their own ingratitude; and that because in the fullness of their prophecies they
valued not the law of Moses, but did what ever seemed good in their eyes; and
by this they provoked their Adonai to wrath, and so he gave them up into the
hand of their enemies.

Therefore in their Synagogues upon every Jewish Sabbath Day, they cause that
verse in Jer. 44.6. to be read twice over in the ears of all the people.

But for that of their predecessors their crucifying the Lord of life their
anointed Jesus, they will tell you that they do abhor it, and do account of it
as a ridiculous scandal that the Christians put upon them. But such were the
miserable consequents of that fact, that they do now esteem nothing more vile
among them, then for any one of them to forget but one hour the destruction of
Jerusalem by Titus: For whose better memory sake you shall always find in one
place or other of their houses this following inscription in that language that
is generally spoken amongst them: Oh if I should forget Jerusalem, then let my
right hand forget its cunning! Believing that they may as soon lose the
knowledge of their daily divine praises out of the Psalmist, as the remembrance
of their ancient holy City.

And therefore on the great days of Nahamu or days of thanksgiving, they go up
and down their Congregations, using this word one to another, Speak ye
comfortably to Jerusalem all ye that love her! For that they believe they shall
yet see Jerusalem and the Temple rebuilt again even by their own brethren. Nay,
they say that they are certain that their JEHOVAH has set a bound to the
fullness of his indignation, and that ere long their captivity shall cease; and
then immediately will follow that great day of Jacobs trouble, when Eliah (as
they suppose) shall arise from the dead, and prepare the way of their Emanuel,
through the chief Cities of the world, with all stately magnificence that can
be attained. And then shall she that now sits in the dust, even thou O daughter
of Zion, arise and sing, Glory be to God on high, who give gifts unto men.

Indeed the little grain of faith which the Jews do already possess, depends
upon that which as yet they see not; and it comes so much the nearer our
Christian faith, according unto that in Heb. 11. tbe Apostle calls it (...),
the substance of that which is only expected. Truly this could hardly be called
a true substance, were it not built upon that everlasting foundation Jesus
Christ: and therefore all such Jews as well as Christians that hope in him
shall never be ashamed. Indeed it is one of the chiefest obstacles in their way
to Christian happiness, even that which the Rabbis have made the twelfth
Article of their Belief, and it is this: I believe that Messiah is yet to come,
who is to be greater then any King that ever was; who though he be long in
coming, yet we doubt not but that he will come at last, neither ought we to
prefix a time for his coming.

Ah poor blind souls, that do suppose such vain matters! as that Christ will
come down again to rule on earth after the manner of men, but in far more
glorious estate then Solomon did. Being also ignorant of that place of
Scripture concerning the coming of Elias, which was fulfilled in John Baptist,
and indeed shall be again fulfilled when that Spirit of God which doubtless did
reside both in Elias and in John Baptist, who was the second of that name,
shall come and make plain those rough places of the heart, before the King of
glory shall come to dwell therein.

And with this they do uphold themselves that although this will be a day of
sadness and astonishment to the inhabitants of the world, yet their nation of
the Hebrews shall be saved out of it. They do moreover affirm, that at the time
when their Savior shall come, he will abolish many of their Mosaical customs,
which till that day are to be had in reverence; for so they were commanded to
teach them from generation to generation, until Shiloh come; and then God will
make so great alterations in the world, that the noise of it will make men
tremble. As I do believe this alludes unto that powerful resurrection of our
Savior from the dead. And as they see Monarchical government to decay, the
believe that so much the nearer is his coming.

Indeed for the first of their sayings, how that God will make great
alterations in the world, is true by our daily experience: But at that time,
(as I did write about six months ago unto a famous Jew residing at Lisbone)
how that God would then make as great changes in that little world within them,
as in the great elements without, even then when he shall reign in their hearts
by faith, and make them for to loath their own righteousness. But for the
second saying, That as you see Kings and Rulers go down, so much nearer is the
coming of your King; I take it only for a mere delusion of I know not whom,
except fabulous Monterini, as a worthy Knight is pleased to style him.

I confess when he comes to the Jews, he shall be the only Monarch in their
hearts, and shall whip out of his Temple all those buyers and sellers of
iniquity and hardness of heart: But the great overtures which they behold in
the world, do rather predict the coming of their Lord to judgment. And for this
I am the more bold, that their joyful time is nearer unto them then they expect
it, wherein they will then understand their great mistakes in this matter as in
others.

But truly in this thing I do praise the Jews, that though the time of their
deliverance be long coming, yet they doubt it not: And although their faith
concerning this matter is untruly grounded in reference to the manner of their
Shilohs coming, (for they say, in the flesh; and we say, in the spirit;) yet
the certainty which they have of his coming, either one way or other, is firm,
and therefore to be well marked as a special argument to prove my former
proposition. And for my part, I do look upon these sayings so frequently spoken
by them unto Christians in Italy, Portugal, and Amsterdam, and in many other
Countries, as mere types of their Christianity and of their change in heart.

But secondly, I prove it by their Actions: And because in this Relation I do
intend nothing of their Ceremony, Fashions, nor Sects, being things beyond my
curiosity; as also knowing that there are one or two Treatises already extant
concerning them, by such learned and transcendent Wits as the worthy and truly
elegant Monsieur James Gaffarel: I shall therefore lay down some of those
actions which become my purpose, and may be something worth observation.

And 1. from their daily exercise in Learning and other lawful sciences, but
especially in their reading and discoursing in the Law and Prophets, of which
they have some few books more then we, and wherein they have such knowledge, as
that they have Praises at all times suitable to every condition; and in so
doing they do obey the command of Christ; and there is no man either for soul
or body can use any thing more then the means, and leave the issue unto God.

2. From their charitable deeds: That notwithstanding the many poor they have
of their own, yet by credible testimony I hear and do know it by some, that
they do often give alms to all amongst them of what nation soever, which are
in want.

They say that they are enjoined unto it by the law of Moses; as also the more
charitable they are here in this life, the more glorious being they shall have
in the world to come. And upon this account they will not, if they can gain the
Port, suffer one of their servants, though he be a Moorish Christian, to be one
night without redemption in a Turkish gally, let it cost them what it will.

Now some men are apt to say, that it is a part of their hypocrisy. But let me
tell such backbiting nominal Christians, that I do think England of all
Countries is so far degenerated from our ancient charity, as that we use
cruelty in stead thereof, and for lucre sake we call charity hypocrisy. And
many Novatians there are now amongst us, which say how that those which at
their deaths did formerly leave something for the poor, or to the Hospitals,
was to the intent they might thereby merit heaven. And thus I am confident they
do hinder the charity of many well-given and truly religious Christians.

But let me desire such men, that as they tender Christ, they do not by such
kind of slanders offend the Jews, lest you offend the apple of Gods eye. For I
do much honor this deed of theirs, as another mark of their approaching
conversion; because they do these actions so freely, and for ought I know out
of a pure intent.

And therefore by the way let me accuse those of gross lying and slander, that
have given out, some in speeches, and others in writing, that they do often
swear, and account it a godly work to cheat and defraud the Christians, and do
get their living merely by extortion. Which base untruths I do even abhor to
harbor, being only scattered abroad by some devilish spirits, only to make
them more odious in the earth then they are already. Indeed in some of those
inland places where they can have no other manner of livelihood, they do use
money one of another, the mechanic Jew of the merchant Jew, but not of a
Christian. A thing however but answerable to us here in England, where one
Christian receives Usemony of his next neighbor, nay worse then so, sometimes
of his own brother. Therefore I doubt we are too too apt (as our Savior says)
to see that in other men's practices, which we will not see in our own.

3. Now the third action is more vain, but that it shows something better in
expectation. As when Ecclipses happen, or any disastrous Comets appear, the Sun
be but thick-clouded, or the like; much mistaking those places in the first and
last Chapters of Joel, at such times they do lave themselves more then
ordinary, and cause all their utensils to be in readiness, that they may be a
more pleasing receptacle for the Lord of life; keeping all their doors and
windows (but especially those toward Jerusalem) wide open, that there may not
remain the least seeming unwillingness to entertain their Savior; crying with
a loud voice toward the East, that verse in the 121 Psalm, I will lift up mine
eyes unto the hills, from whence comes my help. And truly if any thing, this
portends their simplicity in killing of their King. Therefore with men of more
knowing judgments, if that so many generations have passed since, their
deliverance cannot be far off, when God will no more be called of them Baali,
but Ishi, their true and lawful husband. Indeed we may read a Scripture in Amos
4.9. which being taken literally by such whose eyes God has not yet opened,
may afford them some good grounds of their present actions; it is thus:

For behold I create the thunder, and frame the wind, revealing my Christ
amongst men.

Now (Reader) hence it is, that the Israelites in times of thunder or great
winds do so longingly expect their Messiah: For we may observe that here is no
seeming distinction of time between the thunder, the winds blowing, nor the
revelation of the Son of God. And therefore I say it is for something that they
believe Christ will descend on earth, either in a great thunderclap, or else
in a mighty wind: which I think to be a type of that shaking and trembling
which the Lord does cause upon the spirits of such as he brings home to
himself, as also the mighty overpowering and overmastering which the Lord
commonly uses in the changing of the heart.

But in the third place, I will prove it by their sufferings. I might now make
a tedious rehearsal of all their sufferings, beginning at their first
Captivity; but only it would better become such a story to be written in
Haedonis chartis, whereas paper will serve this purpose. And therefore omitting
their several captivities, and the several times that Jerusalem has been
destroyed; as also in Rome, Antioch, Alexandria, and Caesarea, and every where
else that the Romans had any government, how the Jews were given to be devoured
of wild and fierce beasts, as Lions, Elephants and Tygres; and how they fought
upon public Theaters, only to solemnize the triumphs of Vespasian and Titus;
with their being banished out of such and such dominions, and how of late they
have been exposed to the barbarity of the horse-eating Cossacks; and will only
give you a small token of their present sufferings, how that they go far beyond
any of us Christians in their patient acceptance of either buffets,
bastinadoes, or any other abuses. So that by this we may see that God has not
left them without hope, for that they take patiently the spoiling of their
goods, which is indeed a piece of Christianity.

For in Portugal, if any Shackrag give a Jew a blow on the back with his cane,
he does rather turn himself back with a smiling countenance then with a frown,
as if he felt no harm. This is another of the commands of Christ fulfilled; If
any one strike thee on the one cheek, turn to him the other also.

They suffer much for the sin of their fathers; here is blood touches blood;
and the more they suffer, the more refined they believe they shall come out of
the fire. And now I cannot choose but think of Father Ambrose's expression,
because I have heard it from the mouth of an unconverted Jew here in London,
born in Padua a City of Italy, whose father, once a merchant (as he reports)
having most of his estate coming in a vessel from Rhodes, was taken by an
Argiers-Pyrate; and therefore being five brothers of them, he having three or
four languages, came over into England in a Plymouth-ship, having his passage
freely given him, and here he hoped to get a service under some Nobleman; but
waiting long first, is now gone into Scotland, which a Nobleman of this land
says are in some sense allied one Nation to another. But this was his
expression, when I, his interpreter a Frenchman, and one more were with him:
Speaking of their grievous estate, he made answer, Qui vult vincere, primo
discat pati.

Now I say, that although it be a common thing in Turkey for one drunken deboist
Janizare or other to set the Jews houses on fire in the nightime, yet in the
morning they have no change of color in their looks; alluding to their
Countryman Daniels putting into the Lions den; and therefore without
complaining to the Bashaw or Beglerbeg, (as indeed sometimes if they should, it
would be but in vain) they go but to others of their Countrymen, and find
sudden relief; using the expressions of the Patriarch Job, Shall we receive
good, and not evil from the hands of the Lord?

It is now come to the same pass as formerly, when the Egyptians did bear such
malice to the Christians, as Christians in many places do now bear to the Jews;
who when Nilus overflowed not, or any other evil disaster happened, the Devil
who is the father of a lie, and the grand enemy of man's salvation, would
presently oraculize and tell the superstitious inhabitants that it was ob istam
Tolerationem Christinam; and therefore no sooner way to have Nilus fill their
trenches, then by throwing Christianes ad Leones. Even so to the shame and
stain of Christian religion (not of Turks and other Musselmen) in many places
of Italy and Germany, if any thing go amiss, or any fi^e happen, it is common
with many nominal Christians to exclaim of the Jews, and say it came by means
of them: like that lately in Venice, where it is reported of a rich Jew, a
Merchant, to suffer extremely, by reason the Turks prevented the going of some
provisions to Canea.

Some men are for their own ends wilfully blind, and so will take no notice of
the finger of God in any cross; not like Job, who when the Chaldeans and the
Sabeans took away his cattle, cried out, The Lord gives, and the Lord takes
away, blessed be his name. But as the Devil had his end in the primitive times,
(yet as by Divine permission) in procuring some innocent blood; so many men do
make prize of the Jews by these calumnies. Like the Mallabar Junks, who will
not assault a Vessel in her going to those rich Ports of the Chinoise extra
Ganges, but will snap her in the return: So these will suffer the Jews gladly,
until they have by their industry and labor gotten some wealth wherewith to
maintain their children; but then how many Knights of the Post, (not of Malta)
what horrid accusations will be brought, and what impudent pleading (as in
Vckrain) will there be by such as do not fear the alknowing God so much as the
Egyptians did, nor as the Indians do at this day obey the Devil, until such a
Jew's estate be adjudged confiscated! I confess it is a piece of worldly, but
cowardly policy, to do thus by the Hebrews; because I look on them as for the
present sine viribus, being there is few or none that will take their part: So
that the saying of that evil servant is now verified by such austere and hard
masters that reap where they did not straw: As also to the servile Jews may the
Poets fiction be applied of one in hell, That as he makes ropes, there stands
an Ass and bites them asunder. They work for that which others ( contra normam
naturae, and by most unworthy overcoming) do enjoy.

And thus far have I showed the Reader what are the hopes of Israel. In the
next place I shall lay down my weak opinion, how and after what manner the Jews
may be converted to the Christian faith, so as to believe on him whom they call
the Christians Messiah. And first, Negatively.

Not as the Scholars use in Hungaria and those parts, to beat Christianity into
them, by buffeting them in their own shops and houses, and out of one City into
another.

Now (Reader) here is the manner of dispensation of those gifts and parts which
God has given these men: Here is ne amplius but a word and a blow; as if so
be, because God has forsaken them for a while, therefore Hebrews were no
better then dogs. Here is the everlasting credit (or high discredit) of
self-conceited Hungarians I here are your ignoramus Scholars, which make as if
they were only able to unfold the truths of God.

Nay, I am certified, that about a year ago they fell upon the Jews unawares,
and as they were quietly following their calling, and killed some of them, and
would have done greater mischief, had not the goodness of the Emperor extended
presently to them by sending a band of soldiers to rescue them. This moreover
makes me think that God has reservd greater mercies in store for them; for he
does often suffer his own Saints and servants to be tossed with tempest, and
afflicted for many years together.

I am ashamed that knowing men, such as daily read the Scripture, should
conjecture so foolishly, as if so be they were able to beat Christ into them.
Now I say, except a man were utterly given over to brutishness, and to have a
seared conscience, so as he is for any religion, like those people that before
they will endure the least hardship, will turn Turks, denying the Lord that
has bought them: I say else the most barbarous Idolaters will not forsake the
religion of their ancestors by this foolish way of administration; and do these
mad men think to force a Jew from his religion? Are those stupid dunces no
better read in the stratagem of the Jews? where Antiochus Epiphanes that Tyrant
did force the Jews with fire and sword, strangling men, hanging some women with
their children about their necks, others with their poor sucklings about their
breast he threw headlong over the walls of Jerusalem, profaned the Temple,
forced the Jews to eat Swines flesh, to forsake their Circumcision, and to
adore his Gods; yet all this and more could not move the rest one step from
their religion.

Sure these men do little regard how the Apostles mild way of exhortation and
persuasion to believe on the name of the Lord Jesus, did take more with people,
and so will do at this present, although it be in it self but a dead letter,
without the cooperation of the blessed Spirit go along with it: much less will
that way help them, which produces nothing except cursing and bitterness,
being contrary to the words of Christ, Use violence to no man. But on the other
side this must be accomplished by the same almighty power which raised Christ
from the dead. The Lord will first amaze Israel by showing him how nigh unto
cursing he as yet is, before he will enquire how he may be saved. It seems that
that which made Rachel so willingly leave her fathers house, was because she
had gotten away her fathers gods to accompany her in her journey.

Such works as these of regeneration, God uses to effect gradually. So that
for all those good examples which doubtless Jacob did show his wife Rachel, yet
she did for a while retain her paternal idolatry. So I say, that until God does
allure them and speak comfortably unto them, until God their Lord do give them
the vallty of Achor for a door of hope, all the tortures that any can invent
will not turn them; but they will rather suffer reproach patiently: and though
God did allow them burning for burning, wound for wound, and stripe for stripe,
yet we may behold this piece of Gospel written on their hearts in such legible
characters, as he that seeks no occasion may read it, and find this
inscription, Pray for them that despightfully use you. Jesus Christ already
come in the flesh, is something harsh to them: but Jesus Christ in his humble
and meek carriage toward all men, this, I say, amongst Israel even to day is a
bundle of sweet smelling myrrh; and therefore they are very willing to tarry
Gods leisure, before they will be thus handled.

And by the way, let us but consider the two contrary effects that were
produced by the English and by the Spaniards, in that time wherein they did
both pretend to use their utmost might in converting of the Natives, where
soe'r they settled their abode in that new world of the West Indies. For where
the Spaniards came, Hungarian like they set upon the Indians (forgetting their
vows) and destroying many thousands of them; intending, as it was apparent,
naught save gold and riches. Now I say, what was the issue of this, but that
when the Friars and Jesuits have come to some noble Indians at their departure
out of this life, and declared unto them how that none but the Christians could
go to Heaven or a place of joy, and that all others must go to Hell or a place
of torment; they have given in this answer, That if the Spaniards do go to
heaven, they do desire that they may go to hell. Now here is the light of
nature teaching these poor souls that the merciless cannot receive mercy. So
that we are confident, that where in their vast dominions they do convert one
man to the true faith, our Nation in that one Territory of New England do
convert two. And what is the reason but because those true English Christians
in that place do perform what they promised to them at their landing by an
Interpreter, how they sought not vestra but vos, that is, their souls welfare.

But now as I do moderately suppose, these three ways it will be whereby the
Lord will discover unto the Jew the great things of salvation.

1. By our Christian prayers and humiliation as well in public as in private;
and not only to name them once a week so carelessly in the Congregation. My
brethren, Gods people is a praying people; and surely if it were rightly laid
to heart, there is nothing that more discovers our great affection to the
Hebrews, then by our continual praying and entreating of God for their
conversion.

I could be glad to see some whole days spent in this great business of Isreal's
redemption; I am persuaded that the Lord expects it: You all know that the
prayers of the just avail much with God. And truly, in the neglecting of this
duty, we keep silence, and so become guilty of a heinous crime. For what do any
of us know whether this may not be part of that means which God will use
concerning their restoration, even by his giving ear to the fervent prayers of
his chosen servants?

But 2. I do humbly conceive that by way of discourse or writing unto them,
like unto that ever to be honored Gentleman Sir Edward Spencer of Middlesex,
who of late wrote an Epistle to that famous Jew Mr. Manasseh Ben Israel, about
this matter. And let any man ask of him, and he will satisfy, that these
people do generally honor Learning, being a prudent and rational people. O
that some of our single Teachers and godly Scholars would but do as those which
indeed are the laboring Saints, that is, go over into some Country or other
either farther or nearer, as God shall move them to this work; and there to
reason the case with them, not like cruel Hungarians, nor merciless Spaniards,
to beat and misuse them, but as you find it written, beseeching them by the
meekness of Christ to be reconciled: In our Saviors gentle manner of
discourse; He that comes unto Christ, he will in no wise cast him off. I am
sure that he which truly does love Christ, will be willing to undergo any
crosses for him, who thought no pain too much for our souls good. Nay, were it
but because those two blessed Hebrews Paul and Peter thought no labor too
much, no tempests and travels too dolorous, no voyages too dangerous, nor no
deaths too cruel, whereby they might preach the Gospel to us Gentiles. And now
he that is not capable of going to them, I desire he may not be wanting in
praying and supplicating the God that hears prayer.

3. I do submissively propose, that the Supreme Authority of this Nation would
be pleased to hearken to those Propositions which intend their admission into
England, being laid down by that learned man before mentioned, in his Answer to
the Epistle of that prudent Jew aforesaid. And truly I am bold to say, that
there is no Nation under heaven likelier then we to help them, in respect of
those great and miraculous deliverances which God has so many years together
bestowed upon this Nation. And oh that our most worthy PROTECTOR would be a
hiding place and a Covert for some of them, but until God has brought in the
fullness of the Gentiles! because I am afraid that in this little time which the
Devil has to reign, he will use the utmost of his policy together with the
beast, how to mischief all those that either are, or like to be the servants of
the living God, such as look for this appearing. So that perchance if the Turk
should fail in his design against the Christians, he may by Satan's acting the
part of a sycophant, use the Jews in a rigid manner, although for the present
he lets them live peaceably under his yoke.

Now this I do but suppose, and not give it out for an Hypothesis, being
altogether unwiling to captivate any man's experience. But however, I am sure it
will be no damage, but profit for to let them live amongst us. It will be a
rare exchange to give them our carnal things, and we to reap benefit by their
future spiritual and extraordinary gifts and graces, which I am sure they shall
enjoy, when the Lord shall ingraft them in again.

It would be worthy of great praise, if that England would but set apart some
special time to seek for these things; that with Jeremiah we might mourn, and
that our eyes might run down with water, because that the Comforter, even the
man Christ Jesus, has not as yet relieved his ancient people. Doubtless this
will be very pleasing and acceptable unto our God; God may perhaps have mercy
on us for their sakes, when he shall overthrow the Nations in his fury. Did not
the Lord bless not only the house of Pharaoh, but the whole land of Egypt for
Joseph's sake? Was not the harlot saved, for that she did hide some of Gods
people from the fury of the King of Jericho? Was not Meroz cursed bitterly,
because the people thereof did not come forth to help the Lord and his people?
And by this we may see how that God will punish a City or a Nation as well for
neglecting to help forward his work, as he will those that strive to oppose it.
And let all men know assuredly, that in such real projects as this is, where
there is concerned much of Gods glory, even to help the poor outcasts; God
being pleased to put this price into Englands hand, let us (I say) detest the
neutrality of Meroz; because in such a matter he that is not for their
deliverance, must of necessity be against it. Or else we may expect then end of
Meroz, which was Gods heavy and bitter curse; that which the Apostle speaks of
one in a near case, (...). For we do not find that they did like Sihon King of
the Amorites, withstand the Israelites; but Neuters-like, they came not to the
work, and therefore came this bitter curse upon them: Do not we read how that
godly people were always troubled to hear of the afflictions of their brethren?
In the 5. of Judges, v. 15, 16. we see it there twice repeated, that because of
the divisions of Reuben, there were great thoughts of heart. Now the other
tribes at the first wondered why Reuben came not over Jordan; but alas, when
they heard how they were dejected in spirit, and how God had by his providence
caused breaches and schisms amongst them, it did prick them to the heart. It is
a sweet exexpression; the Text says, they had great thoughts of heart, or
careful were their cogitations, which way they might comfort them or help them.
So that true Christians scorn idleness; nay, Augustine calls Christians indeed,
non solum benevolentes, vero eitam beneficientes par Angelis; more like unto
Angels then men, in respect of their care and ministering help which they afford
unto all they can.

Let us but take that blessed advice of our Savior a little before his
passion, which he gave unto an over-confident Peter, That after he was
converted he should strengthen the brethren, not weaken them. But shall any of
us be made so great in Gods favor, as to be raised out of our sad natural
estate, and shall not we love, and study to strengthen our poor despised
brethren that are for the present in so weak a condition?

Now, Reader, I am persuaded, that man which harbors an Israelite in his house,
a poor distressed outcast, shall find that God has increased his riches both
in soul and in body. Well then, shall Israel be such a famous people, and such
transcendently excellent Christians in the last times? Then let me dehort all
men from reviling them any more. Such as use that common byword, He is as
hard-hearted as a Jew; and, You do hate such a man as bad as you hate a Jew,
that base people that crucified the Lord of life, etc.

Now thou do here compare Gods beloved people with (it may be) the most vile
of men, the very brats and darlings of Satan: Not minding what the Apostle
demands when he says, What art thou O man that boastest thy self against the
true Olive Tree? As if he should have said, Art thou a Christian, or art thou
above a Christian? For the interrogation admits of no mediocrity; but either
this man must be below, or else like some of our days, above Christianity and
Christian duties. No, he is far below that blessed estate; for it is the alone
property of a Carib to laugh at the dejected condition of another man. And
therefore in few lines I will set forth what such a man is. And first, he is a
transgressor of the 5. Command; as that he does neither honor them as his
superiors, neither does respect them as his equals, but does upbraid them as
the lowest of his enemies.

And first, that they are our superiors, I shall make good by that place in
Luke 24.47. And that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his
name among all nations. Item, Beginning at Jerusalem. So that were we not
willingly blind, we might see unto whom (next Christ) we owe honor and good
will. The Lord Jesus did come primarily to the Jews, even then when he seemed
unwilling to give their bread unto such godless and hopeless dogs as we then
were. Nay, the Lord says in another place, that our salvation is of the Jews:
which I will unfold in my ensuing discourse. But oh ingratitude! is it not so
in the abstract? For such is the stubborn age in which we do now converse, that
not until now is that Scripture perfectly fulfilled in Isa. 51.18. There is
none to guide her of all the sons whom she has brought forth, etc.

Now that I were but able to set this out in extremes, for so it does deserve.
For first, our Religion sprang forth and craves its birthright from Betlehem a
Town of Judaea, from one of whose inhabitants, according to the flesh, Christ
came; and afterward it was confirmed and ratified by Jewish Teachers, such as
Paul and Peter, those excellent and spiritualized Sophists, and by them
delivered to the Gentiles throughout all parts, and to this day the same is
continued. So that this being put together, all will confess that Jerusalem was
our Mother, Nurse and Tutor. Now if they be our parents, where then is these
men's fear that honor them not? I can liken such men to none better then to
those rebellious children, unthankful Negro's at the Cape of Good-Hope; who
after they are hatched up, being able to fly abroad or help themselves, having
their own turns served, they hate none more then those which brought them up;
nay further, when old age seiseth on their parents, (not being able to help
themselves) these unnatural bruits will convey them to some places in the
inland, where they are sure they may be Lions food. This I have learned from
credible people; but sure they are not all so horrible vile in that large
Continent.

Although it is spoken in the foregoing verse, that of all, or amongst all the
sons which she has educated, there is none, no not one Christian people in the
whole world, that will so take her by the hand as to raise her from that sad
and deplorable condition in which she now abides. And yet this I will say for
my own Countrymen, that there is no Nation but respects her better then we do,
Constantine Magnus that worthy British Christian Emperor excepted; who it is
historied by Eusebius Pamphilus, that he commended the care that his mother had
of their ancient City, and that great respect they bare unto Pilate, for that
they found it left in writing by him, that Jesus was the King of the Jews; and
thereupon they used much cost and pains to build up the waste places of Zion.

But 2. such a man does not respect them as his equals; he does not esteem of
any value those sweet apprehensions that the Prophet Malachi had of some in
those days that did scorn their brethren. Says he, Have we not all one
Father? Did not one God create us all? etc. And truly, with him there is no
respect of persons; there is no difference between Jew nor Grecian: but as they
were all under wrath, as in Adam all dyed, so they are all one under Christ and
in matters of salvation; for has not Christ broken down the mid-wall of
partition? Did not the Lord Christ, whilst he was upon earth, check his
Disciples for their contending who was the greatest? Are not these his holy
expressions: One is the Father, and are not ye all brethren? Why then do we
revile them and mock at them as the gazing-stock of the whole earth?

Let us but consider that the Lord chose them for his heritage long before us,
even then when we Gentiles were all subjects under the Prince of the air, and
were led bond slaves by him at his pleasure, being no otherwise termed by the
Apostle St. Paul then children of disobedience, whose eyes the god of this
world had blinded. So that I may say from the same Apostle in Rome. 3.3. What
if some of them did not believe? does that make void the faith of God? No, God
forbid! For God has reserved them of the Election to enjoy full as glorious
eternity as the believing Gentiles shall in the life to come. It is true, some
of them did harden their hearts, and refused to hear him that came to them;
that it might be fulfilled what was written, that when our Savior came to his
own, they received him not. And therefore because that God had known this
people more then others, in giving them the oracles and the true worship, and
so appropriating them as his own, (though indeed all are) but in a more
especial manner they; upon this account he will undoubtedly and extraordinarily
punish them for their sins and prevarications, and so indeed he has.

But 3. such a Jew-scorner is hereby become guilty of the breach of the 6:
Command, and so I will prove him a real murderer. 1 Ep. John v. 13. Whosoever
hates his brother, is a murderer. and so in Mat. 5. He that calls his
brother fool shall be in danger of hellfire. Now I say, here is not only his
hatred, but also his reproachful words, and his sordid comparisons termed
murder. So that this nominates such a man as backbites and reviles the
Israelites either ways, to be one of those manslayers, for which men Christ
dyed.

Now when such a man uses this petition in the Lords prayer, Forgive us as we
forgive others; he knows not the true meaning of that which he does outwardly
and hypocritically express. He can upbraid and taunt the Jews with his own
proper qualities: he says they crucified their Savior, and pierced the Lord
of life; and I say, that there is not one sin that he commits, but does
crucify the Son of God afresh.

And that I may yet more convince such a one of his arrogancy, self-love, his
hatred of others, his offending the weak Jews, his envy, wrath, strife, and the
like, with which companions the Apostle says no man shall ever enter into
heaven: I will therefore show the world how far such a nominal Christian does
surpass an Hebrew in cruelty.

1. In that it was but one time, and therefore but one singular act of theirs,
when they did hurt and crucify their Messiah; but he does it daily; and which
is the worst of all cruelties, and abominated amongst the most barbarous, is,
that when the Jews had wounded Christ, he does cut and keep the wound open, and
thereby our blessed Savior bleeds afresh. The heathen dealt far better with
their enemies, but he more wretchedly, and that not with an enemy, but to raise
the sin higher, with him that was his best friend.

But 2. in that the Jews only at that time pierced his body with a spear; but
this man by sinning does vex his righteous soul; he does as much as in him lies
crucify the Godhead of our most blessed Savior. So as that the Scripture
distinguishes these two for such heinous actions, and calls them not only a
grieving of, but a will therein contained to quench and totally to extinguish
that most holy spirit of God, wherewithal the true servants of God are sealed
unto the day of redemption:

But 3. and chiefly, all Christians in finning do far exceed and surpass Jews
in cruelty, in this particular respect; that when as we know, and it is the
main article of our faith, that that same Jesus Christ whom the Jews with
violent hands did take and crucify, was the only true Savior of the world,
yet we cease not to crucify him against knowledge; and this sin of all others
is so inexpressibly grievous, as the Jews would have abhorred to have
committed. Are not the words clear in 1 Cor. 2.8. For had they known it, they
would not have crucified the Lord of glory. But because of unbelief, it was
therefore hid from their eyes, so that they then knew it not: but Christians
knowing their masters will, and not doing it, shall be beaten with many
stripes. Where God has sowed and planted, but especially where he has done
such things for his vineyard, as he says What could I have done more? there
doubtless he will expect fruit; but it must be better then backbiting, hatred,
evil speaking, or the like, or else he will cast such vines into fire
unquenchable, there shall be weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth. Let us
then not be deceived with our vain and frivolous boasting against the lopt
branches; for God will not be any longer mocked, but he is now at this present
time going about to unfold and to expose the conversations of all men both Jews
and Christians to the open aspect of the world.

Then let not Israel see our present Christian nakedness: let not Jacob say, I
came to them in want, but they relieved me not; I was hungry, a stranger, and
destitute, and they would not take me in; but on the contrary, like the rich
Glutton, they commanded me to be beaten and driven forth of their gates, and
this was all I heard, (Here is nothing for you.)

And this I can confirm, that last September there was a Jew whose name was
Jobak Ben Daniel, born in Skeydam a place in the Netherlands, and taken amongst
others in a Dutch-Vessel; being with the rest set ashore here at London, and a
Londoner (who thought himself no small Neophytus in Learning) having before in
the Poultry once examined hlm of his country, being in other kind of habit then
the Flemmings, and having an old Armenian now residing in London in his
company, who can speak sufficient English, and being thereof satisfied, as also
of his religion; did not only withhold his own miserable hands from giving him
alms, but withstood the charity of some others, saying where-ere he met him,
Give him nothing, he is a cursed Jew. But if God do not change his rotten
heart, he will have the same answer, Go thou cursed, for I know thee not, I
have no mercy for thee.

Ah friends, God has not blinded Israel for a while, nor broken them off, that
any man should boast, but that rather we ought as the says, to behold the
goodness and the long-suffering of God to usward, and that with great humility,
reverence and thankful affection toward the Lord for this his distinguishing
mercy.

The voice of our Savior (it is said) was not heard in the streets; but the
noise of our cruelty is gone forth into all the solitary places where these
poor Jews inhabit; nay, I am assured that the name of an English man makes them
afraid. The Lord Christ would not scorn the smallest reed; but our Nation has
despised the Lords day of small things: He came to give life unto dry bones,
but we beat them to powder: He came to look after that which had been so many
years lost; but our Ancestors caused them to fly into the secret holes of the
rock. But and if these things will not cause some fellow-feeling in them that
read this book, to take part with the sufferings of Zion, to weep with Titus
the heathen over, or with Constantine that virtuous Christian to pray for them,
etc. I do yet hope that by way of exhortation I may move the most obdurate
spirit, and that for these reasons

1. Because that in the time of our Saviors being on earth, the whole scope
and drift of his words and actions was chiefly to this purpose, as he told the
Jews, that they through him might be saved. These things (says he, speaking of
the way by which we must pass into the kingdom of heaven) I Jesus, I your dear
Savior say, that you poor outcasts might be saved. And though he knew all
things, and needed not the help of any man, and therefore was not in the
leastwise ignorant how their deliverance was yet afar off; yet he like an
obedient Son would make known to them what he came into the world for to do,
even his Fathers will; and therefore thus and thus he communed with them about
their worship and conversation, nothing more then what did tend to their future
estate.

Where is the Christian now, like unto that true and faithful servant who
hides not his masters talent in the earth, but does traffic with it, that
the poor blind Jews may be called from darkness to light? The Apostle Peter
bids us, that as every one has received, even so let him minister; let him
distribute his gifts and graces in fullness of love, one man bearing his
brothers burden; and this is part of the communion of Gods chosen people.

But 2. we ought to use our whole strength to do them good, because that by
their fall salvation came to the Gentiles. Oh that now I could speak home unto
all that read this! It was for our sakes that they hated Christ, refused the
Gospel, and became enemies to the truth, that we might be brought to the
knowledge of him that is able to save to the utmost. It not this argument
enough to persuade us, the Lord has for a season deprived them of their
oracles and their former glory, and has laid them aside which were once his
people, that we stupid and blind idolaters might be grafted into the true Olive
tree, to stand before the Lord, and to be made partakers of their privileges?

Herein consists much of the mystery of our redemption, that when we were
aliens and without hope, even them Christ dyed for us. We had no right to the
promises of old, as the Jews, but were that cursed seed that were forbidden to
enter into the Congregation.

But now the third and last motive shall be from that benefit which will arise
to us Gentiles by means of their conversion. Now where is the man of our days,
but will be desirous and willing, as David says, to behold, or rather receive
anything as is good? Now I say, although we here in England and in some other
adjacent Countries have plenty of knowledge and of the means of grace, yet when
their conversion happens, we shall see and know far more clearly then we do.
For mark but the Apostle expression in Romans 11.12. How much more their fullness?
as if he should have said; At the cuting off Israel, great were the riches
which arrived to the Gentiles: but what light and what riches shall there be
when the Israelites shall say, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the
Lord!

Thus in the original; (...): S. Paul speaks hyperborically, as if he were not
able to conceive what an exceeding plenty there will be of knowledge; then
shall every vessel of the Lords house be filled with holiness, even then when
God makes Jerusalem a praise in the earth. And now that Scripture will be
fulfilled in Zech. 8. and the last verse; Thus says the Lord of Hosts, in that
day ten men out of all languages of the nations shall take hold of the skirt of
him that is a Jew, saying, We will go with you, for we have heard that God is
with you.

I wll write a little of this Scripture. [Thus says the Lord of hosts] This is
that strong and mighty name, by which God was not known amongst his own people
for a long season; and being so full of majesty and terror, who dares read it
without trembling?

In that day it shall come to pass] that is, when the Morning Star shall arise
upon their souls, and the Dayspring from on high shall visit them, as it has
done some of the Americans; this is that day of their joy and gladness, a day
of good tidings; it will not be a day of thunder nor tempest, neither a day of
darkness nor gloominess, but it will be that great day of rejoicing when God
shall build his new Tabernacle in their hearts; and now the Nations shall learn
war no more, but shall break their swords into pruning-knives: Ephrahim shall
no more vex Judah, nor Judah Ephrahim, but shall walk together hand in hand to
worship in the holy mountain of the Lord: nay, the Lord will in that day make
those that are contrary for to agree and lie down together; the young child
shall safely then play upon the hole of the asp, the wolf and the kid shall lie
down together, and then all people shall cease to disturb Jacob, nor vex Judah
any longer.

But further, In that day ten men out of all languages] that is, as some do
suppose, chosen men out of the most pure and refined Christians, because of the
far greater number which are in the world. Others allude it to the ten Tribes,
which these men will now believe are to be found, and therefore will be ready
to burn with zeal for their conversion again.

They shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew;] or rather, as some
Geneva-Doctors would translate it, shall give them the honor due unto them.
But I do of late understand by some knowing and discreet travelers into their
chiefest places in Turkey, there where they are most numerous, that as we unvail
the bonnet to those of noble birth, so they use it by taking the skirt of his
garment in their hand, and kiss it.

But the result of all is, We will go with you.] Here is a resolution without
too tedious a deliberation; it is plain, and the reason is very pithy, Because
we have heard that God is with you. Nay, they will be assured of it, for that
now it is when those many divisions that are amongst us at this present day
shall be decided, and all Sects shall be then collected into one true faith and
one true baptism. And although we are for a time puffed up above measure, as
altogether insisting upon novelties and circumstances; when Israel shall be
exalted, these toys and unnecessary forms that I could name shall be all laid
aside with all their orders and appertenances, to be regulated according to the
new model of the Jews. It is true, that God has been, and still is in a far
more especial manner with us then he is with them; and we do daily enjoy those
gifts and graces which many Princes and Prophets longed with great desire to
see and know, and that which millions in the world know not as at this day: But
then we shall believe that God is in a more glorious and transcendent way with
them, then to day he is with us; because does not the Apostle St. Paul say,
that it shall be like life from the dead? as if the world with all its
inhabitants were but like a chaos of confusion, nothing but darkness; or else
fallen into Endymion's sleep, not able to see their way at noonday, until the
Jews shall raise them up and lead them to the house of prayer, even Gods
dewlling place where he will set up his throne for ever.

I will but put this to any man's consideration, whom perhaps comfortable
experience may cause to know the truth of this; that when a man comes to be
truly converted, and to be a real believer, there will be such another man (as
I may say) to be seen in him, as that all that see him will be so amazed, that
they will scarce believe him to be the same man. Is not blessed Paul an example
sufficient for this? Now I say, that if the conversion of one poor soul will be
so miraculous in the eyes of all those that know it, what will the conversion
of two forlorn Nations cause in the minds of all men that hear of it?

And therefore I could heartily wish, that every man in his own proper station
would lay aside any question concerning the certainty of it, and to use his
whole ability to further it by his daily prayers. I might use a great many more
strong arguments to evince you, and to make men willing; but I look upon all,
(though it were a large volume) as nothing, except the Lord set it home upon
men's consciences. And therefore I will only show what are those grand
impediments which kept the Jews from believing on Jesus Christ the eternal Son
of God.

The first let happened from that inbred unbelief which they did entertain
about the manner of his entering into the world, or in respect of the meanness
and low estate of his fleshly parents.

And thence they say, Can any good thing, or is it possible that any such
should come out of Nazareth? which place they did, and do account of as the
most unlikely place in all the Country thereabouts for to produce their
Savior. And in another place, This man (say they) do we not know whence he is.
Believing that Shiloh shall descend from heaven above with great acclamations
of Angels and men, and so to be placed upon the throne immediately, and rule
over the Nations with a rod of iron. And again, Is not this the Carpenters son?
And with this they do many times at this day suppose to stop the mouth of a
Christian discoursing with them, as if so be the King of Kings and Lord of
Lords would be the adopted son of a Carpenter; and by this their predecessors
did hinder some from believing on him; for (said they) are not his brethren
here with us?

But secondly, to omit the meanness of his birth, this may seem something more
incongruous to a King, and altogether inconsistent with such a degree, that
after he had forsaken the house of his parents, he had not wherein to put his
head, but went up and down in a servile-like estate, even in the very garb of a
dejected spirit. Nay moreover in that he would be that ipse solus, even what
none before ever was, or ever shall be: That whereas the Kings of the East did,
and do always ride either upon Elephants or Dromedaries; I say, because that he
would show the lowest example of humility and meekness, he would therefore ride
upon none other then that which men do account the most inferior of such kind
of creatures, so that the Text says he rode upon an Ass to Jerusalem. And
above this, whereas the Jews did expect, and Israel yet does expect a most
gorgeous and excellent train to attend him, he had none but his twelve mean
followers, and the generality of his company were Publicans; and therefore they
called him a Samaritan, being ignorant of the true meaning of those places in
Isa. 53. and Zech. 9.9.

A third impediment was from the manner and matter of his discourse. And first
the manner of his doctrine seemed not so pertinent unto their Savior, whereby
they might receive either redemption, or the least comfort in the time of their
subjection under the Romans, but so as they could in no wise understand it; for
it is written in the Evangelists, that he spoke to them in parables and in dark
sayings, only to fulfill the Scripture, that Israel seeing him, yet should not
see, nor hearing should understand. For when Christ told the Jews of raising
the destroyed Temple in three days time, he made it not clear to them, for he
then spoke of the Temple of his body; and upon that the Hebrews being not able
to apprehend his true meaning, it seemed but as a vain saying to them. But for
the matter in that place where the Lord did affirm he was before Abraham, there
was their great mistake. Now they meant according to their knowledge of Christ
as he took upon him the humane nature (sin only excepted) but he meant
according unto his eternal Godhead, who was that Lamb slain from the foundation
of the world.

Now it is said in the Evangelist St. John, that when they heard these sayings,
they were offended and cried out, Who can hear it? and thereupon many of his
Disciples were so foolish, as that they revolted from Christ. This was a
greater default in them then in the Jews: which made our Savior wonder and say
to the twelve, Will ye go away also? And notwithstanding their present
detestations of so base a relapse, yet we know that when he came to suffer, his
Disciples ran their way and left him. Then if a Christians faith may be so
tottering, no marvail the Jews did not then accept him for their Messiah.

But chiefly our Savior did drive at this, that he might beat the Jews off
from their own self-righteousness and hypocritical works; and for this cause
they said he came to destroy and to abrogate the Law of Moses, that he would
sit at meat with Publicans and sinners, do cures on the Sabbath Day, and the
like. But the last and greatest hinderance of their belief, next unto Gods
purpose, was, in that he whom they believe is or will be God with them, was or
should be capable of suffering death. Wherefore said the Jews, if the King of
Israel, let him save himself. So that the most ready amongst them to believe on
Christ, when he came to suffer, did then fall away; as in the 24 of Luke, v.
21. But we trusted it had been he who should have redeemed Israel! And herein
consisted the invalidity of their Thesis; they did not firmly believe, but only
supposed that this was he. Their faith was as little, or rather less then the
faith of Thomas: but Jesus Christ calls that a blessed faith, which is the
substance of things only hoped for. But as I say all along, so now, Gods time
it seems is not as yet come, and therefore his justice must and will be fully
satisfied before mercy will extend unto any man. We all know that if God should
not punish for sin, it would much derogate from his holiness; which attribute
God does so excel in, as it is said he hates to look upon sin, and without
the participation of which no soul can enter into glory.

And further, it was requisite and just that the Lord should so punish Israel,
because that whom he loves he chasteneth; and when God does suffer any one to
go on in his sins unpunished, it argues that he lies under the heavy sentence
of Gods displeasure.

The Apostle St. Paul had never found out that good way (not of Damascus) but
that which leads to eternal happiness, if the Lord had not first struck him
blind. So his brethren the Jews must not go to their journies end, without
crosses and persecutions; for it is not only a narrow way, but it is a
perilous way, a pass scarce passable by reason of those many tribulations and
various trials that the faithful meet withal in their pilgrimage; and
therefore great is the wisdom of God which goes along with their captivity.

Then let not Christians that think they stand, boast nor be high-minded. As
there was no Cedar in Lebahon but was liable to lopping; so there is no
Christian so tall nor steady, but may fall into most gross and scandalous
enormities, yea so low, as that God may seem to have forsaken him for a season,
as he has the Jews. For is not this written for eternity to consider on, how
notwithstanding all the good deeds of Hezekiah, yet he was branded, or rather
clouded with this exprobration, That he rendered not unto the Lord according
unto what he had received? And was not this the reason of Isreal's dejection and
present rejection, because the Scripture says he rejected and put far away
from him all the Lords benefits? Jesurun had enough, nay rather too much of the
mercies of God, except he had made better improvement of them, then to kick and
spurn against God and his holy Word.

Certainly the Lord does not give any man riches, or show any man mercy, that
thereby he should rebel: Should we sin, because grace abounds? God forbid!
Nay rather with Saul we should admire the exceeding riches of free grace, that
such bondmen as the Israelites in Egypt were, and that such great sinners as we
are, should obtain the least crum of mercy. This is, indeed was their misery,
that they knew not that it was God that did draw them, as it were, with bonds
of love, neither studied for to know: And for this cause has the Lord cast
them down so low, that nothing can raise them out of their blind and undone
estate, but the omnipotent word of the Lord: which resurrection or restoration
will be accomplished by taking away those scales of unbelief which hang before
their eyes.

For they are not yet arrived to Damascus* neither as yet is Ananias come to
them. They are not thither come, because there is none as yet that do take this
blind creature by the hand whereby to guide her; and he that will enlighten the
dark minds of their understanding, even the Glory of Israel, has not as yet
given charge to the Angel of his presence for their salvation.

It is said in one of the Prophets, Will the Lion roar when he has caught the
prey and has enough? and will not the Grape-gatherers leave the gleanings?

So that from this allusion which the Lord by the mouth of the Prophet sent
unto the Jews formerly, is much talked on amongst them even at this day; so
that they say the Lord will not be always angry with them, but he will remember
the covenant which he made with their fathers: God will leave a remnant to
possess the desolate and waste places, such as he has reserved for his own
purpose, such as can stand and admire to remember the days of old; whose
hearing the sad relation of their fathers so many hundred years living in
darkness, for that horrid and doleful saying of theirs at the crucifixion of
their King, his blood be upon us and our children! will make their ears to
tingle. O foolish people and unwise, that should by their hardness of heart and
stubborness of mind produce such a heavy curse, which has fallen heavy upon so
many generations!

Yet the Jews at this day omitting what is past; profess unto us Christians,
that they have still great hopes and are fully persuaded that they shall yet be
a most holy people unto God, pure and without spot or blemish. And therefore as
Aquinas says, Spes confert ad actionem vel operationem; is, I am sure,
fulfilled in the Jews; for that there never was more searching of the Prophets
then there is at this day amongst them, never more frequent calling upon God,
never were there such longings after him whom their souls will dearly love, as
to day; as yet never any of their predecessors, as I can find, for above these
sixteen hundred years, were so willing to converse and commune with us
Christians about their Messiah. Time was, and that of late years, if a
Christian did but mention Christ unto them, they would shun his company, though
sometimes to their own damage. Therefore let us rejoice at this, and willingly
spend some time to further the building of this Temple not made with hands; and
the Lord will questionless reward us.

It would be well if that England would but now do as the Apostle writes of
them: For verily (says he) it has pleased them of Achaia and Macedonia to
make a certain contribution for the poor Saints which are at Jerusalem.

Now as the Apostle does here write to another Church, he brings this in,
that it might be their example of well-doing. I say that it would be worthy of
eternal remembrance and commendation, if the Supreme of this Nation would be
pleased as the Apostle says, (that is) to be very willing thereto, so as to
entertain these poor, and as yet unchristianized Hebrews, whose debtors (as he
says) we truly and indeed are

I know not of a truth the business between the Dutch and Portugals in Brasile;
but perhaps there being a many Jews, they may be exposed to the elements. And
then let us know here in England, that God does yet strive with us, (who can
well help them without us) and has put one opportunity more of doing good into
our hands, if we will but lay hold of it. If not, I shall apply the words of
Mordecai to Esther unto our Nation, thus saying,

For if thou altogether hold thy peace at this time, then shall their
enlargement and deliverance arise from another place to the Jews, but thou and
thy fathers house shall perish, etc.

So that if we do not now work whilst it is day, and whilst we may help them,
and for which we may have cause to bless God, and to comfort our selves with
that saying of Paul, -- For in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the
Gospel; and that we have that honor before all the Nations in the world, so
that through the assistance of our Lord we may be instruments of Isreal's
resurrection and restoration: Yet if we shall now forbear to put our helping
hands to so glorious and just an employment, and cry out with the sluggard for
a little more quiet, a little more folding the hands, then let us be sure that
their salvation will come from some other Nation, who the Text says shall be
as thorns in our eyes, and help to destroy us on all sides. And besides this,
we know not whose turn may be next, that may be forsaken of God in these
ticklish and perilous times: Is it not good to be found well doing, even our
Lords business? which is to use all our might and strength for the bringing of
dark souls into the true way. Jesus Christ our Savior says, If ye love me,
feed my lambs, and love the brethren. It is not promised to any man, that he
shall go to heaven by all faith, and no works, which are the fruits of the true
faith of the Son of God. For as Gregorius says, Nil juvat nomen bonum,
reclamante conscientia. That to have a notional faith, and to bear the name of
a Christian, without acting like a Christian: And for a Moralist that pays
every man his own, and comes constantly to the public Ordinances, and perhaps
has unto this day lived with good conscience and unblameable toward all men,
(this is all good;) who makes one form of prayer to be his diuturnal sacrifice
it may be to his dying day, and therewith is content and quiets himself. and
hopes therewith to appease God, never striving to proceed further; indeed
having not the Spirit of God, who leads the chosen with suitable supplications,
and gives unto them the spirit of prayer, not of the one only prayer of such a
Minister, although it may be at that time suitable: I say, such a man leans
but upon a broken reed; this lazy progress of his will never bring him to
heaven; but such a man's conscience will one day tell him he is never the better
for his faith. But for the present his conscience may sleep, like the Laws,
quae nunquam moriuntur; and it may be the man thinks he has love and charity
enough; but as for the Jews, they are no kin to him. Yet let him be assured
with Augustine, that quam nihil notum in terra, tam nihil ignotum in coelo; how
that God does take special notice of all his carriage as well to wards them as
the Christians. I said before, that we had all one Father, and are we not all
brethren? Then let us look to it. that we may not become guilty of that
dreadful curse of our Saviors, for not taking in of the poor strangers: But
rather so order our steps everyman in his own sphere, that we may give up the
account of our talents not with fear, but great joy. So that the Lord will
certainly withold that day of gloominess wherein he will judge the world
(notwithstanding the vain opinions of some of our days) till all the servants
of the most High, both Jews and Gentiles, are sealed, and when God has called
them home unto his kingdom of marvailous light, and given them the assurance of
their faith and hope, and how they shall then be secure from those great
plagues that are about to come upon all the wicked of the world. I say then
there shall be silence in heaven, and not before; then will the Spirit say
come, and the Bride say come, even then let every true Christian say come.

If any one that would truly further the coming of our Lord to judgment, and
does desire that those evil days spoken of and predicted by him might be
shortened; let him first study how to further their conversion, because the
other cannot be accomplished until all the elect and chosen Hebrews be made
vessels ready prepared to abide for ever in those heavenly mansions above.

When that day of slaughter begins to appear, the Lord will bring all Nations
down into the valley of Jehoshaphat, and there he will plead with them. Now for
what is it, but the Lords calling unto account those of all Nations that have
scattered his heritage, even Israel, amongst all Nations of the world, and
dealt treacherously with them, by selling them and misusing them?

The wiseman Solomon says, that a prudent man foreseeth a danger and prevents
it. Now here the wise God only for our good, and that we may prevent our
suffering with the rest of the world, does forewarn us as he did Niniveh. Then
had not we better in times of mercy, before the evil day come upon us, to help
the Israelites now whilst we may do it? for it will nor be thanks-worthy to
do it by constraint; because the most wicked of men, when Gods judgments light
upon them, will then begin to do good: This comes only from slavish fear, and
will not stand us in stead in that great day of Jezreel.

And therefore let us bethink our selves what a heavy curse did fall upon Tire
and Sidon, because they sold the children of Judah, even the Lords own people,
unto the Grecians: As also what great mercy in times of calamity God has
shown, and will still show to all those that will help to redeem the poor
captives, and show them what proffers and invitations Jesus Christ holds
forth to their nation. Certainly God which has promised, is also able to
fulfill his words; and we see that in the revolutions of time, and throughout
every generation, one promise or other has either its dawning, or else its
meridian; and therefore I am persuaded their restoration will be the next.
However it cannot be far off; for God has sworn that he will make this people
more glorious then other Nations; and he that bears record, has set to his
seal that God is true; Heaven and earth may pass away, but his words, no not
the least tittle thereof shall fall to the ground. He is not as man that he
should lie; but He is the Amen, the faithful and true Witness, the beginning of
the Creation, who will shortly come and shake all Nations.

But if some adamantine spirits will not yet give way to their transportation;
let others that have well-grounded hope, weep with the Prophet Jeremiah in
secret places for such men's pride, and let their eyes run down with tears,
because the Lords flock remain in captivity, and in an unconverted condition,
even unto this day.

FINIS.

