A JUDGMENT and CONDEMNATION Of the Fifth-Monarchy-Men, THEIR Late Insurrection.

ALSO, How far the Guilt of that Fact may justly be imputed to Those that are
commonly distinguished by the Names of Independents, Presbyterians, Anabaptists
and Quakers.

Set forth in a LETTER to a Friend.

By a Moderate GENTLEMAM.

Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall.

LONDON: Printed in the Year MDCLXI.

A Judgment and Condemnation Of the Fifth-Monarchy-Men, THEIR Late
Insurrection.
VAnity of vanities, says the Preacher, vanity of vanities, All is vanity: and
says the Psalmist, Man is like to vanity; his days are as a shadow that
passes away. But man that is born of a woman is not only of few days, as Job
says, but also full of trouble. Who is able to reckon up the manifold
Calamities, Evils and Miseries that poor man does necessarily yield to? yea,
even wise men as well as fools; good men as well as evil. But how infinite and
hideous are those evils that men expose themselves to through the Prevalencie
of their own lusts and appetites, which when they have once conceived and
brought forth sin, do afterward bring forth death! And besides these, there is
yet another sort of evils which helps to fill up the measure of man's misery,
and which befall him as he is a man (for Humanum est errare) and that is error,
of the mistake of the understanding fa^lty, in judging Truth to be falsehood, or
Falsehood Truth. The first sort of (...) is common to most (...) and (...).
These (...) is in the fullest sense peculiar to bad men, who are habituated to
the following of the allurements of the flesh, rather then the dictates of
reason and true religion. But good men are not wholly free from the mischiefs
that attend their negligence and remisness in admitting even presumptuous sins.
But the third sort of evils that proceed from Ignorance, both wel-minded and
ill-minded men are subject to, with this difference, that the goodness and
compassion of the Almighty will not suffer the well-minded to err damnably and
finally. An Example of one sinning damnably through Ignorance, we have in the
Apostle Paul, who says of himself, that he was a Blasphemer, a persecutor of
the Church, and injurious; but he obtained mercy, because he did it ignorantly,
in unbelief. And whose heart, that has yet any humane blood, does not bleed
within him, to behold the most deplorable Effects of the damnable ignorance of
some men in this our day, who professing themselves to be servants and subjects
of Jesus, who is Prince of peace, do notwithstanding through mistaken zeal,
expose and destroy both themselves and others, in breaking peace, and making
war! Thus though the Gospel is a Gospel of peace, yet accidentally it brings
not peace on earth, but a sword; and that which makes it most sad, is this,
that the injury is done not by the world against the professors of Christ (as
it was wont to be) but by those miserable professors against the world, yea
even their brethren.

The Moralists, and Divines too, divide ignorance into two kinds; vincible and
invincible ignorance: invincible is that, when the Truth lies so deeply hid,
and is so subtle and intricate, or at least our means of information, or
Capacities are so slender and weak; and on the contrary the arguments for Error
so plausible, and our education and converse so prevalent, that it is either
utterly impossible, or very near an impossiblility, for such men to find out
the truth. In this case, according as it comes nearer to, or is more remote
from absolute impossibility, it does more or less excuse. But where there are
sufficient means of knowledge, a competent capacity, the truth is obvious, and
no greater impediments then such as good men do commonly overcome in this case,
the ignorance is vincible: and if it be a matter of necessary concernment,
there must needs be some secret lust or vice, or notable negligence in men,
that hinders them from the knowledge of the Truth in that particular; and so
they are found defaulty in their wills, and demeriting punishment more or less,
according to the degree of their voluntary malignity.

These things premised and considered, the horrid facts, with the great
pretensions of the Fifth-Monarchy-Men, aforementioned, to the Reign of Christ,
proclaiming Jesus King, even with despair of life, and the violent impulse they
appear to have had to this strange work, as also their daily converse with
holy Scriptures, frequent watchings, fastings and prayers, it will easily
appear that what they have done, they have ignorantly done, and as sometime the
Jews, yea, Paul himself, having a Zeal of God, but not according to knowledge:
But if we weigh on the other hand, the means they have had of knowing the truth
in this point, the many grave men and elaborate Treatises of a contrary
judgment, with which they might and ought to have conversed; the Emergent Acts
of Divine Government amongst us, crossing their imaginations, and frustrating
their expectations; the clearness and perspicuity of the contrary duty of
peaceableness, patient suffering, loving their enemies, and the like, it may as
readily be concluded, there was some inordinate lust of Domination, Envy,
Rashness, Impatience, or the like, which they ought to have mortified and did
not, that led them into this gross mistake.

Upon the whole matter, my Judgment is, That instead of insulting and railing
upon them, in Accusations which the Angels would not use, when contending with
the devil; Let our hearts melt over them in pity and compassion. Let us pray
for them that yet remain in the Land of the Living, as our Lord did in a much
worse case, Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do.

As for our own part, let us lay our Hands upon our Hearts, and diligently
consider, with sobriety and modesty, what our Opinions are, in matters of
Religion; especially such as are of great concernment to the Honor of God, and
our own and others welfare! Let us examine our selves by their Ensample! Do we
not entertain, and severely hold, and think them justly deserving punishment
that hold the contrary to some Doctrines and Practices which perhaps we never
took half the pains to search into, nor made a third part of those Prayers to
beg direction in, as these have done, that are thus mistaken? Let us not then
think, that to kill men by an unjust Law, or starve them in Prison, or
otherwise destroy them, (though therein we are persuaded we do well, as these
did) are infinitely less evil then what they have done. Much less let us
imagine, that because men are sometime mistaken in their Zeal, that therefore
it is good to be lukewarm, or to cast on Religion as a melancholy fancy, and
which exposes men to needless Hazards and Self-denials: Let Us not tread the
Blood of Christ under our feet, or count it a common thing, because of some
Men's folly, who adore it: Neither let us shut our eyes, and give up our selves,
with the Papists, to a blind Faith and Devotion; and to be led in Religion, as
the Governor shall please, because in the following our own Judgments we may
mistake: For, besides that God loves not these blind Sacrifices, he has
commanded us in these matters to call no man Master upon earth; for one is our
Master, even Christ: and all are commanded to come unto him, and learn of him,
who is meek and lowly, ready to teach us, upbraiding none.

But further, if we reckon the hainousness of sin, by the malignity of the
will, as we ought, and not by the greatness of the matter wherein the offense
is; what shall we say of those sins that are committed wittingly and willingly,
in comparison of this, that is done through a false persuasion? Shall the
killing men in Duels, or in willful Drunkenness or heedless, Anger, be counted
among venial sins? Shall the defiling the Marriage Bed,
Murthering-false-witness, and grinding Extortion, and profane swearing and
forswearing, be deemed such Peccadillo's, being done against full knowledge,
and with deliberation? Shall we think that those upon whom the Tower of Shiloh
fell, were greater sinners then all that were in Jerusalem? Christ tells us,
Nay, but except we repent, we shall all likewise perish.

Methinks this sad Example gives a sore che^k to the practice of late times,
wherein men have been and are very ready to place the chief of Religion, if not
the whole of it, in some Opinion or Practice, (which if it be true and good, is
yet of lesser moment) and in respect of that, to neglect or under-value all
other parts of Faith and Profession; thus with the Scribes and Pharisees,
tything mint, and anise, and cummin; with neglect of the weightier matters of
the Law, Justice, Mercy, and Faith. Is it not an Epidemical Error, To think
that Salvation depends more upon Truth of Judgment, then Holiness of
Conversation? Whereas it is certain that at Erroneous man may be saved; but an
Unholy man shall certainly be damned. Do not many men think God must needs
accept, their Public Worship, although they seem even to worship the Devil at
home, by all manner of Profaneness? Do not our Allo-Baptists lay a greater
stress upon the point of Baptism, then any other part of Divine Doctrine, or
Holy Conversation? For surely one great evil of these men we speak of was.
Their overweening that Doctrine of the Civil Reign of Christ over the
Kingdoms of the World, placing as it were, all a Christians Duty, in the
promoting thereof. Let us also take heed of those affections that might
possibly have Influence in precipitating them into this Mischief. Let as beware
of singularity and prejudice. In Controversal matters of Concernment, let us
keep an Ear for each party, and not espouse one side, before we understand
either: He that swallows those Doctrines and Patterns he first meets with, it
is rather by Chance then Choice, if he light one the Truth. As for the
unconstant and changing person, it is to be wished, he would set himself to be
incorporated and united with some one good and profitable Principle; so would
he not suffer so much for the future. The Apostle Paul teaches us how to avoid
both this Whirle-pool of Levity, and the Quicksand of Prepossession, when he
bids us, Try all things, and hold fast that which is good.

Your next enquiry is, whether I think this fact of these Monarchy-Men may not
justly reflect such guilt upon the whole Party of those that served the remnant
of the Long-Parliament, and the Protectors, known by the distinctions of
Independents, Presbyterians, Anabaptists and Quakers, as to make them incapable
of some part of that indulgence which is showed them in the Act of Oblivion,
and other his Majesty's Declarations; and the rather, because the Protector in
the case of an insurrection against his Government, mulct the whole Party? etc.

I will say little to that Act of the Protector; only I remember it was not
then approved even by many of his own Party, as being of dangerous consequence.
But as to this, I do freely give you my judgment, that in equity it cannot be
imputed as aforesaid, and that for these Reasons.

These are the very men that were drawing out into the field in Arms, under
there royal standard in Olivers ti^^.
First, It Is well known that this Seditious Party have been constant Adversaries
of the whole Party, under both those Denominations, of Commonwealths-Men, and
Protectoreans, ever since the breaking up of the Little Parliament. Now there
is no show of Reason, that having been at distance so long, (though once
Friends) that the one should suffer for the other, but every one to bear his
own burden.

Secondly, They are professedly of differing Principles, in matters of
Government.

For first, They differ with both the sorts aforenamed, in that they all hold
themselves obliged to submit to the Government which the Will of GOD shall put
them under; and the Protectoreans seem to like Monarchy better then another
Government. The Commonwealths-Men think the King has a Commonwealth-Title to
the Crown, being chosen to it by the Unanimous Consent of the Peoples
Representative in Parliament: So that no Prince in the World has a better
Title. But these on the contrary (as the Event sadly manifests) think
themselves obliged to oppose all Government, but that of the Saints, as they
call it: and judge the Consent of the People in general, no Consent; forasmuch
as Saints only have Right to Election of Governors and Government.

The Commonwealths-Men could wish that all Men were Saints, or at least, that
the Saints only might Govern; But they judge, that till CHRIST come with an
Irresistible Power, to give the Government of the World to the Saints, they
must still follow that Old General Rule, Do unto Others, as Ye would they
should do unto You. They that are not Politically Unsociable, should not be
deprived of Their Share in Civil Society.

Again, These admit of Humane Prudence in accomodating Laws to the Condition,
Temper, Customs, Clymate, etc. of the People; and herein would have the Rules
of the Jewish Commonwealth, and Christian Precepts to bear sway as much as
conveniently may be; but that in Municipal Laws, God has left men liberty of
Creating Humane Ordinances, as the State shall require. The other, leave no
such liberty, but would have the Judicial Laws of the Jewish State severely
observed.

Thirdly, this sort of men have been as far engaged in the suppressing of the
Tumult; and thereby have shown as much dislike of the Fact, as the rest of
their Neighbors, and as their trust did permit.

Lastly, I have heard, that upon their Examination at Guild Hall, before the
Lieutenant, they have vindicated the men I am vindicating, from having any Hand
of Conspiracy, or Correspondence with them in this matter. Some of them saying,
There were not one Hundred in all England that ever knew of their PLOT, and
denying that they had any Confederates, either in City or Country, from whom
they did, or could expect any Assistance in their Attempt.

Wherefore seeing the case is so, that the fault cannot reasonably and
equitably be charged upon them in any measure, I perswad my self that our
Counselors will give no such Advice, as (if they give this) will make
sufferers more thousands of Innocents, then there were Individuals of Nocents,
in that strange Enterprise.

FINIS.

