To the Honorable House of COMMONS.
The Almighty God, bless, guide, and direct you, that you may have the Honor
to protect his true Worship, now in this distracted time, when so many
devouring Devils would destroy it; for the Devil is an Enemy to Truth.
Gentlemen,
I Can assure you I have been very Zealous for the Peace of this Nation; and
God has been infinitely good to lengthen out our Tranquillity hitherto, contrary
to the expectation of Men and Devils: I must consess I do not love War, because
it is destructive, and the winner may be a loser: Therefore I humbly entreat
Your Honors, to beg the Infinite Majesty of Heaven his Directions, and he will
direct you to preserve his Worship, and to keep your Trade, and prevent War, if
you will fincerely seek to him and be just, and to do as you would be done
unto, and not encourage them that violently break his Commandments; which the
Interlopers has done with a high hand. I love the Gentlemen, but I am sorry
they should be guilty of such a Crime, that has brought a scandal upon the
Government, and a dishonor to Religion, not considering Gods Commandments: But
Your Honors know, if any Man has necessity for Money, and he sells his House
to two Men, the last buyer must be the loser, and so it must be in this case;
there must be no Unity, for that will be overgrown, and destroy the Trade of
the Nation. There is not any thing for the advantage and peace of the Nation,
than to unmake them again, for they have made a great breach upon Friendship,
and has disturb the peace of the Kingdom; for every one is tearing and rending
one from another, and if the Commandments be of no effect, Who can live safe?
Therefore if you love God for the good of your own Souls, and the peace of the
Kingdom put an end to it; and if you love the Gentlemen, order their Money to
be paid them again, for that is the greatest good you can do them, for God will
never bless the breach of his Commands; but if they will submit, and be willing
to have their Money again: For it has been an ill example, and if they will be
sorry that they should give the occasion, God will pardon both the Sheep and
the Shepherd; but if they are stiff-necked and will not yield, God knows how to
punish them, and all that supports them; for he is a powerful God, he can safe
and destroy in a moment, for they shall know that there is a God in England as
well as in Israel. The Lord grant that we may do those things to prevent his
anger.

I humbly beseech your Honors, not to bring a Sea of trouble upon your selves
at this time, as to concern your selves for an Heir for the Kingdom, for it
will take up a great deal of time, and it will be all to no purpose; for it is
Christ's Kingdom, and when it is his Will, that you should trouble your self
about an Heir, he will direct you. But the Duke of Monmouth's Children must not
be Heirs; for the King told me, that all the Discourses was Fabulous, for he
was never Married to his Mother: And when the difference was between the King
and the Duke, I fasted three days for to Unite them: And I made Applications
daily, and the King was so gracious, that he did not say any thing against the
Duke, but said you are hard upon me, But why do not you go and hear what he
says to you? But when I came he received me very civilly, but I never heard any
Mortal vilisie the King at so great a rate as he did, which made my heart ache,
and so I declined the Cause. Why should any one think of an Heir, have you not
got a King you can trust? I would that all could trust God, for then you need
not fear the greatness of France, nor depend upon the fidelity of the Dutch;
but you would be glorious, great, and happy, and the King and People would
obtain more true joy in a Week, than they have in a Year; for he would endow
you with such Christian Actions, that might rectify all mistakes. The late
Parliament could trust God without a Standing Army, and make Corn cheap, and
they put down those hellish Serpents that did so much mischief, and the people
are very thankful: And God will enable the Old Company to pay off the New: For
they have been established by Kings and Queens for above these Hundred Years;
and they thought it was for the advantage of the Crown, and the good of the
Kingdom: And Your Honors must keep up the Kings Prerogative; and in so doing
you will preserve your own Power: And God can make the young King of Spain a
Friend to Christendom, and therefore you may own him.

The Almighty grant that you may know how to deny your own Interest, for God's
Glory, and the King and Kingdoms good: Which the Lord grant, Amen. Amen. So I
rest your Souls-well-wisher, ELINOR JAMES.


