To all the People of England, Soldiers, and others, more especially in and
about the City of LONDON; The humble REMONSTRANCE of Edward Jenkes, Gent. on
behalf of the COMMONWEALTH;
SHOWS,

THat the honorable House of Commons (deluded with a false and scandalous
Report made by Laurence Whitaker, Esquire, Chairman to the late Committee for
Examinations, upon the 15. of September. 1645.) did acquit William Lenthal,
Esquire, Speaker of the said House, from several notorious Treacheries, clearly
proved against him before the said Commit: And the said House (so deluded)
did, about the time of the said false Report, appoint a Committee to consider
what exemplary punishment should be inflicted upon William Pendred, Gent. James
Freese, Merchant, and others, as malicious slanderers, (merely for prosecuting
Mr Speakers Treacheries on behalf of the Commonwealth, in obedience to the
Ordinances and Declarations of the Parliament;) But the said Committee never
met in Order thereunto, whereby M. Speaker (ever since the said 15. of September.
1645.) has stood undeservedly justified; and the innocent prosecutors and
witnesses been disgracefully and unjustly abused, for prosecuting against the
said Speaker these ensuing Treacheries; Viz.

1. That the said William Lenthal did combine with Sir John Lenthal, in
maintaining and protecting several Spies and Agents for the late King, within
the Lines of Communication, during the late Wars.

2. That the said William Lenthal did combine with Sir John Lenthal, in
conveying diverse remarkable Prisoners at War out of the Line of Communication
unto the late King.

3. That the said William Lenthal did combine with Sir John Lenthal, in
assisting and protecting several Plotters, on the behalf of the late King, to
destroy the City of London.

4. That the said William Lenthal did combine with Sir John Lenthal, in sending
Horses for War, with Men and Arms, to the late King.

5. That the said William Lenthal did wittingly and wilfully suffer above 30000
l. to be conveyed out of the Line of Communication unto the late King.

6. That the said William Lenthal did hold an intercourse of Letters with the
late King.

7. That the said William Lenthal did combine with Sir John Lenthal, in keeping
an Agent in the Garrison of Oxford to expedite the foregoing Treacheries.

8. That the said William Lenthal did combine with Laurence Whitaker, Esquire and
many other members of the Parliament, (some lately excluded, some now in the
House) to conceal and smother the foregoing Treacheries.

9. That the said William Lenthal did combine with Laurence Whitaker, Esquire and
others, in endeavoring to take away the Lives and Liberties of several of the
Prosecutors and Witnesses unto the foregoing Treacheries.

10. That the said William Lenthal did combine with Henry Wollaston, the Jailer
of Newgate, London, in releasing three Priests and Jesuits out of Newgate, by
his warrant, about the 20. of August, 1646.

These two last Articles were not in question before the said Committee for
Examinations, but were acted since by M. Speaker, which shows his perseverance
in Treachery against the State: All which foregoing Treacheries were lately
printed and published, by my procurement, and with the consent of Col. George
Cook, under the notion of Ten Articles already proved upon Oath against an Evil
Member now in Parliament.

2. That His Excellency the Lord General FAIRFAX, and his General Council of
Officers, did about November. 1648. declare, That the Resolution of the whole
Army was, to b^ing all Fomentors, Contrivers, and Actors in the late Wars unto
speedy exemplary Justice: And for that end, upon the first of January, 1648.
(Lieutenant General Cromwell being President) did appoint a Committee of the
Army for examination of all discoveries of criminal Offenders in relation to
the late Wars: Unto which Committee a Petition, with several Articles of
Treason, wilful Murder, and near forty particulars of absolute Felony, charged
upon the aforesaid Henry Wollaston, was referred by the General Council of the
Army, and upon examination of the said Articles against Wollaston, M. Speakers
warrant for the release of the three Priests and Jesuits out of Newgate (viz.
Edmond Cole, Philip Morgan, and John Wright,) was prod^ced by the said
Wollaston; upon sight and debate whereof, Col. Cook, and others of the said
Committee, did advise, assist, and encourage Hannah Ienks, my wife, from time
to time, for many months together, in the bringing to light M. Speakers
notorious Treacheries.

3. That above twenty Depositions of sufficient Witnesses (some of the Common
Council, and others of the City of London, besides many material witnesses, who
could not be examined by reason of the late dispersing of the Army) were taken
by the said Committee, and did clearly prove Mr Speakers aforesaid Treacheries,
and the smothering thereof by the false Report of the said Laurence Whitaker;
And that Col. Cook, with several other Colonels of the said Committee, did
declare unto near forty Common Council men, and others, of this City of
London, that the foregoing Treacheries were clearly proved upon Oath; and the
reason why they did so declare themselves, was, That a business of such eminent
concernment might not be smothered by any treacherous policy or power
whatsoever.

4. That the aforesaid Depositions were delivered upon the 26. of July, 1649.
unto the Judge Advocate of the Army, who is one of the Commissioners appointed
by his Excellency to make some further progress in the business. But the said
Commissioners do labor to ensnare the Prosecutors, Witnesses, and their
assistants, and to question them for prosecuting the aforesaid Treacheries
against M. Speaker, on behalf of the Commonwealth, as though they intend to
smother M. Speakers Treacheries (clearly proved upon Oath by the aforesaid
Depositions,) and to asperse and abuse the Prosecutors and Witnesses for
declaring the truth, in obedience to the commands of the said Committee of the
Army: All this, notwithstanding that Solemn Covenant, which the Parliament
forced the People to take in the presence of Almighty God, binding them to
discover all Incendiaries and evil instruments, and endeavor, as much as in
them lay, to bring them to public trial, and zealously to assist one another
therein against all opposition. These are proceedings which the very Heathen
would abhor, and which are quite contrary to the late solemn and great
Declaration of the Army; and which (if persisted in by the said Commissioners,
and not disclaimed by his Excellency at an immediate Council of Officers) will
most assuredly bring an odium upon his Excellency and the Army, besides, expose
them to the just censure of being inconstant to their principles, faithless to
their pretenses, and countenancers of Treacheries and Injustice.

5. It is more then probable, that whatsoever M. Speaker has acted with the
Army, has been merely out of design to destroy them, and make the Parliament
odious, in regard he has so betrayed his Trust in his eminent Offices (viz. of
being Speaker of the House of Commons, Master of the Roles, and late
Commissioner of the great Seal of England,) as that above one hundred Articles
of notorious Treacheries and Injustice are ready to be exhibited against him by
my self, and others, unto such Commissioners as the Parliament shall appoint
for the free and public trial thereof.

6. That M. Speaker has many hypocritical and subtle Agents, who go from
person to person, from place to place, to hinder M. Speakers Treacheries and
Injustice from being brought unto a public Trial; which Agents do affright
some people with M. Speakers power and greatness, seduce others by large
rewards and promises, and delude others with fallacious and specious pretenses;
whereas (through the assistance of Almighty God) I doubt not but to make it
appear at a public trial, that Mr Speaker has acted the part of a dangerous
Agent for the Pope, and for the late King, during these unnatural, cruel, and
bloody Wars.

Therefore I do hereby remonstrate and declare, That it is the duty of all the
People of England, both Soldiers and others, in every City and Country, more
especially in and about this City of London, upon sight hereof, with all
possible speed, to move the Parliament with importunate Petitions to appoint
Commissioners for the speedy public trial of the aforesaid Treacheries
against M. Speaker, either for his vindication or condemnation.

And I do likewise declare, That I am confident that no well-affected person
whatsoever will dare, directly or indirectly, to oppose the aforesaid public
trial: But will forthwith stir up all his friends and neighbors to second this
my Remonstrance with such vigor and resolution, as becomes a free Commoner of
England in so public and equitable a matter. And that whosoever does solicit
any Member of the Parliament, Army, Council of State, or Commonwealth, to
suppress or hinder the public trial of his the said M. Speakers Treacheries,
may hereby assure himself, that he will be looked upon as a mercenary Judas, a
friend to the sons of Belial, an enemy to the God of Justice, and to the future
safety of this languishing divided Nation.

Lastly, I profess before God and man, That I am moved to declare these things
out of no Self-end, or interest whatsoever, but out of a desire to discharge a
good conscience and a zeal to promote the good and welfare of my Country.

Eccles. 8. 11. Because Justice is not speedily executed upon an evil work,
therefore the hearts of the sons of men are fully set in them to do evil.

Prove. 28. 15. As a roaring Lion, and a raging Bear, so is a wicked Ruler over
the poor People.


Your Faithful Servant, Edw: Jenkes.
London, Aug. 4. 1649.

