The want of CHURCH GOVERNMENT No warrant for a total omission Of the LORDS
SVPPER. OR, A brief and Scholastical debate of that Question, which has so
wonderfully perplexed many, both Ministers and people.

Whether or no, The Sacrament of the Lords Supper may (according to
Presbyterial principles) be lawfully administered in an un-Presbyterated Church,
that is, a Church destitute of Ruling Elders.

Wherein the Affirmative is confirmed by many Arguments, and cleared from
Objections, especially such as are drawn from the unavoidablenesse of mixed
communions without Ecclesiastical Discipline.

By HENRY JEANES, Minister of Gods Word at Chedzoy in Sommerset shire.



London, Printed for SAMUEL GELLIBRAND, at the Ball in Paul's Churchyard. 1650.

An Approbation of the following Tractate, by that learned Divine Mr. ROBERT
CROSS, late of Lincoln College in Oxford, unto whose censure it was submitted.
Worthy friend,
I Have somewhat heedfully perused your determination touching administering the
Lords Supper in an Vn-Presbyterated Church; It seems to me both judicious and
accurate. I was of your judgment (as to the main) before. But am now much more
enlarged and confirmed in it: If humble sober-minded men be not yet of the same
mind with you, it is (possibly) because they are unacquainted with your
reasons; You shall therefore to my apprehension, do both a grateful and
seasonable work; To make that of public use which may be, and I am confident
will be of public benefit.

Luckam, Novembr. 16. 1650. Your friend and neighbor ROBERT CROSS.

To his honored friend Col. John Pyne, A Member of the Parliament, and one of
the Commissioners for the Militia, of the County of SOMMERSET.
A Principal end of prefixing your name unto the following piece, is, to give
a public testimony of that deep obligation which lies upon me, for those
favors which you have vouchsafed unto me; not in my self only, but in others
for my sake. These have been so many and so great, as that they may make just
challenge for you, unto any thing of my performance. But indeed this Treatise
is yours by a stricter tie of justice, then that of gratitude; For it is
principally by your care and assistance, that it is brought unto the Press: and
therefore to alienate it by any other inscription, would be not only an
ungrateful, but an injurious part. I shall deteine you no longer from your more
weighty affairs; But with my most hearty prayers commending you and yours to
the great Preserver of men, and beseeching him to make you a worthy instrument
of the peace and justice of this County; I shall rest

Yours in all humble observance, HENRY JEANES.

To the Reverend our very much honored Brother Mr. HENRY JEANES, Preacher of
the Word at Chedzoy, These present.
Reverend Sir,
WE have met this day to debate whether there be any course warranted by the
Word wherein Ministers may proceed to the administration of the Sacrament, as
our case now stands, and what that is? We earnestly desire that you would be
pleased to take the Question into your serious consideration, and to give your
thoughts on it, or rather the state of it the fourth of July next ensuing, when
we intend to meet again to consult farther about that thing. And we are the
rather inclined to desire your particular resolution therein; Because we
understand that you have administered that Sacrament, and therefore doubt not
but you have some way satisfied your self therein, which we earnestly desire
that you would be pleased to impart unto

Your affectionate Brethren, Tho. Gatchel. Rich. Newton. Tho. Court. Tho.
Musgrove. Will. Mills John Gardner. George Newton. Barthol Safford. John
Norman. George Bindon.

Taunton, June 13. 1649.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 21. for all read also for, p. 3 l. 5. for to r. so I. p. 5. l. 2.
for by r. even by, p. 6 l. 35 for they r. they whom we oppose, p. 12 l. 14 for
Are r. Is, p. 13 l. 6 for in-ductivum, r. inductivu^ p. 15 l. 24 for nature, r.
naturae, p. 17 l. 18 for is, r. in, idem, l. 32 for slock, r. flock. p. 18 l.
11 for presuptuous, r. presumptuous, p. 27 l. 78 for (...), r. (...). p. 32 l.
last, for a duty r. be a duty, p. 38. for example r. example p. 41 l. 11. for
codclude r. conclude, p. 43 l. 12 for ut r. ad, p. 45. l. 16. for more r. most,
p. 50. l, 20 for proceeded r. preceded p. 52 marg. l. 21 for peccatur r.
peccator, p. 54 l. 11. for possible r. possibly, p. 55 l. 18. for cocunque r.
quocunque, p. 57 l. 1. for directions r. direction, p. 60. l. 5. blot out the
second, to, p. 61 l. 7 for sin r. sinners p. 63 marg. for te net-u r. tenetur,
p. 64 marg. l. ult. for hi r. hic, p 65. l. 6. for stances r. instances, p. 66
l. 20 for say r. see, p. 67 l. 14 for know r. knew, p. 69. l. 35 for re-eive
rerecoive. p. 70 l. 29 blot out not, p. 72 l. 29 for committed r. committed by
our selves.

These are the grossest faults, others of an inferior nature, being easily
discernable by the Reader, are omitted.

Whether or no the Sacrament of the Lords Supper may according to Presbyterial
principles be lawfully administered in an un-Presbyterated Church, that is, a
Church destitute of Ruling Elders?
TO go over the Topical places belonging to the Terms of the Question, will
afford the greatest light: and upon a full and through survey of them, I resolve
upon holding the Question affirmatively.

There be two Terms in the Question considerable (viz.) Administration of the
Lords Supper; and a Non-Presbyterated Church, or a Church destitute of ruling
Elders: and I shall argue for the affirmative from both.

First then Arguments evidencing the Affirmative may be drawn from the Lords
Supper, and the Administration thereof.

From the Command of, and Examples for the administration thereof.

From the general Nature of the Lords Supper.

From the Instrumental Cause, End, and Object of the administration thereof.

From a Comparison of the Lords Supper with Baptism.

From the consideration of the opposite of administration of the Lords Supper;
the non-administration thereof. Primum a Praecepto.


The first Argument shall be taken from Christ's Command, Luke 22.19. 1 Cor.
11.24.25. This do in remembrance of me. All Christ's Commands are to be
observed, even in an un-Presbyterated Church, unless there be some
dispensation from Christ himself to the contrary. The Charge that Christ gave
to his Apostles at his ascension, Mat. 28.19, 20. was to teach those Nations
they should baptize, to observe all things whatsoever he had commanded them.
Now to administer the Lords Supper we have an express Commandment, and no
dispensation that I know of, to lay it aside in an un-Presbyterated Church.
Ergo, etc.

It is an old, and a good rule: Non distinguendum ubi lex non distinguit* We
must not distinguish where the Law does not distinguish. Limitations and
restrictions of divine praecepts that have no foundation in Scripture are
indeed saucy presumptions, a taking upon us to tutour the Almighty.

Unto this express Command for the administration of the Lords Supper the
Scholemen add a virtual and implicit precept from the necessity, Suarez*
or at least profitablenesse of it unto salvation. The people are bound to make
use of all means that are in any degree necessary to salvation; and a Minister
being to watch for the souls of his People, is to make what provision he can,
not only of things simply and absolutely necessary: but all things profitable
and convenient for salvation.

Before I meddle with the Answer which may be to this Argument, I will give it
a little more strength. We have a Command not only for the celebration, but
also for the frequent celebration of the Lords Supper. Mr Marshal in his Sermon
of the Baptizing of Infants argues for a repetition of the Lords Supper by way
of Analogy and proportion from the Passover. Page 35, 36.

All Gods Commands and Institutions (says he) about the Sacraments of the Jews
bind us as much as they did them in all things which belong to the substance of
the Covenant, and were not accidental to them: The Jewish Passover being to be
yearly repeated binds us to have a repetition of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, which came in room of it: because this belongs to the substance of the
Covenant (both of them being Sacraments for spiritual nourishment, growth, and
continuance in the Covenant.) But we have no need to stand upon a virtual or
analogical command for the frequent use of this Sacrament, seeing we have an
express command of it, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25, 26. Addit declarationem istius
clausulae hoc facite. Annunciate (...). Sic m^l^ quam Annunciatis, quasi dicat
annunciare debetis, nam exponit illa verba, Hoc facite ad meirecordationem.
Quod si reddas Annunciatis: erit rationatio cujus vis nulla apparet; Nempe vis
Corinthii celebrantes Coenam Domini, Annunciatis mortem Domini: ergo Christus
praecepit ut hoc faceretis. Quin and determinatie illa temporis videtur
imperativ^em postulare, Annun^iate donec venerit, id est, non solum vos sed
etiam vos secuturi credentes usque ad finem mundi deb^nt in celebranda sacra
caena mortem Domini annunciare.
This do in remembrance of me. This do as often as ye drink it in remembrance of
me: for as often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, show ye the Lords
death until he come. For to choose rather to read the words as they are in the
Margent then as they are in the Translation (ye do show:) you may see in
Piscator two reasons for thus rendering the words. The meaning of them in brief
is, Ye ought to show, declare, represent, and make known the death of the Lord
by this sacred Supper. This is a duty lying not only upon you, but upon all
Believers following you unto the end of the world. The Lords Supper is then to
be celebrated, even until the coming of Christ to judgment; and therefore
there ought to be no interruption of the celebration of it at fit and
convenient seasons, which is that which I mean by the frequent celebration
thereof. That the frequent celebration of this Sacrament is a duty, is inferred
from this Text by Tilemannus Heshusius, Fridericus Baldwinus, Peter Martyr,
Calvin, Musculus, Aretius, Hiperius, Tossanus, Pareus, Piscator, Dickson and
our own Pemble. And for this their inference I find these following reasons
alleged: The first is pressed by Pareus upon the words, Cur saepius faciendum,
quia mors domini perpetuis laudibus celebranda, etc. Christ death is so great,
so important, so beneficial a mercy as that it calls for a frequent
commemoration. Now this Sacrament of the Lords Supper was appointed purposely
to quicken our memory therein; Do this in remembrance of me; therefore ought
frequently to be administered.

A second reason is of Mr David Dickson upon the place. Because Christ shall
not bodily be present in the Church before the last judgment, he therefore
commands that by this Sacrament the memory of the Redemption of the Church by
his death should ever and anon be repeated, and celebrated until he come from
the Heavens in the last day.

A third reason is also in Pareus upon the place: How long ought this Sacrament
to be administered, until the Lord come, till he come to judge the quick and
the dead? For even as the Sacraments of the Old Testament continued until the
first coming of Christ in the flesh; so shall the Sacraments of the New
Testament continue till the second coming of him in glory.

From these Arguments thus premised we may infer in the words of the learned
and godly Pemble, that (...) here implies a (...) as often as ye do it,
therefore do it often, not once in an age, as Baptism, never to be repeated;
nor once a year and no more, as the Passover; but many times in our Age, many
times in a year, according as the Saints in the Primitive Church understood
the meaning of these words, and not as some in these times (when Sophistry has
wrangled out Divinity) would seem to cavil that because the words run, Do it
as often as you eat this bread and drink this cup, therefore it is at their
discretion to do it as seldom as they please; who these Cavillers are that he
speaks of I know not: but Bellarmine has some such evasion in his plea against
the Cup in the Lords Supper; and Bullinger also upon the place has something
sounding that way. By this word, As often, Christ (says he) leaves a liberty
unto the Churches when and how often they will celebrate the Lords Supper. For
this he quotes a saying out of Augustine, Epist. 118. ad Ianuarium; In which
after repetition of some variety, or difference in the Churches of God about
the time of administering this Sacrament, some administering it every day, and
some only upon certain set days, he concludes that the best course for a
prudent Christian herein is to conform himself unto the usage of that Church
unto which he shall come. Unto Bullinger I might join Hiperius, who quotes
Epiphanius affirming as much. But I believe that the liberty left to the Church
which Bullinger and Hiperius speak of, is meant only concerning a prudent
choice of fit and convenient seasons for administration of the Lords Supper;
always provided that she keep within the Latitude of frequency in the
administration thereof. If so be by it they understand an absolute unbounded
liberty of administering it as seldom as she please, the collection is
groundless and unreasonable, and confuted by Volkellius a Socinian: and
therefore an undervalluer of this Sacrament. We must mark, faith he, that the
Apostle does not at all say, that it is free for us to use, or not to use the
Lords Supper; but he teaches us what we must do as often as according to the
command of Christ we celebrate it (to wit, show forth the death of the Lord) so
that if the Apostle seem here to grant any liberty, it does not stand in the
usage or neglect of this sacred rite or ceremony; otherwise he should be
contrary to himself: For he says that he received this Ordinance of the Lord,
and that he delivered it unto the Corinthians, and in them unto all other
succeeding Churches; that so it might be continued and used in the Assemblies
of the faithful, even until the coming of Christ. I hope then you will give
me leave to conclude, that howsoever (...) does not absolutely, and universally
imply (...): yet it does imply it in this place. If any desire further proofs
for the frequency of administering the Lords supper; I shall desire them to
apply hereunto what I shall say touching the ends of the Lords supper. As also
concerning the great need that Believers have thereof, even in an
Un-Presbyterated Church. In the mean time I take it to be sufficiently cleared,
that we have here in the Apostle a peremptory command for the frequent
celebration of the Lords Supper. And how we can obey this command, and yet omit
the administration of it for 5,6,7. years together, nay perhaps for the whole
space of the remainder of our days, I am yet to learn. To suppose that we
shall never live to see the Churches of God here in England settled in a
Presbyterian way, is a supposition of that which is neither impossible, nor
improbable. Now if the fears that many have concerning this particular should
prove true, What? shall the Lords Supper be for ever laid aside? Would not this
be a goodly interpretation of the command, show ye the Lords death till he
come, that is, if you can get the Church to be Presbyterated, otherwise let
there be a perpetual amnesty as to the external commemoration thereof? And
yet this is the exposition of the words which those that dissent from me in
this Question must hold, unless they will retract their opinion, and confess
that the Lords Supper may be administered in an Un-Presbyterated Church.

I have bethought my self what may be answered to this Argument a Praecepto,
and these my thoughts I shall communicate to you as plainly and briefly as I
can. If any think that I propound the Answer feeble, I shall not be unwilling
that they amend the proposal, and add what strength they can thereunto. An
answer may be grounded on what the Schoolmen say, in secunda secundae, Quest.
43. Art. 7. Where Thomas and all his Interpreters debate this Question, An bona
spiritualia sint propter scandalum dimittenda? They resolve that some things in
themselves, duties, and commanded by God to be done, yet are to be omitted at
some times for the avoiding of scandal.

Promulgation of a truth, and Christian reproof are duties commanded by God;
and yet are sometimes to be abstained from, for scandals taken, by not only the
weak, but also malicious. Reprove not a scorner, least he hate thee, Prove. 9.8.
speak not in the ears of a fool; for he will despise the wisdom of thy words,
Prove. 23.9. Give not that which is holy unto dogs, neither east ye your
Pearls before swine, least they trample them under their feet, and turn again
and rent you, Math. 7.6. Pro vitando scandalo cessat rigor disciplinae. To
avoid scandal the rigor of disciplineceaseth* To explain this; farther
recourse must be had unto that old and golden Rule, Affirmativa Praecepta
semper obligant, non ad semper. Affirmative Precepts do always bind, but not
to always; so that we are not bound to peforme always what they enjoyne but
only Loco and tempore debitis, when we have due time and place. Now as by the
intercurrency of other circumstances, so especally by intercurrence of scandal,
there may not be opportunity and seasonablenes of doing what we are urged unto
by some Affirmative Precepts; so these Precepts may pro hic and nunc, cease to
be obligatory. Now say they upon the administration of the Lords Supper in an
Un-Presbyterated Church, scandal will ensew, a scandal tending to sin in the
unworthy receiver, who will be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord; a
scandal tending to sorrow and vexation in the Well-affected, whose spirits
will be sadded at the communion of sinners.

For Reply. First we must put a difference between a transgression of a
Precept, and a temporary, partial, or occasional forbearance of the matter
commanded by a Precept. No Precept whatsoever is for the eschewing the scandal
of any to be truly broken or transgressed; and if a Precept be not
transgressed, when what is enjoined in it, is wholly and altogether omitted, I
confess I cannot divine when it can be transgressed. Bonum per se (says
Suarez) praeferendum est ex genere suo bono per accidens. Now to administer the
Lords Supper is good per se and ex genere suo, (I mean with a material
objective or external goodness:) to omit the administration thereof is only
good per accidens in a case of scandal. And that which is only good by accident
cannot always shut out that which is good per se. Suppose then that the
administration of the Lords Supper upon the emergency of scandal, may pro hic
and nunc, at some times and in some places be omitted, may for a while be
forborne, until we have used all means that lay in our power for the removing
of the scandal, yet it will not hereupon follow that after such use of our
utmost endeavors (and the scandal continue still unremoved) the administration
of the Lords Supper is wholly and altogether to be forborne for five, six or
seven years, or for the whole remaining space of our lives. And it is only this
latter that is broad enough to infer, that the Lords Supper is not to be
administered at all in an un-Presbyterated Church. For a Church may be
un-Presbyterated for so long a space as we now speak of, by means, Partly of
the divisions of the godly Party; Partly because they may be oppressed by a
predominant wicked Party within, and persecuted by adversaries without: either
of which (unless timely prevented) is enough to retard the work of Reformation
for more then the age of a man. That those who talk only of a present
suspension of this Sacrament, do but shuffle and shift, would be easily
apparent, if they would be pleased to speak out, and tell us the latitude of
this present suspension, how long it shall last, when it shall end. I believe
their opinion iffully discovered, will accord with those of whom Musculus
speaks, on 1 Cor. 11. Now adays, says he, thou shall find very many, who in
many years do not so much as once partake of this Sacrament; especially the
Swenckfeldians, who do so reject the Ecclesiastical Communion, of whatsoever
Churches, that they themselves had none at all. When at Auspurge I asked a
Ringleader of this sect, when he had partaken with the Church of Christ, of
the Bread and Cup of the Lord; He expressy answered, he had then abstained
about twelve years from this Communion. Being demanded why he had done so, he
replied, that he had not as yet found any Church, which was inwardly and
outwardly adorned with the gifts and virtues of the true spouse of Christ; and
that therefore he did put off and defer his Communion, until he could find
such a Church rightly settled or ordered.

Here I shall once for all clearly prove, that a Ministers universal and total
abstinence from administration of the Lords Supper unto that flock or Church
over which God has made him an overseer, is unlawful, though for the eschewing
of scandal. No sinful omission of that which is commanded by an affirmative
Precept is lawful for the eschewing of scandal: But a Ministers total and
universal abstinence from the administration of the Lords Supper, unto that
flock over which God has made him overseer, is a sinful omission of that which
is commanded by an affirmative Precept; therefore it is not lawful for the
eschewing of scandal. The major is confirmed from that of the Apostle, Rom*
3.8. Their damnation is just, that say, Let us do evil that good may come: as
also that of Aquinas secunda secundae. Quaest. 43. Art. 7. Secundum ordinem
charitatis plus debet homo suam salutem spiritualem diligere, quam alterius. A
well-ordered charity begins ever at home, making a man chiefly to desire and
endeavor the salvation of his own soul, and consequently to be more solicitous
how to avoid sin in himself, then to prevent it in others; See Rutherford more
largely touching scandal, page 84. The Minor is proved, because it is necessary
for my salvation to obey affirmative Precepts, though not in all differences of
time. See Rutherford, page 13.14. Praecepta affirmativa obligant, though not ad
semper, yet ad aliquando. Affirmative Precepts tie us to do the things they
require, though not at all times, yet at some time or other. And therefore
universally and totally to abstain from what they command, is sinfully to omit
what is commanded by them. I cannot but here call to mind a Reply of the
renowned Chamier to a shift of Cajetan, which he brings to elude our Arguments
against their Communion under one kind, that are drawn from the command of the
Cup. The Command, says Cajetan, is but affirmative; and affirmativa Praecepta,
utsi obligent semper, non tamen ad semper. Unto which Chamier replyeth very
solidly and sharply. Esto (says he) sed quid tu appellas pro semper? nullumne
apud te discrimen est inter non semper? and nunquam? The like Reply will serve
unto those who go about to evade the Command of the Lords Supper, by telling us
that it is an affirmative Command, and does oblige semper, but not adsemper. It
does always bind, but not to always: for there is a wide difference between not
always and never. Now the upshot of these men's tenants, is, that if the Church
be not Presbyterated, the Command of the Lords Supper does never bind, during
such its condition. Suarez in Tertiam Part. Thom. Tom. 30. Disput. 80. Sect. 1.
as also Becanus in his Summae Theol. Scholastic. Part. tertiae Tract. secundo.
cap. 25. Part. secundae. Quaest prima. allege diverse reasons why all Priests
whatsoever are bound to say Mass, if you please to make such a change in them,
as to put Ministers for Priests, and the Lords Supper for Mass. you may make
them Orthodox; and so they will serve our turn.

First, it seems to be a kind of spiritual Prodigality, very dangerous to the
soul, for a minister to deprive himself of the use of the power of order, and
of the fruit of the Sacrament: Unto this we may add out of Dunand, that it is
a virtuall contempt of the great benefit that is offered in the Sacrament*

Secondly, Seeing the power is for the Act, it is an inordinate thing to
receive the power of administering this Sacrament, and not to use this power,
but to let it lie idle.

Thirdly, It is against charity to deprive the Church of that great fruit and
benefit which they might partake of by this Sacrament.

Lastly, Because the Minister by virtue of his office, takes upon his shoulders
the burden of praying for his people, of Preaching, and administering the
Sacraments unto them; and therefore he sins if he never or seldom discharges
these offices and duties of his calling. A calling and office is for the work*
Ministry and service, proper thereunto; and therefore it is a great fault to
neglect that work, service or Ministry which is proper to a man's calling.

Secondly, Not only a Ministers total and universal abstinence from
administration of the Lords Supper; but also seldomnesse and unfrequency of
administering it, is unlawful. And the reason of this is, because as I have
proved and cleared; There is a command for a frequent administration of the
Lords Supper; And a command of frequency in dispensation of an Ordinance is
violated and transgressed, not only when the Ordinance is wholly and altogether
omitted, but also when it is seldom or rarely dispensed, when it is omitted
for the date of many years.

Thirdly, This objection of scandal holds as well against administration of
the Lords Supper in a Presbyterated, as in an Un-Presbyterated Church. For a
Minister may ordinarily foresee, that scandal will follow in a Presbyterated
Church in case there be a Mal-administration of discipline, or else in case
scandalous persons known to be such only unto the Minister himself, or else
unto some one godly person, cannot be convicted, or proved to be such, either
by their own confession, or else by the testimony of two or three witnesses.

Fourthly, It is a very unreasonable position, that the administration of the
Lords Supper ought to be suspended, and deferred upon the likelihood of the
following of scandal; for then a Minister shall be almost perpetually
uncertain whether he may administer the Lords Supper, or no; because
likelihood of scandal to follow will occur, if not always; yet very often.
When our Savior tells us, Mat. 13.41. that in the consummation, or end of the
world, the Son of man shall send his Angels, and they shall gather out of his
Kingdom all scandals, or all things that offend; he does clearly imply that
till then, there will be scandals even in his Kingdom, in his Church. And this
holds not only of scandals in general, but also of such scandals as are likely
to follow upon dispensation of Gods Ordinances unto the end of the world: Some
will be scandalized at the Ordinances of God. The Word will be a savor of
death unto death in them that perish: Unworthy receivers will eat and drink
their own judgment; will be guilty of the body and blood of Christ. Christ
himself will be for a stone of stumbling, and rock of offense. You see then
that to affirm, that the administration of the Lords Supper is to be deferred
upon the likelihood of ensewing of scandal, inferres this gross absurdity,
that the likelihood of scandal extinguisheth Christ's gracious Charter of this
Ordinance unto the Church.

Fifthly, If any one be not fully satisfied with that which I have said, but
shall demand farther in what difference of time the command to administer the
Lords Supper obliges? Unto those I answer briefly; that when a Minister has
used all obliged means for prevention of scandal likely to follow upon his
administration of the Lords Supper; that then he is bound frequently to
administer it unto the flock, or Church over which God has placed him,
especially if they call and cry for it. In this case to delay it is a sinful
omission, and my reason is; Because unless we pitch here, there can be no
certain rule given, when a Minister is to administer the Lords Supper. As for
the assertion of those who affirm that it is to be delayed in case of scandal
consequent, it is very unsound and irrational; for if the lawfulness or
unlawfulness of the administration of the Lords Supper must be determined by
the scandal consequent thereupon; the administration then of it hanges upon a
very slippery and an uncertain ground.

Sixthly, We must distinguish of scandals; they are either Active, or Passive,
Given, or only Taken. The scandal following the administration of the Lords
Supper in an Un-Presbyterated Church (especially when a Minister has used all
obliged means for prevention of the scandal) is only Passive or Taken; not
Active, or Given. And for this I dare appeal unto any definition of active
scandal, or scandal given in any writer; either Popish, or Protestant.

An Active scandal, or a scandal given, is, when one culpably occasioneth the
fall of another into sin: But a Minister in the administration of the Lords
Supper in an Un-Presbyterated Church, (after that he has used all obliged
means for prevention of scandal thereby) does not culpably occasion the fall of
another into sin; for he dispenses a necessary Ordinance of God; he performs
a commanded duty, which he cannot omit without sin. Who ever, says Rutherfurd,
stumbles at the necessary Ordinances of God, they take a scandal which is not
culpably given. Now how little reguard is to be had of passive scandals,
scandals only taken are generally proved by Divines from the account which our
Savior made of the scandal of the Pharisees. Matthew. 15.12, 14. Know thou
that the Pharisees were offended after they heard this saying? But he answered
let them alone: If any one desire to know what the Schoolmen speak of Active
scandal, a scandal given: I shall briefly acquaint them what there is in
Aquinas, who is one of the chief of them; and make application of it to our
matter in hand. In 2 da. 2 dae. Quest 43. Art 1. We have this definition of
Active scandal out of Hierome. Scandalum est vel dictum, vel factum, minus
rectum, praebens alteri occasionem ruinae. Two things I shall take notice of
which he has in the explication of this definition.

First, Minus rectum non dicitur hoc quod ab aliquo alio superatur in
rectitudine: Sed quod habet aliquem rectitudinis defectum, vel quia est
secundum se ma^um; sicut peccatum, vel quia habet speciem mali; sicut cum
aliquis recumbit in Idolo. From whence I thus argue, that wherein there is an
Active scandal, a scandal given, has some moral irrectitude in it, is some
way or other morally irregular; either because it is evil in it self, or
because it has an appearance of evil: But the administration of the Lords
Supper in an Un-Presbyterated Church, is neither evil in it self, neither has
it a real appearance of evil, (for it is an Ordinance of God, a commanded duty.)

Again, whereas it is objected that every word, or deed may occasion the fall
of another into sin; Aquinas thus distinguishes; Dictum vel factum alterius
potest esse dupliciter altericausa peccandi, uno modo per se; alio modo per
accidens; Per se quidem, quando aliquis suo malo verbo, vel facto intendit
alium ad peccandum inducere; vel etiam si ipse hoc non intendat, ipsum factum
est tale, quod de sui ratione habet; quod sit in ductivum ad peccandum: Puta
cum aliquis public facit peccatum, vel quod habet similitudinem peccati. Et
tunc ille, qui hujusmodi actum facit, proprie dat occasionem ruinae: unde
vocatur scandalum activum. Per Accidens autem aliquod verbum vel factum unius
est alteri causa peccandi, quando and praeter intentionem operantis, and
praeter conditionem operis, aliquis male dispositus ex hujusmodi opere
induci^ur ad peccandum; puta cum aliquis invidet bonis. Et tunc ille qui facit
hujusmodi actum rectum, non dat occasionem, quantum in se est: sed alius sumit
occasionem. Et ideo hoc est scandalum passivum sine activo; quia ille qui recte
agit, quantum est de se, non dat occasionem ruin, quam alter patitur. Out of
all this we may briefly observe thus much for our present purpose, that in an
action there is then only an Active scandal, when either from the intent of the
Agent, or else from the nature of the Action in it self, it is inductive to
sin. Now to say that the administration of the Lords Supper in an
Un-Presbyterated Church, is inductive to sin, from the intent of the Agent, is
uncharitable: To say that it is inductive to sin from the nature of the Action
in it self, is a gross blasphemy against an holy Ordinance of God.

Seventhly, Whereas it is said we may forbear the practice of things commanded
by affirmative precepts, hic and nunc, in some places, and at some times; it
must always be taken with this proviso, that there be not incurred a greater
and more perilous scandal by forbearance, then would probably be occasioned by
practice of the thing commanded: which I believe is done in the forbearance of
the administration of the Lords Supper, that is contended for.

For first, if we speak of the scandal tending unto sorrow and vexation, more
are scandalized at the forbearance, then in likelihood would be at the practice.

And secondly, if we speak of the scandal tending unto sin, the scandal which
the wicked take by the administration of of the Lords Supper is not to be
compared with the scandals consequent upon a total forbearance of the Lords
Supper. (I mean in reference unto the Minister as chargeable upon him.) Here I
shall first instance in the scandals tending unto sin, occasioned by
forbearance of the Lords Supper; and then compare them with those which follow
upon administration of the Lords Supper; and consider of which the Minister is
most guilty.

First, I shall instance in scandals tending unto sin, occasioned by the
forbearance of the Lords Supper.

First, There is the scandal of the godly, viz. their wants, and weakness both
of faith and grace, from want of an Ordinance appointed and sanctified for the
confirmation of faith, and increase of grace by the donour of all faith and
grace.

Secondly, Seperatists are hereby encouraged in their separation from our
Churches; because we want a principal Ordinance of God, which also is laid
aside amongst us upon a principle of their own, which was never granted them by
the old Non-Conformists; to wit, that a worship is to be omitted for the sin of
the worshippers, an Ordinance for the sins of the partakers of the Ordinance.

Thirdly, It staggers many weak ones amongst us, and if not timely prevented,
will occasion their total defection and separation from us. For though they
approve not of their Tenants, yet this will much sway with them; That amongst
them they may have an Ordinance, which amongst us is withheld from them, and of
enjoying which, they have not any the least hopes, as long as they stay with us.

A fourth scandal is, in that others take occasion by this forbearance of the
Lords Supper, to contemn the Lords Supper it self, as being by this carriage
induced to believe, that Ministers despise it, and do not so much for a while
forbear, as utterly disclaim the administration thereof.

Secondly, Let us compare these scandals with the scandal which the wicked take
by the administration of the Lords Supper, and consider with which of them the
Minister may most justly be charged. A Minister can never wash his hands from
these scandals which follow upon a total forbearance of the Lords Supper;
whereas having done his duty for prevention of that scandal, which the wicked
take by administration of the Lords Supper, he stands free from the guilt
thereof. My reason for this is, because these scandals which follow upon a
total forbearance of the Lords Supper, are active as well as passive, given by
the Minister, as well as taken be the People; whereas the scandal of the
unworthy receiver consequent to administration of the Lords Supper, is only
Passive, not Active; taken by the unworthy receiver, not given by the Minister.
The former scandals, those which follow upon a total forbearance of the Lords
Supper, flow per se naturally, and kindly from the Ministers neglect or sinful
omission of a necessary Ordinance of God.

The latter scandal, the scandal of the wicked, their being guilty of the body
and blood of the Lord, by occasion hereor is only by accident, by reason,
either of their ignorance, or sinful corruption, and evil disposition. There
is a young smatterer in both Divinity, and Philosophy, who has taken great
exceptions against this passage; But he objected nothing worthy of the least
digression: I shall therefore take no notice of what he says, but only clear,
and explain mine own meaning. When I say the scandals consequent unto a total
forbearance of the Lords Supper, flow naturally there from: I mean congruenter
nature; that is, sutably and agreeably unto the nature of such an omission. The
total omission of the Lords Supper is of itself apt, and likely to occasion
these above mentioned scandals following thereupon.

All sinful words, deeds, and all sinful omissions, (if discernable by others)
are in their own nature scandalous, they are of themselves naturally apt to
scandalize, to occasion sin in others. Now I have proved that a total
forbearance of the administration of the Lords Supper is a sinful omission; and
therefore, I think that it is no Paradox to affirm, that it naturally
occasioneth sin in others.

Again, whereas I said, that the scandal of the wicked or unworthy receiver was
only by accident: I meant in genere causae moralis. For in genere causae
Physicae, the scandals consequent unto a total forbearance of the Lords Supper,
are by accident also.

To manifest this, we must distinguish of a twofold cause of the scandal, or
fall of another into sin, Physical and moral; The Physical efficacious and
nearest cause, is only the ill-disposition and sinful corruption of the Party
scandalized; for all other men's words, actions, omissions are but occasions,
not causes of sin in genere Physico, they work but objectively, and that is no
Physical and real influence. And in this sense I readily grant, that all
passive scandals whatsoever, are accidental in respect of the words, deeds, or
omissions of others; the most enticing practices of others that are, even
Satan's temptations, have no real and Physical influence upon our sins: but this
acception of accidental, is utterly impertinent unto our present purpose. In a
second place then our sinful words, actions, omissions, may be moral causes of
other men's scandal, or falling into sin; they may scandalize (to use the words
of Rutherford morally) by contributing a moral influence culpably to the
scandalizing of others; to speak plainly, all words, deeds, and omissions of
either, that do sinfully and culpably occasion the scandal or fall of others
into sin, are moral causes of their scandal or fall into sin. Moralis causa
est, quae verequidem non efficit, sed tamen talis est, ut ei imputetur
effectus. But now if a word or action, do not sinfully, culpably occasion the
scandal, the fall of another into sin, but he only be scandalized thereby by
his own default, that scandal is only termed then per accidens accidental, a
passive scandal without an active, a scandal taken, not culpably given; such
was the scandal in the Capernaites at Christ's preaching, of eating his flesh
and drinking his blood* John 6.60, 61. So also Christ crucified was to the Jews
a stumbling block, 1 Cor. 1.23.

In like manner the Pharisees were scandalized at Christ's doctrine concerning
the cause of defilement, Matthew. 15.12. All these scandals were only ex
accidente, they were only accidental scandals. Now to make application of all
this to the matter in hand. The scandals in the godly consequent, upon
forbearance of the administration of the Lords Supper, however they come
Physically from the sinful corruption and illdisposition of the godly; vet they
proceed also morally from this total forbearance of the Lords Supper, as a
culpable and sinful occasion of them; whereas now on the other side, of the
scandals in the wicked following upon administration of the Lords Supper, the
administration of the Lords Supper is not a culpable and sinful occasion not
occasio data, sed arrepta, not an occasion sinfully given, but sinfully taken;
even as sin is occasioned by the Commandment, Romans 7.11.13. So that they come
therefrom only per accidens, and therefore may fitly be termed only accidental
scandals.

I am willing to say all that I can in behalf of them whom I oppose; And
therefore I shall desire you to consider the ground why such affirmative
precepts, as command duties relating to others do not bind to always. The
duties that they command are principally to this end; That they do good to men
for the curing of their evils, Tombs of scandalizing. page 167, 168.
for the farthering of Virtue in them. Wherefore when Prudence shows that
such actions will be fruitless in respect of the end, or contrariwise
harmfull, they are to be forborne. But now the administration of the Lords
Supper is an un-Presbyterated Church is not only fruitless, but harmfull unto
the wicked; a Minister reaches out unto them but their poison; they eat and
drink their own damnation.

For answer unto this. The great good and unspeakable benefit that redounds to
the Godly by administration of the Lords Supper, is a stronger, and more
binding Argument for administering it, then the harm which comes unto the
wicked thereby; is for a total forbearance, or seldom and rare administration
thereof.

To clear this: Two things are to be proved.

First, That the great good, and unspeakable benefit which redounds unto the
godly by the administration of the Lords Supper is a convincing, and should be
a prevailing Argument for a Minister, to administer it unto his stock;
(notwithstanding the harm which comes unto the unworthy receivers) who intrude
against the will both of the Minister, and the godly of his Congregation.

Secondly, The harm which comes unto the wicked by the administration of the
Lords Supper is a very weak, and insufficient Argument to conclude a total
forbearance, or a seldom administration of the Lords Supper to be warrantable.

The first is apparent from the end of the Lords Supper. Secondly, the duty of
a Pastor. Thirdly, the end of the Pastoral Office.

First, Next unto God, and Christ's glory, the good of the Saints was the maine
end of this Sacrament: It was principally intended for the godly, for their
use, comfort, and edification, and therefore they are not to be deprived of it,
although it is much against their wills; accidentally prejudicial unto wilful
and presuptuous intruders.

Secondly, the duty of a Pastor is to feed the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own blood, with the food of the Sacrament, as well as the
Word: Acts 20.28. Now we may do good to some, though evil by accident thereby
redound to others without our default: Nay, we must do that good unto which our
Calling obliges us, let the issue or event of it unto others be what it will,
or can be.

Thirdly, The end of the Pastoral Office is, as you may see Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
for the perfecting of the Saints; for the edifying of the body of Christ; and
therefore a Minister is diligently and frequently to use all means which
Christ has instituted for this purpose: Of which the Lords Supper is one.
Neither is he to forbear the use of such means, because some without his
fault and against his will, by their abuse of them, contract guilt, and pull
vengeance upon themselves.

And this brings me unto the second thing; That the harm which comes unto the
wicked by the administration of the Lords Supper is a very weak and
insufficient Argument to conclude a total forbearance, or seldom
administration of the Lords Supper to be warrantable. And for this I shall give
you these three reasons, in which I shall presuppose that which I have already
proved in my clearing of the Command.

The first reason, Because a Minister is not guilty of, nor accessory unto this
harm which comes unto the wicked. For in administering the Lords Supper unto
his flock, he does but his duty, and we suppose besides, that he has done his
utmost for prevention of their unworthy receiving.

Secondly, A Ministers total forbearance, or a seldom administration of the
Lords Supper is a culpable occasion, and so consequently a moral cause of the
harm redounding unto the godly thereby; For it is a neglect of an Ordinance
enjoined by Christ.

Thirdly, if the accidental harm, which comes unto the unworthy receiver, can
of it self without some other ground, legitimate a neglect of administering the
Lords Supper; then there can be no certain Rule given when a Minister is to
administer the Lords Supper in any Church, whether Presbyterated or
un-Presbyterated. And indeed this plea of harm accrewing unto unworthy
receivers by the Lords Supper, will hold as well in a Presbyterated, as an
un-Presbyterated Church. For if the Major part of Church Officers be corrupt,
scandalous and unworthy receivers, may be tolerated, and so the Lords Supper
may do them harm, not good. Shall the Minister then wholly refrain from
administering the Lords Supper? Unto this also you may add, That scandalous
persons may be known to be such unto the Minister, and yet he may not be able
by sufficient testimony to prove them to be so: In such a case he knows, that
these scandalous persons will without a miracle eat and drink their own
judgment; and yet I hope you will not say, that for this he is to forbear
dispensation of the Lords Supper, until their scandal can be detected, either
by proof, or their own confession. And this of the first Argument. The
Commandment we have for the administration of the Lords Supper. What if some
did not believe (says the Apostle) Shall their unbelief make the faith of God
without effect? Romans 3.3. We may say, What if some receive the Lords Supper
unworthily, shall their unworthy receiving make the Lords Command for
administration thereof without effect?

In a second place we are to come to the Examples we have in Scripture for the
administration of this Sacrament. The second Argument ab] Exemplo.
Now there is not throughout the whole Scripture any one example of the
Omission of the Lords Supper in an un-Presbyterated Church. And therefore there
can lie upon us no Obligation from example for omission thereof. But we shall
argue from Examples, not only negatively, but also affirmatively, and enquire
what Patronage the administration of the Lords Supper in an un-Presbytera^ed
Church has from them.

The first example that I shall instance in, shall be that of the first
administration of the Lords Supper by our Saviovr, which was a pattern of all
after-administrations, and therefore most exact and perfect in point of
essentials. It wanted nothing essentially belonging unto the administration of
the Lords Supper. Whereupon it is, that Paul 1 Cor. 1.23. disclaimes all
obtruding of additionals unto the Precept and Practice of our Savior herein: I
have received of the Lord (says he) that which I delivered unto you. But now
it was by Christ administered unto a Church which was not Presbyterated. (If we
understand the Term in regard of Ruling Elders.) And therefore to have Ruling
Elders in a Church is not essential, but accidental unto the administration of
the Lords Supper: And therefore the mere absence or want of them (especially
when it is by the default of others only) is no sufficient bar against
administration of the Lords Supper. I confess that we cannot conclude
exclusively from Christ's Example, That the Lords Supper ought to be administered
only in an un-Presbyterated Church; a Church void of Ruling Elders: no more
then we can infer that it is only to be administered to men or Ministers. But
look, as because Christ gave the Lords Supper only unto men; therefore it
follows, that it is lawful to administer the Lords Supper unto a
Congregation made up only of men; which is a thing usual in ships at Sea, and
amongst Merchants trading in remote parts: even so because Christ gave the
Lords Supper unto a Church destitute of Ruling Elders; therefore the
administration of it unto a Church that now is destitute of Ruling Elders is
lawful, as being agreeable unto the practice of Christ in the first
administration thereof.

A second Example is in Acts 2.42. They continued steadfastly in the Apostles
Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in Prayers. The breaking
of bread here mentioned, is not, say Interpreters, a common, but a Sacred or
Sacramental breaking of bread. And Mr Shepherd in his Doctrine of the Sabbath
Part. 2. page 23. gives a reason for it. The bread was no more common then the
continuance in the Apostles Doctrine and fellowship was common. Now, that the
Church was then Presbyterated is spoken gratis, without any color from the
Text. But you will say the Apostles were clothed with a fullness of
Jurisdiction. What if? First, It is not said, That the breaking of bread was by
the Apostles only, or by their direction. And secondly, if it were: Did they
act under the Notion of Apostles, extraordinary Ministers, or else as ordinary
Ministers? For the former, no Argument appears in the Text, and for the
latter, we have at least a probable Argument. A Connexis, The Doctrine or
Preaching, and the Prayers there mentioned belong to the Apostles as Ministers,
why not so also the breaking of bread?

A third Example is Acts 20.7. And upon the first day of the week, when the
Disciples came together to break bread. From this Example thus I argue. The
Lords day and all duties belonging thereunto are to be observed even in
Un-Presbyterated Churches; But the administration of the Lords Supper is a
principal duty belonging to the Lords day: For Saint Luke describes therefrom,
as its end; the Assembly of the Disciples upon that day, the first day of the
week when the Disciples came together to break bread. And it were absurd to
describe a thing, as from its end, by that which is unnecessary and less
principal. It were absurd to describe a constant meeting upon such a day, as
from its end, by that which is unusual upon the day. The evidence of this
Argument is acknowledged by the London Divines in their Divine Right of Church
Government, Page 20, 21. Whatsoever actions were done by Saints recorded in
Scripture, upon such grounds as are of a moral, perpetual, and common
concernment to one person as well as another, to one Church as well as another;
These actions are obligatory to all, and a rule to after generations; and for
an instance they bring the Text now under debate. Thus, say they, the Churches
practice of Preaching the Word, and breaking Bread on the first day of the
week, Acts 20.7. etc. is our rule for sanctifying the Lords day, by celebrating
the Word, Sacraments, and other holy Ordinances at these times. Unto whom we
may add Mr Shepherd in his Doctrine of the Sabbath Part. 2. page 22, 23. Here
the breaking of bread is made mention of as the opus diei; or the especial
business of the day; and the day is mentioned as the especial time for such a
purpose. And therefore it is called in effect the day of meeting to break
bread. Holy duties are here called breaking of bread by a Synecdoche of a part
for the whole, and therefore comprehends all other Sabbath duties. For there is
no more reason to exclude Prayer, Preaching, singing of Psalms, etc. Because
these are not mentioned, then to exclude drinking of wine in the Sacrament: (as
the blind Papists do) because this neither is here made mention of. Thus Mr
Shepherd. But now we could not well take breaking of bread Synecdochycally for
all Sabbath duties, unless it were a principal part of them. If we consult
Ecclesiastical Stories, they inform us that the Lords Supper was administered
every Lords day. Paraeus proves as much out of Justin Martyr and Tertullian.
Indeed there be many who affirm that the Lords Supper was celebrated by the
Primitive Christians every day: But this strengthens my Argument, as is well
collected by Nathaniel Eaton in his disputation at Franeker, under the
Moderation of Doctor Ames, de Sabbato and die Dominico. If the Lords Supper
were daily administered in the Primitive Church, why then is there particular
mention made of the celebration of it on the first day of the week? unless it
be for the singular eminency of this day above others; and because Christians
were bound by necessity of Command unto performance of this duty of celebrating
the Lords Supper upon that day, whereas in other days they were left unto
their liberty.

The fourth and last Example is in the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 11. And how
strongly conclusive this Example is for the administration of the Lords Supper
in an Un-Presbyterated Church you shall hear, when we come to a Comparison of
an Un-Presbyterated Church, with a Presbyterated Church; in which there is a
Mal-administration of Discipline: Unto which head we shall refer the
consideration of this Example.

The third principal Argument is taken from the general nature of the Lords
Supper. It is an Ordinance of Christ, The third Argument, a genere.
one of those mysteries of God which we read of 1 Cor. 4.1, 2. A principal
branch of Gods positive and instituted Worship; a part of that Profession of
faith which is required at our hands; And therefore to be administered even in
an Un-Presbyterated Church.

First, the Ordinances of Christ may, nay, must be dispensed even in an
Un-Presbyterated Church, unless there be some dispensation to the contrary;
For they are under a Command, have promises annexed, are appointed for Gods
honor, and our good: In the use of them we draw nigh unto God, and therefore
omission of them must needs be transgression, if we may dispense them without
sin, for it is a detracting the shoulder from Gods burden, a neglecting an
opportunity to glorify God, and so a sin against God and our selves. But now
the Lords Supper is an ordinance of Christ, and Ministers have no dispensation
in Scripture to omit the administration thereof. Ergo, etc.

Secondly, Ministers are to dispense the mysteries of God without any
exception, that we read of, as well in an Un-Presbyterated, as a Presbyterated
Church, 1 Cor. 4.1, 2. Let a man so account of us, as of the Ministers of
Christ, and Stewards of the mysteries of God. Moreover, it is required in
Stewards that a man be found faithful; but the Lords Supper is a part of these
mysteries. Ergo, etc.

Thirdly, no principal part of Gods positive and instituted Worship is to be
omitted in an Un-Presbyterated Church; But the Lords Supper is a principal part
of Gods positive, and instituted Worship. Ergo, etc. The Minor is apparent out
of what the incomparably learned Amesius says, Lib. 2. Theol. c. 13. Number.
17.18. The means which God has ordained in this kind; some of them do
propperly and immediately make to the exercising and furthering of faith, hope,
and charity; as public and solemn Preaching of the Word, celebration of
Baptism, and the Lords Supper, and Prayer. And some of them are means for the
right performance of these former, as the combination of the faithful into
certain Congregations or Churches, Election, Ordination, and Ministration of
Ministers ordained by God, together with the care of Ecclesiastical discipline.

Those former are most properly the instituted Worship of God.

Fourthly, No Sacraments of the New Testament are altogether to be forborne,
omitted in an un-Presbyterated Church. But the Lords Supper is a Sacrament of
the New Testament. Ergo, etc. The major is thus confirmed. Nothing necessary to
salvation, both by the necessity of Gods Command and as an ordinary means of
salvation, is to be wholly and altogether omitted; But all Sacraments of the
New Testament are necessary to salvation, both by necessity of command and as
ordinary means of salvation, Ergo, etc. The minor is granted by all Protestants
disputing against Papists, for maintaining the absolute necessity of baptism;
they all yield that not only Baptism, but the Lords Supper also is necessary,
necessitate tum Praecepti, tum medii ordinarii; as commanded duties, and as
ordinary means of salvation, not of the purchase, but of the application of
salvation. For they are seals assuring a believer of his salvation; they are
powerful Provocations unto holiness, which is the way unto salvation; they
serve for the nourishment and increase of all our graces, and therefore they
may be said to be instrumental in the bringing us unto salvation it self; for
by our graces and the exercise of them an entrance shall be ministered unto us
abundantly, into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
2 Pet. 1 11. See Whittaker Praelect. de Sacrament is in genere. Quaest. 2. c. 1.

Fifthly, a Profession of faith in Christ may lawfully be made in an
un-Presbyterated Church, not only verbally, but also really, by observation of
such ordinances as serve thereunto, amongst which the Lords Supper may be
reckoned one of the chief, for by it we show forth the Lords death. We declare
and witness before all the world, that we own and are not ashamed of a
crucified Christ; though unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the Greeks
foolishness: that we embrace the faith, doctrine and worship of Christ, and
that we utterly renounce all idolatrous worship whatsoever, 1 Cor. 10.21. By it
we profess that our expectancy of righteousness and salvation, is grounded
only upon the satisfaction and merits of Christ's death and sufferings.

I shall desire all that are otherwise mind ed, then I am in this controversy,
seriously, and sadly to reflect upon these forementioned general attributions
of the Lords Supper, and then to tell me with what warrant they neglect
themselves, and withhold from others an Ordinance of Christ? because others the
wicked abuse and profane it. Because they who keep aloof from God in their
lives, approach his Table; will they therefore refuse to draw nigh unto God in
the use of this holy and heavenly ordinance? how can they be accounted faithful
stewards of the mysteries of God, who refuse to dispense unto Gods People a
principal part of these mysteries, Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper? because
others worship him amiss, will they not therefore worship him at all? because
others do not sanctify Gods name, but rather dishonor him by their unworthy
receiving, will they therefore rob God of his honor by neglecting so necessary
a part of his Worship? will they wholly omit an ordinary means of salvation,
because some by accident therein eat and drink damnation? Lastly, will they
forbear to make Profession of their faith in the death of Christ, by receiving
the sign, and pledge thereof, only because some without their fault will join
with them in making that Profession, who in works deny Christ?

A fourth principal Argument is taken from the instrumental cause of the
administration of the Lords Supper. viz. The Ministers of the Gospel, and the
power which they have as Ministers to administer the Lords Supper. It is called
by Divines Potestas ordinis or Potestas muneris specialis: and by the London
Divines in their Divine right of Church Government, is defined to be a
Church Power more special, and particular to the office of some
Church Governors only, as the power of preaching the Cospel, and which they as
Ministers may execute virtute officii: and it is distinguished from the power
of Jurisdiction which is more general and common to the office of all
Church Governors, as the power of Censures, wherein Ruling-Elders may act with
Ministers. Now from this their definition of the power of order, I thus argue.
The power of order may be exercised in an un-Presbyterated Church: Ergo the
power of dispensing the Sacrament.

The Argument follows a toto ad parts. For power to dispense the Sacraments,
is a part or branch of the power of order. The consequence then is undeniable.
And as for the Antecedent, that may be confirmed by the abovementioned
description of the power of order. That power which is only committed to the
Ministers of the Gospel, and which they as Ministers may execute virtute
officii; that power may be executed in an un-Presbyterated Church, i. e. A
Church destitute of Ruling-Elders; But such is the power of order, Ergo, etc.
That which belongs to Ministers as Ministers, belongs to all Ministers, and
always, in all states and conditions of the Church, as well in an
un-Presbyterated as a Presbyterated Church. For a quatenus ad de omni valet
Argumentum: and the universality required in a Proposition, that is, de omni,
is universalitas Posterioristica, as well as Prtoristica; Temporis, as well as
Subjecti; Indeed this universality of time, this always is not to be
understood, as in natural attributions, for that which is absolutely such in a
mathematical latitude, but is to be taken (as usually it is) when it is applied
to matters moral, for frequency or usualnesse. But some say, that however the
power of order belong to a Minister in an un-Presbyterated Church wholly and
entirely; yet he can then exercise but a part of this power, power of preaching
the Word and baptizing; he cannot at all exercise the power of administering the
Lords Supper. But this is spoken very unreasonably and groundlesly, unless in
an un-Presbyterated Church, there be some impediment, that by Gods Word, or
sound reason is a sufficient ground for non-administration of the Lords Supper:
or unless the administration of the Lords Supper presuppose, as a necessary
antecedent; a condition that depends upon the Eldership, and not upon the
Minister only. For first every power is for its act, and therefore power in a
Minister of administering the Lords Supper is not to lie idle and unactive; but
to be exercised and actuated as often as there is a fit occasion and
opportunity; unless there be some such impediment, as I spoke of but now, etc.
(...). Hoc est frustra, quod sua natura in alterius gratiam est comparatum,
quando non perficit id, cujus gratia est, and natura comparatum est. Arist.
lib. 2. Phys. Text 62. Now if that may be said in vain which does not reach
that end, unto which it was appointed, much more may that be said so, which is
never used or applied for the compassing of that end. Secondly, The edification
of the Church of Christ is, as the London Divines say well, that eminent scope
and end why Christ gave Church Government, and all other Ordinances of the New
Testament to the Church, 2 Cor. 10.8. 2 Cor. 13.10. The power then both of
Order and Jurisdiction are both to be employed to the edification of the
Church. The power of Jurisdiction the Minister cannot exercise singly by
himself, without other Church Officers. The power of Order he may: For he alone
is the seat and receptacle thereof. And what is usually said of the power of
Order in general may be affirmed of the power of administering the Lords Supper
in particular; if there be any thing that varies the case in this branch of the
power of Order, let them produce it, and prove it, and I have done. Now a
Minister ought to exercise and employ for the edification of the Church all the
power and authority that he may lawfully exercise. For, not to employ it, were
with the slothful servant in the Parable to hide his Talent in the earth. But
now according to this opinion which we oppose; If the Church should chance not
to be Presbyterated for a man's whole life, then a Minister is bound during that
space to suffer a branch of that power of Order which is seated singly in
himself, to be idle and unactive all his life, and never to be exercised for
the good, and edification of the Church.

To avoid the dint of this Argument, they whom we oppose distinguish between
Administration of, and admission unto the Lords Supper. Administration of the
Lords Supper they confess a branch of the power of Order, and only belonging
to Ministers: But admission to the Lords Supper is, say they, an act of the
power of Jurisdiction, and belongs not Vnised Vnitati, to the Eldership. For
they only are to admit who exclude. Now they say, this Admission is a necessary
Anticedent of this administration, and Negato Antecedente, necessario negabitur
and consequen^. In an Un-Presbyterated Church there can be no admission,
because there is no Eldership. Ergo no administration.

We distinguish of admission: It is either negative or positive; negative, is
nothing else but a non-hinderance; And though there be no Eldership, the
Minister may not hinder those whom he has no power, I mean no lawful
authority to hinder. Now the Minister singly by himself has no Authority to
hinder, keep back, or cast out scandalous persons: for so the power of
Jurisdiction would be seated in him alone. But now secondly, There is an
admission that is positive, judicial, and implies a previous forensicall
examination by the Eldership, as of the parties admitted, so sometimes of
Witnesses, and Authoritative declaration of fitness: And this is to be only in
Collegio Presbyteriali, in the College of Presbyters, and Properly as they are
in Court, but not seperatim, and out of Court. Now I conceive that this
juridical and Authoritative admission is not of absolute necessity unto
administration of the Lords Supper. By Baptism the Baptized are admitted or
entered into the Church visible, 1 Cor. 12.13. By one spirit we are all
baptized into one body. See Rutherford in his due right of Presbyteries, p.
254. Now in some cases the Lords Supper may be administered unto those of years
that are baptized without any new authoritative judicial admission of the
Eldership.

First, This may be gathered from Acts 2.41, 42. Those three thousand souls
whose Baptism is mentioned, verse 41. have their receiving of the Lords Supper
recorded, verse 42. And there is not a word of any juridical admission of them
by the Eldership, coming between their Baptism, and their receiving of the
Lords Supper.

Secondly, A persecution may be so hot, as that it may scatter the Ruling
Elders of a Church that they cannot convene in a spiritual Court to perform
this juridicall admission; and out of Court they have no Authoritative
jurisdiction. May not now the Minister having a competent number of his flock,
not yet admitted to the Sacrament, meeting him, who perhaps cannot stay long
together for rage of the persecution without apparent danger of their lives:
May not now the Minister in such a case for their consolation administer the
Lords Supper to them? Nay, if they demand it, can he lawfully withold it from
them? And if in this case he may administer it to them, then juridicall
admission is not a necessary Antecedent of administration.

But because this juridicall and authoritative admission is inferred from the
exclusion of grossly ignorant, and scandalous persons from the Lords Supper; we
shall therefore enquire, whether or no this exclusion be a necessary Antecedent
of the administration of the Lords Supper. And indeed if it be a necessary
Antecedent thereof, it seems undeniably to follow, that in an Un-Presbyterated
Church, there can be no administration, because no exclusion of the scandalous
and grossly ignorant.

For satisfaction to this we must distinguish of a necessary Antecedent. A
thing may be said to be a necessary Antecedent unto the administration of the
Lords Supper, either by Moral, or Physical obligation. That is a necessary
Antecedent unto the Lords Supper by moral Obligation, that is morally required
as a duty before the Lords Supper be administered: That is a necessary
Antecedent unto the Lords Supper by Physical obligation, which is essentially
required for the Nature and Essence of the Lords Supper. The distinction though
applied to another purpose you may find at large explained and applied by
Rutherford in his Peaceable Plea for Paul's Presbytery, cap 9. Now we grant that
exclusion of grossly ignorant and scandalous persons from the Lords Supper is
morally required as a duty to go before the celebration of the Lords Supper.
But of whom I pray is it required? You will say, not of the Minister singly,
but of the whole Presbytery. Indeed it is required also of the people as a
duty; that if they be Un-Presbyterated they do what lies in them for
reformation of the condition of their Church, by a choice of such Church
Officers as are wanting. But what advantage do our Antagonists gain by all
these concessions? It is necessary, that is, commanded as a duty unto every
Eldership to exclude the scandalous and grossly ignorant before the Lords Supper
be administered; It is also necessary, that is, commanded to the People as a
duty to labor Reformation by choice of Ruling-Elders. But now it does not
follow from all this that it is necessary, that is, commanded as a duty to the
Minister to for bear administration of the Lords Supper; if either the
Eldership sin in not excluding the unworthy; or the People sin in not electing
of Ruling Elders. The Elders ought to exclude the scandalous and grossly
ignorant. The People ought to choose an Eldership before the Lords Supper be
administered; and the Minister ought to forbear the administration of the Lords
Supper, in case either Eldership or people do not perform their duties, are
three Propositions far wide: and he that can make good the inference of the
last from the two first shall have such credit with me, as that I will renounce
Aristotle, and learn a new Logic of him, without father stay then upon the
first branch of the distinction; I shall only say thus much, That if the
Eldership or People fail in their duty, it is no warrant for the Minister to
omit his.

But now perhaps they will say, That it is not the Ministers duty to administer
the Lords Supper, but upon condition and presupposal that the Eldership have
performed theirs. To omit that this is spoken without any proof, this
assertion makes exclusion essentially required as an Antecedent of the
administration of the Lords Supper absolutely and indispensably necessary;
Against which I shall oppose these following Arguments.

First, the Lords Supper is invalid and null, that is, it cannot be at all
without that which is essentially pre-required. Where there is wanting any
essential pre-requisite, the pretended action is not the Lords Supper, but a
nullity. In such a case the actions and the Elements are not Sacramental: But
now the Lords Supper is not invalid and null without this Exclusion; therefore
this exclusion is not essentially pre-required to the Lords Supper.

Secondly, Administration of the Lords Supper is a more important and necessary
duty then exclusion, etc. or any other part of the exercise of Discipline; for
it is more properly and immediately the Worship of God then the exercise of
discipline, as may be seen in the place before quoted out of Ames lib. 2. Theol
cap. 13. n. 17, 18. God is more worshipped by the administration of the
Sacraments then by Church censures; The Sacraments are a principal Worship of
God; Church censures and the exercise of Discipline less principal. Now it is
improbable that a less principal Worship of God should be a necessary
Antecedent to a principal Worship. There is says Rada, duplex ordo naturae;
alius ordo essentialis dependendentiae; alius est ordo essentialis eminentiae.
and perfectionis; qualis est inter excedens, and excessum. Now exclusion (and
we may say the like of all other acts of Discipline) is not before the Lords
Supper in regard of the order, either of essential dependency, or of essential
eminency and perfection. The Lords Supper has not an essential dependency
upon exclusion, or any other acts of Discipline: and it is in ratione cultus of
more essential eminency and perfection; as being more immediately and properly
the Worship of God. And therefore it is apparent that exclusion is not a
necessary Antecedent to it. The omission therefore of exclusion by others
without our default is no ground for us to omit that which is a more important
and necessary duty, and withal is in our power to perform.

Again, it is not probable that an ordinance which is more seperable from the
Church then the Sacraments, should be a necessary Antecedent to the
administration of the Sacraments: But the exercise of Discipline is more
separable from the Church then the Sacraments; as appears by what our Divines
write against the Papists touching the marks of the Church: Whittaker de Eccles
controv. 2. Quaest. 5. cap. 17. as also against those of the separation.
Rutherford in his due right of Presbytery, page 287, 288, Whittaker in the
forequoted place, makes the administration of the Sacraments to be in some sort
and sense an essential mark of the Church; withal he excludes Discipline from
being so. The exercise of Discipline, says Rutherford, is not necessary for
the essence of a visible Church, but only necessary to the well-being of a
Church. But now, All do say, That the Sacraments are, though not absolutely,
yet in some degrees necessary to the essence and being of a Church. So then if
you compare together these two duties, exclusion of scandalous and ignorant
persons from the Lords Supper, and the celebration of the Lords Supper. The
Obligation unto the administration of the Lords Supper is of the two the
greater and more weighty. For the Lords Supper is more the Worship of God,
less separable from, and more necessary to the Church then exclusion of
scandalous and grossly ignorant persons from the Lords Supper: Therefore it is
altogether improbable that this latter, (viz.) exclusion, etc. should be an
Antecedent absolutely necessary unto the former, (viz.) the celebration of the
Lords Supper. Again, Discipline and all branches of it are compared to a
spiritual Rod, 1 Cor. 4.21. The Lords Supper is compared to spiritual food or
bread; Now it is unlikely that a Rod should be a necessary Antecedent to food
or bread, that is, that children be kept without bread until a Rod be provided
to whip the dogs and swine.

Thirdly, As the celebration of the Lords Supper is a more important duty then
exclusion, etc. or the exercise of any other branch of Discipline: So the
Commandment for the celebration of the Lords Supper is more clear, express,
and evident then that for the exercise of Discipline. For the former is
uncontroverted amongst all save some Popish Schoolmen, whereas nothing can be
more controverted then the latter. Witness else those endless disputes
touching Discipline by the Prelatical party, Erastians, Presbyterians,
Independents. Now if it be in doubtful matters the best way to take the safest
course, I should conclude, That a duty so wounderfully controverted is not an
Antecedent absolutely necessary unto that which is uncontroverted, by all
generally granted to a duty.

Fourthly, In the absence of the Ruling Elders of a persecuted Church, the
Minister may lawfully administer the Lords Supper unto the remainder of the
scattered flock; though some Professors, who deserve exclusion be against the
wills of the best affected joined with them. The persecution may be so hot, as
that those who stay behind, may every hour be in jeopardy for their lives, in
danger to be haled unto a stake, and how their Ministers, staying with them,
can in such a case lawfully withold from them (assembling themselves together
to communicate in other Ordinances) that Sacrament which Christ has appointed
for the strengthening, comforting, and confirming of his members; especially
when they beg, call, and cry for it; I profess I cannot see.

All these former Arguments receive weight and strength from this
consideration; That the exercise of Discipline is not a necessary antecedent
unto the exercise of other branches of the power of Order; to wit, the power of
Preaching, Baptizing, etc. Therefore to say without proof, that it is a
necessary antecedent unto the exercise only of this Branch, of the power of
Order, is Petitio Principii, a mere begging of the Question.

The fifth Principal Argument is taken from the end of the Lords Supper. The 5.
Arg. a fine.
The principal ends of the Lords Supper have place in, and do belong unto an
Un-Presbyterated Church; and therefore likewise the Lords Supper it self. The
consequence is made good from that Maxim in Logic, Posito fine ponuntur omnia
media ad finem; The Antecedent is manifest from an enumeration of the ends of
the Lords Supper. It will be an endless work to go over them all; I shall
therefore out of them all select two.

The first is that which by Christ's most express command is to be the end of
this Sacrament; And it is to celebrate the memory of Christ's Death and Passion,
that unvaluable price of our double Redemption, Redemption from hell, and
Redemption to glory: This do in remembrance of me. And does it not become
Christians to celebrate with a frequent (shall I say) nay rather with an
eternal memory the Author of their Redemption? Shall so great and glorious a
work be buried in a grave of oblivion? And shall that (I mean the Lords Supper,
which is by divine institution, a Pledge and memorial of this so incomparable a
mercy be neglected and quite thrown aside, if the government of the Church by
the iniquity of the times be not settled in our times. Christ's death is to be
remembered with a memory, both of faith and gratitude; even in an
Un-Presbyterated Church. Therefore the Lords Supper which was by Christ
instituted for the commemoration thereof, is to be celebrated in an
Un-Presbyterated Church.

Secondly, I shall argue from another end of the Lords Supper: The spiritual
growth and nourishment of Christians. The Lords Supper is defined by Ames, to
be the Sacrament of the nourishing, and growth of the faithful in Christ:
Whereupon he inferres that it ought oftentimes to be administered to the same
persons.

In an Un-Presbyterated Church Christians ought to grow in grace, to nourish,
and improve their graces all they can? Why then should they be denied that,
which Christ himself has appointed, as an help and means of this growth and
nourishment? Me thinks it is somewhat a strange kind of reasoning, because the
rod of Discipline is wanting; the children should be denied bread; yea, but you
will say, dogs will eat the childrens bread, Why, will you therefore starve
the children, because dogs without your default may snatch the childrens
portion? Shall the children be debarred (as I may say) their daily bread,
because it will become accidentally poison unto dogs? Hither may we refer
these words of the Bramble Berrie. As it is better for Gods sheep to feed upon
pasture, where some weeds grow, rather then starve for want of food: So it is
better for Gods shepherds to suffer some weeds to grow in the sheeps pastures,
if they cannot prevent it, then to starve their flocks; yea, and as it is
better for the sheep to feed among goats, rather then starve: So it is better
the shepherds should suffer the goats to feed upon the sheeps pasture, though
it should poison them, then for the sheep to be kept from it; It being as I
said out of their power to reform it. Hither you may refer that place of
Beccanus. sum. Theol. Part. 3. Tract. 2. Cap. 23. Quest. 4. Hoc praeceptum
divinum tum maxim obligat, cum prudenter judicatur Eucharistiae sumptionem,
necessariam esse homini ad eum finem, ob quem instituta est, nimirum ad
conservandam, and roborandam vitam spiritualem contra tentationes. Ratio est,
quia hoc est commune Praeceptis affirmativis, ut tunc obligent, quando urget
necessitas finis, propter quem instituta sunt.

The sixth Argument is drawn from the Object of the administration of the Lords
Supper, The sixth Argument. Ab Objecto.
such as have these qualifications which the Scripture requires, in those to
whom it is to be administered, and these qualifications are especially two.
First, Right unto; Secondly, Need of the Lords Supper. Now in an
Un-Presbyterated Church, there are many who have right unto, and need of the
Lords Supper; why then should it be withheld from them? Because they have
right unto it, the Minister is tied to give it them by an obligation of
justice; because they have need of it, the Minister is bound to give it them,
by an obligation of charity.

First, Many have right unto it, not only jus adrem, but also jus in re; not
only a right in actu primo, but also a right in actu secundo; which renders
the person actually and presently capable of the thing that he is entitled to.
That which gives such a right in Foro Dei, is Eaith; but in Foro
Ecclesiastico, profession of the Faith. Now in an Un-Presbyterated Church,
there are many who are Believers, and Professors of the Faith: Ego, many that
have right unto the Lords Supper. And we may argue from the right to the
administration. Philip did so to the Eunuch in case of Baptism. The Eunuch
said here is water, what does hinder me to be baptized? And Philip said, If
thou beleevest withal thine heart, thou may. So may we say; here is bread
and wine, etc. Peter also thus reasons, Acts 10.47. Can any forbid water,
that these should not be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost as well
as we? So may we say, can any man forbid bread and wine, that these should not
receive the Lords Supper, which have received the Holy Ghost; and have in some
degree all spiritual qualifications requisite in Communicants. They have the
word of promise* which is the greater; who can inhibit the sign which is the
less? They are Mr. Geree his words for the Baptism of Infants. They are
faederati, therefore they must be signati. It is Mr. Marshals argument upon the
same subject; and mutatis mutandis applyable to our purpose. Perhaps you will
say, you would willingly give Believers their right; but profane and
scandalous persons will also intrude who have no right: What if they do? If you
have no power or authority from Christ to keep them back by your self; If you
have used the utmost of your power to erect an Eldership in the Congregation;
if you have used your power of Order to the utmost for keeping them back by
exhortation, if you mourn for their intrusion, wherein are you to be blamed?
Because they do wrong, will you do no right? And shall the Saints be debarred
their dues, because these wretches without your allowance, seize upon what is
undue, that unto which they have no right? I shall conclude this Argument with
that of the Bramble Berry. As it were better in our alms to relieve ten
Counterfeits, then let Christ go naked and hungry in any one member: So it were
better to admit ten Hypocrites to the Table of the Lord, then deprive one Godly
man of this soul nourishment.

To this Argument we may add weight by considering, that in an
Un-Presbyterated Church; Believers have not only a right to the Lords Supper,
but also need of it. Their own necessities (says Mr. Pemble) may persuade them
to frequent celebration of this Sacrament, if they can be sensible of their
spiritual weakness and wants. Let them look inward and see how great need they
have of many and often confirmations of their faith, renovations of their
repentance, of stirring up the graces of God in the soul, to add an edge and
eagerness to all spiritual affections after holiness, to get unto themselves
the most powerful provocations unto obedience: Every one that has grace, knows
how frequently the power thereof is impared by temptations, weakened by worldly
distractions, even of our lawful employments, and overmastered by the force of
sinful lusts; so that they must needs discover a great deal of ignorance in
their spiritual estate, that feel not in their souls a pronenesse to a
famishment, as well as in their bodies; at least they bewray intolerable
carlesnesse, that finding the emptiness and leanness of their souls; yet
neglect to repair often unto this holy Table, whereon is set forth the bread
of life; whereof when they have eaten, their spirit may come again, their
hearts may be strengthened, their souls may be replenished as with marrow and
fatness.

The Ministers and Elders met together in the late Provincial Assembly at
London in their Vindication of the Presbyteriall Government, consider the
Sacrament under a four fold Notion.

First, As it is a spiritual medicine to cure the remainders of our corruption.

Secondly, As it is spiritual food to strengthen our weak graces.

Thirdly, As it is a spiritual cordial to comfort our distressed consciences.

Fourthly, As it is a strong obligation, and forcible engagement to all acts of
thankfulness and obedience unto Jesus Christ.

Now Believers in an Un-Presbyterated Church, have need of the Lords Supper
under all these considerations.

First, Their souls are perpetually diseased, and therefore they stand in need
of the frequent use of this Sacrament, as a sovereign medicine to heal them.

Secondly, Their souls are naturally empty of all spiritual goodness, their
graces feeble and defective; their faith weak and often staggering, their hope
fainting, their love cold, their zeal languishing. And therefore the Lords
Supper is frequently needful, as spiritual food for the nourishing and
strengthening of all their graces; for the confirming of their faith, quickening
of their hope, rowzing of their love, and kindling of their zeal. etc.

Thirdly, The faith of the strongest Believers may be shaken, their assurance
ecclipsed with doubts, their spiritual joy darkened with fears, discomforts and
afflictions. They may walk in darkness and see no light. And in such a case
the Lords Supper is necessary, as a precious Cordial to revive and cheer up
their sinking spirits, to confirm their doubting, and to comfort their
distressed consciences.

Fourthly, The hearts of the best of men are false and unsteadfast, loose and
deceitful, apt to start from God and his just commands. They therefore want
the Lords Supper for renuall of their Covenant with God; that so thereby they
may bind, fasten and engage themselves a fresh unto God in the strength of
Christ.

The seventh Argument is from comparison of the Lords Supper with Baptism. The
seventh Argument, A Comparatis.
It is a generally received Maxim amongst Divines, that Baptism ought to be
administered but once, for it is the seal of our new birth, and we are borne but
once. The Lords Supper ought to be administered often, for we stand in need
continually of food, nourishment, confirmation, etc. Now by this Divinity, that
the Lords Supper is not to be administered in an Un-Presbyterated Church, it
will follow: That if the Church wherein we live be not all our lives long
Presbyterated, that then in such a condition of the Church, Baptism is to be
administered once, the Lords Supper never.

The eight Argument is drawn from the consideration of the opposite of the
administration of the Lords Supper; The eight Argument Ab Opposito.
the nonadministration thereof. Non-administration of the Lords Supper in an
Un-Presbyterated Church is unlawful; Therefore administration in an
Un-Presbyterated Church is lawful. That non-administration of the Lords Supper
(I mean thereby at otal forbearance of the administration therefore) is
unlawful in an Un-Presbyterated Church, I prove by these three following
Arguments.

All unwritten Traditions in matters of Worship and Religion are unlawful: But
a total forbearance of the administration of the Lords Supper in an Un
Presbyterated Church is an unwritten Tradition, having no precept, or exmaple
in Scripture to countenance it: Ergo, etc. There is express Scripture for
administration of the Lords Supper unto the Churches of God. As for the
restriction of it unto Presbyterated Churches, it cannot be made good from
Scripture. And Commentaries, Expositions of Scripture that are not by good
consequence deducible therefrom, are unwritten Traditions, and humane
Presumptions. However we cannot argue negatively from humane testimonies, we
may yet from divine the Scriptures. For they are able to make a man wise unto
salvation, and thoroughly to furnish the man of God (a Minister) to all good
works; able to give him sufficient direction, when to perform, when to omit
duties. And therefore seeing there is such a deep silence in the Scriptures,
concerning the total forbearance of administering the Lords Supper in an
Un-Presbyterated Church; I cannot but conclude it to be unnecessary. The Lord
may say unto us, who has required this at your hand. These two things differ
wide.

First, Scandalous persons ought to be excluded the Lords Supper.

Secondly, If for want of an Eldership they cannot be excluded, therefore we
must wholly forbear administration of the Lords Supper. The former is obvious
in Scripture, the latter an unwritten Tradition.

But you will say there is warrant for Omission of the Lords Supper, etc. The
Pass over was omitted by the Children of Israel in the Wilderness, as also
circumcision: whence we may argue by way of Analogy and Proportion for Omission
of the Lords Supper; when the Church is in a Wilderness, and if ever she were
in a Wilderness, then now.

First, Arguments from mere and naked Analogy and Proportion, without some
other ground are not concludent; otherwise we might argue for a Pope from the
Jews High Priest. But as to the instances I wonder, why omission of the
Passeoves in the Wilderness is alleged For after the first celebration
thereof, all future celebrations were by express and plain command to be only
in the land of Canaan, Exodus 13.4, 5. etc. Deuteronomy. 16. from verse 1. usque ad 8.
Rivet. upon Exodus. verse. 5. clears this very well, whose words I shall take
leave to insert. Moses declarat quo tempore solemnitatis illius celebrat^o
inchoari debeat: nempe post introductionem Populi, in terra patribus promissa;
Tum (inquit) coals, Deum nempe, isto cultu, in isto mense, non in deserto, sed
in terra patribus tuis promissa; Meminisse videtur, tot populorum, ut opposita
promissione and potentia Dei, eos muniret adversus tentationem diffidentiae,
quae obrepere potuisset, si simpliciter considerassent, quam arduum esset
negotium, tot nationes and suis sedibus deturbare. At inquit Moses, res adeo
certa est, ut Deus cultum illum a vobis non requirat, quem nunc praescribit;
nisi postquam promissum illudsuum impleverit. Hinc ergo apparet legem comedendi
agnum, ut azymes panes, non obligasse Israelitas totis XL. annis, quibus
vagabuntur in deserto instabiles, and rebus omnibus incompositis. Quod de
plerisque statutis dicendum est, quae postea Deus per Mosem evulgavit, ut
liquet, ex Deuteronomy. 12. verse. 1. Haec sunt illa statuta and judicia, quae
observanter facturi estis in illa terra, quam dat Deus majorum tuorum tibi ut
haereditario possideas eam, omnibus diebus quibus victuri estis super terram.
Antea enim quod ad oblationes, and similia attinebat, non potuit usque adeo in
ambulatoriis Israelitarum castris observari, aut summo jure ab illis exigi:
quod statutum erat, quo tempore etiam indultum est illis ut incircumcisi
manerent. Hoc indicat Moses, ver. 8, 9. Non facietis secundum omnia quae
facimus hodie, quisque quicquid videtur rectum in oculis suis: non adhuc enim
ingressiestis ad locum illum quietis, and ad possessionem illam, quam Iehova
dat tibi, etc. Et certe non poterat Azymoru^ solemnitas servari, uti cum manna
vescerentur, nullus erit usus fermenti cum triticeo pane, non vescerentur.
Commode itaque haec declaratio annexa est, ne scrupulum aliquem conscientiis
injiceret mandati illius omissio spacio annorum, XL.

As for Circumcision, I demand whether their omission of it were with leave
from God, or without leave? if without leave, then it was sinful, and so no
Plea for the non-administration of the Lords Supper: if it were with leave,
then it was either by special and extraordinary Revelation from God; or by some
general rule and direction contained in the written law, or law of nature; if
by especial and extraordinary Revelation, show some such warrant for
forbearance of the Lords Supper, and I have done; if by some general rule and
direction contained either in the written law, or law of nature, produce that
rule and direction, and apply it to the present forbearance of the Lords
Supper, and the controversy is at end.

A second Argument; a negative separation, that is, a non-Communion with the
Church in a lawful and commanded worship is unlawful; Therefore also a total
forbearance of the administration of the Lords Supper in an un-Presbyterated
Church is unlawful. For the antecedent I shall refer you to all that write
against the separation, who generally distinguish separation into Negative and
Positive; Negative, is a non-Communion in Ordinances. Positive, when we gather
and grow into another body, and they codclude them both to be unlawful. The
consequent will be evident, if you please to read those who have written
against the separation; for you will find that many of their Arguments mutatis
mutandis, may be sadled against this forbearance of the Lords Supper. I shall
therefore desire you to make trial of this for proof of this Argument; And
after you have made such trial, you will, I believe, conclude
non-administration to be a greater evil then separation, because the Minister
thereby not only neglects himself an Ordinance of God, but also keeps all
others from it.

Thirdly, it is unlawful for a Minister by himself to excommunicate so much as
one member of his Church, with that which Divines call the lesser
excommunication, which is exclusion from the Lords Supper; therefore his total
forbearance of the administration of the Lords Supper in an un-Presbyterated
Church is unlawful. The Antecedent will not at all be denied by those whom I
oppose; for the Minister by himself to exclude judicially from the Lords
Supper, what were it but to lord it over Gods heritage? sole power of
Jurisdiction, Christ has vouchsafed to no one Person on earth; and therefore
Papal and Prelatical, for being so, has been censured by the Orthodox to be
unlawful and Antichristian. As for the consequence or sequel that is apparent;
because a Minister by a total forbearance of the administration of the Lords
Supper, does exclude his whole Church from the Lords Supper. And therefore his
non-administration of the Lords Supper, is a virtual Excommunication. Now we
may argue from the less to the greater thus. If it be unlawful for a Minister
to exclude by himself, one member from the Lords Supper, when he celebrates it;
it is much more unlawful for him to exclude the whole Church, by refusal to
celebrate it, if he cannot debar one Communicant; how lies it in his power to
dis-common a whole Church? if a steward wrong one servant by thrusting him from
the Table without Authority and Commission from his Lord; does he not much more
wrong the whole family, if he withhold from them meat and drink, and will not
let them have their constant meals allowed them by their master? Neither is the
matter any whit mended by saying, that there is a difference between an
exclusion from the Lords Supper by positive and formal excommunication, and
that exclusion which is by non-administration; For it is unlawful to exclude
from the Lords Supper by a sinful omission or neglect of the exercise of the
power of order, which is seated only in the Minister, as well as it is unlawful
to exclude from the Lords Supper, by an unjust usurpation of sole power of
Jurisdiction, that belongs to the whole Eldership.

And let this suffice for the first sort of Arguments drawn from the Lords
Supper, and the administration thereof.

A second sort of Arguments in which I will be brief, may be taken from the
other term considerable in the question, a Non-Presbyterated Church. i.e. A
Church destitute of Ruling-Elders.
And here we may argue a Genere, ab Exemplo, a Comparatis.

FRom the general nature of an un-Presbyterated Church Un-Presbyterated
Churches, First a Genere, Cum in Abel, and Cain, inciperet divisio civitatis
spiritualis Jerusalem, a civitate Babylonis, oportuit esse signa aliqua sacra,
quibus distinguerentur cives Jerusalem, a civibus Babylonis: sicut videmus in
aliis rebus: oves enim unius gregis, discernuntur ab ovibus alterius gregis,
proprio signo; and sacrae aedes, a non sacris, propriis signis discernuntur;
and civitas nobilis aliquo signo donati consuevit: ut civitas Romana, penula:
and dignitas militaris accinctione gladii: and ossicium traditione virgae, vel
clavium; ex quibus omnibus calligitur, quod Sacramenta fuerunt necessaria
homini post lapsum, ad hoc ut discerneretur esse civis spiritualis Jerusalem,
and de grege domini, es de milita ^jus. Alexand. Alenj. Par. 4. q. 1. m. 2. ar.
2.
(such as our Churches generally in England) are true Churches; and therefore
should have the marks of a true Church. Now administration of the Sacraments
has been always counted amongst the marks and signs of a true Church, by such
as have written concerning the marks of the Church against Papists, as also by
the old non-Conformists writing against those of the separation. Many of them
have gone so far, as to reckon the Sacraments amongst the essential notes of
the Church. Which assertion is explicated the best and clearest by Ames, that
ever I read in any. Adhibentur istae notae (says he) scilicet vera praedicatio
Evangelii; legitima administratio Sacramentorum; and legitima disciplina non ad
veram. Ecclesiam militantem, quoad essentiam ejus internam, certo and
necessario declarandam: sed ut visibilem aliquem coetum designandum, qui est
Ecclesia particularis ex instituto Christi formata. But the Church ought to use
these marks which God has appointed, to distinguish her from the companies of
Infidels and Pagans, as also from the Assemblies of Antichrist, though they be
not simply essential and reciprocal. Mine Argument therefore stands in its full
strength, though the Lords Supper were not an essential mark of the Church.

The second Argument shall be taken from the example of an^un-Presbyterated
Church. Ab Exemplo.
Suppose diverse Christians of several Countries, yet understanding one
language, should casually be together in some sea town of Turkey, Africa, etc.
destitute of a constant minister; now suppose some godly Minister should come
on shore to them out of some ship, who on make no long stay with them; I would
willingly know whether they may not receive the Lords Supper from him, and he
administer it to them; if they may, then we have one instance of an
un-Presbyterated Church, capable of the administration of the Lords Supper. And
the truth of an universal negative is overthrown by one particular affirmative.
I might also instance in Churches under the extremity of persecution, when the
Saints have no constant abode, but are always in a wandering and flying posture
from city to city; though by the extreme rage of the Persecution, Churches
un-Presbyterated have not opportunity to form themselves into a Presbytery;
and in Churches Presbyterated, the Ruling-Elders are so scattered, as that they
cannot convene in an Ecclesiastical Court: shall the People of God now in such
a case be denied the comfort of the Lords Supper? because the world frowns on
them, shall therefore the Pledges of Gods favor be denied unto them? what is
this but to add affliction to the afflicted?

The last Argument strikes against the only reason pretended, The 3. Arg. a
comparatis.
for forbearance of the administration of the Lords Supper in an
un-Presbyterated Church, which is, because scandalous Persons cannot there be
excluded from the Lords Supper. And it is taken from a comparison of an
un-Presbyterated Church, with such a Presbyterated Church, wherein there is
either neglect or mal-administration of discipline. It is drawn a similibus,
and built upon this maxim. Similium similis est ratio, si similia spectentur
qua talia sunt, seu quatenus similia sunt, and quoad illud tertium, in quo sit
comparatio. There is a likeness as to the matter of sinful mixtures, betwixt
an un-Presbyterated and a Presbyterated Church, wherein there is either neglect
or mal-administration of discipline. In such a Church there will in all
likelihood be sinful mixtures, for we suppose the major part of Church Officers
to be corrupt, and likely to give countenance to scandalous and wicked Persons,
to tolerate them in Church Communion, to admit them unto the Lords Supper; but
now for these mixtures the administration of the Lords Supper is not to be
forborne in a Presbyterated Church; therefore these mixtures are no sufficient
argument against the administration of the Lords Supper in an un-Presbyterated
Church. That the admission of scandalous Persons to the Lords Supper in a
Presbyterated Church, is no ground or warrant to forbear the administration
thereof, may be made good by instancing in the Church of Corinth, where there
were schisms and contentions; 1 Cor. 1.12, 13. Envying and strife, 1 Cor. 3.3.
An incestuous Person, not cast out of Church Communion, 1 Cor. 5. Going to law
with the brethren before infidels, eating at the idols Table, 1 Cor. 8. denying
of a fundamental point of faith, the Resurrection of the dead, 1 Cor. 15. And
to give an instance more especially pertinent to the question in hand, many of
them came to the Lords Table drunken, 1 Cor. 11.21. and so did eat and drink
damnation: Notwithstanding this deluge of corruption the Sacrament was
administered, and the Apostle gave no direction to the contrary, though he
treated purposely and at large touching abuses about the Lords Supper, and gave
them directions for reformation of them, delivering whatsoever he received of
the Lord touching this Argument. It is plain therefore that forbearing the
Lords Supper in such a case is no Apostolical practice. If this Tenent of our
Antagonists were true, the easiest and more proper remedy that the Apostle
could have advised them to, was to lay aside the Lords Supper until either the
Church guides became more watchful, or the Church Members more reformed in
lives and Conversations. But now the Apostle falls upon other Remedies of this
abuse.

First, He calls upon the Church guides to cast out the scandalous, 1 Cor. 5.
and then,

Secondly, He exhorts private members to examine themselves, and so eat of
this Bread and drink of this Cup.

From the first remedy, we may, supplying some Propositions conclude; That in
Un-Presbyterated Churches Ministers should use their utmost endeavors for a
Reformation for thee setting up of Presbytery in their Churches that may
exclude scandalous persons from the Lords Supper. But a total forbearance of
the Lords Supper, and an endeavor of reformation are things widely different.
That this Argument thus drawn a comparatis may appear in its full strength; I
shall desire you to consider what our Divines argue hence against separation in
case of sufferance of scandalous persons in Church Communion, and you will find
that mutatis mutandis, it will serve our turn against this Non-administration
or total forbearance of administration, etc.

Before I meddle with Objections, I shall first premise some Concessions which
may save the labor of alleging many Arguments, in which there is that
Fallacy which is termed (...), Ignoratio Elenchi, a proof of that which no way
opposes what I hold.

First then, I grant that Persons grossly ignorant and notoriously scandalous
and impenitent ought to be excluded from the Lords Supper, but it must be done
by them only to whom God has given this power, and in such order and manner as
the Lord has appointed. That is necessary (says Mr Ball in his Trial of the
grounds tending to separation, page 190.) to them that have received Commission
from God, which is unlawful to them that want authority. In the Commonwealth
the execution of justice is necessary; but private persons must not challenge
the Sword of the Magistrate. In a Corporation no one must take that upon
himself which belongs to the Common Council. Holy things must not be given
to profane persons; but every one at his pleasure must not deny holy things to
unholy persons, but unholy persons must be debarred from holy things in such
order as God has prescribed. Haec dispensatio, vel denegatio Sacramenti nonest
consideranda ut actio judicialis vel inflictiva paenae sed solum, ut prudens ac
fidelis administratio Sacramenti, and ideo non pendet ex testibus, aut
probationibus, sed solum ex cascientia, and cognitione, quae prudenti
existimatione secundum occurrentes circumst^^^tias judicatur sufficiens, ut
sine, incommodo possit, and debeat negari Sacramentum. S^^^^es. in part. 3.
Thom. Tom. 3. disp. 67. Sect. 3. page 856.
The Schoolmen are extremely out in this particular, for they deny the
debarring of notorious offenders from the Lords Supper to be an act of
Jurisdiction, and so they put it into the hands and power of the Minister to
deny it unto those whom he judges to be gross and scandalous sinners.

In a second place I also yield that in the permission of grossly ignorant and
notoriously scandalous persons that are impenitent; there is a great sin
committed by all those who have sufficient power to keep them back, and by all
others that are any ways accessory thereunto. But now a man cannot be said to
be guilty of that, to hinder which he has done all that he can (I mean all
that he can de jure, by right, and lawfully.)

Which brings me to my third Concession: A Minister is bound to use all lawful
probable means to keep grossly ignorant and notoriously scandalous impenitent
sinners from the Lords Supper: But he is not, for prevention of their coming,
obliged to use any unlawful means. We must not do evil that good may come
thereof; commit sin our selves, to prevent it in others. Now I have proved a
total forbearance of administering the Lords Supper to be unlawful. And those
with whom I deal in this Controversy must (unless they will go from their
own principles) acknowledge, that for a Minister to exclude any singly and
solely by himself, as also to separate and gather a Church are both unlawful.

Having premised these Concessions, I come now unto the Objections, which may
be reduced unto one principal Argument, and the other added as confirmations.

It is unlawful to give the Lords Supper unto grossly ignorant and notoriously
scandalous persons; but supposing that our Churches in England are generally
mixed Congregations; it will be impossible (as long as they are destitute of
Ruling-Elders) for the Minister to avoid giving the Lords Supper unto grossly
ignorant and notoriously scandalous persons; unless he will either assume unto
himself sole power of Jurisdiction, or else allow the whole power to exclude.
Now the former would be Tyrannical, Prelaticall, and Pope-like, the later would
be a disclaiming of Presbytery, and a marching over unto the Tents of the
Independents.

That it is unlawful and sinful for a Minister to give the Lords Super unto
grossly ignorant and notoriously scandalous persons, is endeavored to be proved.

First, from the fidelity and prudence required in Ministers as Stewards, which
obliges them not to dispense the Lords Supper unto such unto whom Christ would
not have it to be given.

Secondly, From the general nature of the Lords Supper. It is a holy thing, a
Pearl of the Gospel, and therefore ought not to be given unto dogs and swine.
It is a seal of the Covenant, and the Promises. And therefore to administer it
unto those who visibly have as yet no share in them, is a visible and
practical lie.

Lastly, From the consequents of administering the Lords Supper unto grossly
ignorant and notoriously scandalous persons. Hereupon will follow a
Transgression of the Rule of Christ; pollution of the Sacrament, a
participation of the sin of unworthy receivers. The Schoolmen here have diverse
objections which you may see in such of them as Comment in tertiam partem
Aquinatis. quaest. 80. Art. 6.

The first answer is by retortion. All these Arguments may be retorted upon our
dissenting brethren. For they conclude also against administration of the Lords
Supper in a Presbyterated Church, in case there be either neglect or
Mal-administration of Discipline: For then considering the Constitution of our
Churches generally here in England how will you avoid giving the Lords Supper
unto those grossly ignorant and scandalous persons upon whom the Presbytery has
passed no Censure if they should present themselves? And that you can by
admonition keep them back is altogether unprobable.

There be in this case but three effectual means which the Minister can take
to prevent the giving of the Sacramental signs unto them. A total
forbearance of the administration of the Lords Supper. The Ministers exclusion
of unworthy persons singly and solely by himself. Or else separation and
gathering of a more pure and reformed Church.

Now of these possible means, I have proved the first to be unlawful: And by
my Brethrens own Principles the two last are unlawful also. If they can think
of any other course, let them produce it and prove it, and I am confident it
will fit our turn as well as theirs.

Secondly some think that the supposed sin of giving the Lords Supper unto
unworthy persons is easily avoided, if the Minister give not the Sacramental
Elements to each Communicant out of his own hand; but the Communicants divide
the Elements among themselves, which was approved of by the old
Non-conformists; by Gillespy in his Aarons Rod blossoming. Book 3. cap.
8.437.438. By Mr Bowls de Pastore Evangelico. lib. 4. cap. 5. By Mr Burrows in
his Gospel Worship, page 264, 265. and practiced as Gerhard tells us out of
Lavater by the Tigurine Church, Loc. Theol. Tom. 5. de Sacra Caena. cap. 15.
Cajetan upon Matthew 26. thinks that this course is most agreeable to the
example of Christ in the first administration of this Sacrament unto his
Apostles; as also Salmeron, Jansenius, Cassander in Liturgicis. Suarez in part.
3. Thom. disp. 72. Sect. 1. with whom Maldonate upon Matthew accords. As
concerning the Cup Johannes Buxtorfius junior in Exercitatione sacra in
historiam institutionis coenae dominicae. Basil. edita. 1642. thinks that
Christ herein followed the custom of the Jews in the Passover; where the
Pater-familias blessed the bread and brake it; but they who eat the Passover
with him, took their portion with their own hands out of the dish or Platter.
Indeed Christ gave both the Bread and the Cup to the Disciples. But we must
distinguish between giving of a thing unto many in genere and conjunctim, in
general and jointly; and the giving of it viritim and sigillatim, severally
and to each man.

It does not appear that our Savior gave the Sacramental Elements to his
Apostles sigillatim and viritim; to each of them out of his own hand, but that
he gave them unto them only conjunctim, and in genere, jointly, and in
general; is at least made very probable by these following Arguments.

First, There is not in either the Evangelists, or the 1 Cor. 11. any the least
mention of our Saviors distributing the Sacramental Elements particularly,
and severally out of his own hand to each Communicant: Nay, the contrary rather
is probable, because he speaks unto these, whom he gave the Supper unto, only
jointly and in general. (...).

A second reason is given by Cajetan on Matthew 26. The Disciples received the
Bread and Cup into their hands, not from the hand of Christ, but from the
Table. For Christ is found sitting at one Table with his Disciples, unto whom
he still sitting distributed the blessed Sacrament as unto his Communicants:
But now they being so many sat, in all likelihood, at so great a distance as
that the hand of Christ could not convey it into the hands of each Communicant;
And therefore it is probable that Christ gave the dish or platter unto him that
sat next unto him, from whom it was successively reached about unto the other
Communicants.

A third Argument is concerning the Cup: whence we may argue unto the Bread by
way of Analogy: and it is taken out of Luke 22.17. And he took the Cup and gave
thanks, and said, take this and divide it among your selves. Whereas some
understand the Cup to be the Paschall Cup; others to be the Cup in the ordinary
Supper. To me (says Gillespy in the place above quoted) it is plain that it
was the Eucharistical Cup; because that which Luke says of that Cup, that
Christ took it and gave thanks, and gave it to the Disciples, that they might
all drink of it, and told them he would not drink with them any more of the
fruit of the Vine till the Kingdom of God shall come. All this is the very same
which Matthew and Mark record of the Eucharisticall Cup.

But now it is objected, That this is related before the taking and breaking of
the Bread, and therefore it is not likely to be the Eucharistical Cup which was
given after the Bread.

Unto this Gillespy replyeth, that it is but by an Anticipation or
Pre-occupation occasioned by that which had proceeded, Verse 16. So to join the
Protestation of not drinking again, with that of not eating again the
Passover with his Disciples. Wherefore Beza, Salmeron, Maldonate, and others
following Augustine, and Euthymeus, do resolve, that it is an Anticipation,
even as Paul mentions the Cup before the Bread. 1 Cor. 10.16. Thus Gillespy.

Mr Burrows in the but now quoted place gives also three reasons why it is
better to give it generally then particularly into every ones hand.

First, Because that the giving of it once for all does signify more fully the
fellowship and Communion that they have together. As at a Table, it were a
strange thing that every bit of meat must be given to every one particularly,
no, but the dishes must be set before them and they must take it themselves.
Indeed if they be children you cut every piece of meat and give it into their
hands or mouths; but that is futable to a fellowship at Table, and Communion to
have the meat set before them being blessed, and then for all to partake of it.

And secondly, Besides this giving it into every ones hand, came to us from a
Popish and Superstitious conceit of the Papists to bring more reverence to the
Sacrament. Now there is a great deal of danger to bring in men's devices to
cause more reverence.

Thirdly, one would wonder that Ministers should give it in particular, and not
in general to the Church; for by this means Ministers might abundantly ease
themselves of a great deal of charge and guilt.

Now if this way of distributing the Sacramental Elements in general be
justifiable; then as Mr Bowls says in the place above cited, Si quis se
obtrudet, quem ut excluderet, fecit quod in se Pastor non tamille dare, quam
hic arripere dicendus.

But in a third place, Take giving of Sacramental Elements in what sense you
please, we must distinguish of dogs and swine, grossly ignorant and scandalous
impenitent sinners. They are either such indeed, and really, or else
juridically by Church Censure. It is unlawful to give the Sacramental Elements
to the latter sort, but not always unto the first. For though (says Mr Ball,
page 193.) in course of life they may be dogs, yet in public esteem they are
not to be reputed dogs, nor used as dogs till the Church have so pronounced of
them. And for this Aquinas part. 3. Quaest. 80. Art. 6, quotes Augustine Tom.
9. lib. de medicin. paeniaentiae, cap 3. Nos a Communione quenquam prohibere
non possumus, nisi sponte confessum, aut in aliquo Judicio Ecclesiastico vel
seculari nominatum atque convictum. Now if only such dogs and swine are to be
denied the Lords Supper who are such juridically, then the alleged arguments
will no way oppose my opinion; For in a Church without Ruling-Elders there
cannot regularly be any such dogs and swine.

That it is only unlawful for Ministers to give the Lords Supper unto such
dogs and swine as are so Juridically, Ad commune bonum, and convenientem
Ecclesiae vel cujusque reipublicae gubernationem pertinet; ut communia bona,
quae public dispensanda ac distribuenda sunt, juxta merita and dignitatem
singularum personarum a publico Ministro ad hoc munus a Republica vel principe
reipublicae destinato, dispensentur, non juxta privatam scientiam ipsius
ministri, sed per publicam and notoriem: hujusmodi autem est dispensatio
Sacramenti hujus, ut per se constat, ergo quando public sit, non est regulanda
per scientiam privatam, sed publicam. Maj^r propositio videtur ess^ morale
quoddam principium, sere ex ipsis terminis notum. Nis^ haec regula in praedicta
publica dispensatione servetur, talis dispensandi modus more liter loquendo,
erit expositus multis scandalis, perturbationibus, and injuriis: ut ministri
possent facile public infamare, quos vellent, and peccatum, vel indignitatem
fingere, ubi non esset. Et e contrario possent fideles saepe formidare, and
timere, ne a ministr^s hujus Sacramenti infamarentur. Et hac ratione quamvis
peccatur absolute non habet jus ad petendum hoc Sacramentum, tamen quilibet
fidelis haber jus, ut si public p^^at, non repell^tur, nisi debito mod^, id
est ex publica manifestatione, and scientia sui peccati: propter quod dixit
recte divus Thomas, per peccatum mortale amitti jus petendi hoc Sacramentum,
opportere tamen, ut in facie Ecclesiae amittatur, scilicet ut in eadem facie
Ecclesiae, id est public denegari possit. Tandem explicatur, and confirmatur
hoc, illo communi exemplo de judice, qui tenetur judicare secundum allegata and
probata, etiam contra privatam scientiam, solum obsimile principium, quiae ad
commune bonum necessarium est, ut illa publica actio reguletur publica
scientia, and non privata, quoniam si aliter fieret, esset res exposita
infinitis injuriis, and scandalis. This place of Suaraz is very well rendered by
Ball, page 188, 189. See also 190, 191.
will I suppose, be acknowledged by all, both Presbyterians and Independents;
for otherwise they will leave it to the Ministers discretion to exclude whom he
thinks in his conscience unworthy: And what is this but to allow him the
exercise of sole power of jurisdiction, contrary to the Rule of Christ, Mat.
18.17. and the pattern of the Primitive Apostolical Church, 1 Cor. 5. 2 Cor.
2.6.

For a farther proof of this I shall cite an excellent Argument out of Suarez
in part. 3 Thom. disp. 67. Sect. 4. which he brings to prove that the
Eucharist is not to be denied unto a secret and hidden sinner; for it may very
well be extended unto all scandalous sinners that are not such juridically.

It is requisite for the common good, and convenient order both of Church and
Commonwealth, that all common favors which are publikly to be disposed and
distributed according to the dignity of private persons, should be dispensed by
public Ministers designed thereunto, not according to the private knowledge of
this or that man; neither of that Minister, but according to a public and
notorious cognizance; And whosoever does by his offense against God lose his
right and interest to the holy things of God, he must lose it in the face of
the Church, before it can be denied him in the face of the congregation; And he
is to be judged (as in all other cases) not by any man's, nor by any Ministers
private knowledge, but according to proofs and allegations. For the Common
good necessarily requires that such public actions of this nature should be
regulated by a kind of public and not private knowledge, which once admitted
into Judicature, would soon fill up the Church and State with a world of
scandals, injuries, and inconveniences. For hereby a wicked or a peevish and
pettish Minister may without control publicly disgrace and repel from the
Lords Supper whom he please. He may falsely object unworthiness unto the most
worthy, such as are best qualified and fitted of all the Congregation for
receiving the Lords Supper. Men would be loath (says Mr Ball, page 191.) to
put their Lands, nay, their Goods and Cattels, and shall we think the Lord has
put their interest in the body and blood of Christ to a private discretion?

To exclude from the Lords Supper is a kind of Ecclesiastical punishment, and
therefore presupposes an Ecclesiastical Censure; though men have deserved such
a punishment, yet is it not to be inflicted on them until they be legally
censured.

But that a Minister may in some cases give the Lords Supper unto such persons
as he knows to be unworthy and scandalous, will appear from the Concessions
of our dissenting brethren.

For first, If the Church be Presbyterated there may be a neglect, or
Mal-administration of Discipline, and then do the Minister what he can, there
may be by the major part of the Eldership admitted unto the Lords Supper such
persons as the Minister knows to be dogs and swine, scandalous, and unworthy;
and they not being so juridically, the Minister cannot debar them, unless he
will either usurp sole power of Jurisdiction, or else run upon the rock of
separation.

Secondly, Suppose that the exercise of Discipline be never so rigid and
strict; yet how will he keep from the Lords Supper secret and hidden sinners
known only unto himself.

Suppose a Minister by himself only, without any other witness, see a lurking
Hypocrite of his Congregation commit a lewd and great scandal; the Minister
after several admonitions (the party remaining obstinate and impenitent)
complains of him to the Church, but he denies the fact: Whereupon the Church
can do nothing in the business; For her Censures be to pass either upon the
parties confession, or the testimony of two or three witnesses. In this case I
demand whether or no a Minister may lawfully keep back this Hyppocrite from the
Lords Supper? If you say that he may lawfully in such a case keep him back, why
then you will ascribe unto the Minister such a vast and boundless power, as
any modest man will be loath to challenge, upon exercise of which, more
mischiefs will ensue then can possible be foreseen. You will make the
Ministers private judgment to be final, from which there is no appeal to any
Court but the Court of heaven; for no earthly Court can lawfully proceed but
Secundum allegata and probata. Such crimes as we cannot prove are reserved for
the notice and vengeance of God.

But if now on the other side you affirm that it is not lawful for the
Minister to keep back this Hyppocrite; it will follow then, that there may be
some dogs and swine, unworthy receivers, whom the Ministers knows to be such,
unto whom it may yet be lawful for him to give the Lords Supper, viz. such as
he cannot convict for want of witnesses. And I conceive that it is altogether
as lawful for him to give it unto such as he cannot convict for want of Judges.

However, hereupon it is evident that this Proposition, That it is unlawful
and sinful for a Minister to give the Lords Supper unto dogs and swine,
unworthy and scandalous persons, is not, absolutely and universally true. Now
if they will be pleased to limit the Proposition, and to show in what case it
holds, and in what not; they may perchance say something that may cut the
throat of all their Arguments.

As for the Objections of the Schoolmen they will little advantage our
dissenting brethren.

For first, They leave it unto the discretion of the Minister to deny the
Eucharist unto such, as he in his conscience thinks to be open and public
scandalous sinners; and such a power our brethren will not allow unto any
Minister singly by himself.

Then secondly, they speak very doubtfully, and uncertainly, and leave a
Minister in perplexity; for they say, it is lawful unto Ministers to give the
Sacrament to the unworthy, when they cannot refuse them without scandal. Now
(says Mr. Aarons Rod blossoming. lib. 3. cap. 10.
Gill^spy) If the lawfulness or unlawfulness of the thing must be determined
by the scandal they go upon a very slippery ground. As slippery and uncertain
is another restriction which they join unto the former, viz. That it is lawful
for a Minister to give the Sacrament to the unworthy when they cannot keep them
back, without great inconveniency or inexpediency. Suarez in 3am. part. Thom.
disp. 67. sect. 1. Says, that the precept of not giving this Sacrament unto
the unworthy, is not simply negative, but is to be reduced unto an affirmative
precept, of prudently, and faithfully dispensing this Sacrament. Quod
praeceptum quidem formaliter sumptum (ut sic dicam) semper servandum est,
quotiescunque hoc Sacramentum dispensatur: and hinc fit ut si commode possit,
debeat indigno denegari, non tamen quod semper denegari debeat cum cocunque in
commodo and sine ulla exceptione. These last words of Suarez together with
those of Gillespy, will serve to answer all the Arguments of the Schoolmen, so
far as they are urged against us. For in an Un-Presbyterated Church, the
Lords Supper cannot be denied unto unworthy persons without scandal, great
inconveniences; nay, I believe, sin.

And this for a general answer unto all the Arguments, I shall next examine
each argument a part.

The first Argument is taken from that fidelity and prudence required in
Ministers as stewards of the mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4.1, 2. and it is urged
by Suarez in 3am. partem Thom. disp. 18. sect. 2. disp. 67. sect. 1. As also by
Becanus, sum. Theolog. part 3ia. tract. 2. cap. 5. Quaest. 8. Praeceptum
natural est ut dispensator qui bona Domini sui dispensat, sit fidelis and
prudens in dispensando ergo praeceptum natural est ut non dispenset homini
indigno contra voluntatem and insiitutionem sui domini quia hoc esset contra
fidelitatem and prudentiam quam indispensando debet servare cum ergo non velit
Sacramenta sua dispensari indignis non potest Minister si fidelis esse vult,
contra hanc voluntatem facere.
Stewards (say they) ought to be faithful and prudent in distribution of the
goods of their Lord and Master; and therefore they should not dispense them
against his will and appointment. Now for Ministers to give the Lords Supper
unto known unworthy receivers, is to distribute it against the will and
appointment of their Lord and Master Christ Jesus. And therefore a violation of
that prudence and fidelity which is required at their hands.

For answer. First, I shall desire you to apply unto this Argument the general
Answers, and then the Argument may be retorted upon our Antagonists. Prudence
and fidelity obliges stewards, all such as have committed unto them the
dispensation of the goods, food, etc. of their Master unto the household; not to
go beyond their commission, not to usurp the exercise of a power, which their
Master has forbidden them by themselves, only to meddle with as being given in
commission jointly with them unto their fellow Stewards. Now they should go
beyond their commission, and assume a power for which they can show no warrant
from their Lord and Master, if they should singly and solely by themselves
debar any from the Lords Supper.

Secondly, There would be little color in the Argument, if it were not for the
ambiguity that is in the term Gods will. Here if the Objection, conclude any
thing against us: The Will of God must be taken Metonimycally for that which
they call Voluntas signi, in particular the Command of God; and then the
Argument is nothing but a pitiful and miserable begging of the Question. For
that there is a command unto the Minister, not to give the Lords Supper unto
unworthy persons, who are not such juridically, is not so much as attempted to
be proved.

A second Objection is taken from the general nature of the Lords Supper. It
is a holy thing, a Pearl of the Gospel, a Seal of the Covenant of grace.

First, It is a holy thing, a Pearl of the Gospel, and our Saviors command
is, Matthew. 7.6. Give not that which is holy unto dogs, neither cast ye your
Pearl before swine.

Sufficient satisfaction is given unto this place by the general Answers, yet
because it is much stood upon, I shall say something unto it apart.

First, this place, as appears both by the Coherence, as also by the reason
annexed is principally intended concerning admonitions and reproof. For if you
look upon the words foregoing, you shall find a direction for the reprover,
that he be not spotted with greater faults, then those which he reproves in
others. Then in this Verse there is directions concerning the persons to be
reproved, that they be not dogs and swine. But the reason annexed lest they
turn again, and rent you, makes the matter quite out of Question: For the
giving of the Lords Supper unto the prophanest wretches almost that are, is not
likely to occasion any such carriage.

But yet I will not deny that the place may be extended and applied unto the
giving of the Lords Supper unto unworthy receivers; but then it must be cum
grano salis.

Giving of the Lords Supper may be taken either for the authoritative and
juridicall admission unto, or else for the Ministerial distribution of the
Lords Supper.

First then, if you take it for the juridicall and authoritative admission unto
the Lords Supper, then indeed it is true that the Lords Supper ought not to be
given unto swine or dogs: they ought not authoritatively or juridically to be
admitted thereunto; but then we say that the Commandment is not given unto the
Minister solely, but unto the whole Eldership, and thus Mr. Bowls answers
the place. Praeceptum, de non dando quod sanctum canibus, eos duntaxat obligat,
quibus Deus a sacris arcendi canes potestatem demandavit; and haec non uni
alicui, sed pluribus a Christo tradita. With reference unto this is it that Mr.
Ball tells us. page 204.205. that the Minister if he have done the office of a
private Christian, and a public Minister, and afterward he reach the
Sacrament unto an unworthy Communicant, he does not so much give it him, as
suffer his Communion, because he has not power or authority to put him back:
He reaches him the signs, as that which he cannot withold, because he is
held in by the most prevailing power, without which he cannot be debarred. In
this case the Minister is neither actor nor consenter in his admission, because
he does it not in his own name, but according to the Order established by God,
who will not have any member of the Congregation publicly denied his interest
and right to the holy things of God, by the knowledge, will and pleasure of one
singular Minister. If a Minister know a man to be unworthy, he may yet receive
him, because he cannot yet manifest it to the Church: And for the same reason,
if his unworthiness be notorious, if it be not so judged by them that have
authority, he must administer the Sacramental signs unto him, not as unto one
worthy, or unworthy, but as unto one yet undivided from them.

If you take giving of the Lords Supper for the Ministerial distribution of the
Elements; why then again I grant the Lords Supper is not to be given unto dogs
and swine, provided that they be such juridically by Church censure, and so
this precept binds not absolutely, but conditionally upon a condition that
depends upon the Eldership, and not upon the Minister solely.

And thus again the reverend Bowls answers the place: Qui omnium pessim^,
usque dum Ecclesia eos sua sententia decretoria pro cambus and porcis habendos
declaraverit, non mihi cum illis ut canibus and porcis agendum. Latronem, qui
mortem commeruit, nullus jure de vita tollat, usque dum judex and reum
declaraverit, and sententiam tulerit.
I am not to deal with the worst of men, as dogs and swine, until the Church
has sentenced them to be such. Suppose a felon has deserved death, yet the
Sheriff himself cannot lawfully execute him until he be tried, and the judge
has condemned him.

If any should argue from this place for a Ministers not giving of the Lords
Supper unto such dogs and swine as are not so by Church censure; I hope they
desire to be understood not absolutely, but limitedly, so far forth as it
lies in a Minister. And this I readily yield unto, as no way impugning my
opinion. I do confess that a Minister is to keep dogs and swine from the
Sacrament, so far as in him lies (that is, he is to do all that God has
required at his hands for prevention thereof:) But I am very confident that
this grant of mine will no ways prejudice my cause, or advantage that of my
opposites; because God for prevention of wicked men's Sacramental approaches
nowhere requires a Minister to usurp a power which is none of his, a sole
power of jurisdiction, in foro Ecclesiastico externo.

But the Schoolmen endeavor to prove not only from the but now mentioned place
of Scripture, but also from reason: That it is a sin to give the Lords Supper
unto such as a man knows to be unworthy receivers.

Great is the dignity and holiness of this blessed Sacrament, Obligatio
exhibendi reverentiam huic Sacramento, and digne illud tractandi, naturalis
est, ex intrinseca ipsius Sacramenti dignitate orta; ad hanc vero pertinet
obligatio non dandi Sacramentum hoc indignis: Sicut non projicere illud in
locum immundum, and similia. Suarez in tertiam part. Thom. disp. 67. sect. 1.
Is dicitur sacrilegium committere qui violat rem Sacram per aliquam
irreverentiam. D. Thom. 2.2. Q. 99. a. 2.3. Atqui Minister conferens
Sacramentum homini indigno, violat rem Sacram per quandam irreverentiam; ergo
sacrilegium committit. Becanus su mma Theol. par. 3. tract. 2. cap. 5. Sect. 8.
and therefore it should be handled in a meet, decent, reverent, and devout
manner. Now it were a very undecent and unreverent part to take the Elements
as soon as consecrated and wittingly to throw them into a noisome sink; but it
is a point of greater irreverence, nay, it is a kind of Sacrilege, to take
them and give them unto known unworthy receivers: for no sink is so foul,
dirty and stinking as a sinful, earthy and uncleansed soul.

For answer, I deny that there is any sacrilege or irreverence in a Ministers
giving the Sacrament unto unworthy persons, who are not such juridically;
provided still that he use all lawful likely means to keep them off. And the
Schoolmen themselves confess as much concerning hidden and secret sinners; as
also when a Minister cannot avoid the giving of it unto them without scandal
or some other great inconvenience. Indeed the dignity and holiness of the
Sacrament is sacrilegiously violated by the irreverence of unworthy receivers;
But God has not left his Church infallible means to keep his Name and
Ordinances from irreverence: And the Minister is not guilty of this irreverence
in unworthy receiving, though he give them the Sacramental Elements, if he do
what lies in him to keep them off, and when he cannot hinder them he give them
the Elements with regret, with a mourning and bleeding heart; I shall conclude
my answer unto this Objejection with that of Suarez praedicta disputatione
Section. 4. Ipsemet Christus vult ut aliqua ejus injuria potius permittatur,
quam indebito modo ac ordine caveatur. It is Christ's will rather that there
should be a permission of wrongs and injuries unto his Name, Ordinances and
Sacraments, then that they should be prevented by unlawful means, in an undue
either order or manner.

A second general Attribution of the Lords Supper, from whence it is
endeavored to conclude to the sinfulness of giving it in any case, unto such
as are known by the Minister to be unworthy receivers, is, its being a seal of
the Covenant of Grace, the righteousness of Faith. For hence think some, it
follows that administration of the Lords Supper unto known scandalous and
wicked persons, is a practical and visible lie, a confirmation of an untruth,
because it seals the Covenant and Promises to those who have visibly no share
in them.

For answer, The Lords Supper may be said to be a seal of the Covenant, or
Promise of Grace, either absolutely, or conditionally. The truth of the
Covenant and Promises in themselves, our obligation to gratitude and obedience,
are sealed absolutely by the Lords Supper; but interest in the Covenant and
Promises of Grace, the Lords Supper seals unto those that partake thereof,
but conditionally, so they believe: Unto wicked men the Promises are as
propounded, so sealed but conditionally. Sacramenta (says Amesius) non sunt
Testimonia completa and absoluta nisicredentibus. They are (says Rutherford)
seals unto the wicked, not in actu secundo, but only in actu primo. See Mr.
Marshall in his defense of Infant Baptism against Tombs page 117.118.

The last sort of Objections proving that it is a sin to give the Lords Supper
unto known scandalous sinners, is drawn from the consequents that will follow
upon distribution of the Sacramental Elements unto them.

First, transgression of the Rule of Christ.

Secondly, pollution of the Sacrament.

Thirdly, a participation of the sin of unworthy receivers.

Fourthly, a Communion with wicked men in worship, etc.

First then upon a Ministers giving the Sacramental elements unto them, there
will follow a transgression of the Rule of Christ, which by my own confession
excludes scandalous sinners, etc.

For answer; Upon a Ministers giving the Sacramental elements unto known
scandalous sinners, that are not such by Church censure (for of such only we
speak) there will follow a transgression of the Rule of Christ: but by whom? by
the known scandalous sin in unworthy receiving, by the Churchguides in case the
Church be Presbyterated, if they either misgovern or neglect the exercise of
discipline; and by the Church, if she (in case she be unsettled and un-reformed)
do not endeavor the choice of Church Officers. But there can be no rule broken
by the Minister herein, who has done his duty for the keeping of them off; for
he had never any Rule or Command given unto him, for denial of the Lords Supper
unto unworthy Persons, that are not such Juridically; or for delay and
suspension of the Lords Supper, in case an Eldership be not set up in a
Congregation. In modo recipiendi Sacramenti (says Suarez) duo possunt
considerari: unum est ex part ipsius Sacramenti; scilicet quod vere, integre
and cum debitis circumstantiis fiat; Aliud est ex part effectus Sacramenti,
and consequenter ex part dispositionis suscipientis, quae ad effectum est
necessaria. In tertiam part. Thom. disp. 17. sect. 2.

Now if a Minister give the Sacrament unto known unworthy Persons, that are not
such Juridically, there is not hereby any transgression of the rule of Christ,
in regard of the Sacrament it self, which notwithstanding this, may fully and
entirely be administered according to the command of Christ. But there will
follow a transgression of the Rule of Christ hereby, in respect of the effect
of the Sacrament, and consequently the dispositions and qualifications required
in receivers to make the Sacrament effectual: but this is not a fault
chargeable upon the Minister if he do his best to prevent it. More plainly;
Corruption and defects, or breaches of the command and rule of Christ in the
administration of the Lords Supper, are of two sorts; Material, or Personal.
First material, when the Worship it self is corrupted, as in the Popish maste,
where there is but one element. Secondly Personal, when the Worship it self is
in every respect pure, but the Persons communicating, wanting in requisite
qualifications; the former are chargeable upon the Minister administering the
Lords Supper; not the latter, so he prevent them as far as in him lies.

Secondly, it is objected that upon a Ministers giving of the Lords Supper unto
known wicked Persons, there will necessarily follow a pollution and a
profanation of that sacred ordinance; the giving of it therefore unto them is
a sin.

For answer; The Lords Supper (and so we may say the like of other Ordinances)
may be said to be polluted either intrinsecally, or extrinsecally. Intrinsecal
pollutions are in ordinances themselves when they are so corrupted, that
whosoever partakes of them, in the very partaking, cannot but break Gods order.
And so the Lords Supper is polluted in the Popish Mass, where the bread is
adored, where they have but one Element, directly against Christ his
institution. Extrinsecal pollutions or prophanations of the Lords Supper, (and
we may say the like of other ordinances) are, when for want of due
qualifications, they become sin unto the unworthy receiver, even as the Prayers
of the wicked are an abomination to him. The Toleration of Drunkards and
Swearers in the Lords Church, and at his Table, infecteth, and is apt to leaven
all with their evil conversation, but does not leaven the worship unto the
fellow-worshippers; Nor is the sin of private Persons, yea, nor of the
Ministers, who have no power to help them. Rutherford in his due right of
Presbyt.
But now these pollutions of the Lords Supper by unworthy receivers, do not
defile the Lords Supper in it self, nor to others who receive it worthily. He
that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation, (...) to
himself, not to others.

This distinction thus premised; First the consequence of the Argument in the
objection is denied; because the pollution and profanation of the Lords
Supper, that the objection speaks of, is extrinsecal, not in the Sacrament it
self, but only in the unworthy receiver. And again, we suppose that the
Minister has used all lawful likely means to prevent it. And therefore it is
without his default.

Secondly, the Argument will hold against giving the Sacrament unto a secret
and hidden sinner, that is known only unto the Minister (for such a one
pollutes and prophanes the Sacrament, as well as the open and known sinner) and
yet those who dissent from us, will not affirm that the giving of it unto such
a one is unlawful.

Thirdly, it is objected that a Participation of, or Communion with the sin of
others, is a grievous sin, 1 Timothy 5.22. Be not Partakers of other men's sins,
keep thy self pure. But to give the Lords Supper to a known wicked Person, is
to partake of his sin of unworthy receiving; and therefore it is sinful.

For answer, first when other men's sins follow accidentally upon the
performance of my duty, this is no participation of other men's sins.

2ly. a man cannot be said to partake of the sins of others, Nullus te net u ut
non alterius peccati particeps sit facere quod injustum: injustum autem illud
foret, si ille solus arripiret sibi potestatem, quam societati Presbyterorum
crediderit Deus. Bowls p. 192.
when he has used all due and obliged diligence for prevention and hinderance
of them; A man is only to do all that he can by his calling, by Warrant and
Commission from Christ to prevent sin in another. A Minister therefore, to
prevent unworthy receiving in scandalous Persons, is not to pass the bounds of
his calling, to play the Pope, and usurp that power which God has seated only
in the Eldership. Power being wanting, the will stands for the deed, 2 Cor.
8.12. This is also acknowledged by Mr. Gillespy. lib. 3. cap. 15. The suffering
of a mixture of known wicked Persons among the Godly in the Church, does
sometime defile us with sin, sometime not. It does not defile us, when we use
all lawful and possible remedies against it: and namely when we exercise the
discipline of excommunication and other Church Censures, says Augustine. lib.
contra Donatistas post collationem. cap 4. Tom. 7. But it does defile us, and
we incur sin and wrath, when the means of redressing such known evils are
neglected, indisciplinata patientia (it is Augustines word) so to bear with
wicked men, as not to execute discipline against them; that certainly makes us
partake of their sin (I mean in a reformed and well-constituted Church, where
the thing is feasible;) but where it cannot be done because of persecution, or
because of the invincible opposition, either of authority, or of a prevalent
profane multitude, Minister per se loqu^ndo non potest dare Sacramentum
indgno, ne cooperetur peccato illius. Ratio est: quia qui indigne recipit
Sacramentum, peccat mortaliter. Ergo qui cooperatur ad talem receptionem
cooperatur ad peccatum. At nemo magis cooperatur ad talem receptionem, quam
Minister qui dat Sacramentum. Becanus. Nulla potest esse major cooperatio ad
recipiendum quam ipsumet dare. Suarez.
we have only this comfort left us, Blessed are they that hunger and thirst
after righteousness; And, in magnis voluisse sat est.

But this objection is somewhat more speciously urged by the schoolmen. He
partakes of the sin of another, who knowingly cooperates thereunto; but a
Minister that gives the Lords Supper unto such Persons as he knows to be
unworthy, cooperates unto their unwo^thy receiving; for a man can hardly more
cooperate unto the receiving of a thing, then by giving it. Thus Suarez and
Becanus.

For answer I may reserre you unto the schoolmen themselves; Qui autem
moraliter non potest negare, sed sola necessitate coactus, dat alteri
Sa^tamentum, non cooperatur ad indignam susceptionem, solum Physice ad nudam
actionem ^^cipientis. Becanus.

In aliquocasu accid^repotest, ut Minister moraliter non possit negare
Sacramentum homini iniquo petentip^opter scandalum vel similem causam. Et tunc
quamvis ille det, non cooperatur iniquae receptioni ut iniqua est, sed solum ut
receptio Sacramenti est. Suarez in part. 3. Thom-disp 18 sect. 2. But more
fully disp. 67. sect. 4. Respondetur actionem dandi Eucharistiam homini indigno
non semper esse intrinsece malum, sed tunc solum quando ipse qui dat
Sacramentum est aliquo modo causa indignae susceptionis, vel quando commode vel
debito modo exercendo munus suum potest vitare, and non facit. Ac denique
quando illi constat, eum, qui petit, esse indignum ea scientia and modo quo
opus est. At vero quando moraliter vitare non potest actionem dandi, quia prava
dispositio petentis non est illo modo cognita, quo opus est, tum act^^ dandi
non est mala ex part dantis, and intentio ej^s est bona, quamvis ex part
recipientis receptio sit mala, quod null^ modo imputatur danti, quia nullo modo
est causa, quod alius indigne sumat, neque cum action ejus est per se and
necessario conjunct a indigna susceptia. Quamobrem i^i est nulla conperatio ad
malum, sed sola permissio quae moraliter vitari non potest. Nam qui dat
Sacramentum solum cooperatur, ut hic homo sumat, non tamen ut in digne sumat:
Poss^t enim si vellet digne Jumere, quam^is autem sacerdoti constet, hi and
nunc indigne sumpturum, tamen quia non potestid vitare, ideo neque te^etur,
neque ulla censetur cooperatio sed permissio.


what they say, I shall give you in brief; one may be said to cooperate unto
known wicked Persons their unworthy receiving either Morally or Physically; he
only cooperates unto it morally, that is a cause of the unworthiness of their
receiving; and so do all they, and only they, who do not use all enjoined means
to hinder: but now if a Minister has given all due and obliged dilgence, to
prevent the unworthy receiving of wicked Persons, though he gave them the
Sacrament, yet he concurreth unto their unworthy receiving only Physically, not
Morally, that is, he cooperates with their receiving it, not with the
unworthiness of their receiving it. He cooperates with it as it is an action;
but if you look upon it as a sinful and depraved action, so he does not
cooperate with it, but only permit it much against his will, it not being in
his power to help it. If any think that this is but a school nicety, a world of
stances from common experience will condemn them. Subordinate officers may
cooperate Physically to the execution of an unjust sentence, who yet may have
no moral concurrence unto the injustice thereof. Subjects may cooperate
Physically not morally, unto an unjust war of the supreme Magistrate. The
Head of a College having no negative voice, and being over-voted by the major
part of fellows, may pro forma give admission unto an unworthy fellow, and yet
not be guilty of any sin in his admission. For he admits him not in his own
name, but in the name of the major part, who have overborn him, he cooperates
then unto his admission Physically, not morally.

If a Minister have done all that lawfully he may for the keeping back of
unworthy receivers; and they will notwithstanding crowd in amongst the worthy:
if after this he reach out the Sacramental elements unto them: although he be
active in a Physical sense, he is only passive in a moral sense. It may be a
great grief and burden to his spirit, but yet it is not his sin. Those holy
Virgins mentioned in Ecclesiastical history, which to escape ravishment laid
violent hands on themselves, are deservedly blamed. For we are not to commit
one sin for the avoiding of another. When we have done as much as lawfully we
may, for the resisting of sin, then whatsoever befalls, may be (as
Augustine said of those Virgins) our vexation and misery, but not our sin.
This answer may receive strength from this consideration, that receiving of the
Lords Supper by wicked and ungodly Persons is a sin not ex objecto and
intrinsece, but only by accident, Vtcunque agere videtur, qui Sacramentum
indigno inter dignosg^ tim se admiscenti porrigit, cum tamen fecerit quod ei
fas ut arceret pastor, non revera agit sed patitur. Sanctae illae virgins,
quae sibi, ne constuprarentur manu^ inj^cere violentas, merit o culpantur: nec
enim quis malo obsistendo tenetur, ulera quam fas progredi; ubi fecerit quantum
jure potest renitendo, quicquid ultra fit (ut de illis Virgimbus olim
Augustinus) ejus vexatio non peccatum. Bowls 290.291. Sacramenti ceenoe finis
quod ad deum, primarius est, ut mors domini commemoretur, ejus recordatio a
quam plurimis fiat; quidni vel ex eo gloria accedat deo, cum a frequentiori
coetu utcunque non ut oportebat expurgato, sacrum hoc epulum celebratur? Si
enim vel ex corvis per instinctum Deum invocantib us, gloria ^i accrescit; sic
enim Creator, ut sons omnium bonorum agnoscitur; quidni cum confertim in unum
convenient homines, de quibus id lugendum, quod non omni modo ad Christi opus
redemptorium celebrandum idonei? fateor, deo ex eo auctior cederet gloria si ab
iis, qui vitae puritate splendescerent, cultus hic exhiberetur; at, vel ex eo,
nonnibil deoredundat gloriae, cum ut mundi per Christum redemptor a cunctis
agnoscieur. Ad tam excellentis beneficii memoriam in Ecclesia perpetuendam,
convenient coetus, utcunque non debite praeparatus, numerosior. Bowls 293, 294.
ex prava dispositione subjecti; besides as Mr. Bowls observes, their
receiving the Lords Supper may someways conduce unto the primary end thereof,
in regard of God: the external showing and representation of Christ's death, the
public celebration of the work of our Redemption, and so may redound somewhat
unto the honor and glory of God: for God is in some sort glorified by the
outward performance of the duties of wicked men. Now he that cooperates with an
action that is good in it self materially or objectively, and only sinful by
accident, may be far from cooperating with the sinfulness of that action.
For he may no ways be a cause thereof.

Lastly, it is objected that upon giving the Lords Supper unto known scandalous
sinners, a religious Communion with them in worship will ensue; therefore to
give it to them is a sin; for what were this but to turn the Communion of
Saints into a Communion of sinners?

For answer; first this objection is taken from an Independent forge, and will
not be owned by Presbyterians that understand their own Principles. The old
non-Conformists writing against the separation, resolve generally that the
Lords Supper may be partaken of in a Church, where scandals are tolerated. For
we are not (say they) to omit a Worship for the sins of our fellow-worshippers.
You may say as much in the Vindication of the Presbyterial Government and
Ministers, by the Ministers and Elders met together in the Provincial Assembly
at London, November 9. 1649. 134.135, 136. Suppose (say they) there were some
sinful mixtures at our Sacraments, yet we conceive this is not a sufficient
ground of a negative separation.

Secondly, a full and sufficient answer you have to this objection in Mr. Ball,
page 200 201. In coming to Gods ordinance we have Communion with Christ
principally, who has called us thither, is there present by his grace and
spirit to bless his ordinance; and with the faithful, who are there met
together at Gods Commandment, in the name and by the authority of Jesus
Christ: with the wicked we have no Communion, unless it be external and by
accident, because they are not, or cannot be cast out. Internal and essential
Communion we have with Christ and the faithful only; external with the wicked.
Our Communion with Christ and his faithful People is not free and voluntary,
but necessary, enjoined by God, not left to our will or pleasure. Our Communion
with the wicked in the ordinances is unwilling on our part, suffered not
affected, if we know how to hinder it lawfully. God requires attendance on him
in his holy ordinances, and to join with his Voluntaries assembled, where he
is present in the midst among them. If we cannot appear before him as duty
binds, but we must have outward Communion with the wicked, which should be
expelled, but cannot be kept back by us: In this case our Communion with God is
free and voluntary, but our Communion with the wicked is suffered only, or held
in respect of the Will and Commandment of God, who requires that service at
our hands.

A Postscript.
Christian Reader,
I Thought good to acquaint thee that I have received from one Mr. Fulwood a
pretended examination of my Arguments, for the lawfulness of administering the
Lords Supper in an Un-Presbyterated Church: and unto it I have penned a very
large Reply, for which I am exceedingly blamed by my best and most knowing
friends who unanimously tell me, that it is very unfit so worthless a Paper
should have the honor of a Refutation. If the Author thereof think that he has
any wrong by this censure, he may right himself by making it as public as he
please. Most of what he says, is either answered in this my book, or else the
absurdity of it is so gross and apparent as that it carries a refutation in
its own forehead. Indeed there be but two things considerable in this pretended
examination: An Answer, and an Objection.

The Answer is unto my Argument a Praecepto. The sum of it is, That the Command
to celebrate the Lords Supper is not immediate, but mediate and conditional;
not binding, but upon pre-supposal of a preparative work of the Presbytery, etc

For reply unto this, first, all the proof that he brings for its being a
mediate Command, is in 1 Cor 14. ult. unto which I shall presently give answer.

Secondly, An immediate Command does not exclude the Command of all Antecedent
duties, but only of such upon which the Duty commanded has an essential
dependency; and answerably a mediate Command is that which obliges not proxime
and immediate unto the performance of that which it commands, unless there
be performance of Antecedent duties upon which it has an essential
dependency, or an existence of any other Antecedents that are before the duty
enjoynd, in regard of that order which is of essential dependency.

To give an instance of this. The Command to be assured of our Justification,
Vocation, etc. is only mediate, and does not bind immediately, before there be
a performance of an Antecedent duty, upon which it has an essential
dependence, to wit the faith of adherence, before there be an existence of the
Objects Vocation, Justification, etc. which are Antecedents unto this
assurance, in regard of the order of essential dependency. It is not therefore
the absence of of every Antecedent that does suspend, much less evacuate and
annul the Obligation of a Command; but only the wants of Antecedents necessary
by Physical Obligation. A due serious and diligent preparation is enjoined as
an Antecedent unto hearing of the word, and unto public and solemn Prayers;
and yet I hope Mr Fullwood dare not say that upon want of preparation there is
a suspension of the Obligation of these Commands of God, to hear and pray: And
that in such a case not to hear, not to pray, are at the most but mediate
sins. It is generally resolved by all the Casuists that ever I saw, that when
we come unto a duty and do not find our hearts prepared according unto that we
do desire; that we are not yet for that time to let go the duty, and forbear
the performance of it. If any one (says Mr. Burrows in his Gospel Worship) in
answer unto the Question) perform a duty in Worship in that sincerity and
strength that he is able to do, though he be not prepared as he ought, yet he
is better to do it then to neglect it. And he applies this his answer unto
receiving of the Sacrament, as well as the Word and Prayer, as may be seen by
his proposal of the Question.

Again, There are diverse things required in the call and Ordination of a
Minister that are by Gods command to be Antecedent unto his preaching unto his
flock. Some of which are wanting in such Ministers as were ordained by Bishops.

But because they are not Antecedents essentially necessary unto the preaching
of the Word, by the want of them, the Obligation unto the preaching of the word
is not suspended, much less annulled. And yet it is not denied but that the
want of them is sinful, for which such Ministers ought to be humbled. Scotus
lib. 4, Distinct. 12 Quest. 3. number. 32. thus limits this Proposition. Destructo
priori, destruitur posterius. Vera est (says he) de simpliciter priori, a quo
scilicet dependet posterius, non autem de illo quod aliquo modo est prius, a
quo tamen posterius non dependet essentialiter. He speaks of things Natural and
Physical, but it is also appliable unto things moral. The omission of a duty
that is by Gods command Antecedent unto another, does not suspend, much less
nullify the Obligation unto the consequent duty; unless there be an
essential dependency of the consequent duty upon the Antecedent duty.

But now to make application of this unto the Lords Supper; Although the
Presbyterating of a Church, and the exercise of Jurisdiction by an Eldership be
enjoined by God as Antecedents unto the administration and receiving of the
Lords Supper; yet it does not hereupon follow, that upon want of an Eldership,
an omission of the exercise of Jurisdiction, the command to administer and
receive is suspended, much less extinguished; unless you can prove, that there
is an essential dependency of the administration and receiving of the Lords
Supper upon the Presbyterating of the Church, in which it is administered, and
the exercise of jurisdiction therein. It implies a contradiction, and is
utterly impossible for a thing to be without that upon which it essentially
depends: But it does not imply a contradiction, it is not impossible for the
Lords Supper to be administered and received in an Un-Presbyterated Church;
Therefore the administration and receiving of the Lords Supper does not
essentially depend upon the Presbyterating of a Church, upon its having
Ruling-Elders; and consequently the Command of administering and receiving the
Lords Supper is not in reference unto the Command of settling an Eldership, only
a mediate Command. Unto the proof of this Mr Fullwood may apply those
Arguments alleged by me to prove, That the exclusion of scandalous and gross
ignorant persons is not a necessary Antecedent unto the administration of the
Lords Supper by Physical Obligation, unto which Mr Fullwood has given no
answer at all.

Thirdly, Suppose we should grant, that the Command of administering and
receiving the Lords Supper be mediate, with reference to the Presbyterating of
a Church, yet Mr Fullwood will gain little thereby, if he understand, as he
must, the Command concerning the Presbyterating of a Church to be not de
Eventu, but only de Conatu; and if withal he put a difference between guilty
and innocent persons, those who hinder or do not what lies in them to farther
the settling of an Eldership; and those who pray, sigh, and use all other
lawful means for the compassing of it. That the Command to have a Church
Presbyterated, to have Ruling Elders, is to be taken only de Conatu, concerning
an endeavor of it, will not, I think, be denied by Mr Fullwood. And indeed, it
were not unreasonable to understand it de Eventu, concerning the event,
concerning an actual Presbyterating of the Church: for that may not be in our
power to effect. The whole Church may be over-powred by the Magistrate, and the
best affected Party in a Church may be over-borne by a Major part that may be
disaffected unto Presbytery: Now if it should be granted unto Mr Fullwood,
That the Command to receive the Lords Supper did not bind immediately, but only
mediately, upon pre-supposal that we had done our endeavor, and used all
lawful means for the erecting of an Eldership; I do wonder what advantage such
a Concession can yield unto his cause But now if he shall contend, that after
we have used our utmost endeavor to erect an Eldership, and cannot possibly
prevail, that we are then by that which is merely the fault of others,
dis-obliged from the receiving the Lords Supper. First, I say that for this
assertion Mr Fullwood cannot bring so much as any colorable Argument. Then
secondly, It makes the Lords Supper to have an essential dependence upon an
Eldership, which I have before refuted.

The second only thing that is considerable in Mr Fullwoods Book, is an
Objection which I shall give you in his own words and then return a brief
answer unto it.

Mr Fullwood.
While we will use this Sacrament in a Church Vn-Presbyterated do we not thus
directly oppose and violate that Command of the Spirit of God by the Apostle, 1
Cor. 4. ult. Let all things be done in order. We on both sides acknowledge that
there should be the exercise and act of Jurisdiction, that there should be
Ruling Elders elected and settled in our Churches for the same end, for our more
orderly proceeding in this holy exercise: But because we cannot have an
Eldership as, and so soon as we would, we will have the Sacrament as, and so
soon as we can, If we cannot have it with, we will have it without our
Saviors, or any order; how keep we then the named Precept, do all things, and
this sure amongst the rest, do all things in order. First, settle Eldership,
then upon their preparitive work, by the acts and exercise of their
Jurisdiction administer the Sacrament according unto our Saviors order.


Answer.

These Ministers and people that have done their endeavor and used all lawful
means for the settling of an Eldership, do not at all violate the command of the
Spirit, 1 Cor. 14.40. Neither does that which you say prove it at all, as will
easily appear; if you please to put your Argument into form; for then it
stands thus. If there should be the exercise and act of Jurisdiction, if there
should be Ruling-Elders elected and settled in our Churches for our more orderly
proceeding in the administration of the Lords Supper; then those that have used
all lawful means for the exercise of Jurisdiction, for the election and
settling of Ruling-Elders and cannot prevail, they directly oppose and violate
that command of the Spirit. 1 Cor. 14.40. if they administer and receive the
Lords Supper. The consequent is most extremely false, and is not backed so much
as by any color or shadow of reason. And indeed you can never make it good,
unless you can prove either that there is an essential dependency of the
Lords Supper upon the Eldership, or else that there is a command to delay and
defer the administration of the Lords Supper until an Eldership be erected.

Mr. Fullwood.
Moreover this Command has with it the force of a Negative, namely let nothing
be done in disorder.


Answer.

This Proposition, Let nothing be done in disorder is ambiguous and may be
understood two ways.

First, as a prohibition of disorder and confusion in the Worship, and
Ordinances of God; and so it is granted and the concession of it will not
prejudice any thing that I affirm.

Next it may be taken as a prohibition given generally unto every one of that
Worship and Ordinances of God, wherein there is any disorder committed by our
selves or others, (though without our default) And so it is very untrue; and if
granted concerning the disorder of others, would open a gapp unto a total
neglect of public prayers, hearing of the Word. For unto those Ordinances
wicked men come disorderly, because unpreparedly. Other men's violation and
breach of order does not disoblige us from the Worship and Ordinances of God;
especially when we are innocent of such their disorder. Nay, if we understand
the Words as a Prohibition of that Worship and Ordinance, wherein there is any
disorder committed: even so they are not generally true; for though we come
with disorder and unpreparednes unto the hearing of the Word, and public
prayers; yet we are not for this disorder to omit public prayers, and hearing
of the Word: for this were the way not to prevent, but to multiply our sin; and
yet I do not deny, but that this disorder and unpreparednes is a great sin, for
which we ought to be humbled.

FINIS.

