THE WHOLE FAITH OF MAN: Being the Gospel declared in plainness, as it is in
JESUS, and the way thereof of old confirmed by diverse Signs, Wonders, Miracles,
and Gifts of the holy Ghost.

In thirty six Heads, setting out Man's way and work, from the day of his
Conversion to the day of his Dissolution, and what therein is both to be
believed and practiced.

The Second Edition much Enlarged.

By WILL. JEFFERY, who has for years been a poor Labourer in Christ's Vineyard.

So likewise ye, when ye shall have done all those things which are commanded
you, say, We are unprofitable servants; we have done that which was our duty to
do, Luke 17.10. London, Printed by G. Dawson, for Francis Smith in Flying-Horse
Court in Fleet Street, near Chancery lane end; and Stephen Dagnal of Alisbury,
1659.

TO The Christian READER.
Loving Reader,
THis work presented to thy view, read I pray with diligence and care,
employing thy whole understanding to observe what (...) written herein, whether
it be according to the Scriptures of truth, and finding it so, lay it up in thy
heart, and bring it forth in Conversation and in Worship; and that thou may
so do, mark well the Scriptures that are brought for the proof of that which is
said; and for the right understanding of the Scriptures, note these five things.

First, who it is that speaks.

Secondly, the ground or cause of the Word spoken.

Thirdly, what is spoken.

Fourthly, the time when.

Fifthly, to whom it speaks.

And labor to understand Prophecies, whether they be fulfilled or no, and
mistake not so as to think that Parables, or Comparisons in Scripture prove
nothing, for they do excellently prove things, if rightly understood; for the
Parable of the unjust Judge, and the Widow, Luke 18. v. 1. proves, that men
ought always to pray, and not to faint; and that in Rev. 16.15. which says,
that Christ will come as a thief; proves, that Christ will come suddenly, and
that day of the Lord shall come upon ungodly men unawares, yea as a snare shall
it take them, 2 These. 5.23. but it does not prove that Christ will come
unrighteously as a thief, for that connot be: So Parables and Comparisons in
the Scriptures, prove excellently the things for which they are brought, but
beware of using them beyond their line; and also note, that a Commandment or
Precept, only gives ground to duty, for where no Law is, there is no
transgression; mistake not, for the manner of the performance of the duty, is
not always in all things laid down in the Commandment; so the primitive
examples of the People of God, for the manner of the performance of duty, is
very safe, and where there is no example of the People of God in the
Scriptures, for the manner as aforesaid, take heed that the duty be done
decently, and in order, 1 Cor. 14.40. James 5.14. But stand in awe in the fear
of God, and beware that you add not to the Commandment, nor diminish therefrom
in the performance of duty, for he that shall presume to speak a word in the
name of the Lord, which he has not commanded him, shall die, Deuteronomy. 18.20. Pro.
30.6. Revel. 22.18, 19. Mind also, that according to the Law and the Prophets,
and New Testament, are to hear Christ in all things, yea to give more heed to
Christ then Israel was to Moses, Heb. 2.1, 2. Chap. 12.25. and to labor to
understand what the first Testament is, and who were the children hereof; and
what is the new Testament, and who are the children thereof; and let no man
that believes and is added to the Church according to the Scripture, content
himself in a child like state, but labor with all diligence, to come to man's
stature, being strong in Christ, 1 Epistle of John. 2.13, 14. For in these last
days, will come in all deceiveableness of unrighteousness, and so many will
fall away; the age grows ripe, many run to and fro, and knowledge is
increased; therefore labor to understand the Mysteries of the Scripture, walk
up purely in all that thou know; for they shall be revealed and fulfilled in
these latter days; yea whosoever thou art, observe more what is declared, it
being truth, then the manner of the declaring it; and be not offended at the
plainness or poverty of the man that speaks, he speaking as the Oracles of
God; For God has chosen the foolish things of the world, to confound the wise.

I have studied brevity for many reasons, therefore heed well what is spoken,
and so have thy heart open for truth, but closed up against all error, and try
all spirits by the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, For if they speak
not, According to the Law and Testamony, it is because there is no light in
them, Isai. 8.20. And so read this Book with a single eye, for it very highly
concerns thy eternal life, for, for this end was it written, that men might
know the good old way of the Gospel, and walk therein, and so find rest for
their souls; and that God might have all the Glory; and this is the sincere
desire of him, that is ready to serve thee with all his might in he strength of
the Lord, in the work of his Generation.

William Ieffery.

A TABLE OF The principal Matters spoken to or handled in this Book.
1. THe Gospel what it is? Page 1 2. That the Gospel is to be preached to all
Men. Page 2 3. That Christ dyed for all Men. Page 4 4. That God through Christ's
death in the ministration of the Gospel, sets all men in a way to come to the
knowledge of the truth, and be eternally saved. Page 6 5. How Men in all ages
were set in that way. Page 9 6. What Adams sin brought upon all the sans of
Men. Page 13 7. How Christ redeemed all Men from the first death, and all the
guilt or punishment of Adams sin. Page 18 8. That all Infants dying in
Infancy, shall be saved. Page 17 9. The great cause of condemnation, and what
it is? Page 21 10. How Men are given up to blinded eyes, and hardened hearts,
and wherefore. Page 30 11. How Gods Decree takes hold of Men to condemnation.
Page 27 12. Gods Decree concerning Election to salvation. Page 32 13. Why none
but Believers are chosen to salvation, and yet foreseen faith not the cause.
Page 33 14. The first Testament, what it is in the strictest sense, and what it
is in the largest, and who were the children thereof, and how is it cast out
and its children, and the difference between the Law of Faith, and the Law of
Works; and a word of the abolishing of the seventh day Sabbath. Page 35 15.
What the second Testament in the strictest fence, and what in the largest; and
who are the children thereof, and who the Ministers thereof; and the vast
disproportion between the first Testament and the Second. Page 42 16. What
Repentance is, and what Faith is, and the nature thereof. Page 52 17. That
Bilievers only are the Subjects of Baptism, not Infants. Page 54 18. That
Prayer and Laying on of Hands upon all Believers after Baptism, is a Prinsiple
of the Doctrine of Christ. Page 60 19. The Resurrection of the Bodies of just
and unjust, proved; and the Christ that died and rose again, and ascended into
heaven, shall come again in person. Page 64 20. What the eternal judgment is,
and when it is. Page 70 21. What the Church of Christ is, and who are to be
received into the Church of Christ, and who not; and the bounds of Communion;
and that we are to give more heed to Christ then Israel was to Moses. Page 75
22. That there are Preachers, and Administrators of Ordinances in this our age
(and shall be until Christ comes) and who they be. Page 86 23. The manner and
right receiving of the Lords Supper, and that Saints ought to practice it
until Christ come. Page 91 24. What Officers belongs to the Church of Christ
and how they are to be chosen, and what there Work is. Page 95 25. The
Maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel, what it is; and that it is not by
Tithes. Page 99 26. Some things spoken concerning the Washing the Saints feet;
also that of Anointing with Oil in the name of the Lord, and Prayer with
Fasting. Page 102 27. The way to deal with them that sin against God and one
another, and to cast them out of the Church. Page 103 28. That the power lies
in the Church to judge Offenders. Page 108 29. That Magistrates are to be
obeyed in all civil things, and are supreme; but they have no more power in
the Church then Members. Page 109 30. That all the way of the Gospel, is a way
of love and free grace. Page 112 31. That men may fall from grace, and that the
grace of perseverance is of God; and salvation, eternal life, is the mere gift
of God. Page 113 32. That the whole House of Israel after the flesh, shall be
called to believe, and be a glorious people, and the time when. Page 120 33.
What the Whore of Babylon is, and who are her Daughters, and that the
Antichrist, or Man of Sin, is not the Whore of Babylon; showed in seven
particulars. Page 126 34. That Christ shall Reign Personally on the earth, most
gloriously. Page 161 35. That until Christ come to Reign, the Saints shall be
in a troubled, persecuted Estate; and that there shall be war unto that day;
and a word to the Fifth Monarchy Men. Page 164 36. Some of the Signs of Christ's
coming. Page 174
Reader,
Thou will find only some literal Faults, which were not worth the while to
make an Errata of, therefore thou art desired in a friendly way, to correct
such Trivials with thy Pen.

THE GOSPEL Declared in plainness, as it is in JESUS, And the way thereof of
Old confirmed by diverse Signs, Wonders, Miracles, and Gifts of the Holy Spirit.
IN the first place mind what the word Gospel is, or does hold forth unto us:
and you shall find that it signifies good, or glad-tydings, as appears Isai.
52.7. compared with Romans 10.15. Luke 2.10, 11.

Now what is contained in this good-tydings is this, (according to the
Scriptures) that God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, not
imputing their Trespasses unto them, 2 Cor. 5.19. and that Christ dyed for our
sins, and was buried, and rose again the Third day, 1 Cor. 15.1, 2, 3, 4. and
that in Christ Jesus there is Remission of sins, Luke 24.47. or forgiveness of
sins, Acts 13.38. and everlasting Life, 46. this is the Gospel.

And this Gospel is to be preached to every Creature by the Commandment of the
Lord, Mark 16.15. that is to say, to every Man and Woman that have ears to hear
so as to understand; not to Infants, for the Lord speaks not unto (though of)
them, Deuteronomy. 11.2. for they know neither good or evil, Deuteronomy. 1.39. which is
agreeable to the testimony of the Angel of the Almighty, which brought
good-tydings of great joy unto all people, Luke 2.10.

Furthermore, this Gospel was preached unto all, yea unto them that received it
not, (and that in all Ages) Genesis 3.15. 1 Pet. 3.19, 20. 2 Pet. 2.5. Heb. 4.2,
3, 17. Acts 2.5. Coll. 1.23. for Paul says, it was necessary that the Word of
God should be Preached unto them that rejected it; yet there was no less in
that word than everlasting life, which they put from them, Acts 13.46. in much
envy contradicting and blaspheming, and raising persecution against the
Apostles, so that at length, they shook off the dust of their feet against
them, ver. 51. And you know that Christ says, It shall be more toller able for
Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, then for such a people; So then the
Gospel was preached to them, that never received it, as well as to them that
did receive it; therefore unto all.

Again the Parables, and comparisons in the Scriptures, proves that this good
Tidings of eternal life, as it is in Jesus, is to be preached unto all, as it
appears, Mat. 13. in the parable of the sower; for there you may see it is
declared unto all sorts of men, as the seed is sown in all sorts of ground;
likewise in Mat. 22. the ^arable bids all, even them also that would not, nor
did not come, the bad as well as the good, for to come to the marraige. Also
the comparison of the brazen Serpent shows, as that was lifted up for all,
that all that were stung might look on it, andlive, Number. 21.8, 9. So is the Son
of man, the Lord Jesus lifted up for all, that whosoever believes on him
should not perish, but have everlasting life, John 3.14, 15.

Again this is the condemnation of the world, namely, the not receiving the
light that is in Jesus, held forth in the Gospel, John 12.46. John 3.19. And
how shall they receive it, so as to believe it without a preacher? Romans 10.14.
Therefore it is to be preached unto all.

Again Christ will judge all men according to the Gospel, Romans 2.16. Acts
17.31. and he that hears, and beleiveth, according to the Gospel, shall be
saved, and he that will not believe shall be damned, as John witnesses, that
they that refuse to hear the word, so as to receive it, shall be condemned at
the last day, by that word which they heard, and rejected, John 12.47.48.
wherefore Christ judging all men at the last day by the word of the Gospel, and
that according to righteousness, it follows plainly, that the Gospel must be
preached unto all men.

Well then, seeing the Gospel is to be preached unto all, or this good tidings
of peace, which is (as has been showed) that God was in Christ reconciling the
world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, and offers
everlasting life unto all in and through the death of his Son, it will follow
that Christ died for all men, so as to seek to serve all men, Luke 19.10. Mat.
18.11. yea, to set all men and women in the way so as by his death they might
have eternal life. I say, it will follow clearly, that Christ dyed for all men,
for else the Gospel will be the tender of a lie, which is blasphemy to affirm.
It will (I say) be the tender of a lie, because in the Gospel there is offered
to all (as has been showed) remission of sins, and everlasting life, through a
crucified Christ; but if Christ died but for some men, and this glad-tyding of
peace in the Gospel be held forth for all men, as it is, then to some of these
(all) it will be the tender of a lie; but that cannot be, therefore I conclude
that Christ died for all men.

This further will appear, if you observe well, how that all men every where
are commanded to repent, and believe the Gospel, Mark 1.15. Act. 17.30. and
that is witnessed in the Gospel to all men, both believers, and Unbeleevers,
that there is eternal life in Christ, and that they who receive it not, make
God a lier, 1 John 5.10, 11, 12.

Again consider, that God does bid all earnestly, and does not mock any (until
first they reject him, Prove. 1.25, 27.) nor does he deal as hypocrites, to bid
men to his supper, having before decreed in himself, that they shall never
taste thereof, but (I say) unfaignedly, and altogether truly does the Lord bid
and invite all persons to come to the marriage supper, and (says he) for, All
Things are ready: now if Christ died not for all, how could he invite all, even
them that never came, saying, all things are ready, when as to them that came
not, which are the greatest part of men, to them (I say) the only thing, was
not ready; that is to say, a Christ crucified for their sins; and so whereas
Christ says, that all things are ready; this opinion which I contend against,
declares, that there is nothing ready, for I am sure that without a crucified
Christ there is no salvation for the sons of men; and moveover to conceive that
Christ died but for some men, notwithstanding his so often calls, and loving
invitations to all men whatsoever, to come unto him that they might be saved,
Joh. 1.7. whether in the city, or in the lanes, or about the hedges; to
conceive this I say, is to liken the Lord Jesus unto the vilest of men, who (as
David says, Psalm. 55.21) have in their mouths words smoother then butter, but
war in the heart, words softer then oil, yet were as drawn swords.

Moreover the Scriptures holds forth plainly, that unbelief in the son of God
is a great sin, yea, the cause of eternal condemnation, John 3.18. Joh. 8.24.
Now if the son of God died not for the unbeliever, who is (says Christ)
condemned already; because he believes not on him, then the unbeliever is
condemned for not believing a lie; but this cannot possibly be the judgment of
the righteous God, who condemns men for not receiving, and believing the truth,
that they might be saved, 2. These. 2.10, 11, 12. Therefore again I conclude,
that Christ died for all men.

Moreover we find Paul (that eminent light of the world) in great heaviness,
and continual sorrow of heart, yea and wishing himself accursed from Christ for
his brethren the Jews, that were shut up in unbelief, Romans 9.2.3.32 33. Romans
11.7, 8, 9, 10. To whom also he acknowledges did belong the adoption, and the
glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the law, and the service of God,
and the promises; now it is most plain that the Apostle does (by acknowledging
these so many, and excellent privileges pertaining to the Jews) declare, and
clearly preach up, that there was a time when they might have been happy, had
they (with others) sought after the righteousness of God by faith; but alas,
alas, they obtained it not, wherefore? (because Christ died not for them, says
many) but says the holy Apostle, because they sought it not by faith, but as
it were by the works of the law, ver. 31.32. And this is charged upon them as
their great folly, which indeed had been none at all, had they not (as well as
others) been put into a capacity through the grace of a crurified Christ to
have believed, and so eternally saved, which thing most asuredly Paul
understood touching them, and therefore he abode in great heaviness for them,
yea, and wished himself accursed from Christ for them, knowing and believing,
that God had sent his son Jesus to bless them, yea so far (mark I pray) as to
turn every one of them from their iniquites, Act. 3.26. and indeed to conceive
the Apostle to be of a contrary belief, that is to say, that Christ died not
for his Brethren, that were shut up in unblief; (such a conception (I say) does
render the wise, and eminent Apostle Paul to be simple, and foolish, both by
his great heaviness and continual sorrow of heart; for that which could not
possibly be obtained, to wit, the salvation of his Brethren the Jews; and also
by his wishing himself accursed from Christ for them that could not possibly
ever be blessed; but God forbid that any sober minded man should hold any opinion
that should thus render the wisdom of the wise of no effect; but however if
men will thus foolishly presume, wisdom is justified of her children, who
clearly understands that Christ died for all men; whereupon when they come to
understand that men will not come unto him that has died for them; that they
might have life, Joh. 5.40. they understandingly (with holy Paul) greive, and
are of a mournful heart for them, like the Lord himself; Luke 19.41, 42.

Moreover Peter the Apostle of the Lord, full of the Spirit declares, That the
Lord bought such as bring in damnable Heresies, and so bring upon themselves
swift destruction, even damnation that slumbereth not, 2, Pet. 2.1, 2, 3. So
then by this also it clearly appears, that Christ died for, or bought all men,
since no man questions his dying for such as shall be saved.

Furthermore, there is before you a cloud of witnesses eminently advancing the
truth of this Particular, speaking after this manner; Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them which were sent unto thee! How
often would I have gathered thy Children together, as a Hen gathers her
Chickens under her wings, and ye would not? Mat. 23.37, And when he beheld
their City, so great was his love toward them, that he wept over it; Saying,
if thou had known, even thou at least in this thy day, the things which
belong unto thy peace; but now they are hid from thine eyes: Luke 19.41, 42. Oh
that my people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways, so
should their time have endured for ever! Psalm. 81.13.15. Oh that their were
such an heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep all my Commandments
always, that it might be well with them, and their Children for ever? Deuteronomy.
5129. Oh Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean, when shall it once be? Jeremy.
13.27. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee, Israel? As
I live, says, the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but
that the wicked turn from his way, and live; turn ye, turn ye, for why will ye
die, oh House of Israel? Ezekiel. 33.11. And now O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and
men of Judah, Judge I pray you betwixt me, and my Vinyard, what could have been
done more, to my Vinyard, that I have not done in it? Jsa. 5.3.4. But when he
looked that it should bring forth Grapes, it brought forth wild Grapes; As also
Israel in the wilderness, Wherefore he was greived with that generation, and at
length, swear in his wrath that they should not enter into his rest, because of
Unbelief, Heb. 3.10, 11, 19. Now that the Father, the Son, and the holy Spirit
in the Prophets, should utter such deep desires, and large professions for the
welfare of a People, with weeping, and great lamentations upon their neglect of
that which should have been for their welfare, ( Psalm. 69.22.) Also confirming
his desires by the immutable Oath of himself, and yet notwithstanding know them
(even from the first) altogether incapable of happiness and well-being, and
that for want of that grace which himself is the only giver of; That God (I
say) whose Attributes of love, and mercy are met together with truth, and
righteousness, and kisseth each other, Psalm. 85.10. should thus declare
himself, is altogether incredible; for if he sent not his Son to die for them,
there is no other Name given under heaven, whereby they might be saved, Act.
4.11, 12.

The sense of these things being much upon my heart, leads me forth yet further
to question with you, viz. How the wise God, the Father, could grieve forty
years long for a Peoples unbelief, if there was no Salvation for them to
believe in? And how Christ the Son of God could marvel at the Peoples Unbelief,
if he tasted not death for them, whereby they might believe, Mar. 6.6.

And how the holy Spirit, the gift of God, could strive with men for their
good, if Christ, in whom is all good, was not intended for them? The Father,
the Son, and the Spirit (according to the Scriptures of truth) in all ages
plainly declares, That he would have all men to be saved, and come to the
knowledge of the truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. in order to which he exercised much
long-patience, sending his servants, calling upon them, and beseeching them to
be reconciled unto himself, 2 Cor. 5.20. And so God preparing all things ready
for them, and using a sufficiency of means, whereby they might come and receive
it (according to the Parable) that is to say, might believe, and eternally be
saved, Joh. 1.7. Jo. 3.17.2 These. 2.10. they not coming, they not believing,
the God of love in wisdom greiveth for them, and upon good grounds swears in
wrath, they shall not enter into his rest. Mark well; A man's not doing
impossibilities, or not believing on that which is not, is no sober man's
wonder, cause of grief, or ground of wrath; Wherefore all these things being
considered, together with the many more Scriptures that speak to this purpose,
as also many Scriptures bearing plain Testimony, that Christ died for all, 1 Timothy 2.6. Heb. 2.9.2. Cor. 5.15.1. Joh. 2.2. Rom 3.22. And not so much as one
Scripture that says, he died but for some, therefore with wise and holy Peter,
I conclude, that the Lord God is not willing that (any) should perish, but that
all should come to repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9. and be saved through Christ the
Savior, who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time;
Therefore let all men fear how they testify against it.

Object. If Christ died for all, how is it then that all are not saved?

Answ. Bear with me I pray you, if I speak somewhat large to this Question, for
I know that there is something in the understanding of those that ask this
question, as the ground thereof, which is a great hindrance to the
understanding of this glorious truth of Gods love unto all men; namely, that
Adams sin brought him, and all his posterity into a state of eternal
condemnation in Hell: which whosoever beleiveth, cannot easily understand how
Christ should die for all men, (say they) if he died for all, to free them from
eternal punishment in hell, and Christ dye not in vain, then (say they) How can
it be but that all must be saved?

First consider your mistake touching Adams sin; for it is plain, that his sin
brought but the first death and the companions thereof, as fear, shame,
sickness, eating bread in the sweat of the face, etc. together with the ground
cursed for his sake, and not eternal torments in Hell, which says the
Scripture, is the second death, Rev. 20.14. First because the second death, or
eternal torment in Hell was neither threatened to come upon him before his fall,
Genesis 2.17. neither is it in the least signified in the sentence against him
after his fall, Genesis 3.17.18.19. but rather this, Dust thou art, and unto dust
shall thou return: this death therefore being only spoken of, which is the
first death, let no man presume above what is written.

Secondly, observe the sense of the Apostle Paul, touching this Particular, who
says, That by one man (to wit Adam) sin entered into the world, and death by
sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned, Romans 5.12. Now
in that he says, that the death which came by Adam passed upon all, it
follows with much plainness, that he understood it to be only the first death
that entered into the world by Adams sin, because the second death, or eternal
torment in Hell, had not passed upon all, and so he could not mean the second
death; for he right well knew, yea and all men do know, it had not passed upon
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with many others that might be mentioned; no nor
never shall. In vain will it be for any to go about to evade the force of this
text, by conceiving that it is the desert of eternal death which passed upon
all, forasmuch as the Apostle in much plainness says, That death passed upon
all men, not only deserved death, but death it self passed also upon them, as
their desert.

Thirdly, remember, and well consider that it is granted on all hands, that
Adams sin from the beginning, did and now does bring men down to the dust, or
first death; and also well consider, that it is as generally believed, that the
second death, or Hell torments, is an eternal fence of misery both upon the
soul, and body; or an eternal, horrible, dying, and never being dead: both
which being considered, you may easily see, that if God did intend Hell torment
to be the portion of Adams sin, either you must imagine, that God did purpose,
and decree, and so accordingly declare to Adam, that if he sinned he should for
a time return to the dust, and afterward be raised up again from the dust, and
so cast into Hell torments, which is the second death; which imagination is
very strange; and besides it presupposes a Resurrection without Christ; or
else you must imagine, that God intended in his saying to Adam, -- Thou shall
die: that his soul should go into hell torment, the second death; and his body
to the dust, the first death: which Dagon-like Image shamefully falls before
the Ark of truth.

First, because it renders the coming of Christ, the greatest of Gods gifts to
mankind, who come not to condemn the world, but that the world through him
might be saved, John 3.17. I say, it renders the coming of Christ to be the
only cause of a horrible Judgment, without the least mixture of mercy, upon
the bodies of those men, whose souls were cast into hell for Adams sin; that is
to say, Christ by his coming raises their bodies from the grave, where they
were without the fence of any misery, and casts them (without any cause) into
everlasting torments.

Secondly, the imagination falls upon the account of Paul's words, Romans 5.12.
showing that that death which came by that one man, Adams sin, passed upon all;
wherefore it cannot be meant an eternal death upon the souls of men, for that
passed not upon the souls of the holy Fathers, as aforesaid.

And thus you may see, that neither of these imaginations can stand either
according to Scripture, or Reason; and therefore the truth only remains before
you, as clearly proved by these considerations, namely, That Adams sin brought
but the first death, as has been showed, and that men's loving darkness rather
then the light, is the cause of a second death; and this may not be rejected,
because Christ himself says, This is the condemnation, John 3.19.

Fourthly, that Adams sin brought but the first death as aforesaid, also
appears from the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 15.21, 22. wherein is plainly held
forth, that Christ will bring all men to a resurrection from that death which
comes upon all men by the first Adams sin; wherefore it cannot possibly be the
second death which he speaks of as brought by Adam: for then it supposes all
men brought to a resurrection from the second death, or Hell torment, and so
preaches general salvation, which is folly to conceive: so then, (with the
Prophet) I conclude, that the Son shall not die eternally for the iniquity of
the Father, But the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him; (that is
to say, upon him alone, and not his child, so as to bring it to eternal life)
And the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him; (that is upon him alone,
and not his child, so as to bring it to eternal death, Ezekiel. 18.20.

Well then, by this time it is necessary to mind again our Question; namely,
That if Christ died for all men, How is it that all are not saved?

First, by what has been said, you may see in what state man was in by his
first Transgression, even out of Gods favor, and in a state of misery
condemned to the first death; But God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son to taste death for every man, Heb. 2.9. Romans 5.18. and so
destroys him that has the power of death, (that is the devil;) And thus there
is purchased (by Christ) a resurrection for all men from the first death, with
the gift of God, which is eternal life: (and hence it is, that children dying
in Infancy, cannot be condemned at the last day, for of such is the kingdom of
God, Mat. 19.14.) But now men (having a being here through Christ) come to
rebel against God, and going out of the way, so as there is none righteous, no
not one, Romans 3.12. they become the children of wrath; but such is the love of
God, that he follows the creature with mercy, commanding the Gospel to be
preached to every creature, which Gospel men not believing, the wrath of God
abides on them, John 3.36. the light of eternal life, and remission of sins in
Jesus is held forth, but men loves darkness rather then light; the prize of
glory is put into their hands, but they (like fools) have no heart to it; and
so, whereas the Objector asks, how it is that all are not saved, if Christ
dyed for all; the answer is in Christ's words, This is thecondemnation, John
3.19. that light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather then
light, because their deeds are evil.

Thus I judge that the seeming show of the objection vanishes, and that the
truth remains in its power, and plainness, namely; That Christ died for all
men; and so sets all men in a way in which they may come to the knowledge of
the truth, and be saved; The truth of which will appear, if you shall take a
view of the Scriptures, speaking of the Generations from the beginning; as
first, in the very day that Adam fell, Christ was promised by God, saying, The
seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head: and it is said of Abell, That
by faith he offered a more excellent sacrifice, then Cain, Heb. 11.4. Showing
plainly, that Abell was enlightened touching the promised seed, to wit, Christ
the true Sacrifice, in whom he believing, his sacrifice became more acceptable
then that of Cain: also it is said of Enoch, that by faith he was translated,
that he should not see death; and before his translation he had this testimony,
that he pleased God; and not only so, but himself being enlightened touching
Christ, we find that he Prophesies also of the coming of Christ, with his
faints to Judgment, Jude 14.

And so he was a preacher of the Gospel to others, in his, and following
Generations. In like manner we find Noah declared to be a preacher of
Righteousness, and by Faith preparedan Ark, whereby he Condemned the World, and
became heir of the righteousness which is by faith, 1 Pet. 3.18, 19, 20. 2 Pet.
2.5. Heb. 11.7. All which shows, that Noah was such an eminent light in his
Generation, that the whole world (then in being) was so taught, and instructed
by him, (he being a Preacher of Righteousness) as that (they being disobedient
thereunto) are said thereby to be condemned. Also we find very clearly, that
the Gospel was Preached to Abraham, saying, In thee shall all Nations be
blessed, Gal. 3.8. And afterward unto his seed, (the children of Israel) in
the wilderness, as appears, Heb. 4.2. Among which people God showed such
mighty, and wonderful power in saving, and delivering them, and destroying
their enemies, as that thereby he declared to all the World, that he was
Isreal's God, and approved of their Faith, and Worship; as to instance some of
many, The Angel smote of the Camp of the Assyrians, an hundred four score and
five thousand, 2 King. 19.35. Also God delivering Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednigo from the fiery Furnace; as also Daniel being delivered from the Lions
den; decrees were made, that Every People, Nation, and language, should tremble
and fear before their God, and that his Kingdom shall never have an end, Dan.
3.29.6.26. Moreover the Lord bringing his people out of the captivity of
Babylon, stirred up the spirit of Cyrus King of Persia, to make Proclamation in
all the Kingdoms of the earth, that he was to build him (the only true God) a
house at Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 1.1, 2. Besides all such kinds of preaching, there
was among them a continual Ministry of the holy Prophets, whose words, (says
Paul) went unto the ends of the world, Romans 10.18. by which means some of every
Nation under heaven were proselyted, devoutly worshipping the true God, Acts
2.5.9, 10, 11. And as God was present with the house of Israel in power and
might as aforesaid; so also in giving great and wonderful wisdom, so that the
Queen of the South, came from the uttermost parts of the earth, to hear the
wisdom of Solomon, Mat. 12.42. yea, and all the Kings of the earth sought his
presence, to hear the wisdom that God had put in his heart, 2 Chro. 9.23. By
this cloud of witnesses, it is manifest, that the Gospel was made known to all
people in all Generations down to the Apostles, in whose Generation, Christ
commanded the Gospel to be preached to every creature, and says the Apostle,
it was preached to every creature under Heaven, Col. 1.23. And so it is
evident, that God set all men, at all times, in a way by the Gospel, that they
might come to the knowledge of the truth, and be saved.

Object. Though it be true, that the Gospel was preached among the Nations, yet
we cannot judge that they all had, or that all people now have a sufficiency of
means, whereby to believe.

Answ. That all men had, and have a sufficiency of means so as to believe, and
be saved, is evident, and to you will appear if you keep well in your minds the
agreement of Gods Attributes, so as that they may sweetly meet, and kiss each
other in all that you believe; for you know the Scriptures holds forth, That
God is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
Repentance; yea, and swears by himself, that he desires not the death of the
wicked, but rather that he turn, etc. 2 Pet. 3.19. Ezekiel. 33.11. Now all the
means of Repentance, and Faith, and the grace to keep men from perishing, is
from God, as you also confess, for him therefore to withold the means of
Salvation from the poor creatures, whereby it is altogether impossible for them
ever to miss eternally perishing; yet nevertheless to say, that he is
long-suffering, and not willing that Any should perish, yea, and to swear that
he desires not the death of the wicked; affectionately saying to them, Turn
ye, turn ye; for why will ye dye? Whenas himself withholds the means,
without which they cannot return, and live; I say, for God thus to say, and
swear, is altogether incredible, being that which calls in question the
Attributes of the Almighty; and indeed is proper only to an unjust, deceitful
man, and not to God: so then it is plain, that as God desires the Salvation of
men, (and swears that he wills not their condemnation) so he affords a
sufficiency of means in order thereunto.

Secondly, That there is a sufficiency of means for all, appears, because
Christ charges persons not coming to him, so as to believe in him, upon the
obstinacy of their wills, and not upon the want of means, as appears by these
Scriptures, Joh. 5.40. Ye will not come unto me that ye might have life, Mat.
23.37. Oh Jerusalem, How often would I have gathered thy Children, but ye would
not, Joh. 4.48. Except ye see signs, and wonders, ye will not believe.

Thirdly, It appears also to be so, because those who are said to perish, shall
be lest without excuse, or claok for their sin, Romans 1.20. Joh. 15.22. Which
cannot be, in case they always wanted means, or ability to believe, for of all
cloaks, or excuses that possibly can be, what is a greater, or safer excuse,
then an impossibility to do the thing required? Yea surely, it will be a fair
plea before the Just, and Righteous God; but God will judge all men according
to their works; therefore no such excuse or piea.

Fourthly, The Scriptures says, that Christ marvelled at the unbelief of some,
(as has been showed) and also pronounces condemnation to the unbeleever,
because he believes not, etc. Which may clearly prove to them, that honor God
in all his Attributes, that he allows a sufficiency of means to every man, to
do the thing which he requires: unless it may be safe to conceive, that Christ
(the wisdom of God) did marvel at known impossibilites, and also that he will
plunge men into hell for ever; for not doing that, which himself only works
in the creature* (as you conceive) but God forbid such horrible blindness.

Fifthly, Christ commands men to believe in the Light, while they have the
Light, that they may be the children of Light, Joh. 12.36. Now for a man to be
exhorted to believe in the Light, that he may be a child of the Light; and he
in such darkness as was the Egyptians, and as unable to help himself out of it
as they were; would be a most unwise, vain, and deceitful Exhortation; unwise,
and vain, it being known he could never believe; deceitful, in pretending that
he might be the Child of Light, it being altogether unpossible: wherefore still
I conclude, that Christ's words are pure, and unfeigned, and so men every way
made able through grace to believe, and do the things which they are exhored
unto: Christ the Lord (whom we serve) being no hard Master.

Sixthly, while men are treating about what means God does allow in order to the
doing his will; himself comes in, and pleads, What could I have done More, that
I have not done? And yet will any man dare to say, that he had done Nothing in
order to their Salvation? as he had not if he never made them able to believe:
Oh do not say so, for in so doing, you will grievously sin against God; who
allowed such a sufficiency of means, as that (in his wisdom) he looked for
that to be done which he commanded; What, did he look for that which could not
be? and also enter into judgment with them, laying them wast, and giving them
up to blinded eyes, and hardened hearts, Isa. 5.4, 6, 7. Isa. 6.10. as a
recompense unto them, Romans 11.9. From all which I conclude, that Jesus Christ
tasted death for every man, and that All men Every Where may repent, as they
are commanded by him who is no hard Master; and that All men might believe; as
in plain words is written, Joh. 1.7.

Moreover, as it is conceived, that the one part of mankind have not a
sufficiency of means to believe, and so perish: so also the other part of
mankind have an irresistible means making them to believe, and so they are
saved. The latter of which is as inconsistent to truth, as the former, as
lively appears from Christ's words, Mat. 19.23, 24. saying, That it is easier
for a Camel to go through the eye of an Needle, then for a rich man to enter
into the kingdom of Heaven. For all cannot but know, that if God be the alone
Agent in, and about man's conversion, and his ordinary way be to work
irresistibly therein; all (I say) cannot but know that it is Alike easy for
him to convert a rich man as a poor man. And besides, if Gods ordinary way to
convert men be to work irresistibly, how he could appeal to Israel (who
according to your sense, knew that this was his way) saying; what could I have
done More, which I have not done? Whenas he had not wrought so much as in his
ordinary way upon them; I judge no man can give a reasonable account to this.
Therefore in brief I conclude, (in opposition to all those that imagine Gods
ordinary way to convert men is unresistible) with Stephen, saying, Ye do
always resist the holy Spirit, as your fathers did, so do ye, Act. 7.51. and
with the words of the Lord, I drew them with the cords of a man, with bonds of
love, yet they refused to return, Hosea. 11.4, 5.

Object. But this which you have said, seems to cross the way of Gods Election,
and reprobation, from the beginning; whose way is to hate some men before they
have done either good, or evil; as is plainly held forth in that of Esau; and
so impossible for them ever to believe, and be saved; For he has mercy on whom
he will, and whom he will he hardens.

Answ. For the better understanding of this Point, well consider the principal
thing, which Paul treats of in that Chapter, Romans 9. which is, that the fleshly
seed of Abraham, are not the children of promise, or the Elect of God, ver. 7,
8. wherefore (says the Apostle) though Esau was the child of Abraham according
to the flesh, and that upon Isaacs side too, yet God hated him: therefore you
Jews that stand so much upon your brith privileges, as being the seed of
Abraham after the flesh, by this of Esau you may know, that it will not prove
you to be the Elect of God, but you may be hated as Esau was, he being as truly
a child of Abraham as you, but for his wickedness, (whether considered as a
Person, or as a Nation) God rejected him; I say, for his wickedness as
appears, Obad. 9.10. For thy violence, (O Esau) against thy brother Jacob,
shame shall cover thee, and thou shall be cut off for ever, Mal. 1.3, 4. Amos
1.11. Heb. 12.16, 17. Esaus wickedness therefore (whether considered a person,
or a Nation) I say, with the holy Prophets, was the cause why God hated him;
whose wickedness, God that foreknoweth all things, foreknew in Rebecca's time,
and thereupon said to her, Esau, or Edom, the elder shall serve the younger;
which saying Paul being acquainted with, spoke these words; to wit, That the
children being not yet born, neither having done any good, or evil, that the
purpose of God, according to Election might stand, not of works, but of him
that calls; it was said unto her, as aforesaid, Romans 9. showing thereby, that
God was so mindful, that his pu^pose according to Election might stand; (which
the Jews so mightily opposed) that he signified so long ago as Rebecca's time,
before the children were born, or had done either good or evil, that (Esau) the
elder, (foreseen to be wicked) should serve (Jacob) the younger, for his
violence against him; as (says the Lord, Obadiah 9.10.) And therefore this
Election by grace, (as if the Apostle should say) which I contend for, being as
ancient as the Fathers, spoken of by God himself to Rebecca, you may in no wise
reject, for I preach no new thing.

But alas, how is it, that men so stumble at these words spoken by Paul in this
ninth Chapter to the Romans, as if God hated Esau before he was born, without
respect unto his foreseen wickedness, as the cause thereof? I say, how is it,
that you so conceive, and thus imagine vain things? for does it in the least
follow, that God so hated him, because it is said (if that might be granted) he
hated him before he was born, or had done any evil? surely no: unless it could
be found, that God hated him also before he had done evil, without respect to
foreseen evil, in which is the main Controversy; and not so much whether God
hated Esau before he was born, or had done evil, yea, or nay; but rather what
was the cause for which he was hated, to which this Text (in the Romans) does
not at all speak, only speaks of the time, to wit, before the Children were
borne, etc. But as touching the cause wherein is our great Controversy, I tell
you again, the text speaks not; wherefore it remains that you diligently mind
other Scriptures, which speaks as to the cause thereof, which plainly tells you,
that Esau's violence etc: was the cause, Obad. 9.10. Now although this be
spoken of him after he had personally transgressed, yet I question not but that
you with me will acknowledge, that all his transgressions was known to God in
Rebecba's time, (as also before) which if so, Why may it not be thus? for what
is said in this place to the Romans, namely, that God foreseeing Esau, or Edoms
wickedness in Rebecca's time, said upon that account, the elder shall serve the
younger: yea verily, it is plain, that God did speak to her upon the account of
foreknowledge, for faith he; Two Nations are in thy womb, Genesis 25.23. which
all cannot but know was no otherwise, but as God foresaw two Nations proceeding
from the two Children, which only was in Rebecca's womb; and so also God
calls things that are not, as if they were, Romans 4.17.

Further, to what you say, touching God having mercy on whom he will, and whom
he will he hardens.

I freely grant it, but the Controversy is, whom God has mercy on, and that
is, believing men; and whom it is God hardneth, and that is, disobedient,
unbeleeving men; (though they be Abraham's seed, that is after the flesh.) And
this I believe was Gods righteous dealings in all ages; that is to say, God
first manifested his tender loving kindness to them, with much long patience,
and gentleness, waiting upon them in the use of means, bidding them to open
their mouths wide, and he would fill it; but those that will not hearken, but
reject his counsel, So God gives them up to their own hearts lusts, Psalm.
81.10, 11, 12. So, that which should have been for their welfare, is become
their trap, Psalm. 69.22. God blinds their eyes, lays stumbling blocks before
them, gives them up to hardness of heart, and Reprobates them for ever, as a
recompense to them, for their wilful rebellion; the Only cause thereof, as
preaches this vein of Scriptures, Pro. 1.24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. Jerem.
6.16, 17, 21. 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16. Zech. 7.11, 12, 13. Mat. 13.13. Romans 1.19,
20, 21, 26. 2 These. 2.11, 12.

These things I lay before you, because the question is, wherefore God hardens
men's hearts; and not, whether he does harden men's hearts, yea, or nay. For I do
(and always did grant that; and the cause thereof is as aforesaid; namely, the
creatures nelgecting, and putting from them so great salvation, as is freely
tendered in Jesus, when as they ought to receive it with love thereunto; For
This Cause, (says the Apostle) God shall send them strong delusions, that they
should believe a lie; that so they might be damned, Because they received not
the love of the truth, that they might be saved, 2 These. 2.10, 11. according to
which all Nations are in the hand of God, as clay in the hand of the Potter,
and so at what instant soever, God speaks unto a people, showing them,
through the Gospel, that his pleasure is to build, and plant them, and so make
them vessels for honor; if that people do evil in his sight, that they obey
not his voice of good will toward them, and so Mar themselves, (1 Samuel 6.6.)
in the hand of God, he then repents of the good wherewith he said he would
benefit them, Ier. 18.4, 9, 10. so he gives them up to hardness of heart, so
they become vessels for dishonor; when as others of the same lump, turning
from the evil of their ways, God makes them vessels for honor, and so of the
same lump one vessel for honor, and another for dishonor.

But if not withstanding you shall yet turn the body of these Scriptures
otherways, then behold its face; namely, That God did (before time) hate the
greatest part of the world, without respect unto foreseen wickedness as the
cause thereof, and that (in time) he gives them up to hardness of heart, (without
grace at any time whereby to be saved,) and at the day of Judgment will cast
them into everlasting Torments, because of their wickedness and hardness of
heart; and yet declare in his Word, (which you say is a word of truth) that he
is good to all, and that his tender mercies are over all his works; that he is
slow to anger, and of great mercy, Psa. 145.8, 9. Patient, long-suffering, etc.
Exodus 34.6, 7. Not willing that Any should perish, 2 Pet. 3.9. swearing by
himself, that he desires not the death of the wicked, Ezekiel. 33.11. but would
have all men saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth, 1 Timothy 24. Forty
years long grieving for the iniquity of his people, Heb. 3.17. Bemoaning their
undone estate, Psalm. 81.13. yea, even weeping for them, Luke 19.41. saying.
What could I have done more, (for your good) that I have not done? Isa. 5.4.
when as he knew, (according to your Tenent) that himself had shut them up from
all possibilities of believing unto Salvation, and that by his own,
unresistible Decree, and purpose of Reprobation; Judge ye (friends) in this
cause, and judge righteous judgment, and with fear, and trembling, weigh these
things.

To return a little to the objection again; sider further, that though Thave
proved that Esau's wickedness, and so the wickedness of all wicked men, was,
(and is) the cause for which the Decree of Reprobation took hold of them; yet
(mistake not for) I do not say, that 'twas foreseen wickedness in them, that
was the moving cause in God to Make the Decree of Reprobation, but rather the
unutterable purity, and unwordable holiness dwelling in himself, (which
possibly could not admit of any wicked creature in his presence.) This I say
moved him to Make the Decree, that all wickedness might be excluded from
happiness in his presence.

So having spoken of Esau, and how he, and all other wicked men are reprobated
to Condemnation; it remains that I now speak of Jacob, and how he, and all
other righteous men are elected to Salvation.

First therefore, I believe that God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son to die for the world, whenas there was nothing in the world that
did, or could move him thereunto.

Secondly, the world being gone all out of the way, and coming short of Gods
glory, God did purpose a gracious purpose of Election in Christ; namely, to
choose, or set apart believing men for glory, Psalm. 4.3. Ephesians. 1.4. 2 These. 2.13.
And so Jacob (with all other believing men) being found in Christ, Gods
gracious purpose, and decree of Election takes hold of them, being such as are
Elected from the foundation of the world to eternal Salvation; but by this
(take notice) I do not say, that God foreseeing faith in Jacob, or in any
other, was thereby moved to Make that decree of Election, as if the works of
righteousness which we have done, first moved him so graciously to purpose, and
decree for the good of believing men; I say not so, but rather the mere love,
and compassion dwelling in God himself, moved him to purpose, and Elect
believers in Christ to Salvation, agreeable to the Apostles words, Ephesians. 1.5.
Having predestined us, etc. according to the good pleasure of his will, ver.
9. purposed in himself, and of himself, Romans 9.11. nothing of worth in man
first, or last moving him thereunto; and so our Salvation is of God, that
shows mercy upon them that believe. And whereas this purpose reaches in the
believer in Christ only, it is not because God saw such a worth, or moving
excellency in the creatures believing, but that he might (in showing mercy unto
men) not destroy his attributes, as of honor, and justice, which would have
been blemished, had he chosen the unbeleeving, sinful man for himself, having
before cast man out of his presence for sin: and so though the believer only
has interest in Gods purpose of Election, yet the cause of his happiness is
the tender love, and compassions of God, dwelling originally in himself.

Where then is bosting? It is excluded; by what law? by the law of Faith, for
as much as Christ, who is the object of faith, is the mere gift of God, who
also has from of old decreed. from the mere grace dwelling in himself, and not
from foreseen faith in the creature, to Elect, and choose men unto Salvation,
through (not for) the belief of the truth, 2 These. 2.13. whose belief also
comes by hearing the Gospel of Christ, which is to be preached to every
creature, for the obedience of faith, Romans 16.26. So then, all being of him,
and through him, not unto us, not unto us in the least, but to the Lord alone
be glory for ever.

The next thing which I purpose, is somewhat touching the two Covenants,
because I find that some stumble for want of a right understanding the old, and
other some for want of a right understanding of the new Covenant, wherefore for
the good of each, this I declare, head it well I pray you.

You I mean that stumble about the Covenants, for have you not read, that
Abraham had two Sons, the one by a Bond-maid, the other by a Freewoman: which
things (says Paul) are an allegory, for they are the two Covenants; the one
from Mount Sinai, which is Hagar, who (you may remember) did abide with her son
Ishmael for a time in Abraham's family; but when Isaac was borne, and Ishmael
found mocking at him, he no longer must abide there, Genesis 21.9, 10. but Sarah a
Freewoman, and her son Isaac a child of Promise, who indeed had more right to
dwell in Abraham's family, then she that was a mere Bondwoman, and her son born
after the flesh. Now being told by Paul, that these are the two Covenants, it
follows plainly, that as there was a time for Hagar, and Ishmael to abide in
Abraham's family, but must be cast out when found mocking at the true promised
seed according to the flesh; so there was a time, when the first Covenant, and
her children after the flesh, (held forth by Hagar, and Ishmael) had a being in
Abraham's family, but at length being found mocking at the new Covenant, and her
children after the promise, must be cast out; so the new Covenant remains, and
her children (held forth by Sarah, and Isaac) with whom the Bondwoman, and her
son shall not be heir.

But that you may the more clearly understand the casting out of the first
Covenant, and her Children; First, mind what the first Covenant is: and that is
in a strict sense, the ten Precepts, written upon the Tables of Stone, Exodus
34.28, 29. Deuteronomy. 9.9. Heb. 9.1, 2, 3, 4. And in the largest sense the whole law
of Moses given to Israel, when they came out of Egypt, Heb. 10.1. Deuteronomy. 31.24.
Heb. 9.19, 20, 22. And those who were accounted children of this first
Covenant, or Testament, were the Children of Abraham after the flesh,
descending from Isaac, Genesis 17.9, 10, 11, 12. Jerem. 31.32, Exodus 19.3, 5.
Deuteronomy. 4.8. Psalm. 147.19, 20. Amos 3.1, 2. For they all were borne Heirs of the
Land of Canaan, and so were commanded to be circumcised, that the Token of the
Covenant might be in the flesh; the truth of which is undeniably held forth by
that touching Hagar, and Ishmael, (as has been said) whom the Apostle says,
signifies the first Covenant, and her children, Gal. 4.23, 24, 25. Whereupon
if Ishmael the son of a Bondwoman, born after the flesh, hold forth the
Children of the first Covenant, which gendered to bondage; it must needs
follow, that Abraham's seed after the flesh, were the children thereof;
therefore (says the Scripture) cast out the Bondwoman, and her Son, (which
says Paul allegorically is the first Covenant, and her children) who shall not
be Heir with the son of the Freewoman; that is to say, the children of the new
Covenant; now most sure I am, that if they were not fleshly, (but Spiritual)
they should not be cast out, though by this I do not deny, but that many of
Abraham's seed after the flesh did become, through beleiving, everlastingly
happy, but not by the law, or first Covenant, the tenor of which is, Do, and
thou shall live, Romans 10.5. but by the law of faith, Romans 3.27. which excludes
boasting in birth previledges. So then the first Covenant, was made with the
fleshly seed of Abraham, the Priesthood given to a fleshly line, (the seed of
Aaron, Exodus 40.14, 15. Ezra 2.62.) the Sacrifices and Ordinances carnal, that
is, fleshly, seeming for the purifying of the flesh, Heb. 9.10, 13. that they
might stand before God, and not die, and enjoy the good land of Canaan, which
God Covenanted to give to them, as they were the fleshly seed of Abraham.

Now the nature, or tenor of the first (or old) Covenant (as in the hand of
Moses) was this; to wit, He that Does these things shall live by them; (that
is, should be blessed with long life, deliverance from all their enemies, with
all other temporal blessings in the promised Land, Deuteronomy. 28. the nature of
which law, Paul sets in direct opposition to the law of faith, which (says
he) speaks on this wise; That if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord
Jesus, and shall Believe in thy heart, that God raised him from the dead, thou
shall be saved, Romans 10.5, 6, 9. And hence it is, that Israel seeking after
righteousness as it were by the works of the law stumbled, and fell, showing
plainly, that the righteousness, which takes hold of eternal life, was not
attainable by the law, Romans 9.31, 32. for the law is not of faith, and so it is
evident, that no flesh shall be justified by it in the sight of God, Gal. 3.11,
12.

Thus you see the tenor of the Law, as in the hand of Moses, was, Do, and thou
shall live; and so the Law, or first Covenant in that sense leading to bondage,
(answering the Bondwoman) is cast out, with her fleshly children, (answering
Ishmael, Abraham's seed after the flesh) and So it comes to pass, that Paul in
plain words declares, that the Law written, and engraven in stones, is done
away, and abolished, 2 Cor. 3.7, 11, 13. Also says the Apostle, he takes away
the first that he may establish the the second, Heb. 10 9.

But mistake not, for by this I do not import as if Christ came to destroy the
Law, but rather to fulfill, and establish it: yea and now also the Law, so far
as it is ministered in by Jesus, is to be observed (by Saints) as a righteous
rule, in the doing of which God may have honor; but mind I pray you, the vast
difference betwixt doing the law as ministered by Moses, from doing the Law as
ministered by Jesus* as thus, Do (says Moses) and thou shall live: but, Believe
(says Christ) and thou shall live; and so when the creature comes to believe,
and in believing has life, he then having life, is to do whatsoever Christ
teaches him of the Law, as also all other things which he shall require him to
do for the honor of his, and the Fathers name, 1 Cor. 10, 31. in the doing of
which, Christ says he shall abide in his love, John 15.10. But if he wax
wanton, and come to dishonor the father, and the Son, who has given him life
in believing, in his trespass which he has trespassed, and in his sin which
he has sinned, in them shall he dye.

All this being considered serves (by the way) first to remove the
conscientious scruple risen in some, touching the now remaining of the seventh
day sabbath; for while they are wondering how it can be that one of the ten
Precepts, should be taken away, and the other nine remain, the truth offers it
self in, showing that they all are done away, as ministered in the old Covenant
by Moses, 2 Cor. 3.7, 11, 13. though remaining so far, and upon the account, as
Christ teaches them, who is the great, and alone Prophet, that is to be heard
in all things whatsoever, He shall say to us.

Secondly, it serves for sharp reproose to those who would be looked upon
zealous for God, in that they contend for the sprinkling of infants: for if the
fleshly seed of Abraham, are cast out, and so not admitted as members of the
new Testament, or Church of Christ, merely as such; (upon which account John
the Baptist, put back the Pharisees from his Baptism, as not fit members for
the Church of Christ, upon their plea of having Abraham to their Father, Mat.
3.9.) how lame, weak, frothy, carnal, and confused a thing is it to receive
little children into the Church by Baptism, upon the plea, that they are the
seed of Believers; What! all the fleshly seed of Abraham the father of the
faithful cast out, and yet labor to receive in the fleshly seed of Abraham's
children? be ashamed hereof, O ye Priests, for the Lord will not hold them
guiltless that makes void his Commandments by their own traditions. But more
to this elsewhere, Mat. 15.6. Now to return.

The sum of all is (as the Apostle says) the Bondwoman, and her son, that is
to say, the first Covenant and its children, is cast out, ever since the death,
and resurrection of Christ, so henceforth know we no man after the flesh, 2
Cor. 5.16. because the son of the Bondwoman ( Ishmael after the flesh) shall
not be heir with (Isaac) the son of the freewoman; that is to say, with the
children of the New Covenant or new Testament: wherefore it remains in the
next place, to consider what the new Covenant is, and who are the children
thereof; since they only are heirs according to promise.

The New Covenant, or New Testament, is in the strictest sense, that which is
written in the 31 of Jer. 33, 34. verse. and Heb. 8.10, 11, 12. And in the
largest sense, the Gospel, the gladtydings, way, and ordinances thereof, as
it is written in the books of the new Testament, whereof Paul was a Minister, 2
Cor. 3.6. Mat. 26.28. Heb. 9.16, 17, 18.

Now the Children of the New Covenant are penitent, believing, obedient men,
and women, such as are born again, not of blood nor of the will of the flesh,
nor of the will of man, but of God, John 1.13. New creatures, and these are the
children of Abraham after the spirit, and heirs according to promise, John
8.39. Gal. 4.29. 2 Cor. 5.17. And with them, considered such, God makes, or
enters into Covenant, giving them his spirit, and so puts his Laws in their
minds, and writes them in their hearts: and so he is a God unto them, and they
only are his people, Heb. 8.10. And so they need not teach every man his
neighbor, and every man his brother; saying, know the Lord; for all shall know
him from the least to the greatest of them, verse 11. But mistake not, though
all the children of the New Covenant need not to teach one another, so as to
know the Lord, yet they ought to build, up one another, in the knowledge of the
Lord, Jude 20. having received gifts from the Lord, they are to teach one
another to grow in grace, and in the knowledge of the Lord, exhorting one
another, and so much the more as they see the day of Christ approaching; so by
using of their gifts, they come to be established, and go on to perfection:
Heb. 5.12, 14. and 10.25. 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4.8, 11, 12.

Moreover, the Lord will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins,
and their iniquities will he remember no more, so that they may have free
access to him through Christ, he being sacrificed for them; so that there is
no need of a sacrifice as there was under the old Testament, for then there was
a continual sacrificing, and so a remembrance of sin every year, and so the
comers thereunto could not be made perfect, for it was not possible that the
blood of Bulls and Goats should take away sins, Heb. 10.1, 2, 3, 4. But Christ
being come, by one offering, he has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified; so he takes away the first Covenant, that he might establish the
Second, that the children of the second Covenant might stand before God, and
die not, having a new and living way which he has consecrated, or made through
the offering of the Body of Jesus Christ once for all; and so they come before
the Lord with boldness, yea, enter into the holiest by the Blood of Jesus; and
having an High Priest over the house of God, draw near with a true heart in
full assurance of faith, having their hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience,
and their body washed in pure water, Heb, 10.9, 10, 19, 20, 21, 22.

So then the children of the New Covenant have free access to God, worshipping
of him in spirit, and in truth acceptably, without any sacrifice, as after the
Law, or old Administration, that being abolished and done away, 2 Cor. 3.11,
13. so sin is not remembered, and so they shall be eternally saved, if they hold
fast the profession of their faith without wavering to the end; but if they sin
wilfully, there remains no more sacrifice for sins; but a Certain fearful
looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation; which shall devour the
adversaries; he that despised Moses Law died without mercy, under two or three
witnesses, of how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be thought worthy,
who has trodden under foot the son of God, and has counted the Blood of the
Covenant wherewith he was sanctified an unholy thing; and has done despite
unto the Spirit of grace, verse 23, 26, 27, 28.

Furthermore, the Ministers of the new Testament, are not by a fleshly line, as
the Priests of the old Testament were; the sons of Aaron born by Generation,
Exodus 29.9. Numb. 16.40. But they are made Ministers of the new Covenant merely
by gifts given from God, as appears, Ephesians. 4, 8, 11. where the Apostle
shows, that the Lord Jesus ascended up on high, and gave gifts to men; he
gave some Apostles and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, some Pastors, and
Teachers; for the gathering together of the Saints, for the Work of the
Ministry; for the edification of the body of Christ; till we all meet together
in the unity of the faith; and knowledge of the son of God, unto a perfect man,
and unto the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ, verse. 12, 13. So then
it is clear from hence, that all the Ministers, or Preachers of the new
Testament, are to preach or teach by gifts given from God, for they have gifts
given for the work of the Ministry, and that in all ages till Christ comes; for
all the saints cannot meet together in the unity of the faith, and the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, not until Christ his coming;
therefore the whole work of the Ministry is, to be performed by men gifted of
God in all ages, and not by men of a fleshly generation, line, or by any humane
learned Arts, for that is contrary to the new Covenant, for all her children
are taught of the Lord.

And this will further appear, because (as the Apostle shows) the world by
wisdom knew not God, 1 Cor. 1.21. Nor if all the humane arts in the world did
not teach the knowledge of God, it follows that all humane Arts cannot enable
a man to preach, or declare the Gospel, the unsearchable riches that is in
Christ; and so Paul though learned, ignorantly persecutes the Church of Christ;
but by grace given him, he was made able to preach the unsearchable riches of
Christ, Ephesians. 3.7, 8.

Again, Jesus rejoiced in Spirit, and gives thanks to his Father, that he had
hid the things of the Gospel, or new Covenant, from the wise and prudent, or
learned, and revealed them to Babes, Luke 10.21. And Paul says, The things of
God knows no man, but the spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.11. And the Prophet Isaiah
says; That the vision of all is become as a book that is sealed; So that the
learned and unlearned cannot read it; Isa. 29.11, 12. From all which it
plaineth appears, that all Ministers of the new Covenant, are made able for
the work of the Ministry, through the spirit, grace and gift of God; for the
spiritual man judges all things, even the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10, 15.
And so God has not chosen the mighty men, or things of the world, which are
highly esteemed among men, but chooses the poor, foolish, weak, base, despised
things, things that are not, to bring to naught things that are; That no flesh
should glory in his presence, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28. Luke 16.15.

So then mark well and see, the vast disproportion between the Old Covenant and
the New, the Old was of works, do and live long, so they doing it,
Justification would have been of dept, Romans 4.4. but the New is, Believe and
live eternally, So Justification is by faith, that it might be by grace, Romans
4.16. The Old Covenant is litteral and kills, because all have broken it, but
the new Covenant, is spiritual, and gives life in Christ through believing, 2
Cor. 3.6. the Old was written in Tables of Stone, the New writes the law of
God in the heart; the sons and daughters of the Old Covenant, were Abraham's
seed after the flesh; the sons and daughters of the new Covenant, are the seed
of Abraham after the spirit, newborn, new creatures; God according to the Old
Covenant, did know and choose the family of Abraham after the flesh, above all
the families of the earth, Amos 3.1, 2. Psalm. 147.19, 20. but now according to
the new Covenant, he knows no man after the flesh, 2 Cor. 5, 16. but every
man of any Nation, that fears God, and works righteousness is accepted with
him, Act. 10.35. whether he be Jew or Gentile. The children of the old Covenant
being after the flesh by generation, there was need to teach them to know the
Lord; but the Children of the new Covenant, need not to be taught to know the
Lord; for they all know the Lord, from the least to the greatest of them, as it
has been showed; The old Covenant, or law, though just, holy, and good, yet
weak through the flesh, having no strength to Justify the Children thereof;
God finding fault with them, because they had broken the Covenant, there was a
place found for the new Covenant, established upon better promises, so through
Jesus the High Priest and Mediator of it, the Children thereof are Justified;
see Romans 8.2, 3, 4. Heb. 8.6, 7, 8. The Sacrifices of the old covenant were
carnal, fleshly, the blood of Bulls and Goats, and so could not make the comers
thereunto perfect; so there was a Remembrance of sin every year, but the
sacrifice of the new Covenant, is the Lord from Heaven, the man Christ, his
Blood being the blood of the new Covenant, being shed for remission of sins,
Math. 26.28. and so perfects for ever them that are sanctified; which are the
children of the new Covenant, so that their sin is remembered no more, as it
has been showed before; Heb. 10.12, 14. the High Priest of the old Covenant
was after the order of Aaron, by generation after a fleshly line, and so many
were made Priests, because they were not suffered to continue by the reason of
death, but Jesus the High Priest of the new Covenant, is after the order of
Melchizedec, and comes not to it by a fleshly line after the order of Aaron,
(as the Priests of the Law did) as touching his Office of the Preist-hood, he
is without father or mother, without kindred, and has neither beginning of
days, nor end of life, but remains a Prieft for ever after the order of
Melchizedec. So he is able also perfectly to save them that come to God by him,
(as the children of the new Covenant do) seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them, Heb. 7.3, 6, 11, 13, 14, 16, 21, 24, 25. The Children of
the old Covenant had blessings and promises after this manner; That the Lord
would set them on high above all the Nations of the earth, blessed in the city,
and in the field, blessed in the fruit of the body, flocks of sheep, and herds
of cattle, and deliverance from their enemies, and long life in the land of
Canaan, withal the riches thereof, Deuteronomy. 28. The blessings of the new
Covenant, are after this manner; deliverence from the evil of temptation; 1
Cor. 10.13. Led into all truth, so as they experience that comfort, peace and
joy that their names are written in the book of life, witnessed by the holy
spirit, all things working together for good, no condemnation, for they walk
not after the flesh, but after the spirit; the promise of the life that now is,
and of that which is to come, even eternal life, so as to reign in glory.

So then, all may see, that they that go about to be justified by the Law,
Written upon tables of stone, or the Law of sacrifices, are fallen from grace;
for if righteousness be by the Law, then Christ died in vain, Gal. 2.21. and
5.4. But Christ died not in vain, but God is just, and the Justifier of him
only that believes in Jesus, having that faith that works by love, Romans
3.26. for such only are the sons and daughters of the New Covenant.

Also hence it clearly appears, how the Church of Rome is Mystery Babylon the
great, the mother of harlots, and abominations of the earth, she became so by
bringing in a generational fleshly seed, where Abraham's seed after the flesh is
cast out, so she goes a whoring, in bringing in a false carnal seed, instead of
a true spiritual seed, she brings in children into her Church, by baptizing
them (as she calls it) and so the matter of her Church is merely carnal, and
her ministry by humane learning, and not by gifts given from Christ, and yet
talks of spiritual matter, confounding the Old Covenant with the New, and
making the commandments of God of none effect by her many inventions; and so
national Churches that sprinkle their infants, bring in a false fleshly seed,
and are her daughters, and so she is truly said to be Mystery Babylon, or
Confusion, the mother of harlots, so she going a whoring after her own
inventions, she has made all Nations drunk with the wine of the wrath of
herfornication, Rev. 2.5. and so according to that in Isa. 24.5. The earth is
defiled under the inhabitants thereof, because they have transgressed the
laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant, and therefore
she shall be destroyed, Rev. 17.16. And the curse of the Lord God Almighty will
devour the earth; Isa. 24.6, 19, 20. wrath shall come upon the Gentile nations
to the uttermost, as it did upon the Jews, yea, the Lord will make a full end
of the Gentile nations, Jer. 30.11. O that men would lay these things to heart,
and hear, and obey the Lord according to the Gospel, walking up orderly
according to the new Testament in all things, in sincerity of heart, that they
might escape the things that shall come to pass, and to stand in Judgment
before the Son of man, Luke 21.36.

And that ye may be sons and daughters of God according to the New Testament in
order, and so stand before the Lord with acceptance, observe well that the
first Principle of the doctrine of Christ, is, Repentance from dead works, Heb.
6.1. For the Gospel is to be preached to all, as it has been showed before,
that men may repent of all their dead works; now repentance is a change of the
mind, from all that which is evil, to all that which is good; it has in it a
hearty sorrow for sin, and a confession of sin; and therefore John the Baptist
preaching Repentance, they came confessing their sins, Math. 3. Repentance is
such a thing as changes the man from an evil conversation, to that which is
very good; and also from all false whorish ways of Worship, to the pure
Worship of God; it has in it these seven things; As first, it brings forth a
continual care, as not to commit evil, nor to omit good, yea, a readiness to
every good work: secondly, clearing the matter of fact, if it be in wrong done
to any man, by a wise just restitution, (if able) Luke 19.8. and by doing so no
more, what ever sin it be, confessing it to God with brokenness of heart,
turning from it. Thirdly, an inward indignation against all sin. Fourthly, the
sear of God, which teaches a man to depart siom evil and to have a singular
respect to all the Commandments of the Lord, so as to do them. Fifthly, a
vehement hungring, thirsting desire after Righteousness. Sixthly, a zealous
continuing in every good work. Seventhly, a holy revenge, in bringing the body
under subjection by fasting, esteeming the Commandments of the Lord more then
necessary food, 2 Cor. 7.11. And so it is repentance, or a change of the whole
Man from dead works, for the wages of sin is death.

Furthermore, that men may do works acceptably in the sight of God, the next
Principle, or teaching of Christ unseparably joined with Repentance, is, Faith
toward God; and that is, to believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of
them that dilligently seek him; and that Christ died for our sins, and that he
was buried, and that he rose again the third day, according to the Scriptures;
and that the blood of Christ, is, the Blood of the New Testament Shed for the
remission of sins; and that there is everlasting life, and a most glorious
Kingdom, for all them that believe, and walk according to the Gospel, or New
Testament; and so Faith is the substance or ground of things which are hoped
for, and the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1, 6.1 Cor. 15.1, 2, 3, 4.1
John 2.4, 6. yea this faith is of a purifying nature; for every one that has
this hope, purifyeth himself as Chirst is pure, Chap. 3.3. Acts 15.9.

The next Principle of the Doctrine of Christ, is the Doctrine of Baptismes; it
is said to be Baptismes, because there is a Baptism of afflictions in a
comparative sense, in the which Chirstians are dipped into, so as the waves
goes over them, yet are raised out of it by the Lord; it is not every
affliction, but some great affliction, and yet this is common to Christians,
Mat. 20.22, 23. Luke 12.50. Psalm. 42.7. John 16.33.

There is also Baptism or Dipping in Water, which is the one Baptism in a
litterall sense, which all Believers ought to practice; I say it is Dipping in
Water, because the word in the Greek holds forth a washing by dipping, and not
sprinkling, for it cannot be showed in the Lexicons, as the learned confess;
and John Baptized in the River of Jordan; Mark 1.5. and Christ when he was
Baptized, came up out of the water, of the river of Jordan, Mat. 3.13.16. and
Philip and the Eunuch went down both into the water, and he baptized him in the
water, Acts 8.38, 39. Baptism in Water holds forth in a likeness, a burial
with Christ, Romans 6.3, 4. All which declares, that Baptism, is Dipping the
whole person in Water, and this learned Perkins, freely conffesseth in his
Golden Chain.

Furthermore, penitent Men and Women are the only Subjects of Baptism, and not
Infants.

That such as profess faith as aforesaid are to be Baptized, and not Infants,
will appear, because the Lord commands his servants, to Go teach all Nations
Baptizing them, that learn the Gospel, so as to believe the same; but Infants
cannot learn the Gospel by teaching, (for they know neither good nor evil,
Deuteronomy. 1.39.) Therefore it is not lawful to Baptize them.

That Christ commands such to be Baptized, as believe through teaching, or
preaching, is evident, from Mat. 28.19. in these words. Go and teach all
Nations, Baptizing them, etc. That is, Them of the Nations that believe, for
they might not Baptize unbelieving Jews, nor heathens; therefore Mark says,
being the same with that of Matthew, That Christ commands the Gospel to be
preached to every creature, and He that believes, and is baptized, shall be
saved; so then the Gospel is to be preached to all* for this end, that all may
believe: but all do not, but they that hear so as to believe the Gospel, are to
be Baptized and no other are in the Commission, or Commandenent of Christ for
baptism it is plain; so then, they that Baptize Infants, do that which they
have no Law of Christ for; nay, it is against the Law of Christ, because they
cannot believe through preaching, and so they have not faith, for there is but
one faith, and that comes by hearing, Ephesians. 4.5. Romans 10.14.17.

Object. But some say, That Infants are apart of the Nations, and Nations are
to be baptized; therefore Infants.

Answ. So are unbeleeving Jews, and Heathens part of the Nations, yet are not
to be Baptized; and so it is plain, that Nations are not to be Baptized, as
such; but believing men and women, as has been showed before; therefore not
Infants.

Object. But some men say, That Infants do believe from that Scripture, Mat.
18. in these words. But whosoever shall offend one of these little ones which
believe in me, etc. From these words, Compared with ver. 2. some conclude that
Infants may believe.

Answ. First note, That them that are newly come to the faith, or be weak in
the faith, are called little children, Gal. 4.19.1. John. 2.12. yet are men and
women. Again, Christians ought to be humble, and without malice is little
children, 1 Cor. 14.20. And this is that which Christ teaches, when his
disciples strove who should be greatest in the kingdom of heaven, as
appears, Math. 18.1. Compared with Luke 9.46. And therefore he takes a
little child, and shows them, except they be converted from their ambitious
thoughts, and become humble as little children, they shall not enter therein,
ver. 2, 3. Also he shows, that he that humbles himself as a little child is
great in the kingdom of heaven; and whosoever shall receive such a little
Child in my name, receives me, John 13.20. that is, such a one as humbles
himself as a little child; and whosoever shall offend one of these little ones,
which believe in Christ, that is, such a one as is humble, and becomes as a
little child, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his
neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea; and this is said, ver.
4, 5, 6. and is the sense of the place; Now for any man to understand the place
so, as that that little child which Christ set in the midst, or any other, did
or do believe, they are much mistaken, for such an exposition of the place
would cross many plain places of Scripture, for Infants are not capable of
hearing, and faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.17. neither do they know good nor
evil, nor their right hand from their left, as has been showed before; neither
does the Scripture speak to Infants, Deuteronomy. 11.2. though it speak of them;
neither can they work, and that faith is dead that works not, James. 2.17, 26.

Now if any question how Infants dying in infancy, can be saved, because they
believe not? I say, that if you look back to what is said as touching Adams
sin, you may see that all Infants dying in Infancy shall be saved; for the son
shall not die for the Iniquity of the Father, Ezekiel. 18. and the guilt of Adams
sin shall be taken off from all at the Resurrection.

But to return, there is no Commandment in all the Scriptures (which are the
word of God) for the Baptism of Infants; and where there is no Law, there is
no transgression, Romans 4.15. therefore he that refuses to baptize Infants,
breaks no Law; Therefore no man can justly charge him with sin, for a
commandment gives ground to duty; and examples are teaching to show us how
duties should be done; also note, that there is no example for infants Baptism
in all the Scripture; (and yet they are able to make us wise unto Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15.) for the Apostles and servants of the Lord did Baptize such only as
did profess faith, and did gladly receive the word of the Gospel, search and
see, as the Bereans did, Acts. 17.11.

Object. But some say, That there is no Command, nor Example for Women
receiving the Lords Supper, yet they are to receive it; so may Infants be
Baptized, though no Command nor Example for it.

Answ. In this objection it is granted, that there is no command, nor example
for Infants Baptism: also note, that believing baptized women are disciples,
and are members of the Church of Christ, and so are commanded to break bread,
Act. 1.14, 15. Chap. 8.12. Phil. 4.13. Act. 20.7. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25, 28. compare
the 1 of Act. 14. with the 2 of Acts. 41, 42. you may see that women did
receive the Lords Supper.

But if any should say, That Infants are Disciples, and therefore are to be
baptized. I answer, That Christ faith, that whosoever bears not his cross,
and follows not after him, cannot be his disciple, Luke 14.27. but Infants
cannot do so, therefore they cannot be his disciples.

I shall say no more to this Principle of the Doctrine of Christ at this place,
because many have wrote very largely upon it, and there is no true consequence
to be gathered from all the Scriptures for Infants Baptism, for it is against
Scripture, and crosses the way of the New Testament, for it brings into the
Church a fleshly seed, instead of a Spiritual: and so makes void the command of
God as has been showed before.

But seeing it is so, that penitent, believing men and women, are only to be
Baptized, let all the Churches in the fear of God, take heed that they Baptize
no other but such as are truly penitent, believing men and women, that so all
the members of the Church of Christ, may be new creatures, living stones taught
of God, built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ
himself being the Chief corner stone, that all the building may be fitly framed
together, growing unto an holy Temple in the Lord, 1 Pet. 2.5. Ephesians. 2.20, 21.
2 Cor. 5.17.

There is also the Baptism of the Spirit, which is a powerful falling down of
the spirit, so as to be filled with it, enabling men to do some great work, as
in Act. 1.5. compared with Chap. 2.1, 2, 3, 4. But this Baptism of the Spirit
is called so comparatively, as Christ is called a door, John 10.7. but there is
but one Baptism really, and that is in water, Ephesians. 4.5.

The next Principle of the Doctrine of Christ, is Prayer, with Laying on of
hands; for the gift of the spirit; so as to abide with us, and to lead us into
all truth, and bring all things seasonably to remembrance, and comfort us in
all afflictions, John 14.26. Chapter 16.13. note, it is the gift of the spirit,
that is to be prayed for, not gifts, but the spirit as a gift, Luke 11.13. Act.
2.38. and so gifts follow, as it pleases the holy one of Israel; and so they
that practice Laying on of hands, with prayer, show that they do look upon
Christ as the only Prophet, to teach them by his spirit according to his word,
Act. 3.22, 23.

Now this of Laying on of Hands, was practiced upon all Believers Baptized; for
the Church of Samaria, were under it, Act. 8.12, 15, 17. And the Church of
Ephesus were under it, Chap. 19.6. and the Church of the Hebrews also, Heb.
6.2. therefore all the Churches, for they all walked in one way and order,
Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6. 1 Cor. 4.17.

Object. But there is no Command for Laying on of Hands; therefore it ought not
to be.

Answ. There is a Command from Christ for it, for the Author to the Hebrews
says, it is a Principle of the Teaching or Doctrine of Christ, and so
commanded by Christ, Heb. 6.2.

Object. But this Laying on of Hands spoken off, Heb. 6. is not that Laying on
of Hands which follows Believers Baptism, or it is doubtful whether it be
that or no?

Answ. First, understand that there was but three sorts of Laying on of Hands,
practiced by the Apostles, and they are these; Laying on of Hands to recover
the Sick; and upon Officers; and upon persons Baptized; Now it cannot be, the
Laying on Hands upon the Sick, for men might be sick, and recovered through
Laying on of Hands, and sick again, and so recovered again, and again, and so
some men might be under this Laying on of Hands many times; but this in Heb.
the 6. must not be practiced above once, for it is said, Not laying again, the
foundation of repentance from dead works, of Faith toward God, of the Doctrine
of Baptismes, and Laying on of Hands.

Furthermore, it cannot be that Laying on of Hands on Officers, for it is said,
that they that had laid this Laying on of Hauds spoken off, Heb. 6. had need to
be taught the first Principles of the Word of God: but Officers could not be so
ignorant, therefore it was not upon Officers.

Moreover, the same that are exhorted to go on to perfection, had laid this
Laying on of Hands, as you may see, if you read diligently the 1, and 2,
verses; Now all are exhorted to go on to perfection; therefore all the Church
of the Hebrews were under this Laying on of Hands; so then it cannot be, that
upon the Sick, nor that upon Officers; for men may go on to perfection, and
never be under that Laying on of Hands for the Sick, nor yet that upon
Officers; Therefore this Laying on of Hands spoken of, Heb. 6. is that only
which follows Baptism; and to this agrees the order of words, verse. 2.
neither can it be thought on good grounds, that the holy spirit should rank any
other Laying on of hands with these Principles, which are the beginning of a
Christian man; so then it follows, that Prayer with Laying on of Hands, upon
every Baptized person, is a Principle of the Doctrine, or beginning word of
Christ, as has been showed before.

Object. But the end of Laying on of hands was, that the spirit might be given,
so, as that some extraordinary gifts might follow, as there did, Acts 19. but
we see none now; therefore not to be practiced.

Ans. By the same reason we may refuse Baptism, for the Apostles promises the
gift of the spirit to every penitent, believing, baptized person, Acts 2.38,
39. which then did fall down miraculously; but we see it not so now; Therefore
no Baptism,

Again, Mark says that these signs shall follow them that believe the Gospel;
in the name of the Lord Jesus they should cast out devils, and shall speak with
new tongues, etc. Mark 16.16, 17, 18. But we see no man do any such thing now;
Therefore by the same ground, you may say no man believes; and then no
salvation. Again, the Apostle says, God has set in the Church,
miracle-workers, 1 Cor. 12.28. By the same rule no miracles, no Church; but
mistake not, the Gospel and the Ordinances thereof, and the whole way thereof
was at the first confirmed by signs and wonders, and diverse miracles and gifts
of the holy Ghost, Heb. 2.4. and all Believers are to walk up according to the
Gospel, and all the Ordinances, and the whole way thereof, until Christ come,
2 Timothy 2.2. 2 Pet. 3.2. Rev. 2.25. To conclude this point* the Spirit of the
Lord is promised, so as to be given to all penitent, belieeving, baptized
persons, Acts 2.38. Gal. 3.14. and the way and order of the Gospel is, to seek
it by Prayer, and Laying on of Hands, Acts 8.15, 17. Chap. 19.6. 2 Timothy 1.6.

The next Principle of the Doctrine of Christ, is the Resurriction of the dead;
which is this, to believe that Christ's very body that was crucified, did rise
from the dead the third day, according to the Scriptures, John 20. and that our
bodies shall also rise again from the grave, when Christ comes in person
again, according to that, in 1 These. 4.16, 17. The Lord himself shall descend
from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trump
of God; and the dead in Christ shall rise first; then we which are alive and
remains, shall be caught up together with them, in the cloud, to meet the Lord
in the air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord.

Now it is very plain, that the very body of Christ which was crucified, and
buried, did rise again, he and not a spirit like that body, did appear.

First, Because he commands his Disciples to handle him, and see, for a
spirit has not flesh and bones, as I have; and so he showed them his hands and
his feet, Luke 24 39.40. and so he showed Thomas the place of the nails,
bidding him, put his hand into his side; all making it appear, that it was the
very body that was nailed to the Cross, and peirced with a spear, that did
rise again.

Secondly, Because he did eat and drink with his Disciples, after he arose from
the dead, Acts 10.40, 41. and was showed openly several times, not only to the
eleven Apostles, but to five hundred brethren at once, 1 Cor. 15.6.

So then, seeing Christ's body is risen from the dead, so shall all men's bodies,
the just and unjust also, shall be raised from the grave at the last day, Acts
24.25.

First, I say, that the bodies of the righteous shall rise from the grave
according to that in the 26 of Isa. 19. Thy dead men shall live, together with
my dead body shall they arise, awake and sing, ye that dwell in the dust, for
thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead, yea if
the righteous in Christ have hope in this life only, they were of all men most
miserable, 1 Cor. 15.19. Because of persecution, and temptation and trialls,
according to John 16.33. Christ tells the righteous, that in him they shall
have peace, but in the world they shall have tribulation.

Therefore, they shall rise again to receive a reward, Heb. 11.26. or else it
were better for them to eat and drink, for to morrow they shall die; yea, it
cannot stand with the righteousness of God, that his should suffer affliction,
and persecution always here on their bodies, for the testifying of truth, and
their bodies never to rise to be freed from misery.

Secondly, because the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15. It is sown a natural body, it
is raised a spiritual body; and so he says, That corruptible, must put on
incorruption; so I reason, That is it the same body that died, that shall be
raised, only it shall be changed into a spiritual body; for there is a natural
body, and there is a spiritual body, as the Apostle shows, but it is that
Same that is natural, that shall be made spiritual at the Resurrection;
Therefore note what the Apostle says I pray, and that is this, It is sown a
natural body, It is raised a spiritual body; so it is, that every seed
according to the comparison, that the Apostle makes of the seed has his own
body, and so the comparison of the seed, does lively set it forth, for the corn
does not bring forth except it die, that is, be changed, for so the word die,
holds it forth; so the natural body cannot be made a spiritual body except it
die, or be changed, and so God gives it another body as it pleases him, for
he makes that natural body, a spiritual body, and so it puts on immortality at
the resurrection day, and so the same flesh and blood, as it is a corruptible
body, cannot inherit the kingdom of God; as the Apostle says, flesh and blood
cannot inherit the kingdom of God; but that corruptible body of flesh, shall
be an incorruptible body of flesh, for it shall be flesh and bones after the
Resurrection, for Christ's body was so, after he was risen, Luke 24.39. So then
it is the same body that dies, that shall be raised, only it shall be made
incorruptible, and in all perfection, for this corruptible must put on
incorruption, and this mortal, must put on immortality, 1 Cor. 15.53. So it
cannot dye, nor go down to death any more, and therefore when it rises from
the grave, or the dead, it triumphs over death and the grave, as it appears
at large, 1 Cor. 15. from verse. 35. to 57. And to this agrees very sweetly
that in Hosea 13.14. I will ransom them from the power of the grave, I will
redeem them from death; O death I will be thy death, O grave, I will be thy
destruction; repentance shall be hid from mine eyes; God is not as man that he
should repent, he will make good his promise, his name is Jehovah, making good
his promises; note also I pray, that in Isa. 25.8. He will swallow up death in
victory, and the Lord God will wipe away tears from off all faces, and the
rebuke of his people shall he take away from all the earth, for the Lord has
spoken it.

Thirdly regeneration, or the knowledge of God in the highest degree that can
be attained on this side the grave, is no where in Scripture called a
Resurrection, therefore I conclude, that that is no Resurrection; and that this
is good reasoning, it appears plainly, Heb. 1.8. and if we note the
Scripture, we may see this only is a resurrection, which is the rising from the
grave, or from the dead, after the breath is departed, because Job says, that
he shall See God in his flesh, and them very eyes, and no other shall behold
him, for him, Job 19.25, 26. Note, that he says, he shall see God in his
flesh, which shows, that the same flesh shall rise again, and be made
incorrupti ble, yea, immortal, and then shall see Godface to face, yea in his
glory, Rev. 22.4.

Fourthly, that the dead shall rise at the coming of Christ, is shown by many
examples we read of in the Scriptures, how the dead were raised, 1 Kings. 17.
Elijah raised the widows Son, and in 2 Kings. 4. Elisha raised the Shunamites
child from the dead; and chap. 32.21. Math. 27.52, 53. The graves were opened,
and bodies of the Saints which slept arose, and came out of the graves after
his resurrection, and went into the holy city and appeared unto many; note, the
bodies of the Saints arose, therefore the bodies of the children of God shall
rife from the dead, and so the Lord Jesus raised Lazarus his body from the
grave, when he had been dead four days, Jo. 11.39, 44. Act. 9.37, 41. Peter
raised Tabitha, so then the dead were raised in the time of the law, and by
Christ, and his Apostles to the glory of God; which teaches us, that it is not
a thing incredible that God should raise again the dead, yea, seeing Christ the
first fruits is raised, afterward they that are Christ's at his coming, 1 Cor.
15.23.

Fifthly, Christ proves the resurrection by that which was written by Moses
after Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob was dead, that God was a God to them though
they were dead, yet God is not a God to the dead, but to the living; for all
live unto him; therefore Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob must rise again, Luke 20.37,
38. and so many shall come from the East, West, North, and South, and sit down
with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of God, Luke 13.28, 29. so
if the Scriptures be true, the dead must rise, but heaven and earth must pass
away, but not one jot or tittle of his word shall not fail, Mat. 5.18. Chapter
24.39. Therefore the resurrection is certain, and a blessed truth.

Sixthly, that the just and unjust shall rise from the dead, is plain, in that
Christ says, John the 5.28, 29. Marvel not at this, for the hour shall come,
in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and they shall
come forth that have done good unto the resurrection of life, but they that
have done evil, unto the resurrectiof condemnation; And Paul makes it the great
Article of his faith, when he was accused of the Jews, Act. 24.14. freely
confessing unto the Governor, that after the way which they call heresy, so
worshipped he the God of his Fathers, believing all things which are witten in
the law and the Prophets, and had hope toward God, that the resurrection of
the dead, (which they themselves look for also) shall be both of just and
unjust; and so I conclude the just man's body shall be raised from the grave, or
be changed, and the unjust also.

The next Principle of the Doctrine of Christ is, the Eternal Judgment, and
that is this; That every man shall be judged according to his works done in the
flesh, be they good, or evil, Math. 16.27. for the Son of man shall come in the
glory of his Father, with his Angels, and then shall he give to every man
according to his deeds, Mat. 25.31, 32. When the Son of man comes in his
glory, and all the holy Angels with him; then shall he sit upon the Throne of
his glory; and before him shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall separate
them one from another, as a shepherd seperateth the Sheep from the Goats; For
we must all appear before the judgment Seat of Christ, that every man may
receive the things which are done in his body, according to that he has done,
whether they be good, or evil.

So that the Saints must give an account of all that they have done at the day
of Judgment, after they are raised from the dead, (or changed being made
immortal) For God will bring every work unto judgment, with every secret thing,
whether it be good, or evil, Eccl. 12.14. And to this Christ speaks very fully,
Mat. 12.26. That of every idle word that men shall speak they shall give
account at the day of judgment; For by thy words thou shall be justified, and
by thy words thou shall be condemned; So Paul says, We shall all appear before
the judgment seat of Christ, Romans 14.10. so that God shall judge the secrets of
men by Jesus Christ, according to the Gospel, Romans 2.16. but Saints sins shall
not be mentioned so as to condemnation, but shall be blotted out at that good
day, that day of refreshing, Act. 3.19. So that through Christ, which is the
substance of the Scapegoat, the Saints sins shall be separated from them, and
so they shall be presented before the father without spot or wriukle, or any
such thing, holy, and without blame, Ephesians. 5.27. and so Paul says to the Saints
at Rome; That every one of us shall give account of himself to God, Romans 14.12.
and so the discovery of their good and bad works, they being brought to
judgment, will exceedingly set out the love, goodness, mercy and compassion of
the Lord God, in forgiving the debt or payment for Christ's sake, and his
faithfulness, justice, and righteousness in making good his promise, in
rewarding them according to their works, for he will not forget their work, and
labor of love: This Doctrine does teach the children of God to walk very
circumspectly, redeeming the time, applying their hearts to wisdom, cleansing
themselves from all filthyness of flesh, and spirit; prefecting holiness in the
fear of God; and to abound in love one toward another, and toward all men;
adding to faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance,
and to temperance patience, and to patience godliness, and to godliness
brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness* Charity, or love; For that faith
which works by love is availeable to Justification, Gal. 5.6. and the duties
done in love only will avail in the day of judgment, 1 Cor. 13. Therefore let
us have respect to all the Commandments of the Lord, for in keeping of them in
love, there is great reward; yea let us cloth our selves with righteousness as
with a garment, reaching after that which is before, following hard toward the
mark for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus; giving up
themselves to watch and pray, that so they may stand complete in all the will
of God.

So then they that die in the Lord, or are found in him at his coming, shall
receive eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, for the gift of God is
eternal life, Romans 6.23. and also eternal death will be the portion of them
that obey not the Gospel, Mat. 26.46. 2 These 1.8, 9. yea they that are not
found written in the book of life, shall be cast into the lake of fire, Rev.
20.15. and this is the eternal judgment, for it is unrevokable, and this shall
be when Christ comes in his own person and not before, that very person that
was peirced with a spear, yea, that very person that dyed and rose again from
the dead the third day, which the Apostles did see and handle, yea, he was seen
of five hundred brethren at once, and many (if not all) did see him aseend into
Heaven, Act. 1.11. Zach. 12.10. Luk* 24.39, 40. Jo. 20.27. and so the Apostle
Paul possitively asserts, from the word of the Lord, that the Lord himself
shall descend from heaven with a shout, and with a voice of the Archangel, and
with the trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first; yea, if you
read from the 13 verse of that Chapter to the end, you will see that the same
Jesus that died and rose again from the dead, shall descend from Heaven, and
all the Saints shall be raised, and they that be alive at his coming shall be
changed, and shall be caught up to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall be
ever with the Lord; and so shall be made perfect altogether, Heb. 11.40.

Object. But it is said by some, that it is not the person that shall be
judged, and cast into torments, or hell, but sin, or the lust of the flesh, and
the tempter, which is Satan, and therefore they bring that in Revel. 20. Death
and hell is cast into the lake of fire; not men (say they) but sin.

Answ. It is unjust men as they do consist of soul, body, and spirit, that
shall be judged and cast into the lake of fire, and there shall be tormented
for ever and ever, for their sin.

1. Because soul, body, and spirit may be blamed at the coming of Christ, 1
These. 5.23. and they that are then blamed, and set at the left hand of Christ,
as goats, are cursed and delivered over to everlasting torments, Math. 25.41,
45, 46.

2. Because the fearful, and unbeleeving, and whoremongers, and Idolaters, and
murderers, sorcerers, and all that loves or makes a lie, shall have their
part in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, Rev. 21.8. and Chapter
22.15. it is not the sin, or the lie, but the sinner, and the liar, so it is
the man that lusts and so commits sin, and repents not, he shall be
punished for ever, for that is the second death; and so death is cast into the
lake of fire, for the second death, or everlasting punishment for sin, is to be
in the lake of fire, Rev. 20.14. And for hell, the grave and hell in the
Scripture is taken for all one, as it appears, ver. 13. So the earth shall be
in the lake of fire, or a great part of it, when God causes the elements to
run together again, 2 Pet. 3.10. and the Devil which is the tempter, shall be
cast into the lake of fire, where the beast and false prophet, or man of sin,
shall be in torments for evermore, Revel. 14.11. and 20.10.

These Principles or foundations Pieces, or Pillars upon which wisdom builds
her house, ( Prove. 9.1.) are the Doctrine or commandment of Christ, and are
laid down upon Jesus Christ the chief Corner stone, Ephesians. 2.20 Heb. 6.2.

And there is no man or woman that can be judged, or looked upon as a Christian
in order according to the Scriptures, nor to be received into communion with
the Church, except he believe and practice this Doctrine; mistake me not, there
may be some, that walk up to their light, and neglect not to know more, that
may be precious in the sight of God; but we are to look to the order of the new
Testament, and to walk accordingly, doing all things decently and in order, 1
Cor. 14.40. Therefore no man ought to be received into communion in a Church
state, but those that do own and practice all the Principles of the Doctrine of
Christ, as aforesaid.

And that this ought to be so; first consider, that all that began to be
Christians, owned all this beginning Doctrine of Christ, Heb. 6.1. and
therefore they are called the first Principles of the Word of God, and milk for
Babes, Heb. 5.12, 13. or, the word of the beginning of Christ, and so the
beginning of a Christian man; and the three thousand which gladly received the
word were baptized, Act. 2.41, 42. that is dipped in water; and continued in
the Apostles Doctrine, which is the Doctrine of Christ.

Secondly, As they under the Law of Sacrifices were to walk up in all the Law,
which did hold out Christ to come in the flesh, doing all the commandments, as
the Lord commanded them in order, so were accounted righteous, and in order
according to the Law, Exodus 12.48. Lev. 16. Deuteronomy. 6.25. 1 Chronicles. 15.12, 13. So
even so, all they that, and will prove themselves visible Christians in order,
since the Resurrection of Christ, must walk up in the Doctrine, or beginning
word of Christ, and in all his Ordinances which declare Christ come in the
flesh; John 1.31. Romans 6.3, 4. 1 Cor. 11.2. Act. 2.41, 42. Chap. 3.23. 2 These.
2.15.

Thirdly, We are to give more heed to the word of Christ (so as to keep his
Statutes walking in order according to them, Heb. 2.1, 2, 3. 1 Timothy 1.3. Chap.
6.3, 4.) then the children of Israel were to the Law; yet Moses was like to be
slain because he had not circumcised his son, Exodus 4.24, 25. and Vzza was
slain for touching the Arc, 1 Chr. 13.9, 10. because they carried it not in
due order, Chapter 15.12, 13. and the Lord sharply reproves the Jews, for
receiving into his house uncircumcised in heart, and uncircumcised in flesh,
Ezekiel. 44.7, 9. So then it is plain, that no uncircumcised person was to be
received into communion under the Law, nor none of the house of Israel could
stand before God with acceptance, but they that walked up according to the Law;
and we are to give more diligent heed to Christ, then they unto Moses;
therefore the Church of Christ ought to receive none into communion, but such
as believe and practice all the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ,
professing from the heart obedience to that form of Doctrine, Romans 6.17. and
they only are to abide in communion, that walk up in all the Commandments of
the Lord orderly.

Fourthly, the Church of the Tessalonians is commanded in the name of the Lord
Jesus, to withdraw from every brother that walks disorderly, and not after the
instructions received of the Apostles, 2 These. 3.6. Now if they were to be cast
out of the Church that walk not after the instructions of the Apostles, it
follows, that they are not to be received into the Church, that never came up
to the beginning of a Christian man, so as to own all the Principles of the
Doctrine, or beginning word of Christ, for that were to build again the things
we have destroyed, and so to make our selves transgressors, Gal. 2.18.

Object. But there are some in the Nations which holds Infants Baptism, and
submit not to the order of the Doctrine of Christ, yet are precious in the
sight of God, and have communion with him; therefore may have communion with
the Church.

Answ. I grant that some in of the Nation may fear God, and have acceptance
with him; yet it does not follow that they may be in communion with the Church,
for the Woman of Samaria had acceptance with God, yet had not communion with
the Jews, neither did Christ account her to be a child of the old Covenant,
Mat. 15.26, 27, 28. and Cornelius prayers heard, and yet not received into
communion with the Jews, nor with the Church of Christ, until he was
Baptized, Act. 10.6, 47. and under the old Testament it was not enough to
profess the circumcision of the heart, but they must be circumcised in the
flesh also, or no communion, as it is showed before, and you may see, Exodus
4.24, 25, 26. Ezekiel. 44.7. Gen 17.14. So even so, none but such as profess faith
in Christ, and are baptized into Christ, and so put on Christ, so made
Disciples according to the Doctrine of Christ, John 4, 1, 2. 1 Cor. 12.13. Gal.
3.27. are to be received into the Church of Christ. Further, for the proof of
this, note what the Apostle says, Romans 16.17. Mark them which cause divisions,
and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine that ye have learned, and avoid them:
And the Apostles serperated the Disciples from all others, Act. 19.9. Note
also, 1 Timothy 6.1, 3. Chap. 3.4, 5. And we are commanded to separate, and to
touch no unclean thing, 2 Cor. 6.7. now to bring into the Church, believers
seed in infancy, by baptising them, is to know them after the flesh, and so to
touch an unclean thing; and so they that do it, are transgressors, yea very
much cross the plain way of the new Covenant in changing the Ordinance of
Christ, to a false Subject, 2 Cor. 5.16, 17. John 6.45. Isa. 24.5. So then it
is plain from the old and new Testament, that to profess holiness in
conversation, is not enough so as to admit men into the Church of Christ; but
there must be also obedience in order to the form of the Doctrine, or beginning
word of Christ; so worshipping God, in spirit and in truth, according to the new
Covenant, Romans 6.17. John 4.24. so they are to be received into the Church of
Christ, and no otherwise; therefore let every man mark well, and behold with
his eyes, and hear with his ears, what is said unto him concerning all the
Ordinances of the house of the Lord, and all the laws thereof, and mark well
the entering in of the house, with every going forth of the sanctuary, Ezekiel.
44.5.

Furthermore mind also; that though the Apostles did bear with the Churches in
several things of the Law of Moses, (because they were once commanded of God,
and they being conscientious to them, not being truly enlightened) yet they did
not receive into the Church, nor bear with them that did not obey Christ in his
Ordinances, so as to walk up after the new Covenant, as it has been showed,
and this further appears in many places of Scripture, take some for many,
Phil. 3.17. 2 These. 2.15. Gal. 1.8, 9 1 John 2.4, 5, 6. 2 Pet. 3.2.

Object. But some men may say, I contend more for Baptism, then for other
Commandments of Christ.

Ans. To which I say, the Lord knows I do not, but I do with a good conscience
contend for those Ordinances, that men have made void by their tradition, of
which Baptism is one, for there is one Baptism Ephesians. 4.5. which is Believers
only, for sprinkling of Infants, or Baptizing them, is not the Ordinance of
Christ, nor is no more accepted with God, then offering a lamb, or any thing
under the Law that had a blemish, Exodus 12.5. Lev. 22.20, 25. But for Believers
Baptism, it was as much honored as any Ordinance, for Jesus himself being
about thirty years of age was Baptized, and the spirit of God descending like a
dove, lighting upon him; There came a voice from heaven saying, this is my
beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, Mat. 3.16, 17. Luke 3.23. Father, Son,
and Spirit in a singular sense met at Baptism, and so Christ was in a most
excellent way vissibly declared to be the Son of God; and so every Believer in
a singular sense at his Baptism, is visibly declared to be the Child of God.

Object. But some men have said, that we are not to practice this Doctrine
because the Author to the Hebrews says, not laying again these principles,
but be led forward to perfection; And the Epistles and commandments in the
Scriptures, were for that age, and for the people that lived in the Apostles
days, for the Epistles were written to several Churches; we being not those
Churches, they do not concern us.

Ans. The Author to the Hebrews exhorts them to their duty, and so all
believers, to go on to perfection in the way of Christ, taking up the
similitude of a building to make it out; and as in the building of an house
there are Foundation, or Principle pieces laid down, and according to the rule
of these Foundations, or principle Pieces, the builders of a Temporal house go
up as far as the Principles guide them, and then the house is come to
perfection, or finished; so even so, in this spiritual house, when we at the
first have laid down these Principles, we are to go up to perfection, according
to the rule of the Foundation Pieces in the Doctrine of Christ, Jesus Christ
being the chief Corner Stone, on which the building fitly framed together,
grows up unto an holy Temple in the Lord, Ephesians. 2.21. And when we are come as
high as these Principles lead us, we are come to perfection; for when we enjoy
the Resurrection, and the eternal Judgment, we are then come to perfection;
and as in a temporal house, none can finish it, so as to make it perfect, if
they do not build according to the rule of the Principles or Foundation Pieces
laid down; so also in the spiritual house, if we go not up according to the
rule of the Foundations, how can we go up to perfection. And also, in a
temporal house, if they leave out any of the Foundation Pieces, they cannot
build up to perfection; then how can any in the spiritual building, go up to
perfection, if they leave out any of the Principles, for if they do, the house
will be in danger to fall. Again, in a temporal building, when they have laid
down the foundation of the house, if they build not upon them, but lie still,
there can be no perfection, and so it is in the spiritual house also; and that
was that which, the Author to the Hebrews blames them for, their neglect in
not going forward in the building of the spiritual house, Heb. 5.12. neither
would he have them to lay the Foundations again, but to go forward to
perfection, as they teach them for to do, for no other foundation can no man
lay, then that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ; and whosoever hears his
word, and does the same, builds upon on him, the rock of ages, Mat. 7.24. Chap.
16.18. Psalm. 62.2. 1 Cor. 10.4. And also the Scriptures were written for this
end, to teach all men their duties in all ages till Christ come, and yet many
times, the words thereof spoken to the People in present being, yet concerns
all; as that which the Lord says to Eve, that she should bring forth in sorrow,
Genesis 3.16. the word is spoken to her only, yet all women bring forth in sorrow.

Secondly, Christ speaks to his disciples which were then present with him at
that time, that when the signs did appear, which he had declared concerning
his coming, they should lift up their heads, for their redemption draws near,
Luke 21.28. Now these words though spoken to the present Disciples, are for the
comfort of them especially that live a little before the coming of Christ;
therefore the Scriptures are for to teach us upon whom the ends of the world
are come, yea, even them that live when the last signs of Christ's coming
appear, 1 Cor. 10.11.

Thirdly, Because the Lord Jesus exhorts the saints of Thyatira, to hold fast
that burden that he laid upon them until he come, Rev. 2.24, 25. And so Peter
wrote his second Epistle, for to warn the saints to give diligent heed to the
words of the Prophets, and the commandments of the Lord Jesus, delivered by
the Apostle, for says be, in the last days there shall come scoffers walking
after their own lusts; saying, where is the promise of his coming? and he wrote
this when his departing was at hand, 2 Pet. 3.2, 3. Chap. 1.14. And Jude bids
the saints contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints, Jude
3. and John says, that he that remains in him, ought even so to walk as he
has walked, 1 John 2.6. So it is evident, that whosoever is in Chirst ought to
walk after him according to his word in all ages, and that he wrote no new
Commandment, and that the old Commandment is the word, which they have heard
from the beginning, verse. 7. So that it is evident, that in the Scriptures are
all the commandments of God, for all the children of men to walk up in till
Christ come in person, who is the bright morning star, Rev. 22.16. for there is
no other Gospel then that which has been preached, Gal. 1.8, 9. So Jesus
Christ, yesterday, to day and the same for ever; therefore, be not carried
about with diverse and strange Doctrines, for it is a good thing that the heart
be established with grace, Heb. 13.8, 9. so I say with Paul (who wrote to
Timothy a little before his death) that the Sciptures are able, to make a man
(wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus, for all Scripture
is given by inspiration spiration of God, and is prositable for doctrine, for
reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God
may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17.

Object. But there is no walking up in these Ordinances, because we cannot see
any so sent of God to preach and work miracles as the Apostles did; and so
there is no Adminstrator of Ordinances, for we do no see the signs following
spoken of, Mark 16.

Answ. That the Lord Jesus does give all power to those that do believe, that
he is the Christ, the Son of the living God, and have through grace willing
hearts to obey him, to preach and to administer all Ordinances, Mat. 16. John
20.21, 22. Yea they are the Church that do believe he is the King to rule them,
and the Priest to make intercession by his blood, speaking better things then
that of Abell, and the alone Prophet, to teach them, they hearing him in all
things, Mat. 17.5. so as to have fellowship, in breaking of bread, and prayer,
Acts 3.22, 23. I say and witness with the Scriptures, that they which believe
with all their hearts, that Jesus is the Christ, and have willing hearts to
obey as aforesaid, may preach and administer all Ordinances, orderly, and so
become a Church, although they do not work Miracles.

Secondly, The Testament is bound up, and the law sealed among Disciples, Isa.
8.16. therefore the Ordinances also, they that continue in the word of Christ,
are his Disciples indeed, and they are the friends of Christ that do whatsoever
he commands them, John 1.14, 31. Chap. 15.14. Now if they have not power to do
his commands, they cannot continue in his word, and so no Disciples, nor
friends; and so being not found in the old way, no rest for their souls: but
the Lord God would have all men obey him and have respect to all his
Commandments, and the Lord Jesus is the Author of eternal salvation to all them
that obey him, Heb. 5.9. Therefore he gives them that do believe, power to walk
up in all his Ordinances.

Thirdly, They that do repent, and believe, and are ready to do all that the
Lord commands by his Son (who speaks in these last times to all men) and so
hearing the voice of Christ, are his sheep, Act 10.33. John 10. from the 4. to
the 17. and so have Christ, which is the substance, in whom all the promises
are yea, and amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. therefore the adminstration of Ordinances, and
all is theirs, 1 Cor. 3.22. as aforesaid.

Fourthly, John the dipper did no miracle, yet all that he spoke was true, John
10 41. and therefore the Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the counsel of God
against themselves, being not baptized of him; so it is plain that it was a
very great evil in any to refuse his Baptism, though he wrought no miracle; so
even so, they that preach the truth according to the word, are not to be
rejected, but received, though they work no miracle, for the Scriptures
speaking to us is as much, if not more, as if a voice from heaven spoke to us,
as it appears, if you mind what Peter says, 2 Pet. 1.18, 19. which shows,
that they heard a voice from heaven, declaring Jesus to be the Son of God; and
yet that we have a more sure word of the Prophets, to the which we shall do
well, if we take heed; yea, we are to mind and keep the commandments of the
Apostles of the Lord and Savior, even unto the last days, when there shall be
mockers, which will walk after their lusts, and say, where is the promise of
his coming? and so forth, Chap 3.2, 3, 4. From all which it is clear and plain,
that the Prophets and Apostles speaking in the Scriptures the commandments of
the Lord, are to be abeyed, as if a voice from heaven spoke to us, and if we do
not, we sin very greivously, though their be no miracles, for the Apostles
writing the commandments of the Lord, it gives us sufficient authority for to
administer Ordinances as aforesaid.

Fifthly, Moses Law being written, they that returned from the captivity of
Babylon walked up in it, though there was no miracle, Ezra 2.63. Chap. 3.4.
Neh. 8.14. No not any Priest that stood up with Vrim and Thummim, neither had
they extraordinary Prophets, for they had not Haggai, nor Zechariah when they
began to build the Temple, as it appears in the 4 of Ezra, compared with the
5. ver. 1, 2. and Hag. 1.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Zech. 1.1. So then the law
written by Moses gave full authority, he being but a servant, Muth more Thrists
Law being written, he being a Son; and heir of all things, we being heirs with
him, as we walk up after the new Covenant, the everlasting Gospel, Romans 8.17.
Gal. 4.30. Rev. 14.6.

Sixthly, Believers in Christ, holding out the Doctrine of Christ, have all
power to preach, and to administer Ordinances, yea, they only are sent of
Christ, for John says, 2 Epistle, 9.10. That he that brings not the Doctrine
of Christ, ought not be received into the house, as a teacher, sent of God, and
that he that abides not in the Doctrine of Christ, has not God; and so he
directech the elect Lady, and her Children, how they shall know who are sent of
God, and they were such as did bring the Doctrine of Christ, and that they
which did not, or do not bring the Doctrine of Christ, are not sent of God; so
then it is not miracles alone that does prove men to be sent of God, but the
Doctrine they bring proves it, it is not miracles proves it, for Antichrist
shall work miracles, 2 These. 2.9. Rev. 13.13, 14. Chap. 16.14. So then it
follows, that they which bring the Doctrine of Christ, are sent by Christ, so
as to preach, and to administer the Ordinances of Christ, whether they work
Miracles or no, they preaching the truth, their Doctrine is to be received; for
the Samaritans believed, when the woman of Samaria declared Christ to them, Jo.
4.39. and Jesus upbraided his Disciples for their unbeleif, when they believed
not them that declared him risen from the dead, Mark 16.14. And Paul rejoices
that Christ was preached, though out of envy, Phil. 1.15, 18. And the
Scriptures are written, that men might believe, Jo. 20.31. So men believing as
it is written, they speak, 2 Cor. 4.13. (For no man lights a candle and
puts it under a bushel, but on a candlestick;) so turning men to
righteousness, they shall shine as the stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3. If
any should say, the Scriptures are not the word of the Lord; J say, that I need
not to bring arguments to prove it to be the word of the Lord, for the
Prophesies that foretell things to come therein, God will bring to pass, so as
men may be convinced of the truth of it.

So having showed you the matter of a Church, and what a Church or congregation
of Christ is, as namely, such as walk up in the Doctrine, or Commandments of
Christ, in singleness of heart, in fellowship, in breaking of bread, and in
prayers, Act. 2.41, 42. And that none ought to have communion in breaking of
Bread, but such as own every Principle in the Doctrine of Christ.

Now the next Ordinance of Christ is Breaking of Bread; Now the manner of
Breaking Bread, is first to take Bread, and to bless it in the name of the
Lord, and then to break it; and also the Wine in the next place, and bless it
also; and then the Congregation are to divide it among them, eating and
drinking of it moderately as a Supper at even, or about the even, having
communion together, discerning the Lords body, for the time we are not to bind
it down to an hour, but it is to answer as unto a supper, 1 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25,
26.

Secondly, We are to bless the Wine before we eat the Bread, in my
understanding, because the Bread being blessed distinct apart from the Cup,
before we eat up the Bread, sets out Christ's Body broken and his Blood shed
before our eyes in the sign; but if we eat up the Bread before we bless the
Cup, then we eat up the Body of Christ in the sign, before we have the Cup, or
Blood in the sign; for it is not the Cup of the new Testament, until it is
blessed, for it is sanctified by the word of God, and set apart by Prayer; yea,
if we eat up the Bread before we bless the Cup, we divide Christ, in our
feeding upon the Bread, before we have the Cup; therefore we ought to bless
the Bread, and break it, and then bless the Cup, and then eat and drink of it,
eying Christ as his Body being broken, and his Blood being shed for our sins;
also take notice, that the order of words does not prove, that the Bread must
be eaten, before the Cup is blessed, for Paul speaks of the Cup first, 1 Cor.
10.16. and Mark says, that when Christ had blessed the cup, he gave it to
them, and they all drank of it, before he notes that Christ declared what it
signified, chap. 14.23, 24. But it does not follow in reason, that they did
drink all of it, before he gave them to understand what the Wine (being set
apart) signified; so it does not follow, though Christ did bless the Bread,
and gave it to his Disciples, and bid them eat, that they did eat, before he
blessed the Cup; but rather the Bread being blessed, be blessed the Cup also,
that they might eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup, discerning the Lords
Body broken, and his Blood shed for remission of sins, 1 Cor. 11.26, 28.

Moreover, it ought to be a Supper with moderation, because it is said to be a
Supper, and a Feast, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. Chapter 11.20. and there is nothing in all the
Scripture, that is said to be a Supper, if there be any eating at all, that is
less then an eating to satisfaction with moderation.

Secondly, There is perfect satisfaction in Jesus the Savior; therefore to eat
to refreshment is the more lively and full.

Object. But it was not a Supper when Christ set it apart, for it was eaten
after the Passover.

Answ. The Lord took them off from eating the Passover before they had done,
for the Scripture says; As they were eating, he took bread and brake it, and
so the Paschal Lamb, and the Bread and Wine together made their Supper, for the
two signs, the Paschal Lamb, and the Bread and Wine, one holding out Christ to
be slain, the other, Christ as slain meet; Christ the substance being there;
but when Christ was slain, the Passover was abolished, no more to be kept; the
Ordinance of Bread and Wine, which is called the Lords Supper, only remains,
and is to be a Supper, as aforesaid; for so it holds out the substance Jesus
excellently; but let every man eat so much of this Bread, and drink of this
Cup, as it may be most helpful unto him, to discern the Lords Body broken, and
his Blood shed for his sins, and the benefits that come, and shall come
thereby; but let every man take heed in the fear of God, that they do not eat
and drink too much, as the Corinthians did, better it would be for to eat, and
drink too little.

Also mind, That there is only Bread and Wine to be eaten at the Lords Supper,
and no feast of other food, for that which Christ and his Disciples did eat
before the Bread and Wine, was the Passover Lamb, as the Scripture says, Mat.
26.18, 19. Mar. 14.12, 16. Lu. 22.13, 15. and Paul makes mention only of Bread
and Wine, in the 10. and 11. of the 1 Cor. and for the love feast that some
talk of to be kept before they eat the Bread and drink the Wine, there is no
such thing written in the Scripture; but there is a feast of charity spoken of,
Jude 12. which is that feast that Christ commands, to call the poor, the
maimed, the lame, the blind, let him that is able, do this singular thing, for
Christ says, he shall be blessed; for the poor cannot recompense him, but he
shall be recompensed at the Resurrection of the Just.

Also mind well, That it is Bread and Wine after it is blessed, not changed
into the Body and Blood of Christ, as the Papists hold, though it be said,
after it is blessed, This is my Body which was broken for you, and my Blood
which was shed for remission of sins; it is so said, because in a figure, or
shadow, it holds forth Christ's Body broken, and his Blood shed for remission
of sins; and so the Passover Lamb did hold out the Lords passing over the
firstborn of Israel; yet is called the Lords Passover, it putting them in mind
of the same, Exodus 12.21, 27. and also the Apostle says, it is Bread and Wine,
after it is blessed, 1 Cor. 11.27, 28. therefore not the real Body and Blood
of Christ; So let a man examine himself, whether he discern the Lords Body
offered up as a Sacrifice for sin, to make an Atonement for him, and that he
be in love and peace with all men; so that in believing he may eat his Flesh,
and drink his Blood, so as that there may be a communion in one body, Christ
being the Head, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup.

Moreover, for the better being of the Congregations of Christ, the Lord Christ
has appointed, and given Overseers, and gifted men, and they are first
Apostles, or Messengers, and Prophets, and Evangelists, and Pastors, and
Teachers, for the Lord Jesus did ascend on high, and gave gifts unto men, for
the gathering together of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the
edification of the body of Christ, till we all meet together in the unity of
the faith, and knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, and unto the
measure of the age of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. 1
Cor. 12.28.

And for the word Apostle, it being Englished is Messenger, for so the word
holds forth, and so it may be translated, and is so, 2 Cor. 8.23. they are to
be chosen by the Congregation out of the Congregation, for so was Matthias
chosen, Acts 1.23, 24, 25, 26. And the Spirit commanded the Church of Antioch,
with the Prophets, to separate Saul and Barnabas, and send them forth, Acts
13.1, 2, 3. And that was the will, and way of God, for after that in Chap.
14.4, 14. they are both called Apostles and not before; and so the Church are
to choose Messengers still, for the gathering the Church, and establishing of
the same; so that they are to go forth to preach the Gospel, that all may know
God in Christ, and own the truth as it is in Jesus.

Also it appears, that Messengers or Apostles, are to be in the Church till
Christ comes, from that in Rev. 18.20. and Ephesians. 4.10, 11, 12, 13. That in
Rev. the 18. shows, that there shall be Apostles to rejoice at the overthrow
of Babylon, or the Whore, and that will be a little before the coming of
Christ; and that in Ephesians. 4. shows, that they are for the gathering together
of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edification of the Body of
Christ, till we all meet together in the unity of the faith, and knowledge of
the Son of God, unto a perfect man, and until the measure of the age of the
fullness of Christ; Until the coming of Christ in person: Therefore Messengers
are to be till Christ come.

Again, If Pastors and Teachers are to abide in the Church, then Messengers, or
Apostles; but Pastors and Teachers are to abide; Therefore Messengers also; for
the Lord ascended up on high, and gave gifts to men, some to be Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers; one gift or office is to continue
as long as the other, that is plain, if you note the Scripture, and that is
till Christ comes, as has been showed before.

Again, if you note the Scriptures you may see, that there were more Apostles
then the twelve, for there was Paul and Barnabas, which were set apart by the
Church of Antioch, and Titus, and others that were Messengers of the Churches,
and the glory of Christ, 2 Cor. 8.23. If they were made Messengers only to
carry the contribution of the Church, how can they be said to be the glory of
Christ? Let the wise judge; they were great Preachers of the Gospel with Paul,
and Titus was left at Crete, to redress the things that remain, and to ordain
Elders, Titus 1.5. Therefore they were not set apart to carry contribution
only, (though they did it upon occasion as Paul did) but for the work of the
Ministry; and Epaphroditus was a Companion in labor, and fellow Soldier with
Paul; and the Messenger of the Church of the Philippians, Phil. 2.25. and the
Church of Ephesus tried some, which said they were Apostles, and found them
liars* Revel. 2.2. Therefore there were many Apostles besides the twelve.

Again, there is very much need (if not as much as ever) of Messengers to
preach the Gospel, and to make out truth to the Nations in these last times;
yea, the Gospel is to be preached to every kindred, tongue and people; in these
last times, for a witness unto all Nations, and then shall the end be, Matthew.
24.14. Rev. 14.6. Therefore Messengers ought to be continued till Christ come;
mistake not, for I do not mean extraordinary Apostles as the twelve, and Paul
and Barnabas, but such as to persuade men to what is written, so to believe and
obey the Gospel.

The way to choose, and set apart Messengers, Elders, and Deacons, it is by
electing them out of their own company, I mean the Church is to choose them by a
free consent (as in part has been showed before) and by fasting, and prayer,
and laying on of hands on them; they are so to be set apart to their several
offices, Acts 1.23, 26. Chap. 6.5, 6. Chap. 14.23. where the word Election is
left out in the new translation, but it is in the old, and cannot be denied to
be in the Greek, the Elders, or Pastors work is to feed the Flock of Christ,
and to take care of the Church, and of every Member thereof, looking up the
Sheep if they go astray, laboring in the work of the Ministry, giving in meat
in due season, Matthew. 24.45. being unto them that believe an ensample in word,
in conversation, in love, in spirit, in zeal, in faith, and in pureness, 1 Timothy
4.12. Acts 20.28. Matthew. 18.12. Not as though they were Lords over Gods
heritage, feeding the Flock, not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy
lucre, but of a ready mind, 1 Pet. 5.2, 3. let them be very diligent and
faithful men in their places, for cursed is he that does the work of the Lord
negligently.

The Deacons office is to look to the poor, and to serve them with all
necessaries, the Church giving them sufficient to do it, Acts 6. for
qualifications of all the Officers; see the 1 Timothy 3. and Titus 1.

The maintenance that the Ministers of the Gospel ought to have, is to be
freely given them, Matthew. 10.8. Gal. 6.6. that is, all things necessary, that
they may be enabled to do the work of the Lord, and they also ought to
endeavor to the uttermost, to make the Gospel without charge, 1 Cor. 9.18.
Acts 20.34, 35. Their Maintenance ought not to be by Tithes, nor no forced
Maintenance.

First, Because the way of Christ is a way of love, no duty is available, but
that which is done in love, 1 Cor. 13. Gal. 5.6.

Secondly, The Priesthood being changed, therefore of necessity the Law, Hebr.
7.4.10.13.

Thirdly, The Levites had no lot nor inheritance in the Land of Canaan, Deuteronomy.
14.27. and their work and labor of body was great about the Sacrifices, and
taught the people also, 2 Chronicles. 35, 11, 12, 13, 14. And therefore the Lord
gave them Tithes, yet they were to give to the fatherless, and stranger, and
widow, a part of their Tithes; Therefore the Ministers of the Gospel being not
Levites, neither have the Christians a Canaan to divide by lot, for they are
not twelve Tribes springing from one man, neither are the Ministers of the
Gospel the hundred part of the Nations, neither has the Lord Jesus given them
Tithes; Therefore they that take Tithes wrong their own souls, in doing that
which is unlawful.

Fourthly, They that take Tithes, or force it to be paid, destroy or make void
the Law of Christ, which is a Law of love; for forced service cannot be in
love; therefore the Ministers of the Gospel, have received a gift to preach,
and freely received, freely give, Matthew. 10.8. Romans 12.6. Ephesians. 4.8, 11. And
Christians truly knowing their duties, will freely give unto them of their
goods, Gal. 6.6. or set before them that they need, Luke 10.7.

Fifthly, They that take Tithes bring in the service of the Law, which is done
away, 2 Cor. 3.11. and the Levitical Priesthood which is changed, Heb. 5.6, 12.
and so deny Christ come in the flesh; and forced maintenance, brings in
compelled service, which is abhorred by God, and good men; therefore Tithes,
nor any forced Maintenance, is not the Maintenance of the Ministers of the
Gospel, neither let any man say, that the Magistrate has power to force men to
pay Tithes, from that of Christ, Matthew. 17.27. and from that of Paul, that we
are to pay custom, to whom custom belongs; I say, that in all civil things,
we ought so to do, and rather then to offend, to pay upon a civil account,
though it be not due as Christ did; but when it is required upon a spiritual
account, as Tithes, or any forced maintenance for Ministers, we may and ought
to refuse to pay, and the Magistrate sins against God, if he force men to pay
it; for the Magistrate, as a Magistrate, has not, nor never had power to judge
in spiritual cases, Luke 22.25, 26. for that is by the Lord given to the
Church, Mat. 18.17, 18. and he, as a Member of the Church, has power to judge,
as every Member has, and no more; but more of this in another place.

Also, take notice of that Ordinance of Christ, of washing the Saints feet, it
is commanded by Christ, and a blessing promised to them that do it, Exodus
13.14, 15, 16, 17. and therefore it ought to be done, and it sets out
Christ's humility, and puts us in mind of the same; so declaring that the ways
of Christ are self-denying ways; and this is a self-denying thing, and
therefore serves to humble the creature, and to beget familiarity, and love
one with another, it being done decently and in order.

Also, as James says, Is any among you afflicted, let him pray, is any merry,
let him sing, is any sick among you, let him call for the Elders of the Church;
and let them pray for him, and anoint him with oil in the name of the Lord; and
the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and
if he have committed sin it shall be forgiven him; Acknowledge your faults one
to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed; for the prayer of
a righteous man avails much, if it be fervent, James 5.13, 14, 15, 16, 17,
18. Mar. 6.13. You may see there is faith required in the actors in this
Ordinance, and agreement, and then the Lord will make good his promise; for he
is faithful and cannot deny himself.

Also Prayer with Fasting is a duty for the whole Church, Isa. 58. Luke 5.33,
35. Act. 14.23. especially for every Saint in private, entering into the
Closet, or some secret place, that he be not seen of men, Mat. 6.5, 6, 16, 17,
18. Let every child of God be often in this duty, 2 Cor. 6.5. he will profit
very much thereby, they that neglect this duty, will not stand, or very hardly
stand in these last times; the Lord put all his people upon this duty, that we
may be able through grace to stand before the Son of Man, Luke 21.36.

Also, the way to deal with Members of the Church if they sin against God, is
as follows.

First, if it be a private trespass, he that trespasseth is to be told of it,
as in Mat. 18.15. And if he repent he is to be forgiven, Luke 17.3. for we
ought to be like our heavenly Father, and if he hear not, he that is trespassed
against, is to call (...) with him, one or two more as in Mat. (...) 16. But if
he hear not, then tell it to the Church, and if he hear the Church, she is also
to forgive him, 2 Cor. 2.7. but if he refuse to hear the Church, let him be
unto the Church as a Heathen man, and a Publican; Also note, he that sins
privately is speedily to be brought to the Church; the next Church meeting
after he has sinned if possible.

First, because we are not to suffer sin upon our brother, but plainly to
rebuke him, Levit. 19.17.

Secondly, because he may not pray, that does not confess his sin, and be
reconciled to his Brother, for if he bring his gift to the Altar, Christ, and
remember that his brother has ought against him, let him not offer it, but
first be reconciled to his Brother, Math. 5.23, 24. Heb. 13.10.

Further I say, he must be brought to the Church the next meeting, for else the
Church will have communion with him that lies in his sin, and he will be in
fault, that brings him not orderly to the Church.

Also they that sin openly, are to be rebuked before all, that others also may
fear, 1 Timothy 5.20. And so Paul blamed Peter before all men, Gal. 2.11, 14. And
he that is admonished by the Church, and does not hear the Church, is to be
delivered to Satan, and so to withdraw from him; yea, not to have so much
company as to eat common food; and so the Apostle exhorts and commands the
Corinthians, to deliver the Fornicator that had his Fathers wife; And if any
man that is called a Brother, be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or Idolater, or
Railer, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such a one eat not, 1 Cor. 5.3,
10, 11. And so he commands the Thessalonians, in the name of the Lord Jesus, to
withdraw from every brother that walks disorderly, and not after the
instructions, which they received of him; and if any man obey not their
sayings, that they should note him by letter, and have no Company with him,
that he may be ashamed; yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a
Brother, 2 These. 3.6, 14, 15.

So it is plain, that they that sin, and will not hear the Church when they are
brought before them, so as to confess their sin, and turn from it, yea, to
make restitution if they be able, if they hear not, the Church is to deliver to
Satan, or to withdraw from him, or them, and then to admonish him two or three
times solemnly, and in the fear of God, not counting him as an enemy, but
admonishing him as a brother, with all long suffering; and if he then neglect
to hear the Church, she is to reject him, and to let him be as a Heathen man,
and a Publican; and a man being so rejected, or so cut off, I do not see how he
can repent, yea, I am very much persuaded, that he will never repent.

I say, the Church must admonish two or three times, before she do reject or
cut off, because she ought to be like her heavenly father, merciful as he is
meriful, and long suffering.

Again, he that is an Heretic, ought to have the first, and second admonition,
before he is rejected; therefore all other ought to have two or three
admonitions before any are rejected, or cut off, Titus 3.10.

Also I say, that the man that is under dealing, being three times wisely, and
seriously admonished by the Church, and rejected; I do not see how he can
repent: First, because whatsoever the Church binds on earth, shall be bound in
heaven, and whatsoever they loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven; now a
man being once alive through believing, and then through sin, become as a
heathen and a Publican, or as a dead man, and so bound, how can he live again,
except a man twice dead may live again, Jude 12.

Secondly, No man cutteth a natural member from a natural body, except it be
rotten, and so endanger the whole body; even so also, in the spiritual body,
the Church is to cut off them that will endanger the whole body, so as to carry
them to hell, Mat. 18.8, 9. So a member of a natural body being cut off, cannot
be set on again; so when a Church has rejected, or cut off a member, how can
it be received in again.

Thirdly, If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema
Maranatha, had in execration, yea excommunicate to death, 1 Cor. 16.22. or as
some translation reads it, that the meaning of the word may be this, let him be
accurssed even to the coming of the Lord; that is to say, to his deaths day,
even for ever; now he that loves not the Lord, is he that keeps not his
commandments, or his sayings, John 14.15, 23. and he that sins, and will not
hear the Church, being so often admonished, as the Lord has appointed in his
word, does not keep the saying of Christ, and so loves not the Lord; therefore
is to be rejected or excommunicated unto death, till the Lord come; so
according to that in Prove. 29.1. he that being often reproved, hardneth his
neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy.

Also mind well, that the power to judge differences, and to deal with
Members, lies in the Body, the Church, not in the Officers destinct a part
from the Church; This will plainly appear.

First, because the Lord commands, Mat. 18.17. That the offender, and his
offense, be brought to the Church, that they may judge it; now the company of
Elders are not the Church, 1 Cor. 1.2. Therefore they have not the power apart
from the Church.

Secondly, the Apostle writing to the Church of the Corinthians, commands them
when they are gathered together in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, by the
power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver the Fornicatour (that had his
fathers wife) to Satan, 1 Cor. 5. to the 6. Mark, he does not command the
Elders to do it, but the Congregation, being gathered together to do it;
therefore the power lies not in the Elders alone, but in the Congregation.

Thirdly, The Lord Christ says, that they which are accounted to rule over the
Gentiles, exercise Lordship over them; and their great ones exercise authority
upon them, but it shall not be so among you, but whosoever will be great among
you, shall be your servant, and whosoever will be chief of you, shall be
servant of all, Mark 10.42, 43, 44. And therefore the Elders who are the chief
servants, are not to exercise Lordship over their Brethen, therefore not to
rule without the Body, the Church, for if they should rule without the Body, it
would be like that evil that Solomon spoke of, Eccl. 10.7. Servants upon
horses, and Princes walking as servants upon the earth; and so indeed it has
been, and is where the Pope, and Lord Bishops, and Presbytery has the power,
they make the members of their National, Generational way, slaves to serve with
great burdens, and many of them are very ignorant.

But although it be so, that the power lies in every particular Body, the
Church, to govern according to the word of Christ, yet understand that with
consent the Elders, and Messengers are to rule in love, and are to be obeyed,
by every particular member, they exhorting and commanding duty, and declaring
the sense of the Church, according to the word of Christ, Heb. 13.7, 17. and
also, the Body, the Church, may command the Elders, or Pastors, and
Messengers, to look to their Ministry, which they have received in the Lord,
that they fulfill it, Col. 4.17. And also note, it is good and safe for a
particular Church, in things of high concernment, to call for, or desire help
from sister Churches, and so Messengers who are to take care of all Churches,
in an especial manner, are to go in such cases, Act. 15.

Quest. Has not the Magistrates power in the Church, to set apart her
Officers, and to punish Offenders as he sees good, yea, with death if he
please.

Answ. No, for Christ has not said any where that he should so do, now if
Christ have not said it, nor it be not in the Law and Testament, as it is not,
it may not be, Isa. 8.20. Heb. 1.5. Nay, for the Magistrate to set apart
Officers in the Church, crosses the Law of Christ, which is, that the Church,
by a free choice, should set them apart as it has been showed before.

Again, Magistrates may not punish offenders, as in point of conscience, for
Christ commands the contrary, Mat. 13.30, 38. For there he says, that the
children of the kingdom, and the children of the wicked one, shall both grow
together in the field of the world, till the end; yea, the Jews that blaspeme
against Christ, are to be suffered, for they are beloved of God, for their
fathers sake, though they be enemies to the Gospel, Romans 11.28. and when the
fullness of the Gentiles is come in, all Israel shall be saved, as it is
written, ver. 25, 26. So then the Jews be to have liberty, that is plain,
therefore all ought to have liberty of conscience, that is as plain.

So then the Magistrate has not any power in the Church, more then any other
member, but the power lies in the whole Church, to cast out offenders, as has
been showed; but in all civil affairs, as all sins against the second Table,
yea in all things that be civil, that helongs to the Commonwealth, the
Magistrate is supreme, and the whole Church is to obey him, and honor him, as
the supreme in every civil thing, for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 15.
paying custom to whom custom belongs, and tribute as he, or they has and
does appoint, Mat. 22.21. Romans 13. from ver 1. to 10. Yea, let them not dispute
who is Chief Magistrate, no not by any means, by war, but rather submit to the
chief Magistrate in being, in every Nation.

So then from all this that has been said, it does appear and that very
clearly, yea most excellently from the Scriptures of truth, that God is a God
of love and mercy, and is long suffering, and the riches of his goodness, and
bounty does abound most freely, and graciously, toward all men, and would have
none perish, but would have all come to the knowledge of the truth, and be
saved: and that the way of Christ is a way of love, in that he laid down his
life for all men, yea though they were and are enemies, he tenders the word of
the Gospel, even glad tidings of peace, beseeching by himself, and by his
servants, (though they do abuse them) to be reconciled to God; O how meek, and
lowly in heart was the Lord Jesus? how does his love, and goodness appear, in
that he being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with him,
made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant; and
was made in the likeness of man, and being found in the fashion of a man, he
humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross;
And so the Lord of life and Glory, by whom all things were created, beseeches
the creature, to be reconciled to God, and so to obey him in love, and walk up
in the way of the Gospel, which is a way of love; for the love of God being
spread abroad in the heart, men having from the God of love received gifts, the
love of Christ constrains to preach the Gospel, and to feed the flock of
Christ, and to seek up them that go astray; and the Saints in love minister and
communicate unto them what they want, and so Ministers are chosen in love, and
their Doctrine is heard in love, and received in love, and the poor relieved in
love, and them that sin are dealt with in love, and their meetings of the
Church, and feasts are in love, and their Communion in Breaking of Bread is in
love, and so al duty is to be done (without murmurings, and disputings) in
love, and so Faith in Christ is available working by love; and so the children
of God receive the kingdom as a reward in love, given by the God of love; so
all the way of Christ is a way of love, and his word is the Doctrine of love;
So let all the Saints conclude with the Spouse, his mouth is most sweet, yea,
he is altogether lovely, Cant. 5.16. And so this way of love, which is the good
old way of the Gospel, was of old at first confirmed by signs, and wonders, and
with diverse miracles and gifts of the holy Ghost, according to his own will,
Heb. 2.4. Therefore let every man in the fear of God walk therein, and they
shall find rest for their Souls, Jer. 6.16. Yea, let every member of the Church
of Christ, put on the whole Armor of God, having their loins girt about with
truth, and their feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace; and
praying always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching
thereunto with all perseverance, Ephesians. 5.13, 14.15, 16, 17, 18. O that every one
would lay it to heart, and with fear and trembling, work out their Salvation;
for in these last days, will be perrilous times, 2 Timothy 3.1. and many that
have tasted of the good word of God, and been enlightened, so as to believe the
truth, will fall away from grace; yea, from the true faith, so as that eternal
death will be their portion; yea, some have fallen from the faith, therefore it
is no new thing.

First, the warnings in Scripture proves this, exhorting men to take heed that
they do not fall away from the grace of God, Heb. 12.15. and these warnings and
exhortations are given to such as have received the truth, so as to believe, as
it appears, Heb. 2.1. 1 Cor 10. from 6. to 12. Heb. 3.12. reads it thus, Take
heed Brethren, least at any time there be in any of you, an evil heart, and
unfaithful, to depart away from the living God, Heb. 4.1. 2 Pet. 1.5. Chap.
3.1, 2, 3. Jude 3. Rev. 3.2, 3. All these are warnings given in Scripture, and
very many more might be brought, which exhort men to take heed that they do not
depart from the truth, which would be in vain, 2 Cor. 6.1. if men could not
fall away, therefore they may, 1 These. 3.5.

Secondly, Threatenings, if any do fall away prove this, Rev. 2.21, 22, 23.
Hebr. 10.26. reads it thus, If we sin willingly, after that we have received
the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for sin: and
chap. 6.4, 5, 6. is very full to this purpose, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21. For if after
they have escaped the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of the
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome,
the latter end is worse with them then the beginning; for it had been better
for them not to have known the way of righteousness, then after they have known
it, to turn fom the holy commandment delivered unto them, Rev. 3.3. Ezekiel.
18.26. you may read also, which plainly proves this point.

Thirdly, This appears by examples in Scriptrue of some that did fall away from
the truth; yea, from the true faith, as Judas, Matthew. 26.25. Acts 1.17, 18. and
Demas, 2 Timothy 4.10. and Balaam who spoke excellent things by the help of the
Spirit of God, as the other Prophets of the Lord, Numb. 24. Jude 11, 12. and
some making shipwreck of faith and a good conscience, 1 Timothy 1.19. and Hymeneus
and Phyletus, who concerning the truth have erred, saying, the resurrection is
past already, and overthrow the faith of some, 2 Timothy 2.17, 18.

Fourthly, The Scripture speaking prophetically, faith expressly, That in the
latter times some shall depart from the Faith, 1 Timothy 4.1. and 2 Timothy 4.3, 4.
and 2 These. 2.10. 2 Pet. 2.1. Jud. 14, 15, 16. All these Scriptures do foretell
of some, yea, many in the latter times shall fall away, so as to depart from
the faith, and give heed to Doctrines of Devils, and shall privily bring in
damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them; and many more places
might be brought for this purpose.

Fifthly, The Metaphors, and Proverbs in Scripture proves this also, as Prove.
26.11. Mat. 5.13. Mark 9.49, 50. and Mat. 12.43, 44. and 2 Pet. 2.20, 21. that
in Peter shows, that they which have been freed of their vomit, and have been
washed, yet turned as a Dog to it again, as a Dog to the vomit again, and the
Sow to the wallowing in the mire.

Sixthly, if this were not so, no man could sin against the Spirit, nor none
could be Reprobates, for the sin against the Spirit, is a sin of knowledge, and
against the conscience, they do that which they are convinced they ought not to
do, as it appears, Mark 3.22, to 31. compared with John 7.20, 28. And also no
man can be a Reprobate, except he have known the truth, or sinned willingly
against that he knows, as it appears, Romans 1.28. 2 Cor. 13.5. 2 Timothy 3.8.

Object. But it is but a seeming faith they fall from as the Scripture says,
Luke 8.18. That shall be taken from him, which he seems to have.

Answ. That if it be but a seeming faith, then they do well in falling from it,
but Paul says to Timothy, 1 Timothy 1.19. That some did make Shipwreck of Faith,
and a good conscience; and he exhorts Timothy, to abide in that faith, which
others have made Shipwreck of; And for that in Luke 8. the sense of it is, that
they that do enjoy the light, or talent, that is given them, so as to hear the
truth, and seem to make a good use of it, but do it not, I say, God will take
away that Talent, or light, because he seems to improve it, but does it not;
that this is so, it will appear if you compare Luke 8.16, 17, 18. with Mat.
13.12. and Chap. 25. from verse. 24. to 30.

Object. But Paul says, that he is persuaded, That neither Death, nor Life,
nor Angels, nor things present, nor things to come, nor any things could
separate him from the love of God; also, he demands, Who shall lay any thing to
the charge of Gods Elect? for God Justifies, Romans 8.

Answ. Paul as he is a believer is parswaded, that nothing shall be able to
separate him from the love of God, which is in Christ, and so are all true
believers persuaded; but if they depart from the faith, nay if they do not go
on adding to their faith virtue, and knowledge, etc. as it is 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7.
they lose that persuasion, as Paul acknowledges, that he himself might become
a castaway, if he kept not his body under subjection, 1 Cor. 9.29. It is true
none can lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect, for God does and will
justify; but there is no man or woman Elected, but in and through believing, 2
These. 2.13. as it has been showed, and will appear if you mind the Scriptures,
for the Apostle tells the Ephesians, that they were Elected, yet the Lord Jesus
says to them, Rev. 25. that if they do not their first works, he would remove
their candlestick; and John exhorts the Elect Lady, and her children, to look
to themselves, that they lose not those things they have gained, but that they
receive a full reward, 2 John 8. And so he that continues in the faith to the
end, he shall be saved; for the just shall live by faith, Heb. 10.38. But if
any draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him.

Object. But it is impossible to deceive the very Elect, therefore men cannot
fall from the true faith, Mat. 24.24.

Answ. Christ speaks of such, as make their calling and election sure, by
adding to their faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge
temperance, and to temperance patience, etc. abounding in the bringing forth of
fruit, giving all diligence to continue therein, according to 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11. they that do so shall never fall, for the Lord God will give
grace, and deliver them from the evil of temptation, making a way to escape,
that they may be able to bear it; and so there is no condemnation to them that
walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit; and so none can lay any thing
to those that so through Grace persevere to the end, God justifies them, who
can condemn them? yea, an entrance shall be ministered unto them abundantly into
the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord, Psalm. 84.11. 1 Cor. 10.13. Romans 8. But,

Further observe, that such as have believed the Truth, and do run well, are
called, The elect of God, 1 John 1.8. and are written for Heaven, in the Book
of Life (which is the New Testament) if they go on, adding as aforesaid; but if
they turn again to folly, and so turn from the holy Commandment, and so come
to be dead, yea, twice dead, their names are blotted out of the Book of Life,
Gal. 5.7. Exodus 32.33. Rev. 3.5. chap. 22.19. and this will be fulfilled upon
many in these last days; for Christ says, That false Christ's, and false
Prophets shall arise, and deceive many, Matthew. 24.5, 11. Now if they were not
in the way to life, they could not be deceived, for they cannot be deceived and
led out of the way, which were never in it; so then this is the way of the new
Covenant, they that through grace walk up after it, are written for life, and
them that do not abide in the truth of it, are written for death, for the Lord
will be with men, while they be with him, but if they forsake him, he will
forsake them, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. John 15.2, 10. So men are elected in Christ
through believing the truth, but they that depart from the faith depart from
their election, and choice, for God has chosen the godly man for himself, not
persons simply, but godly persons, and decreed to save them that so make use of
his Grace, so as to hold fast their confidence to the end, Hebr. 3.6. and no
other.

Object. But the gifts and calling of God are without repentance, Romans 11.29.

Answ. It is true, For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting
life, John 3.16. And while we were yet sinners Christ died for us, Romans 5.8. So
that God gave his Son freely for the world, and so he calls men freely to
believe, that Christ died for them, and gives time and space to all to hear,
and repent, and this he does, whether men believe, and repent, or no; so it is
Christ's death that makes the peace with God, but it is made out by Faith, Romans
4.16. And so eternal life is the gift of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
for in and through Christ's death, comes forth the glad tidings of Peace, and so
by him are all things, 1 Cor. 8.6. for in him we live, and move, and have our
being, and by Christ's death we are saved alive, and are made able to believe;
so that justification is not of works, but merely of grace; yet understand,
that Scripture in Romans 11.29, speaks of the house of Israel, how that the Lord
God has decreed to call the Jews, and the whole House of Israel, and make them
one Nation, and a glorious People, and of this he will not repent.

But for the clearing up of this, understand, that when the fullness of the
Gentiles is come in, then the Deliverer shall come to Sion, and shall turn away
ungodliness from Jacob, Isai. 59.20. Romans 11.26. Christ the Redeemer shall
come, and gather the outcast of Israel, and the dispersed of Judah from the
four corners of the earth, Isai. 11.12. And make the two Nations, of Israel,
one Nation, neither shall they be divided into two Kingdoms any more at all,
Ezekiel. 37.22. And perform the good thing to Israel, even the new Covenant,
according to that in Jer. 31. Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I
will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah,
not according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers, when I took them
by the hand, to bring them out of the Land of Egypt, (which my Covenant they
brake, although I was an Husband unto them) says the Lord: But this shall be
the Covenant, that I will make with the house of Israel after those days,
says the Lord; I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people; and they shall not
teach every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, know the Lord,
for all shall know me, from the least of them to the greatest of them, says
the Lord; for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no
more. And so a Nation, even all them that remain of Israel, shall be born at
once, and so all Israel shall be saved, Isai. 66.8, 9, 10. Romans 11.26, 27, 28,
29, 30, 31, 32.

Object. But if any should say, That these Scriptures were made good unto
Israel, when they returned from the Captivity of Babylon.

Answ. That cannot be, because both the Houses of Israel returned not at that
time, and so could not be made one Nation; but when these Promises are made
good, the two Nations are made one, and shall abide so forever, and shall be
moved no more at all out of their own Land, Jer. 31.40. Consider well the 37.
of Ezekiel, especially from the 16. verse, to the end.

Also it cannot be, that these Scriptures can be fulfilled in the conversion of
the Gentiles, they being so made Jews, for these Promises are made to the House
of Israel, and the House of Judah, and the converted Gentiles are not called
the House of Israel, and the House of Judah, in no place of Scripture.

Thirdly, These things that are here promised to Israel, and Judah, cannot be
made good to the Gentiles, because the fullness of the Gentiles is to be come
in, when these things shall be made good to Israel, Romans 11.25. There the
Apostle shows, that he would not have us ignorant of this Mystery, (least we
should be wise in our own conceits) that blindness in part is happened to
Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in, and so all Israel shall
be saved, as it is written.

Fourthly, These Scriptures in the 11 of Isa. 11. to the end, and chap. 59.20,
21. chap. 66.8, 9, 10. and Jer. 31. and Ezekiel. 37. and the Covenant in this
place spoken of, does belong to the house of Israel, and the house of Judah,
and that will plainly appear, if you note well those Scriptures mentioned, for
Paul shows us in the 11. of the Romans; All Israel shall be saved, as it is
written, There shall come out of Sion the Delieverer, and shall turn away
ungodliness from Jacob; for this is my Covenant unto them, when I shall take
away their sins. So the Apostle speaking of the 59 of Isai. the.20. applying it
only to the house of Israel, and that the Covenant of the Lord is to them; so
as to take away their sins; yea it is plain, that he speaks of the house of
Israel after the flesh, because he says, as concerning the Gospel they are
Enemies for your sakes, but as touching the Election, they are beloved for the
fathers sake; so you may see as concerning the Gospel, they are Enemies, but as
touching the Election they are beloved for the Fathers sakes; that is, for
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob sakes, for the Lords Covenant is with them, and so
they are chosen, yea he speaks of them which should come of them, which then were
concluded in unbelief, ver. 32. which was the Jews; therefore he speaks not of
the Converted Gentiles, but of the house of Israel according to the flesh, for
the gifts and callings of God are without repentance, verse. 33. So I say, the
Lord God has determined to call Israel, and of this he will never repent.

Again, this does further appear, that God will call again Israel after the
flesh, and teach them according to the new Covenant, so they shall know him and
worship him in spirit and in truth; for Zechariah says, Thus says the Lord of
Hosts, it shall yet come to pass, that there shall come people, and the
Inhabitants of many Cities; and the Inhabitants of one City, shall go to
another; saying, let us go speedly to pray before the Lord, and to seek the
Lord of Hosts, I will go also; Yea many People, and strong Nations, shall come
to seek the Lord of Hosts, in Jerusalem, and to pray before the Lord; Thus
says the Lord of Hosts, in those days, it shall come to pass, that ten men
shall take hold out of all Languages of the Nations; even shall take hold of
the the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, we will go with you, for we have
heard that God is with you, Zech. 8.20, 21, 22, 23. And Micah faith, in the
last days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of the house of the Lord
shall be established in the top of the mountains, and it shall be exalted above
the hills, and people shall flow unto it. And many Nations shall come and say,
come and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God
of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths; for
the Law shall go forth of Sion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem, Chap.
4.1, 2. But now men say, that these Scriptures were fulfilled when Judah
retured from Babylon, for the Jews after their return from Babylon never
enjoyed such things unto this day; (search and see) and these Scriptures say,
that they shall be fulfilled in the last days; and the Scriptures do not call
them the last days that were before Christ came in the flesh; therefore not
fulfilled; but before the house of Israel shall be called so as to believe the
Gospel, as it has been showed, the Gospel of the king dome must be preached in
all the world, for a witness unto all Nations, Mat. 24.14. according to Revel.
14.6. And I saw another Angel fly in the midst of Heaven, having the
everlasting Gospel to preach unto them, that dwell on the earth; and to every
Nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people; And this must be a little before,
and in the time of the fall of the Whore of Babylon, and the rising of the man
of sin, the Antichrist, as appears in verse. the 8, 9. And to this agrees,
Mark 13.10. The Gospel must first be preached among all Nations; compared with
Mat. 24.14. and then the end shall be; So the Gospel a little before the end
shall be preached in the pure way thereof to all Nations; so the fullness of the
Gentiles shall come in: But it does and will so come to pass, that now in this
last of the last days, the Gospel that is and shall be preached in the pure
way thereof, and the Whore of Babylon falling, that the spirit of Antichrist
does and will more and more appear, and the Antichrist, the Man of Sin will
come forth, whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power, and
signs, and lying wonders, 2. These. 2. for the Antichrist or Man of Sin, is not
the Whore of Babylon; and for the right understanding of this truth, mark well
these seven Particulars.

1. First, Who is this great Whore of Babylon, and where her chief seat has
been, and is?

2. Secondly, Her fall and the means, how and by whom?

3. Thirdly, What is the spirit of Antichrist, and who has that spirit?

4. Fourthly, That the Antichrist will be a single person.

5. Fifthly, The manner of his rising, and when?

6. Sixthly, Some of the great things he will do.

7. Lastly, His fall, when, and by whom?

Of these things in order:

But first I freely confess* That many honest men, fearing God in those latter
times, have been mistaken in saying, that the Romish Whore of Babylon is the
Antichrist that the Scripture speaks of; but men may see in this latter part of
the last time, with a diligent and serious search of the Scriptures, through
grace, that the great Whore of Babylon is not the Antichrist; And it being so,
that God having showed it me through the Scriptures, I being not accounted of
in the world, knowing that God does great things by them that are not esteemed
among men, that no flesh should glory, etc. And considering, that this which I
do in this work may be seasonable, and for much profit to the People of God,
and for the praise and glory of God; I shall show in brief, that the Whore is
not the Antichrist: And for the clearing up of this truth.

First, you may see who this great Whore of Babylon is, by noting her chief
seat where it is, and that is at Rome, for John says, Rev. 17. That the great
Whore of Babylon, which sits upon many Waters, is that City which reigns
over the Kings of the earth; now Rome only was the chief City, and reigned over
the Kings of the earth, when John wrote the Revelation; for when Christ was
born, Augustus Caesar taxed all the world, Luke 2.1, 2, 3. And when Paul appeals
to Caesar, they send him to Rome, Acts 25.11. Chap. 27.1. and 28.16. So it is
plain by these Scriptures and many more, that when John wrote the Revelation,
that Rome reigned over the kings of the earth; therefore the chief seat of this
Woman the great Whore, the Mother of Whoredoms, is the City of Rome: so then
the Pope and his Cardinals, Bishops, with the rest of the Clergy, (as they call
themselves) and all Ministers that have Ordination from them immediately, or by
succession, which stand in a National way, is the Whore that sits upon many
Waters; which is People, and Multitudes, and Nations, and tongues, Rev. 17.15.

Secondly, The Church of Rome, and all National standing, is truly said to be
Whorish, because she brings in members, and accounts them of the Body or
Church of Christ by Generation, and so makes her Church National; whereas the
Church of Christ is by Regeneration, or new birth, Titus 3.5. And so not
National nor Dependant, but particular, or Independent.

Thirdly, This appears fully, that the Church of Rome is a Mother of Harlots,
and all National Churches that spring from her, are Whorish, and so are her
daughters because she baptiseth or springleth upon a fleshly account, and so
accounts of her Members in a fleshly way by generation, and so brings in
Infants in a lineal way, bringing in the old covenant in a confused manner, and
so receives false seed, and so knows her members, and her children in a
fleshly way, contrary to the express way of Christ, as Paul shows, Romans 9.8.
says he, They which are the children of the flesh are not the children of God,
but the children of the promise are counted for the seed. And 2 Cor. 5.15, 16,
17. he shows, that since the death of Christ, Henceforth know we no man after
the flesh, yea though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth
know we him no more; therefore if any man be in Christ he is a new creature;
old things are passed away, behold all things are become new.

Fourthly, The Church of Rome, the Lord Bishops, and Presbyters which spring
from her, for they hold their Ordination which they had of her, and their
Infant Baptism which the Church of Rome administered to them, and so show
themselves to be Whorish; they have forsaken the Lord Jesus Christ, (the Head)
and his ways, and have gone a whoring after their own inventions, as Israel
did, Psalm. 106.39. For the Lord Jesus ascended up on high, and gave gifts to
men; and so sends forth a Ministry by gifts, for the gathering together of the
Saints, for the work of the ministry, and for edification of the body of
Christ, till we all meet together in the unity of the faith, and the knowledge
of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, etc. Ephesians. 4.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. But
this Harlot contrariwise brings up her Ministry to humane learning, in sending
them to the Universities, and there they learn Philosophy from Aristotle, a
Heathen Author; and such like, and for them that are gifted by the Lord, if
they preach, she forbids them. But on the contrary, note also, that the
Ministers of Christ ministering by gift, Romans 12.6, 7. being qualified according
to this, 1 Timothy 3. and Titus 1. and approved by the Congregation of the Lord,
they are Chosen by them, and Ordained, and so made Bishops, or Elders, Acts
1.21. to the end, chap. 6.3. and 14.23. But this Harlot makes her Ministers, or
rather Lords, without the consent of her Parishes, and forces them in upon
them whether they will or no, and so her Maintetenance is by Tithes forced from
men, bringing in the old Priesthood; yea, in the time of the Law they did not
imprison men, if they did not pay their Tithes that we find, and yet she does;
and so this Romish Harlot has made all Nations drunk with the wine of her
fornication; her Children are children of fornication, according to the flesh
by generation, a carnal seed consisting of Parishes, many of which consist of
Swearers, Liars, Drunkards, Whoremongers, and such like; and a humane carnal
ministry forced upon the people, and forced maintenance, and also her poor is
maintained by force, and forcing men to worship with her, or else Fines,
imprisonment, Banishment, or Death must be their portion; and also she has
changed the Ordinances, and the manner of administering them, and the subject,
and so her way is not the way of love, and so not the way of Christ, and yet
she says in her heart and word, I am, and there is none else, I sit being a
Queen, and am no Widow, and shall see no sorrow; and so let every one weigh
well what is said, that the Saints at Rome were once famous, Romans 1.8. but in
time they departed from their espoused Christ the Lord, and so came to change
the Ordinances; and yet she pretends to be the Spouse of Christ, having a show
of all the Ordinances, or the names of them, for Believers baptism, she has
Infants sprinkling, and for Laying on of Hands, she has Confirmation, or
Bishoping, but the Presbyters have left this out, and in this they are nearer
Antichrist then the Lord Bishops; and for Breaking of Bread, or the Lords
Supper, that is in part ministered unto the People, or Parish, and so to the
wrong subject, being not penitent, nor baptized persons; and instead of the
true Call to her Ministry, she has a humane way as has been showed, which is
not mentioned in Scripture; and so Tithes and forced Maintenance, instead of
that which is by free gift; and instead of singing with the Spirit, and with
the understanding also, 1 Cor. 14.15. she has singing in Rhyme, in a carnal
formal way, many together without understanding, the Psalms being collected
into English meeter, by Tho. Sternhold, John Hopkins, and others; and so she
has a glorious show, and a golden cup, and through the Popes supremacy, and
the Peter Pence, and prayer to Saints, and doctrine of Purgatory, and such like
trumpery, the Clergy is very rich, proud and covetous; and thus all may see the
way of the Whore is National, Generational, Fleshly, Carnal, Humane, after men's
traditions; thus she goes a whoring after her own inventions; and so you have
a brief discovery of the Whore of Babylon, which is the Mother of National
Churches, her Daughters, and abominations of the earth, and is drunken with the
blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, Rev. 17.5, 6.
and that is and will be the cause of her fall, and that brings me to the second
thing, even the fall of this Whore of Babylon, and the manner how and by whom;
and for the clearing up of this;

First, consider that this Woman sits upon a scarlet colloured Beast, full of
the names of blasphemy, which had seven heads and ten horns, Rev. 17.3. Now
note, that five of them heads, or kings were fallen, when John wrote the
Revelation, and the sixth was then in being, verse. 9, 10. Now this Woman the
Harlot, was to sit upon the sixth head, and has so done a long time, and so the
beast that had seven Heads carries her and bears her up, forth Magistrates
have supported her all along; understand also, that the fixed Head of the Beast
has reigned ever since the writing of the Revelation, but now is partly strong
and partly broken; and that the sixth Head is not fallen, is plain if you note
well, for the seventh Head when he comes, he must continue a short space; now
that head of the Roman Monarthy which is in being, has continued long, even
from before the birth of Christ; for Rome was governed by Emperors before the
birth of Christ, Lnke 2.1. and the imperial power stands yet, though it be
translated into Germany; therefore the Imperial Head cannot be the seventh
Head, because that has continued long; and that the seventh Head continues
but a short space, note, Rev. 17.10. Five are fallen, and one is, and another
is not yet come, and when he comes, he must continue a short space; Also mark
well, that the power of the Pope and his Clergy, cannot be the seventh Head,
for they have continued long.

Secondly, the Whore cannot be any of the Heads of the Beast, because she sits
upon, and is carried by the Beast that has seven Heads, and ten Horns, so she
causes the Beast to serve her, and makes the Beasts and the Kings of the
earth slaves to her, to do her will; so then the sixth Head of the Roman power
is not fallen, though it be in part, and the seventh Head is now arising, which
will take away the sixth, and does, will, and must give some liberty to preach
the Gospel, and to administer the Ordinances in the old way thereof; and so the
Lord God will bring things to pass; for not one jot or tittle of his word shall
fail; and so in the rising and reign of the seventh Head, and the ten Horns,
the Angel shall fly in the midst of Heaven, having the everlasting Gospel, to
preach to them that dwell on the earth, and to every Nation, and kindred, and
tongue and people; saying with a loud voice, fear God, and give glory to him,
for the hour of his judgment is come, and worship him that made heaven and
earth, the Sea, and the fountains of waters, Rev. 14.6, 7. So the Gospel and
the way thereof being preached, the Nations will be enlightened, and so God will
put it into the hearts of the ten Horns, or Kings, to hate the Whore, and
shall make her desolate and naked and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with
fire. Rev. 17.12, 16. So through the preaching of the Gospel in the pure way
thereof, the great Whore of Babylon falls, and so the hour of her judgment is
come; and to this agrees that in Rev. 14.6, 7, 8. which shows, that after
the Gospel is preached to the Nations, then shall follow another Angel saying,
it is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon the great City, for she made all Nations to
drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, ver. 8. Much more might be
spoken to this, but let this suffice as touching what the Whore is, and her
fall, the manner how, and by whom?

In the next place, note diligently what the spirit of Antichrist is, and who
have that spirit; now John in his first Epistle, Chap. 4. And ver. 3. does
declare what the spirit of Antichrist is; namely, every spirit that confesses
not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God; and this is that
spirit of Antichrist, whereof you have heard that he should come, and even now
already is in the world. Also understand, that John did not intend the heathen
that never did believe, nor the unbelieving Jews, which never did acknowledge
Christ come in the flesh; but those have the spirit of Antichrist, that went
out from the Church of Christ, Chap. 2.18, 19. John shows them that it is the
last time, and as you have heard, that Antichrist shall come, even now are
there many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last time; They went out
From us, etc. So that the spirit of Antichrist, is that spirit that is found in
them that have been enlightened, and have known the truth, and go out from the
Church of Christ, and in a mystery deny Christ come in the flesh, and so Paul
speaks of the Antichrist, or Man of Sin, 2 These. 2.7. says, The Mystery of
iniquity, does already work etc. and Peter speaking to the Saints, says (in
his 2 Epistle. 2.1.) there shall be false teachers among you, who Privily,
shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that Bought them, and
bring upon themselves swift destruction; So the spirit of Antichrist denies
Christ come in the flesh secretly, and they that have this spirit, say, Christ
is come in their flesh, and so say the light within them is Chuist; when at the
best it is but the light of nature, and in many the spirit of error; their
light being become darkness, being delivered up to strong delusion, to believe
lies, thinking they have Christ in them, when it is a spirit of error, and so
pervert the sense of the Scriptures, declaring the Anointing, and the
Anointed to be all one, teaching up the spirit of Christ, apart from the Body
of Christ, to be the Christ, or rather the spirit of error in them, to be the
Christ come in their flesh; and so in a very deceivable secret way, deny
Christcome in the flesh, in saying, he is the Christ that is within them, which
is an evil spirit, so applying the Scriptures that speak of the spirit of
Christ dwelling in men, to be that evil spirit in them; so declaring that
spirit of error in them apart from the body, or flesh of Christ, to be the
Christ, and so deny Christ come in the flesh; but note well, what the
Scriptures of truth says, they declare that Jesus Christ was slain, Act. 2.22,
23. Chap. 3.15. Chap. 4.10. in Chap. 5.30. Peter who was full of the holy
Ghost, says, the God of our fathers has Raised up Jesus, whom ye flew, and
hanged on a tree; and Paul says to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 15.3, 4. First of
all, I delivered unto you, that which I received, how that Christ died for our
sins, according to the Scriptures, and that he was Bursed, and that he Arose
the third day according to the Scriptures; So it is plain, that the spirit
apart from the body or flesh of Christ, is not the Christ; and therefore again
note, what Paul says, 1 Timothy 2.5. There is one God, and one meditatour,
between God and man, which is the Man Christ Jesus; and Heb. 10.10. shows,
that the Hebrews were sanctified by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ,
ver. 19.20. Seeing therefore brethren, that by the Blood of Jesus, we may be
bold to enter into the holiest; by the new and living way, which he has
consecrated for us through the vail, that is, his Flesh. So that Jesus, that
was Baptized of John in the River Jordan, was anointed with the oil of gladness
above his fellows, Mat. 3.13, 16. Psalm. 45.7. So Jesus the Savior is the
anointed of God, for he gave him not his Spirit by measure. John. 3.34. and so
the spirit of the Lord did rest and abide upon the Man Christ Jesus, Isa. 11.2.
John 1.32. So then the spirit of God, or of Christ, apart from the Body of
Christ, is not the Christ.

Therefore most abominable is that which men say, that that which is in them is
Christ, when it is a spirit of error, and so men may see how through this
Mystery of iniquity, men come to say they are Christ; for consider, if the
spirit in some man be the Christ, what hinders him to say he is Christ; and
therefore some one presumes to say he is Christ; Let no man mistake me, for I
say that the spirit of God does dwell in the Saints, and that Christ does dwell
in their hearts by faith; but note, that faith is the substance of things hoped
for, and the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1. So the just live by faith,
and look for the Son of God from heaven, whom he raised from the dead, even
Jesus who delivers us from the wrath to come. But to return, so as to show
yet further, who has the spirit of Antichrist, and they are such as race out
the Ordinances of Christ, which came in being when Christ came in the flesh,
which plainly declare Christ come in the flesh, dead, and risen again, as
baptism of Water, and Breaking of Bread, which does declare the Lords death
till he come, 1 Cor. 11.26. Romans 6.34. Col. 2.12. Now there are a sort of men
which say, to know or acknowledge Christ in the practice of those Ordinances,
is formal and sleshly. low, and carnal, and so reject the counsel of God, and
will not be Baptized; and so not walking up in the Ordinances that did come in
being, when Christ came in the flesh, and do so excellently declare him come in
the flesh, and are to continue until Christ come from heaven, and change our
vile bodies, and make them like his most glorious body, Phil. 3.20, 21. I say,
those that do slight and reject those Ordinances, and say, they are formal, and
will not practice them, have the spirit of Antichrist, and do deny Christ come
in the flesh; because they will not practice those Ordinances that declare
Christ come in the flesh; yea, more fully then the Whore, for she has a show,
and so a remembrance of the Ordinances; though she have changed the subject,
and the manner as aforesaid; but These root out the very being of them (as much
as in them lies) and so deny Christ come in the flesh, and so are discovered
to have the spirit of Antichrist. Also those that have been en, lightened, and
have believed the Resurrection of the body, and also the eternal Judgment, and
then come to question it, and deny it, and say the Judgment day is come, have
the spirit of Antichrist, for Christ being put to death in the flesh, and
rising again from the dead, so brings in the Resurrection of the Bodies of
all men, and then comes in the eternal Judgment, according to that in Act.
17.30, 31. He has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness, by that Man whom he has appointed, whereof he has given
assurance to all men, in that he has raised him from the dead; so as by man
came death, by man came also the Resurrection of the dead; For as in Adam all
die, so in Christ shall all be made alive, but every man in his own order; the
first fruits is Christ's, afterward they that are of Christ, at his coming, 1
Cor. 15.21, 22, 23. So Christ being come in the flesh, the Man Christ, Savior,
died and rose again, and so comes in the Resurrection, and no otherwise;
therefore they that have been enlightened in the Resurrection, and the eternal
Judgment, and come to say they are in the Resurrection, or that it is past
already, and so deny the Resurrection of the body, deny Christ come in the
flesh, and so have the spirit of Antichrist; and therefore John writing to the
Saints, warning them that they take beed of the Antichristian spirit, that they
be not deceived, exhorts them thus; Let that therefore abide in you, which
you have heard from the beginning; if that which you have heard from the
beginning shall remain in you; yea also shall continue in the Son, and in the
Father, 1 John 2.24. read also for this purpose the whole Chapt. Now that which
they heard from the beginning, was the beginning word of Christ, (according to
that of Paul, 1 Cor. 15.3, 4. which he delivered first of all to the
Corinthians, That Christ Died for our sins, according to the Scriptures, etc.)
and the first Principles of the word of God, which is the Principles of the
Doctrine of Christ, to wit, Repentance from dead works, and of Faith toward
God, the Doctrine of Baptismes, and of Laying on of Hands, and of the
Resurrection of the dead, and of eternal Judgment, Heb. 5.12. Chap 6.1, 2. Now
these Principles of the teachings of Christ, came in being, by and through
Christ, being manifest in flesh, his death and Resurrection, as has been
showed before; therefore, whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the
Doctrine of Christ, has not God, for he denies Christ come in the flesh, and
so he has the spirit of Antichrist, 2 John 6.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. and so there was
many that had the spirit of Antichrist in the Apostle John's time, and so many
Antichrists, they are said to be Antichrists, because they have the spirit of
the Man of Sin, the Antichrist, 1 John 2.18. Chap. 4.2, 3. But the Antichrist,
the Man of Sin, shall be possessed will the Spirit of the Devil, above his
fellows, and so is said to be, The Antichrist, The Man of Sin; And so having in
part declared what is the Spirit of Antichrist, and who has that Spirit, I
come now to the fourth thing which is,

That Antichrist will be a single person.

And for the proof of this; first consider how the Antichrist is set out in
Scripture, in the singular number, not in the plural; as the Man of Sin* 2
These. 2.3. not men, and Isa. 14.16. Is this the Man that made the earth to
tremble, and did shake the Kingdoms, the Son of the morning, and Son of
perdition? not sons; the vile Person, not Persons, Dan. 11.21. Isa. 24.12.
there fell a great Star from Heaven, not Stars.

Object. This in Isa. 14. was fulfilled in Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel of
Chaldee.

Answ. That cannot be, for after this power, that is there spoken of is fallen,
the whole world is at rest, and is quiet, they sing for joy; yea, the
Furr-trees rejoice at thee, and the Cedars of Lebanon, saying; since thou art
laid down, no feller is come up against us, verse. 7.8. Now the world did not
enjoy such a rest as is there spoken of, so as that no Feller came up against
the People of God no more; for since the time of Nebuchadnezzar, and that
Monarchies fall, there has come up many fellers, or destroyers of the Jews,
and the believing Gentiles, as is clear, that Antiochus and the Romans against
the Jews, and the Whore of Babylon against the Christians; and again the
Apostle in 2 These. 2. takes up the same words in substance, and applies them to
the man of sin, which is the Antichrist; therefore that in Isa. cannot be
fulfilled in Nebuchadnezzar; (for this compare Isa. 14.13, 14. with 2 These. 2,
4.) though he might be a type of Antichrist.

Secondly, it appears that the Antichrist will be but one man (though many have
his spirit, and so many Antichrists) because it will suit best with his way of
delusion, for he will pretend he is the very Christ, and will cause fire to
come down from Heaven on earth in the sight of men, Rev. 13.13. and so he will
endeavor to imitate Christ in all things, for as the Lord Christ shall be
revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance
on them that know not God, and that Obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ: so the Antichrist, will make fire come down from heaven in the sight of
men, he will endeavor to make all the Scriptures that speak of Christ's coming,
and of his reign to meet upon him; So his coming will be after the working of
Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, and with all
deceiveableness of unrighteousness in them that perish, because they receive
not the love of the truth, that they might be saved, 2 These. 2.9, 10. So, as
there is the Man Christ Jesus, the Son of the living God, which came in his
Fathers name, Mat. 16.16. John 5.4, 3. without sin, 1 Pet. 2.22. So there will
be the Man of Sin, the Antichrist, which will come in his own name, and profess
to be the Christ, but will be directly an enemy against Christ and his People.

And so I come to the fifth thing; which is, the manner of Antichrists rising,
and by what means; for the clearing up of this; First, consider that the
Gospel, and the way thereof, is to be purely preached, and the Ordinances
rightly administered, and so the Angel is to fly in the midst of Heaven, having
the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to
every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and People, Rev. 14.6. And so the Gospel
being preached to the Nations, and the Ordinances Administered in the good old
way, according to the Scriptures, men come to be enlightened, as many are in
these nations where the Kingly power is fallen, that did support the Whore, and
would not give liberty of conscience; so I say, as the Gospel comes to be
ministered, in the old way thereof, men come to be enlightened, the power of the
Whore falls, and men slighting, and rejecting the truth, and also many of
them that do receive and obey the truth, fall and depart from the faith, and so
receiving not the love of the truth that they might be saved; for this cause
God does, and will send them strong delusions, that they should believe a lie,
2 These. 2.10, 11. And so are given up to the Spirit of Antichrist; and so the
Apostle Paul shows, that the day of Christ's coming shall not come except
there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of
perdition, 2 These. 1.7, 8. Chap. 2.3. and so the Spirit speaking expressly, that
in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing
Spirits, and Doctrine of Devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their
conscience seared with an hot Iron; forbidding to marry, etc. as in 1 Timothy 4.1,
2, 3. And the Apostle Peter writing to the Saints in his second Epistle, Chap.
2.1, 2. shows, that there shall be false teachers among you, who shall
privily bring in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and
bring upon themselves swift destruction; and many shall follow their pernicious
wicked ways; by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of; and
Chap. 3.3, 4. he says, that there should be scoffers, walking after their own
lusts, saying, where is the promise of his coming, etc. and so men
transgressing and abiding not in the Doctrine of Christ, fall from the faith of
the Gospel; and so the spirit of God departs from them, and an evil spirit is
sent unto them, which is the spirit of Antichrist, so out from them that thus
fall away, and go out from the Church, 1 John 2.19. and so separate themselves,
sensual, having not the spirit, as Jude has it, verse. 19. and also from them
that have been enlightened, and have neglected to walk up in truth, and so
reject the counsel of God, as the Lawyers and Pharisees did, Luke 7.30. so I
say, from them that so fall away, and neglect to hear and obey the Gospel, from
them arises the Antichrist, or man of sin.

Again, the sixth Head of the Roman Monarchy, which is the imperial, or Kingly
power, has always, and does by the guidance of the Pope and the National
Ministry (which rides upon the Beast as has been showed) persecute men for
their Consciences, and so has let and hindered the Gospel from being preached,
and the Ordinances from being rightly administered, and so the light of truth
was exceedingly kept back, and but few received it, and them that did receive
it, she persecuted, some she put to death, others she banished, or caused to
fly into strange Countries, and into howling wildernesses, others imprisoned,
and fined, and so she comes to be drunken with the blood of the Saints, and
with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, and so the Gospel could not be declared
in the pure way thereof, to every Nation, kindred, tongue, and people, Rev.
14.6. And so also, if any did arise that had the spirit of Antichrist, she took
him off also, and so she plucked up much wheat, and tares also, contrary to
that of Mat. 13.29, 30. Let both grow together until Harvest, etc. So the sixth
Head of the Roman Monarchy being rid upon, and guided by the Whore, did let the
Gospel from being preached, and the Antichrist from rising; and so I think that
the fixth Head did hinder the coming in of the man of Sin in the Apostles
days, for the Emperors being heathens then, persecuted the Saints, and so
that sixth Head supporting, and carrying the Whore also, so as that it did let,
and will let, until it be taken out of the way, 2 These. 2.6, 7. but now the
sixth Head being in part taken away; and the seventh Head arising, he giving
some liberty of conscience, the Gospel is preached, and truth appears, and many
receive the knowledge of it, and obey it, and many fall away from it, and so the
spirit of Antichrist arises, and so the seventh Head of the Roman Beast shall
take away the sixth Head, and shall continue a short space, Rev. 17.10. and so
the ten Horns also shall arise in one hour with the beast that was, and is not,
even he is the Eighth, and is of the Seventh, verse. 11, 12. and so is the
little Horn that Daniel speaks of, Dan. 7.11, 24, 25. and the last power, or
Beast, the Antichrist, the Man of Sin, and so the seventh Head and ten Horns,
or Kings giving liberty, the servants of God sends forth the truth as it is in
Jesus, ministering in the Gospel glad tidings of the Kingdom to the Nations,
men come to know the truth, and so are enlightened with it, and so many may
come to shine as Stars, and yet fall away as the Antichrist, or man of sin,
himself will be some notable man shining as a Star for a time, yet afterward
falling from the truth, according to that in Rev. 8.10, 11. The third Angel
sounded and there fell a great Star from Heaven, burning as it were a lamp, and
it fell upon the third part of the rivers, and upon the fountains of waters,
and the name of the Star is called Wormwood; and the third part of the waters
became Wormwood, and many men dyed of the waters, because they were made
bitter. So the man of Sin falls from the truth, or true Church, as a great Star
from Heaven, burning like a Lamp, through Satan's transforming himself as into
an Angel of light, and so falls upon the rivers, and fountains of waters, so
that he makes them bitter: so the sweet promises of the Gospel; and the way of
Christ, in which men shall be made partakers of the waters of life, and so made
glad in the City of God, are so made bitter like Wormwood, changing the taste
of them, so that many men die of those waters, according to that of Jude 12.
Twice dead plucked up by the roots; and thus he causes men to fall, so that
the third part of the Sun is smitten, and the third part of the Moon, and the
third part of the Stars, so as the third part of them is darkened, and the day
shone not for a third part of it, nor the night likewise, Rev. 8.12. The Sun is
hear compared to the Church, because the Church or Saints through Christ are
said to be the light of the world, Mat. 5.14. and so Jacob who is called
Israel, according to Joseph's dream, is compared to the Sun, Genesis 37.9, 10. The
Moon I take to be the world, or the Whore, the false Church, which has her
light from the true Church, as the Moon has her light from the Sun, the Stars
are the eminent teachers in the Churches, Rev. 1.20. and this in the eight
chapter before spoken of, is an allegory, because the waters are said to become
Wormwood, and yet men drink of them, which cannot be, if they were made
Wormwood; therefore it is Allegorical, that the word of the Gospel in the
ministration of the Prophets is compared to water, look Ezekiel. 34.18, 19. Isa.
55.1. Rev. 22.17. So then a many of the Church will fall from the faith, and
the Stars, the Elders, or chief teachers also, and many of the World, or false
Church that shall be enlightened, and will not obey, shall be darkened, and so
shall lose that light they have, and so shall be given up to gross darkness,
and so after a great falling away from the truth; So the man of Sin, the
Antichrist is revealed, and gets the power and rule by flatteries, after the
working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, and with all
deceiveableness of unrighteousness; and So opposes and exalts himself above
all that is called God, or is worshipped; so that He as God, sits in the
temple of God, showing himself that he is God, Dan. 11.21. 2 These. 2.3, 4, 9,
10. And so I come to the sixth Particular, which is,

Some of the great things that the man of Sin willdo, with his false Prophet.

Which in the first place take what Daniel says of him, setting him out by a
little Horn, Chap. 7.8, 11, 24, 25. he says, That he shall subdue three
Kings, and he shall speak Great words against the most high, and shall wear out
the Saints of the most high, and think to change times and laws; and they
shall be given into his hand, until a time, and times, and the deviding of
times; And so he shall reign in full power three years and a half, for time is
taken for one year, times, for two years, and half a time, for half a year, as
in Dan. 4.25. some translation reads, for seven times, seven years, and so the
woman Clothed with the Sun, that flies from him into the wilderness, and is
there three years and a half, Rev. 12.1, 14. so he shall presecute the Saints
of the most high, ver. 11, 17. and the false prophet causeh the first beast
whose deadly wound was healed, to be worshipped, and he does great wonders, so
that he makes fire to come down from heaven on the earth in the sight of men;
and deceives them that dwell on the earth, by means of those miracles, which
he shall have power to do in the sight of the beast; saying, to them that dwell
on the earth, that they should make an image to the beast, which had the wound
by a sword, and did live; and had power to give life, or breath to the image of
the beast, that the image of the beast should both speak, and cause that as
many as would not worship the image of the beast, should be killed; and he
causes all both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to give a mark
in their right hands, or in their foreheads, and that no man might buy or sell,
save he that had the mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his
name, Rev. 13.11, to 18. So the Beast that has a wound with a sword, that is,
the seventh Head is slain to death, yet he having another which is of the
seventh, and is the eighth, and so lives; and so it is the Beast that was, and
is not, and yet is, and so the false Prophet shall by miracles, cause the world
to worship the Beast, the man of sin, the Antichrist, as God, sitting in the
temple of God, showing himself that he is God, 2 These. 2.4. and cause as many
as will not worship the beast or his image, to be killed; and so the fallen
Star before mentioned, which is the Beast, the Antichrist, ascends out of the
bottomless pit, the key of the bottomless pit being given him, he opens the
bottomless pit, and then arises a smoke out of the pit, as the smoke of a
furnace, and the Sun, and the air, will be darkened, by reason of the smoke of
the Pit, Rev. 11.7. Chap. 9.1, 2. and near the end of his reign, when the sixth
Vial is poured, or pouring out, then shall come three unclean spirits like
frogs out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and
out of the mouth of the false Prophet; for they are the spirits of Devils,
working miracles, which go forth unto the Kings of the earth, and of the whole
world, to gather them to the battle of that great day of God Almighty; and he
gathered them together to a place, called in the Hebrew tongue, Armageddon,
Rev. 16.12, 13, 14, 16. which is into the Land of Canaan, according to Joel
3.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Multitudes, multtudes in the valley of decision; and
so I come to the seventh particular; which is.

The fall of the Beast or Man of Sin, and when, and by whom.

Now Paul says, that the Lord will consume him with the spirit of his mouth,
and shall destroy him with the brightness of his coming, 2 These. 2.8. So when
the enemy shall come in as a flood, the spirit of the Lord shall lift up a
standard against him, Isa. 59.19. and so when the Lord himself shall descend
from Heaven, with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute Judgment upon all, and
to convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds, and of
their hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have spoken against him, Jude 15.
Then the Sun and the Moon shall be be darkened, and the Stars shall withdraw
their shining; the Lord also shall roar out of Sion, and utter his voice from
Jerusalem; and the heavens and the earth shall Shake; but the Lord will be the
hope of his people, and the strength of the Children of Israel, Joel 3.15, 16.
And in that day will the Lord make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all
People, all that burden themselves with it, shall be cut in pieces, though all
the people of the Earth be gathered against it, Zech. 12.1, 2, 3, 4. Then the
Lora Jesus, (that Died and Rose again,) himself shall descend from Heaven with
a shont, and with the voice of the Archangel; and with the trump of God; and
the dead in Christ shall rise first; Then we which are alive and remain, shall
be caught up together with them in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the air,
and so shall we ever be with the Lord, 1 These. 4.14, 15, 16, 17. And so as
Zechary has it, The Lord my God shall come, and all the saints with him, Chap.
14.5. And then the ten horns which received power as Kings in one hour with the
Beast, the Man of Sin, These have one mind and shall give their Power and
Strength unto the Beast, These shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall
overcome them; For he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and they that are
with him are called, and chosen, and faithful, and so according to Rev. 19. The
Lord Jesus, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, with his Armies which were in
Heaven, following him upon white Horses, clothed in fine Linen, white and
clean, descends from heaven against the Beast, the Man of sin; And the Kings of
the earth, and their Armies gathered together, to make war against him that
sat on the Horse, the Man Christ, and against his Armies; and the Beast was
taken, and with him the false Prophet, that wrought miracles before him, with
which he deceived them that had received, the mark of the Beast, and them that
worshipped his image; These both were cast alive into a lake of fire, burning
with brimstone; And the remnant were slain with the sword of him that sat upon
the Horse; Which sword proceeded out of his mouth; and all fowls were filled
with their flesh; So the Beast, the Antichrist, the Man of Sin, and the false
Prophet, which did work miracles before him shall be taken alive, and cast into
a lake of fire, burning with brimstone; and so Tophet is ordained of old, yea,
for the King it is prepared, he has made it deep and large, the pile thereof
is fire and much wood, the breath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone does
kindle it, Isai. 30.33. And so, as men are threatened, in Rev. 14.9, 10. That if
they worship the Beast, or his image, and receive his mark in their foreheads,
or in their hands; The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which
is poured out without mixture, into the cup of his indignation, and he shall be
tormented with sire and brimstone, in the presence of the holy Angels, and in
the presence of the Lamb; So it shall come to pass when the Lord Jesus shall
appear; and therefore take the 11 verse. And the smoke of their torment
ascends up for ever and ever, and they have no rest day nor night who worship
the Beast and his image, and whosoever receives the mark of his name; For
this purpose read Isai. 14.18.19. and Chap. 66.24. Ezekiel. 38.22, 23. Thus the
Lord will magnify himself, and sanctify himself, and he will be known in the
eyes of many Nations, and they shall know that he is the Lord; And then in that
day shall his servants say. This is the Lord, we have waited for Him, we will
be Glad in his Salvation, Isai. 25.9.

So then we may see, that the Whore is not the Antichrist, that the Scripture
speaks of, for the Whore is set out in Scripture thus, as a Woman, a false
Church, as a Queen, The Mother of Harlots, and ahominations of the earth; The
Antichrist is set out thus; A Man of Sin, The man that did shake kingdoms, The
Son of the Morning, The Son of Perdition.

Secondly, the sixth Head of the Roman Beast carries the Harlot, but the
Antichrist, the Man of Sin is the eighth and last Beast, as has been showed.

Thirdly, The Whore confesses Christ to be come in the flesh, and has a show,
and a remembrance of his Ordinances, though she have changed the subject and
manner; but the Antichrist denies Christ come into the flesh, and his
Ordinances that declare him come in the flesh, as it has been showed.

Fourthly, The Woman, the Harlot, and her members that do worship according to
her Traditions, and inventions, have space given them to repent, and many do
repent; but they that do worship the Beast, the Antichrist, or receive his mark
in their right hand, or in their forehead, they cannot repent; they must drink
of the wrath of God, etc. as it is Rev. 14.9, 10. and in Chap. 16.11. They
repented not of their deeds; note, that the first vial is poured out upon the
earth, and the men that had the mark of the Beast, and worshipped his Image,
are plagued; therefore none of the vials are poured out until the Antichrist
reigns, verse. 1, 2.

Fifthly, The ten Horns hate the Whore, and destroy her, and make her desolate,
Rev. 17.16. But the Antichrist is taken alive, when the Lord comes, and
punished with everlasting deflruction from the presence of the Lord, in a lake
of fire, 2. These. 1.9. and Rev. 19.20.

And so to draw to a conclusion, I do desire all men to take heed to the
Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles, for they are able to make men wise
unto Salvation; and if men speak not according to the Law and Testament, it is
because they have no light in them. Isa. 8.20. O give heed to the most sure
word of the Prophets, as unto a light shining in a dark place. until the day of
Christ dawn, and the day Star arise in your hearts; noting diligently all
things that are spoken of, that must come to pass, for when the signs
concerning Christ's coming are come to pass, the day of Christ's personal
appearing will dawn.

Secondly, is there such a spirit of delusion among men, wherein is a mystery
of iniquity? Then let all take heed, that they seek the Lord while he may be
found, and to kiss the Son lest he be angry; and ye perish in the way; O do not
neglect to read, and search the Scriptures, and walk up in that you do know, be
not deceived, God will not be mocked; what a man sows that he shall reap, for
he that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption, but he that
sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting, Gal. 6.7, 8.

Thirdly, is it so, that God does, and will give up men to a Spirit of
delusion* that they should believe a lie, that they all might be damned who
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness? Then he exhorted
from hence, to forsake all unrighteous ways in conversation, and all whorish
inventions of men in point of Worship; for if Moses Law be abolished, which was
given to him by the Lord, let no man think that he shall be excused if he
worship according to men's inventions.

Fourthly, let all the Saints consider, and lay to heart what has been spoken,
and search the Scriptures, that they may be informed what is to come to pass,
and so according to Christ's exhortation, in Luke 21.36. Watch ye therefore, and
pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that
shall come to pass, and to stand before the son of man.

Moreover when the Lord thus overthrows Antichrist and his Armies, and the
Kings of the earth, as it has been showed before, and more plentiously
appears in Scripture; When the whirle wind of the Lord goes forth with fury,
a cutting whirlwind, it shall remain with pain upon the head of the wicked;
the fearce anger of the Lord shall not return, until he have performed the
intents of his heart; At the same time, says the Lord, will I be the God of
all the families of Israel, and they shall be my people: For God has loved
them with an everlasting love, therefore with loving kindness he will draw
them, Jer. 30.23, 24. Chap. 31.1, 2, 3. And it shall come to pass in that day,
that the great Trumpet shall be blown, and they shall come that are ready to
perish in the land of Assyria; and the outcasts in the land of Egypt, and
shall worship the Lord in the holy mount at Jernsalem, Is. 27.13. So when the
Enemies shall come in like a flood, great enemies being gathered by the beast,
the Antichrist, according to Rev. 16.13, 14. being m^^ according to Joel 3.9,
10, 11, 12, 13, 14. the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against
him; then even then, the redeemer shall come to Sion and unto them that turn
from transgression in Jacob, says the Lord, Isa. 59.19, 20. compared with,
Romans 11, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. Then at that day, the Lord himself
which was dead and arose again, and is alive for evermore, Rev. 1.18. shall
descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the
trump of God; and the dead in Christ shall rise first, 1 These. 4.14, 15, 16.
compared with Isa 27.13. and so as Zach. says, The Lord my God shall come and
all the Saints with thee, and his feet shall stand in that day upon the mount
of Olives, which is before Jerusalem, Chap. 14.4, 5. then the Lord Jesus Christ
the Lord of Hosts, and Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, shall reign personally
upon the earth in mount Sion, and in Jerusalem, and before his ancients the
house of Israel gloriously, Isa. 24.23. Rev. 17.14. Chap. 19.13, 14, 15, 16.

And for the further proof and clearing up of this truth, That the Lord Christ
shall reign personally on the earth, more then a thousand years, and all the
Saints with him, from Adam to his coming, which dyed in the faith, and are
found in the faith at his coming, are to reign with him upon earth; First,
consider and mark well what the Scripture says in the letter of it, for the
proof of the same, the Prophet Jer. says, Behold the days come says the
Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous branch, and a King shall reign
and prosper, and execute Judgment and justice in the earth; In his days Judah
shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely; and this is his name, the Lord
our Righteousness, Chap. 23.5, 6. Ask of me and I shall give thee the heathen
for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession,
Psalm. 2.8. In his days shall the righteous flowrish, and abundance of peace
shall be so long as the Moon endures; He shall have dominion also from Sea to
Sea, and from the river unto the end of the earth; Yea all Kings shall fall
down before him, all nations shall serve him, Pfal. 72.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. verse
17. His name shall endure for ever, his name shall be continued as long as the
Sun; and men shall be blessed in him: All nations shall call him blessed; and
the Lord shall be King over all the earth; in that day shall there be one Lord,
and his name one, Zach. 14.9. Dan. 7.27. And the Kingdom and dominion, and the
greatness of the Kingdom under the whole heaven shall be given to the people
of the Saints of the most high; whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom; and
all nations or dominions, shall serve and obey him; and Rev. 5.9, 10. says,
Thou have made us unto our God Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on the
earth, Chap. 11.15. And the seventh Angel sounded, and there were great voices
in heaven; saying, the Kingdoms of this world, are become the Kingdoms of our
Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever, Rev. 20. shows
at large, That the Saints shall reign with Christ a thousand years; which
cannot be understood but to be on the earth.

So then the letter of the Scripture speaks much, that the Lord Christ shall
descend from heaven, 1 These. 4.16. Acts. 1.11. and his feet shall stand upon
mount Olives, which is before Jerusalem, Zach. 14.4. and that he shall reign on
the earth with his Saints; And that it may not appear a strange thing, observe
well how the Scriptures were taken in the letter, that spoke of Christ to come
in the flesh, and his sufferings; as, A virgin shall conceive and bear a son,
Isa. 7.14. Christ the King of Jerusalem, and Lord of Lords, and King of Kings,
riding upon an Ass, and upon a coult the foal of an Ass, Zach. 9.9. Mat. 21.5.
of their giving him vinegar to drink, Psalm. 69.21. Mat. 27.48. again the
selling of Christ the Lord of life and glory, for thirty pieces of silver,
Zach. 11.12.13. Mat. 27.9. Much more might be said, to show that strange things
were foretold by the Prophesies in the Scripture, concerning the coming of
Christ in the flesh, and his suffering, and rising from the dead, plainly
declared in the letter; yea, men hardly believed them until they were
fulfilled. So then the Scriptures speaking plainly also of the Lord Christ
descending from heaven to the earth, and to reign on the earth with his Saints,
(as it has been showed before) why should it be thought to be uncredible.

Again there is a stream of Scriptures that declares, that the Saints shall
suffer persecution, and be in tribulation until the coming of Christ, John
16.33. 2 Timothy 3.12. Luke 14.2, 27. Acts. 14.22. Yea, the nearer the coming of
Christ, the greater trouble to the Saints, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 13* Dan. 7.25. Luke
18.7, 8. Rev. 7.14. Also the Scriptures declare plentiously, that the Saints
shall reign on the earth, and flourish exceedingly, and that a long time, Psalm.
72.7. Isai. 65.21, 22, 23. Daniel 7.27. Psalm. 149. Mat. 5.5. Rev. 2.26, 27.
Chap. 5.10. Chap. 11.15.

Now observe it well, how can this stand or consist, that the Saints must from
Christ coming in the flesh, to his coming to Judgment suffer persecution and
tribulation, and yet must have a long time to reign and flourish, seeing
reigning over the earth and flourishing, is inconsistant, for men cannot be at
one time in a persecuted, troubled, afflicted condition, and in a reigning,
flourishing state; therefore I say, that Christ must reign on the earth, and
appoint his people a kingdom, Luke 22.29, 30. and so they shall reign with him
on the earth.

Again there is a stream of Scriptures, that declares, that there should be
wars, and rumors of wars in the last days, Mat. 24.6, 7. Mark 13.7, 8. Dan.
2.40. Chap. 8. Chap. 11. Rev. 13. Chap. 17. Yea, the fourth Monarchy, which is
the Roman power, which did begin to reign before Christ, came in the flesh, and
has reigned in the sixth Head, and will reign in the seventh and eighth, which
is of the seventh of that Roman power, until Christ come as has been showed
before; has all a long brought in wars, and does and will to the coming of
Christ; for the Scriptures show, that this fourth power, will break in pieces
and subdue all, and stamp the residue with the feet of it, Dan. 2.40. Chap.
7.7. So there has been no long peace, but devision, and wars, and is and will
be more and more, until the coming of Christ, Dan. 2.42, 43. Chap. 7.24, 25.
Joel 3.9, 10. Exek 38. Chap. 39. Revel. 16.14. Chap. 19.17, 18, 19. So then, by
the Scripture it appears from the coming of Christ in the flesh, to the
coming of Christ from heaven, to judge the quick and the dead; there has, and
will be war; and to this Histories agree also, that there has not been no
long peace in the world, since the Jews captivity in Babylon, but very much
war.

But the Scripture shows plentiously also, that there shall be a long peace
in the whole world; Psalm. 72.7, 8. in his days, shall the righteous flourish,
and abundance of peace, so long as the Moon endures, Zach. 9.10. Isai. 14.7.
The whole world is at rest, and is quiet, they break forth into singing, Mich.
4.3, 4. And he shall judge among many people, and rebuke strong Nations after
off, and they shall beat there swords into plow-shares, and their spears into
pruning hooks; Nation shall not lift up a sword against Nation, neither shall
they learn War any More: But they shall sit every man under his vine, and
under his fig tree, and none shall make them afraid; for the mouth of the Lord
of hosts has spoken it, Isa. 2.4. So then there has been and will be war
until Christ comes, and yet there must be a long time of peace, and this peace
never was, nor cannot be until Christ comes; (as the Scriptures of truth
witness) and then if the earth be utterly destroyed, as some say, then that
peace cannot be; But I say with the Prophet, that that peace must be, and it
cannot be until Christ comes; therefore Christ will reign with all his Saints
on the earth personally, and then he will make war to cease unto the ends of
the earth, he breaks the bow, and cutteth the spear asunder, he burns the
Chariot in the fire; saying, Be still and know that Lam God, I will be exalted
among the heathen, I will be exalted in the earth, Psalm. 46.9, 10.

Again the whole house of Israel after the flesh, shall be called, as it has
been showed before, which cannot be until the fullness of the Gentiles be come
in, and the appearing of Christ; and this will appear evidently if you well
observe, what Isa. says, 59.20, 21. compared with Romans 11.25, 26, 27. for the
Apostle shows, when the fullness of the Gentiles is come in; then the
deliverer shall come to Sion, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob; For
this is my Covenant unto them, when I shall take away there sins; And that you
may see the Apostle speaks of the whole house of Israel, that remains on the
earth when the fullness of the Gentiles is come in; note well, the 25. verse,
and so to the 33. And also what has been said before, concerning this thing.
So then the whole house of Israel shall be called to a glorious state here on
earth, when the fullness of the Gentiles is come in; and then the deliverer the
Lord Jesus Christ, shall come to Sion, and then shall they look upon him whom
they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him as one mourns for his only
Son, Zach. 12.10. So then, from all this, (and much more might be said) it
clearlly follows, that the Lord shall reign personaly on the earth, and so
the Lord God shall give him the Throne of his Father David, and he shall reign
over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end,
Luke 1.33.33.

Now in the next place, take notice further of some of the excellent things
that the Lord will do in that day for the house of Israel; In that day shall
the branch of the Lord be beautiful, and the fruit of the earth shall be
excellent, and comely, for them that are escaped of Israel. And it shall come
to pass, that he that is left in Sion, and he that remains in Jerusalem,
shall be called holy, even every one that is written among the living in
Jerusalem; When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of
Sion, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof, by
the spirit of Judgment, and by the spirit of burning, Isai. 4.2, 3, 4.

Then shall health be restored unto Israel, and their wounds healed, says the
Lord, because they called thee an outcast; saying, this is Sion whom no man
seeks after; Thus says the Lord, behold I will bring again the captivity of
Jacobs tents, and have mercy on his dwelling place, and the City shall be
builded upon her own heap, and the palace shall remain after the manner
thereof: And out of them shall proceed thanksgiving, and the voice of them that
make merry; and I will multiply them, and they shall not be few, I will also
glorify them, and they shall not be small, Jer. 30.17, 18, 19.

Again at this time, will the Lord make them one Nation in the land upon the
mountains of Israel, and one King shall be a King to them all, and they shall
be no more two Nations, neither shall they be divided into two kingdoms any
more at all; Neither shall they defile themselves any more with their Idols,
nor with their detestable things, nor with any of their transgressions; but I
will save them out of all their dwelling places, wherein they have sinned, and
will cleanse them; so shall they be my people, and I will be their God, Ezekiel
37.22, 23.

Again, Wait yea upon me says the Lord, until the day that I rise up to
gather the Nations; that I may Assemble the kingdoms to pour upon them mine
Indignation, even all my fierce anger; for all the earth shall be devoured with
the fire of my jealousy: For then will I turn to the people a pure Language,
that they may all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve him with one
consent; At this time I will bring you again, even in this time that I gather
you; for I will make you a name and a praise among all people of the earth,
when I turn back your captivity before your eyes, says the Lord, Zeph. 3.8, 9,
10.

Again, Look upon Zion the City of our solemnities, thine eye shall see
Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a Tabernacle that shall not be taken down, not
one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall any of the cords
be broken: And the Inhabitants shall not say, I am sick, the people that dwell
therein shall be forgiven there iniquity; Isa. 33.20, 24.

Again, Hear the word of the Lord, O ye Nations, and declare it in the Isles
afare of, and say, he that scattered Israel, will gather him, and keep him as a
shepherd does his stock; For the Lord has redeemed Jacob and ransomed him
from the hand of him that was stronger then he: Therefore they shall come and
sing in the hight of Zion, and shall flow together to the goodness of the Lord;
for Wheat, and for Wine, and for Oil, and for the young of the flock, and of
the heard; and their souls shall be as a watered Garden, and they shall not
sorrow any more at all, Jer. 31.10, 11, 12. Yea, in that day shall that song be
sung by the house of Israel that is in the 12. of Isai; Yea they shall cry out
and shout for joy, for great is the holy one of Israel, in the midst of them,
verse the 6. Zeph. 3.15. They shall not see evil any more; then that in the 35.
of Isai. shall be made good, and that in Isai. 60. and many other places which
speak very clearly to these things; search and see, for Paul would not have us
Ignorant of this mystery, Romans 11.25.

Moreover be not mistaken though it be so, that the fullness of the Gentiles
under this dispensation shall come in before Christ come in person, and many
shall be given up to blindness, and be destroyed at his appearing, (as it has
been showed before) yet them that are left of the Nations, shall fall in with
the people of Israel, and say; Come let us go up to the mountains of the Lord,
to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways; and we
will walk in his paths; For out of Sion shall go forth the law, and the word
of the Lord from Jerusalem, Isai. 2.2, 3. Micah. 4.1, 2, 3. Yea, many people
and strong Nations shall come to seek the Lord of hosts in Jerusalem, and to
pray before the Lord; Thus says the Lord of hosts, in those days it shall
come to pass, that ten men shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew,
saying, we will go with you; for we have heard that God is with you, Zach.
8.22, 23. yea Zach. says, that when the Lord comes and all the Saints with
him, even then the Lord shall be King over. all the earth, in that day shall
there be one Lord, and his name one; and then it shall come to pass that every
one that is left of all the Nations which came against Jerusalem, shall even go
up from year to year, to worship the King the Lord of hosts, and to keep the
feast of Tabernacles, Chap. 14.9, 14. and this as I understand was signified
under the Law, when the males came up to Jerusalem to keep there feast, so the
Nations shall come up from one new Moon to another, and from year to year, to
worship before the Lord, Isai. 66.23. for then the Gentiles shall be Converted
to the house of Israel, Isai. 60.5. For the house of Israel that are brought
back and are called when Christ come, shall then be chief among the Nations,
according to this Scripture, Isai. 19.24, 25. In that day shall Israel be the
third, with Egypt, and with Assyria, even a blessing in the midst of the land;
whom the Lord of Host shall bless saying, blessed be Egypt my people, and
Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel mine Inheritance; so in that day, the
earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea,
Isa. 11.9.

So in that day when Christ raigns gloriously on the earth, there will be first
all them that dyed in the faith, and are found in the faith at his coming, made
immortal, and shall reign with Christ over the whole earth, Dan. 7.27. enjoying
perfection in knowledge and purity, 1 Cor. 13.10, 11, 12. Ephesians. 5.27. and be
made free from all manner of imperfections, yea as David says, They shall be
abundantly satisfied with the Fatness of thy house, and thou shall make them
drink of the River of thy pleasures, Psalm. 36.8. So they shall be completely
happy enjoying fullness of joy, for ever and ever.

Secondly, the house of Israel that is called when Christ appears (as has
been showed) shall be under them, and governed and judged by them, Obad. 21.
Mat. 19.28. Luke 22.28, 29, 30.

Thirdly, The nations that know the Lord shall be inferior to the house of
Israel, serving them in that day, Isa. 60.12, 14.

Fourthly, That there will be some of the nations in that day, that will not
come to worship the King, the Lord of hosts, and upon them shall come great
judgments, Zach. 14.17, 18. Jer. 31.30. Isa. 65.20. So there will be in the
kingdom of Christ (at least some of the time that he raigns on the earth,
before he delivers up the Kingdom to the father) four sorts of people, but the
Saints that come with Christ, shall reign most gloriously over them all.

So then, things being so, lets look back to what has been said concerning
Christ coming to reign; namely, that the Saints must be in a troubled,
persecuted, afflicted estate, until Christ comes, and the nearer his coming,
the more persecution, and tribulations, Luke 18.7, 8. This serves to inform the
fifth Monarchy men, that the Saints shall not have dominion of the earth,
neither shall the fifth Monarchy be, until Christ comes, for the fourth
Monarchy, or Beast in his Heads and horns, raigns until Christ comes, and
presecutes the Saints, Dan. 7.25, 26. as has been showed.

Secondly, if there will be war and rumors of wars, and overturning of powers
until Christ comes; that should teach the Saints, not to deceive themselves so
as to conclude, they shall enjoy long rest and peace here on earth, before
Christ comes, and so to seek great things for themselves; I say with the
Prophet, Jer. Seek them not, for that the Lord has built, he will break down,
and that which he has planted, will he pluck up, Chap. 45.4, 5. For the
nations must drink Jeremies cup, them that are wicked to the sword, says the
Lord, Chap. 25. from the 15. to the 34.

Thirdly, This should teach us to buy the truth and not to sell it, and so to
seek the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, in the first place, and to give
all diligence to make our calling and election sure; redeeming the time, that
we be not found among those foolish Virgins that let their lamps go out; but of
those wise, that stand with their Loins girded about with truth, and their
lights burning, as men that wait for their Lord when he shall return to the
wedding; Mat. 25. Luke 12.35, 36, 37.

Furthermore take notice of some signs that go before Christ's coming; First,
observe that the Gospel being preached as it is now, (and shall be more fully
hereafter) and many falling away from the truth, and the spirit of Antichrist
appearing, this is a sign of Christ's coming, 2 These. 2.3.1 John 2.18.

Secondly, If we see and hear of wars and rumors of wars, and false Prophets,
and false Christ's appearing, and many run to and fro, and knowledge increase,
and the great Whore of Babylon fallen, these things coming to pass are evident
signs that the time of Christ's coming is near, Mat. 24.5, 11. Dan. 12.4. Rev.
14.6, 7, 8.

Thirdly, When we shall see false Prophets, and false Christ's, saying; lo hear
is Christ, or lo there; working miracles, and the Antichrist or man of sin
arising or appearing; then may we certainly conclude the coming of Christ to be
at hand; yea if we see the Whore of Babylon fallen, and the man of sin arising,
we may certainly conclude, that before that generation shall go down to dust,
the Lord will appear, Mat. 24.23, 24.2 These. 2.9. Rev. 14.9. Luke 21.32.

Fourthly, When there shall be famins and pestalence, and earthquakes in
diverse places, and the Jews return into their own land, and the Antichrist (or
man of sin) plant his tabernacle in the holy mount, Dan. 11.45. Mat. 24.7.

Fifthly, When the Man of Sin and the false Prophet shall set up an Image, and
give the mark of the beast, and cause fire to come down from heaven in the
sight of men, Rev. 13.13, 14, 15, 16. and the sixth vial poured out, and that
false ministry of the beast go forth, and gather the nations to the battle of
the great day, according to Chap. 16.12, 13, 14. Joel 3.9, 10, 11. and the Sun
and Moon darkened, and upon the earth distress of nations, with perplexity, the
Sea and waves roaring in an extraordinary manner, Isa. 13.10. Joel 3.15: Luke
21.25, 26: When these changes begin to come to pass, especially the four last,
then let us lift up our heads with joy, for our redemption draws nigh, verse
28. And when the last appears, know that the Kingdom of God is near, even at
the very doors, Mat. 24* 33. Now from all these things, let every one be
persuaded to walk up in all the commandments, and Ordinances of the Lord,
improving all grace, so as to serve God acceptably with reverence and godly
fear; yea let all the children of God, work out their salvation with fear and
trembling; O let us give heed to the word of the Prophets, as a light that
shines in a dark place, until the day of Christ dawn, and the day Star arise
in our hearts* that is, until Christ who is the bright morning Star he by his
spirit; we giving heed to the word of the Prophet will cause us to understand
the secrets of the Lord; yea the signs of his coming, as men that walk in the
night know the day is near, when they see the day Star arising; so the Lord
will give us the morning Star, that we may know in an excellent measure the
time of his coming, 2 Pet. ^.19. Rev. 22: 16. Chap. 2: 28 Psalm. 25: 14.

But let no man be deceived, so as to account of the coming or receiving of the
spirit in the most excellent manner, to be the coming of Christ; for the
Corinths came behind in no gifts, yet waited for the coming of the Lord Jesus,
1 Cor: 1.7: And the Apostle John shows, that there are but three sorts of
Christians, the little ones; young men, and old men, in Christ; and old ought
to wait and did wait for the coming of Christ, 1 John 2: 28: Chap. 3: 2. and
then they and we shall be like him, Phil. 3: 31: O let all these things be laid
to heart, and let all the children of God receive council of the Lord Jesus, so
as to watch and pray always, that we may be accounted worthy, to escape all
these things, that shall come to pass, and to stand before him acceptably, Luke
21.36.

FINIS.

