A TRVE AND FVLL RELATION, OF THE TROUBLES IN LANCASHJERE; between the Lord
Strange, now Earl of Derby; And the well-affected People of that County: with
their Valiant Resistance, and full Resolution.

ALSO, Certain passages between the Earl of New Castle, and Captain Hotham in
York-sheire.

Sent to a Reverend Divine in LONDON.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Blackmoore, December the 9th. 164^

Kind SIR,
I Have received your Letter, with the Printed Papers of the News amongst you
therein enclosed, for which I return you many thanks, and in requital thereof
have sent you, by this Post, the Passages and Accidents which this last week
has befallen us in Lancashire. The County, as you know, is grievously
distracted and divided into two factions; The Papists and Malignants (whereof
there are many in our County) act one part, and the well-affected Protestants
another. The Lord Strange (now Earl of Derbie) is the great Ringleader of the
Popish faction and Malignant party, and keeps his Randevouz at Warrington,
whither great multitudes of ill-affected people, both out of Lancashire and
Cheshire do daily resort, it lying upon the fronters of both. They make daily
great spoil in the Country, which has now awakned them of the Country, and
so incensed them, that they are tide death tide life resolved to endure it no
longer, as may appear by the last Skirmish that this last week fell out at
Leigh and Loaton Common, between the Earl of Derbies Troops and the Country
people, whereof I my self being one, can relate you the truth: for the last
Sabbath as we were going toward the Church, a Post rode through the Country,
informing us that the Earls Troops were coming toward Chow-bent; whereupon
the Country presently rose, and before one of the Clock on that day we were
gathered together about 3000. Horse and Foot, Incountring them at Chow-bent
aforesaid, and beat them back to Leigh, killing some and wounding many. Where
you would wonder to have scene the forwardness of the young youths, Farmers
sons, who indeed were two forward, having had little experience of the like
times before this. And so We over-road our Foot, being carried with a fervent
desire to overtake them, and to do some notable Service upon them, so that we
drove them to Loaton-Common, where they knowing our foot to be far behind,
turned faces about and began to make head against us. Whereupon began a sharp
although a short Encounter, but when they perceived our full and settled
resolution, they made away as fast as their Horses could carry them, and we
after them, killing, wounding, and taking prisoners about 200 of them; and we
lost never a man, only we had three of our men wounded, but not mortally, so
that I think they will trouble us no more out of that part of the Country,
but if they do we shall be better provided for them then before, for we are
all upon our Guard, and the Naylers of Chow-bent, instead of making nails,
have busied themselves in making of Bills and Battle-Axes; and also this weeek
the other part of the Country meet and intend not only to stand upon their
Guard, but to disarme all the Papists and Malignants within their Precincts,
which we are resolved upon in our Precincts, and also by Gods assistance to
take the greatest Papists and most dangerous Malignants prisoners, and carry
them to Manchester to keep house with Sir Cecill Traffard, that Arch-Papist,
who is there a prisoner; for now the men of Blackburne, Paduam, Burnely,
Clitherc, and Colme, with those sturdy Churles in the two forests of Pendle
and Rossendale, have raised their Spirits, and are resolved to fight it out,
rather then their Beef and fatt Bacon shall be taken from them. For the last
week Sir Gilbert Houghton set his Beacon on fire, which stood upon the top of
Houghton Tower, and was the signal to the Country for the Papists and
Malignants to arise in the field, and in Lealand hundredth; whereupon upon great
multitudes accordingly resorted to him to Preston in Andernesse, and ran to
Blackburne, and so through the Country, disarming all, and pillaging some,
which Master Shuttlewath, a Parliament man, and Master Starkie hearing of,
presently had gotten together out of the places formerly mentioned about 8000.
men, met with Sir Gilbert and his Catholic Malignants at Hinfield-moore, put
them to flight, took away many of their Arms, and pursued Sir Gilbert so
hotly, that he quit his horse, leapt into a field, and by the coming on of the
night escaped through fur-bushes and by-ways to Preston, and there makes great
defense by chaining up Ribble-bridge, and getting what force he can into the
Town for his security: out of which the Country swears they will have him
by Gods help, with all his adherents, either quick or dead; so that by the
next Post, I hope, I shall certify of some good posture that the Country will
be in. O that the Parliament had but sent down their 1000. of Dragooneers into
the Country, we would not have left a Mass monger, nor Malignant of note,
but we would have provided a lodging for him.

It is reported by some about the Earl of Derbie, that he is very melancholy,
and much perplexed about that unadvised course that he has run, for the last
Thursday at Warrington at dinner, he said he was borne under an unfortunate
Planet, and that he thought some evil Constellation reigned at the hour of
his birth, with many such other words of passion and discontent, so that we all
think he would purchase his peace with the Parliament at a very dear rate,
for now he is fled from his holds as yesterday, and to morrow goes toward
Congerton, as is reported.

This day came News from York, that it is in great distress for victuals, so
that the Citizens, especially the women, swear if my Lord of Cumberland will
not be gone, they will try their skill to set him packing. He daily offers
conditions of peace to the Lord Fayrefaxe, and desires he would suffer him to
march through the Country, and he will offer no wrong; but his Treaties are
refused. The last week Sir Thomas Gleman, with three hundredth men, assaulted
Wether be in the night, where Sir Thomas Fayrefax, the good Lord Fayrefax son
lay in Garrison, but the Noble Knight, with six of his Soldiers, beat back Sir
Thomas whole company, having them in a narrow passage, and Sir Thomas Fayrefax
himself valiantly incountred Sir Thomas Glemans Sergeant Major, slew him, and
so had dealt with Sir Thomas Gleman himself, had he not been arrayed in a Coat
of Male, to maintain his Array Commission, with all, if that County had but
Commanders, the very Fowls being so shrewdly bitten by the Cavaliers, and the
City also, would all rise to assist my Lord Fayrefax, whom we hear is made
General of this County, which we are not a little glad of, for he has done
very good Service; and this day Captain Hotham and my Lords Regiment went to
meet my Lord of Newcastle coming toward York, and give them a sharp
Encounter, beat them back again to Durham, and I hope they will come no more.
So until meeting, am

Altherton this 2. of December 1642. Your friend and Servant, THOMAS JESLAND.

FINIS.

