Heaven upon Earth: OR, THE BEST FRIEND IN THE WORST of TIMES. Delivered in
several Sermons, By JAMES JANEWAY Minister of the GOSPEL.

The Third Edition much Corrected and Enlarged.

JOHN 15. ver. 15. Henceforth I call you no more Servants, -- but Friends.

LONDON, Printed by T. Milbourn, for D. Newman, at the Kings-Armes in the
Poultry, the Corner of Grocers-Alley, MDCLXXI.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
WHen I consider what a noble thing the Soul of Man is, the High end for which
he was Made, and the great Account he is shortly to make to Him that made him,
I cannot but wonder, That he who was made little lower than the Angels, should
make himself little better than the Beasts.

The great and dreadful God has taken much pains to reduce the Inhabitants of
London, and indeed all the Nation to the Obedience of his Son. He has been
pleading with poor England of late in such a manner, as is scarce to be
paralleled in foregoing Ages; he has left the print of his Fingers behind
him, and written divine displeasure in Black Letters.

The Righteous Judge began his Circuit in London, and in that one City, above
one Hundred Thousand received the Sentence of Death from his Just Tribunal.

That was not quite Removed before another Amazing Judgment was sent to succeed
it. The Voice of the Lord was not heard, the Language of the Plague was not
understood; wherefore the dreadful Jehovah spoke Louder, and Louder, as he did
once from Mount Sinai, in Fire, Flame, and Smoke; he rode upon the Wings of the
Wind, he rode in a Chariot of Flaming Fire, whilst the Bells did Ring their own
Knells, as they were Tumbling; and it is to be feared, were more melted at the
Anger of the Mighty God, than Thousands of Hard hearted Men and Women were. The
Leads of the Churches were Dissolved into showers more easily far than stupid
Professors, that were wont to sit under them. That was a Black Cloud indeed
which no Wind could blow over, till it fell in such Scalding Drops.

These things Considered, I hope it will not be unwelcome, nor unseasonable, if
I put you upon looking out for such a Friend as will provide sufficiently for
his under all these Straits, and prove the Best in the Worst of Times. He knows
Job upon the Dunghill, as well as David upon the Throne; he will be most Kind
when others are most Unkind; he will Visit you, when others will scarce Look
upon you. In his House you shall be as welcome as ever. There are many
Mansions, if it were not so, he would have told you. In this City there is Room
enough, and you shall have Entertainment, etc. be more Welcome than if you had
stayed away: His Doors will be open to them who have no Houses to hide their
Heads in. Come to him ye Harberless ones, he Invites you Earnestly and
Heartily, etc. He will give you Shelter, you that have no Friends, or but sorry
ones. Come to him now in your Straits, and he will never cast your Poverty, or
his Kindness in your Teeth; except your Carriage be Proud, and unbecoming your
State. God has lately read us a Lecture of the Vanity of all Creature
Enjoyments, And will you after this refuse Acquaintance with Him, who will be
better to you than a thousand of the best friends that ever man had upon Earth?

I have in the following Book given you Directions how you may come to be
Acquainted with Him.

As God appointed Cities of Refuge, so he gave express Command, that the way to
them should be made Plain, Fit, and Broad: And therefore the Messengers work
every Year was to Remove all Stumbling Blocks, and Offenses. They suffered not
any Hill or Dale to be in the way, and at the partition of ways, they set up
in writing, Refuge, Refuge, That the Pursued might have notice what way to take
upon every turn, Deuteronomy. 19.2, 3.

The like I haved endeavored in this ensuing Discourse, to make the Way to
this Blessed Friend Plain and Familiar. Pray for a Blessing upon it, which cost
the Author some Pains, Prayers, Tears, and Groans; That what was here written
might be the Transcript of his own Experience, and might be some way
subservient to the Glory of God in the Conversion and Comfort of Souls. If you
find any good in the use of this Book, give God the Praise, and labor to keep
a constant warm sense of the Excellency of such a Friend upon your Spirits, and
commend this Friend to all your Relations and Acquaintance; that none of them
after great Losses, may lose God, Heaven, and themselves too. O that will be a
Dreadful Loss indeed! I again beseech you; forget not to Pray for one of the
most unworthy instruments that ever Infinite Goodness made use of in so
glorious a Work:

James Janeway.
July 20. 1669.
HEAVEN UPON EARTH.
Job 22.21. Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at Peace, thereby good shall
come unto thee.


THey who have improved their experience of things by Wisdom, and gathered up
the value of man's life, by comparing his desire with his Enjoyments, his
Troubles and Sorrows with his Content and Joy, have concluded the worth of the
life of man to be below nothing; they have drawn a black line upon the whole,
and shut up all in darkness. Thus Jacob of old in the account which he gives of
his life to Pharaoh, Genesis 47.9. and Job 5.7. And also Solomon, who had an
extraordinary measure of wisdom by Divine dispensation, who had a large spirit
like the Sand of the Seashore, he gave himself great liberty in trying what
that good under the Sun for the sons of men was, Eccles. 2.1. When he had taken
a taste of all the worlds Contents. yet he finds a bitterness mixed in all
delights, which abides no longer then the pleasure verse. 11, and 17. And
whosoever shall enter into himself, and feel the workings of his own mind,
shall be able to read over the Transcript of the same in his own Conscience.
Who is he among the sons of men, that in his Natural life has attained to a
state where in he was able to say, Here I will stay, it is now well with me, I
desire no addition to my present condition? If there be any such, I dare
undertake to prove him unacquainted with himself. Where now shall I fasten the
blame of this universal evil? Shall we fall out with our life, as a thing not
worth the having? Shall we shrink unto our former nothing, and cast up our
being and life into the hands of God, as that out of which we gathered nothing
but bitterness and disquiet? Far be this from us, this were to justify that
evil and wicked servant, who said of God, That he knew he was a hard Master,
reaping where he had not sown, and gathering where he had not strawed. This
would be to accuse God of having made us to an unavoidable necessity of misery.
How then comes it to pass, that we are all held fast in this common calamity?
It is from thy self, O man, it is from thy self; this evil is because of our
falling from God. It is a Righteous thing with God, that when man departed from
him, he should reap the Fruit of his own doings; and indeed it is impossible
for a creature of our composure and constitution, but to feel it self
dissatisfied with all worldly material employments, and to find trouble and
disquiet in it self, while it is deprived of its true good. If we would have a
true account of our disquiet and dissatisfaction, this it is. God made man of
all the works of his hands, to be the nearest to himself, and has fitted his
principles for a higher life, then that which has the things of this world for
its object; but man has made himself like the Beasts that perish. We have
given our souls into captivity to our bodies, or rather, we are fallen from our
Union with God, and are gathered up into our selves, and become deprived of a
sufficiency in separation from God; then it must needs be, that we being gone
down into a lower state than that which we were made to, should find nothing
but dissatisfaction and emptiness; here we are by nature, and hitherto we have
brought our selves by forsaking God.

Now the great inquiry will be, what Remedy there is for this our woeful
condition; is there any way whereby we may be delivered from this misery? if
there be, what way is it? These words which I have chosen to speak to, do
contain the Answer to this Inquiry.

Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at peace, thereby good shall come unto
thee. This is the counsel of one of Job's three friends to him in the time of
his great affliction. You have heard of the affliction of Job, and how his
three friends came to relieve him with their Counsel; but the Devil who had a
Commission from God to try his utmost with Job, yet sparing his life, made use
of his friends, who are to be a comfort in the hour of adversity, to be a great
means of his disquiet, so that he cries out of them, Aliserable comforters are
ye all, Chap 16.2. And the great way of their troubling him was, by
mis-applying, by making false application of true principles. In their
Discourses there are many excellent Truths; yet by their hard construing, and
ungrounded condemning of him, they by God are reproved, as not having spoken
the thing that was right, Chap. 41.7. yet in many things their counsel was
suitable, and seasonable, of which sort, the words in the Text may be
accounted. In this Chapter Eliphaz had been inquiring into the cause of Job's
great affliction, and holding this for an undeniable Principle, that the
righteous God, being the great disposer of affliction, did bring this evil upon
him because of his sin; he measured the greatness of his sins, by the greatness
of his afflictions; he made account, because Gods hand was gone forth in an
extraordinary manner against Job, therefore there was some extraordinary guilt
upon him, verse. 5. and 13. And thou say, How does God judge through the dark
clouds? Thus we have his apprehension of Job, as one under great affliction,
because of his great sins; and the Text is Eliphaz his counsel to Job, under
this character; and so is suitable advice to those that are under sickness, or
great afflictions, and that are under the guilt of great sin.

Acquaint thy self with him, and be at peace, thereby good shall come unto
thee. The words are a Doctrine for the soul under a sense of its lost
condition, with a Promise very comfortable upon the embracing thereof.

The Doctrine is, Acquaint thy self with him, and be at peace.

The Promise: Thereby good shall come unto sher.

These words, Be at peace, may be referred either to the former, as an addition
to the Doctrine, Be at peace; that is, keep your selves in a quiet submission
to the hand of God; or to the latter, and so be at peace, is as much as, peace
shall be to thee.

In the Doctrine we are to consider the Act, and Object.

The Act, Aquaint.

The Object is God.

DOCTRINE.
So that the Doctrine is, To enter into acquaintance with God. This Proposition
stands forth to the view of every eye, that it is the Duty of man to be
acquainted with God.

Now the first thing that is before us to require after, is, What this
acquaintance with God is. Secondly, to evidence and clear it to be the Duty of
man to acquaint himself with God. Acquaintance with God implies several things.

1. It signifies a full and determinate knowledge of this Truth, that there is
a God, and so to know him, as to his Nature, distinct from all other beings.

There is a threefold Knowledge of God.

1. A Rational. 2. A Natural. 3. A Supernatural.
First, there is a Rational knowledge of God, which is a clear discovery of an
Almighty, All-sufficient Cause of all things, which is attained by a Reasonable
discussing Power of the Soul, which argues from things that are visible and
sensible to an invisible and self-principled Cause of all things. Man found
himself brought into the world furnished with an innumerable variety of
Creatures, and none of these having power to make it self; we see likewise such
an accurate order in every particular Creature; and in all the Creatures one
with another, that we cannot but see clearly that there is a Supreme Almighty
Cause of all things, who has by his power, brought forth all things into
being: who is likewise the most wise Agent, who by his unsearchable wisdom,
has curiously framed every Creature, and by his wonderful counsel has set
them in such an order, that they all serve one another, till at length they all
meet in man, as in the common center.

Secondly, there is a Natural knowledge of God, which is the inward touch, and
mental sensation of a Supreme Righteous Judge, to whose trial we feel our
selves under an unavoidable bond, in doing good and evil. This is that which is
commonly called Conscience: this a man finds in himself if at any time he have
committed any secret sin whatsoever, which none in the world knows but himself:
he feels it to be a pressure upon his spirit, as being under the examination of
a power superior to himself. Now this is nothing else but a secret impression
that God has made of himself upon the minds. of Men, by which man is bound to
stand before the Tribunal of God. These two ways of knowing of God were very
clear to man in his perfect state, but since the fall of man they are much
weakened, and decayed. But,

Thirdly, There is a supernatural way whereby we come to know God which has
repaired our loss by Adams sin, and that is by Gods extraordinary Revelation of
himself in his holy Scriptures: by these, we may come to have a more clear
distinct knowledge of God, both that he is, and what he is. To these three ways
of letting in the knowledge of God into the soul three mental Acts of the soul
do answer.

First, A Rational Discourse, by which we find out God by the Creatures.

Secondly, An inward sensation which feels God as just in good and evil.

The Third mental Act is Faith, which for its Foundation has the Word of God.

There is a Fourth way of knowing God which is by experiment; which is when God
manifests himself to his peculiar ones, and lets out the knowledge of himself
to their Souls; as when the Sun breaks forth with a bright shining in a cloudy
day: but this belongs rather to another head.

Thus you see the first thing employed in this acquaintance with God, which is
the lowest.

Yet how many are there that have little acquaintance with God in these signs?
May we not come to many who profess they know God, and yet among all their
thoughts, they have had few or none to satisfy themselves concerning him? How
gross are the apprehensions of some concerning God? Some men resist and stifle
that Natural knowledge that they have of God, such as those, Romans 1.20. they
did not like to retain God in their knowledge, and God gave them over to a
Repeobate mind, or a mind void of judgment, as the word signifies. Others have
lived all their days upon the bounty and goodness of God, and yet have not been
led by the streams to the Fountain, from which all has flowed. Others can
busy themselves all their time in other things, and little inquire into the
word of God, by which they may be led to the knowledge of him; But woe to those
on whom the fury of the Lord shall be poured out, because they know not God,
Jer. 10.23.

Secondly, Acquaintance with God, implies frequent access unto God. We do not
usually reckon our selves acquainted with any person, by a bare knowledge that
such a person there is, and that we are able to give some General Description
of him; but when we say we are acquainted with any, it is understood that we
have been in such a ones company, we have come to him, and been with him: such
is our acquaintance to be with God.

Under this Head I shall speak, First, Of that separation that is of the soul
from God. Secondly, Of the return of the soul to God. Thirdly, Of the abiding
of the soul with God.


First, Of the separation and distance of the soul from God. That corrupted
estate in which every man comes into the world, is a state of separation from
God. This distance is not to be understood as a Physical Natural Distance, for
so God is near to every one of us by his Omnipresence, and by his infinite
Power, sustaining us in our being and actions, Acts 17.27, 28. Though he be not
far from every one of us; for in him we live, move, and have our being. But
this is to be understood,

First, Of a moral separation from God. There is a great strangeness between
our souls and God: we reckon our selves to have little to do with him, and to
be very remotely concerned in him; we reckon that God takes very little regard
of us, we look upon God as far from us, and we think God looks upon us as at a
great distance; we love not God, and think that God loves not us.

Secondly, This separation may be understood of a Judicial Distance, at which
God has set sinful man from himself. Man is kept out from God, as being unfit
to approach to him in his sinfulness and impurities, and that is either in this
life, in which condition every one is, till he be made nigh by Christ, and set
before the Father without sin in him; till they are born again of the Spirit,
and justified, and sanctified by Christ, Ephesians. 2.13. Ye that sometimes were
afar off, were made near by the blood of Christ. Here this Judicial separation
is the execution of that terrible sentence, Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25.41. Thus ye see
the Distance at which man is from God, which is not Physical, but either Moral
or Judicial.

Secondly, When we are thus separated from God, if we will be acquainted with
him, there is required a returning to God. Acquaintance does necessarily imply
an Union: Now where there was a former separation and distance, there is
required a motion to compliance, and a return either in both parties, or in one
at least; so that before ever we can be acquainted with God, there must be a
forsaking our former distance, the separation must be removed. Now God has
done what could be conceived, and beyond what could be expected toward the
reducing of us, to an union with himself; whereas he might justly gave thrust
us away from him for ever, and never have given us liberty to come near him
more, as being so filthy by sin, that his Holiness cannot endure us: yet he
has freely set open 2 door of hope for our return: he did not come thus nigh
to Angels when they fell, but they were turned away from him, and are bound in
chains of darkness to the Judgment of the great day: it is impossible for them
to return any more. And so it would have been for us, had not God made it
possible by an Act of Free Love; and he has likewise revealed his willingness
to receive us if we return, yea, his earnest desire, Turn ye, way will ye die?
Yea, his rejoicing in our return, as a Father rejoices to receive a prodigal
Son that has departed from him. But that God should go further, to close with
us while we retain our impurities, and remain at a distance from him, it is
impossible, because of the unchangeableness and simplicity of his Nature, and
because of the purity and exactness of his Holiness; it must therefore
necessarily follow, that a yielding and return must be on our parts, or else
there is no possibility of compliance between God and us, after that we have
forsaken him by sin. And this is most righteous and equal; for man did forsake
God, God did not forsake man; man made the difference; man ran away from God:
God follows man as far as his Holiness and Unchangable naturn will permit him;
he calls to us to return, he is ready to meet and embrace us in the arms of his
Love, and to receive us into acquaintance with himself, as the Father in the
Parable met his prodigal Son, Luke 15.20. He saw him afar off, and had
compassion on him, ran and fell upon his neck and kissed him. Herein have we
shadowed out to us the great readiness of God to receive returning sinful man;
but as the Prodigal Son must return to his Father, so man must return to God.
Now it is sin that separates between us and God, and keeps good things from us,
Isa. 59.2. Your iniquity has separated between you and your God, and your sins
have hid his face from you: Therefore while we cleave to our sins, we are
separated from God: till we are separated from our sins, we cannot be united to
God. Thus ye see our separation from God, and our necessity of returning to
God, before there can be any acquaintance with him.

Thirdly, To our acquaintance with God, is required an abiding with God. We
reckon not our selves acquainted with any person upon the first meeting, or
when there has passed but a word or two between us; but it is supposed to
acquaintance, that we have made a considerable stay with him; and have had
frequent access to him. Thus it is between God and us: we must not only come to
him, but abide with him, or else we shall never be acquainted with him, Joh.
8.13. If ye continue in my Word, then are ye my Disciples. So I say, if you
return to God, and continue with God, then shall ye be acquainted with him
indeed. Acquaintance, signifies not a bare Act, but a State or Habit. Now this
is the difference between an Act and a State; that an Act is passing and is
gone; but a State signifies an abiding and continuance. There may be a drawing
nigh to God, without abiding and continuing with God, upon some deep
Conviction, or strange providence, or eminent danger; as it is said, In their
affliction, they will seek me early. Yet they may soon forget and forsake God.
This is but a seeming and practical approaching to God, a drawing nigh in
appearance, when the heart is far from God: but that approaching to God which
makes acquaintance with God, is abiding with him. Those that are acquainted
with a spiritual life know these things what they are, and that they are the
greatest realities in the world; they know that sometimes there is a greater
nearness of their souls to God, they are sensible of the approaches of their
heart to God; and of the withdrawing of their souls from God; they know what it
is for the soul to feel the approaches of God, and his smiles sill their souls
with unspeakable Comfort: And to feel God withdrawing from the soul, this
clouds their joy, and makes them go mourning: They can tell you at such a time
they were brought unto his Banqueting House, and his Banner over them was
Love: They can tell you at such time Christ came into his Garden to eat his
pleasant Fruits; at such a time they heard the voice of their Beloved, saying,
Open to me, my Sister, my Spouse, my Love, my Dove, my Undefiled. And when the
soul has neglected this knock of Christ to open to him, that then he has
withdrawn: I opened to my Beloved, but my Beloved had withdrawn himself, and
was gone. These things are the experiences of a precious child of God, which I
fear are little felt, and little known amongst us: but where these things are
not, there is no acquaintance with God. For,

First, They do know him.

Secondly, They draw nigh to him, they have near access to him.

Thirdly, They have intimate Converse with him. This is another thing required
to acquaintance. We are not said to be acquainted with any person, unless we
have had intimate converse with him. We may be next Neighbors, and yet have no
Acquaintance, unless our conversation has been mutual. So it is between God
and us; there may be a nighness between the Soul and God, and yet no
Acquaintance between the Soul and God. We are nigh to God, in our dependence
upon him, we are near to God by his immediate providence and sustentation of
us, and by his Omnipotence. There is a nearness to God by way of Dedication. As
God set apart the Children of Israel to be a people near unto himself; so the
visible Church of God is nearer to him then those that are not of the Church.
There is a nearness of Dedication among us by Baptism. But all this may be
without Acquaintance. There is therefore required to our Acquaintance with God,
an intimate converse with God. We have great converse with those who are of the
Family, or society with us. Now such is our acquaintance with God, as those who
are of his Family. God is called the Father of the Families of all the earth:
and the visible Church is reckoned as Gods Family; but in a great Family there
may be little Acquaintance with those persons which be of remote employments:
but to acquaintance with God there must be such a relation as implies familiar
converse. This intimacy that the people of God have to him, is expressed by the
nearest relations in Scripture. As Abraham is called The Friend of God. 2 Chronicles. 20.7. Jehoshaphat prays unto God, and says, Art not thon our God, who
did drive out the inhabitants of this land before thy people Israel, and gave
it to the seed of Abraham thy friend for ever? And the Lord spoke unto Moses
face to face, as a man speaks to his Friend, Exodus 33.11. John 15.15.
Henceforth I call you not servants, but friends, for the servant knows not what
his Lord does; but I have called you Friends, for all things that I have heard
of my Father, I have made known unto you. Now by Friend is commonly understood
a state of converse and society one with another. And this intimacy is
expressed likewise by the relation of Husband and Wife, Isa. 54.5. For thy
Maker is thy Husband, Hos. 2.7. Then shall she say, I will go and return to my
Husband, for then was it better with me than now. By Husband there is meant
God. And the whole Book of the Canticles is a relation of the mutual converse
betwixt God and his people, betwixt Christ and his Church, under the relation
of a Bridegroom and his Spouse. Now what converse more intimate than between
Husband and Wife? Such is that between a soul acquainted with God, and God.
Again, this is shadowed out to us under the relation of a Father and his
Children, 1 John 3.1. Behold, what manner of Love the father has be stowed
upon us, that we should be called his sons! And the holy Spirit is given to be
the Spirit of Adoption in the hearts of Gods people, Romans 8.15.16. Ye have
received the spirit of Adoption, whereby ye cry, Abba, Father. The spirit it
self bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God. What is
signified by this Relation but a nigh union and intimate converse between the
soul and God? And this is necessary to our acquaintance with God, even intimate
converse with God. By this I mean a nearness of employment, when the Objects of
our employments are the same, then are we said to converse with God, when we
are employed about those things wherein God is most. When there is, as it were,
a mutual commerce and trading between the soul and God; man giving himself up
to God, and God giving himself out to man; man taking up the interest of God,
and God undertaking for the interest of man: these and such like actings are
the converse which the soul has with God. I speak of things which the men of
the world are not acquainted with; but those that are acquainted with God, know
these things, and upon the mention of them, their hearts leap within them. As
face answers to face in a glass, so experience answers these things. When
this string is struck, their hearts do harmonize; as when a Lute-string is
struck, the other strings of nighest concord with it move also. But these
things are a mystery to the world, and they say as those of Christ's word, We
know not what he says. And it is no wonder, for they are the actings of a
Divine life, to which all are naturally dead, till they are raised to newness
of life by the quickening of the spirit of God. But I proceed to show what is
meant by this acquaintance with God.

Fourthly, To this Acquaintance with God, there is required a mutual
Communication. Where there is acquaintance between man and man, there has been
a mutual Interchange of conference and discourse. Thus when the soul is
acquainted with God, there is an Interchange of conference between God and the
soul. The soul opens its wants, breaths out its complaints, spreads its
necessities before God; God opens the treasures of his love in his Son, the
rich Mines of his precious Promises, and the secrets of his good Will to the
soul. Thus Psalm. 25.15. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and
he will show them his Covenant. Genesis 18.17. The Lord says, shall I hide from
Abraham the thing that I do? Those that are friends and acquaintance, they will
let out their thoughts and purposes one to another, and they gave out
themselves mutually into communion one with another. Thus Christ's knocks at the
door of the soul, Rev. 3.20. Behold, I stand at the door and knock: if any man
hear my voice and open the door, I will come in and sup with him, and he with
me. Here is Christ offering himself to the soul, and the soul is to entertain
him; at another time the soul goes to God, and God entertains it; God has
promised that he will open, Mat. 7.28. Knock and it shall be opened unto you;
and to him that knocks it shall be opened. There are frequent actions among
those that are acquainted: And by these are expressed to us the acquaintance of
the soul with God.

Now the Communications that are between the soul and God, are exceeding
transcending all communications that are between men's acquaintance. Men may
communicate their thoughts, their estates, their assistance to one another; but
they cannot communicate their life, nor their nature, nor their likeness, but
such communications there are between God and the soul that is acquainted with
him. All being is a communication from God the first being: nay, the several
degrees of being, have several communications from God, some greater and some
lesser, spiritual beings have a higher communication then natural; but Gods
highest communications have been to man in that mystical Union of the Divine
Nature to the Humane Nature in Christ, and next in the mystical Union of the
Sons of God to Christ, and in him to the Father. Thus Christ is said to live in
us, Colos. 2.20. I live, says Paul; yet not I, but Christ lives in me. Thus
Christ prays the Father for his Children, that they may be one, as thou Father
art in me, and I in thee; that they be one in us, Joh. 4.17, 21. and Joh. 1.15,
16. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwells in him,
and he in God. He that dwells in love, dwells in God, 2 Pet. 1.4. We are
said to be partakers of the Divine Nature. This expression implies high
communication of God to man. Again, there are high acts of communication from
man to God (for though God receives not from man, yet man is to act as giving
out himself to God;) such as to give up the will to Gods will. As that of Eli,
It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. And that of David, 2 Samuel
15.16. If he thus say, I have no delight in thee, behold, here am I, let him do
with me as seems good unto him.

Another act of high Communication of a man's self to God, is parting with
present enjoyments for future hopes, in confidence of Gods promise. Thus the
Spirit of God works in the children of God a readiness to forsake Father or
Mother, and Brethren, and Sister, and life it self for the cause of God. Thus
John Baptist was willing to become Nothing, that Christ might become All; to be
cast down, that Christ might be lifted up, Joh. 3.13. He must increase, but I
must decrease. Thus Abraham gives his Isaac to dye when God calls for him.
Thus Moses esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of
Egypt, Heb. 11.26. Paul counted not his life dear for Christ, Acts 20.24. These
have been the actings of the souls of those that have been acquainted with God;
and such workings as these are the feeling of a child of God.

I have showed you four things which are requisite to acquaintance with God.

First, Knowledge of God.

Secondly, access to him.

Thirdly, Converse with him.

Fourthly, Communication to him, and from him.

Fifthly, There is likewise required to acquaintance, a loving compliance.
Amongst men Acquaintance implies Affection. And so it is between God and Man.
Never any soul was acquainted with God, that did not love God; and such a soul
is an enemy to God; therefore very few are acquainted with God; but all that
are not acquainted with God, are enemies to God. If we should come to a person
that is not acquainted with God, and say, Thou art an enemy to God; this would
seem a heavy imputation: but I speak it freely, thou, whosoever thou art, that
art not acquainted with God, thou art an enemy to God; for thou art still as
thou we'rt born: but we are all enemies to God according to our corrupt nature,
and abide enemies till we come to be acquainted with God. Love to God, and
acquaintance with God go together, are heightened by one another. First, God
lets into the soul by his Spirit a partial discovery of himself, and by this
with the working of his Spirit, he incline the heart in love to him. Then on
the first working of the soul toward God, he lets in a clear light, whereby he
draws the soul to a further degree of love. A clear place for this, Ephesians.
3.17, 18. And that being rooted and grounded in love, ye may be able to
comprehend with all Saints, what is the length, and breadth, and depth, and
height, and to know the love of God which passes all understanding: that ye
might be filled with all the fullness of God. The love of God fits the soul to
comprehend the glorious discoveries of God; and the discoveries of God, does
heighten our love to God. Acquaintance with God, makes us like unto God, as in
Joh. 3.2. We shall see him as he is. And our likeness to God, as it makes us
the delight of God, so it makes us delight in God; for the cause of Complacency
and Love is a likeness between the Lover and Beloved. God does not love us with
a love of complacency, till we are like him; nor do we love God, till we are
made like God. Now our beholding God, and being acquainted with him, is a great
way to our being made like to God, 2 Cor. 3.18. We all with open faoe,
beholding as in a glass, the glory of the Lord. are changed into the same
Image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. Thus you see
that love is likewise required to our acquaintance with God; without it no
acquaintance.

I have in the first part, spoken of the Nature of acquaintance with God in
five particulars. There must be,

First, A Knowledge of God.

Secondly, Nigh access to God.

Thirdly, Familiar converse with God.

Fourthly, Mutual communication between us and God.

Fifthly, An affectionate love toward God.

The next thing should be to show that man is to be acquainted with God; but we
will first take a review of these things. We have taken these things into our
understandings; now let us set our hearts to these things, for in these things
is the life of Religion. If there be acquaintance with God, then gross
wickedness drops off, as scales from an ulcerated body, when the constitution
of the body is mended. In acquaintance with God will be your only true comfort
in this life; and the perfection of it, is the very happiness of Heaven. Let us
then behold, till our hearts earnestly desire, till our souls be drawn out
after acquaintance with God. If God be to be known, to be approached unto, to
be conversed with by me, will he communicate himself to me? and I my self to
him. Oh that he would love me, that I might love him! Oh blessed are they that
know him, as they are known of him! It is good for me to draw night to him. A
day in his Court is better than a thousand elsewhere. My soul longs, ye
faints for the Courts of the Lord. My heart and my flesh cries out for the
living God. Oh that I were received into converse with God! that I night hear
his voice, and see his countenance, for his voice is sweet, and his countenance
comely! Oh that I might communicate my self to God, and that he would give
himself to me! Oh that I might love him! that I were sick of Love! that I might
die in love! that I might lose my self in his Love, as a small drop in the
unfathomless depth of his Love! that I might dwell in the eternal love of him?
This is acquaintance with God.

Acquaint now therefore thy self with God, and be at peace, so shall good come
unto thee. We now proceed to the next thing, which is to evidence it to be the
duty of man, to acquaint himself with God. This then is that into which the
whole Scripture runs, as into a common Channel. The Scriptures are a discovery
of Gods proceedings with man under a double Covenant, and this is the great
design of God in both Covenants. The first Covenant was, That while man did
remain in obedience to God, God would give man free and intimate acquaintance
with himself. But if man became disobedient, then he should be dispossessed of
an interest in God, and of Communion with him; which was that death threatened
upon the eating the forbidden Fruit. The death of the body is its being
separated from the Soul; but the death of the Soul, is in separation from God.
Now immediately upon Adams transgression, man becomes unacquainted with God; so
that upon the hearing of the voice of the Lord, they hid themselves from the
presence of the Lord, among the trees of the garden. What a woeful case is man
naturally in? He has lost his acquaintance with God, and was in a way, never,
never to recover it: upon Gods approach he flees. And such is the nature of all
sin, it puts a man into a disposition to greater sins: Every departure from God
inclines toward a greater. In the first Covenant this is the whole of it; it
is both a command to keep nigh to God, and a promise of Gods being nigh to
them, and a threatening of Gods putting them away far from him, man breaking the
first Covenant. The immediate effect of it was the sin of fleeing from God,
quite contrary to that acquaintance. Instead of their former apprehensions of
God, they seem to have forgotten his omnipresence; instead of peace with God,
they have nothing but dread and torment in the thoughts of God; instead of
drawing nigh to God, they run away from him; instead of converse with God, they
choose never to have to do with him more; instead of giving themselves up to
God, they if it had been possible, would have hid themselves from God.
Acquaintance with God is the sum of the first Covenant; unacquaintance with God
is the misery of the breach of the Covenant. This is likewise the great design
and purpose of God in the second Covenant. The second Covenant is this: When
God beheld man in a miserable condition, by reason of the breach of the Frst
Covenant, in the unsearchable riches of his goodness, according to the eternal
purpose of his good Will toward Man, he made an agreement with his Son to send
him amongst a generation of sinful Men, that if he would undertake to bring
them back into acquaintance with the Father; he was willing and ready to
receive them again into acquaintance with him; the Son being the express Image
of his Fathers will, and person, has the same good will to man with the
Father, and is ready to close with his Fathers proposals; and so enters into a
Covenant with the Father to satisfy Divine Justice, and to take away Sin, and
to take away the middle wall of Separation, to recover a chosen generation, and
to bring them back again to God. Thus he became the head of another Covenant
between God and man. And as the first Covenant was made with Adam for him and
his seed; So the second Covenant is made with Jesus Christ, for him and his
seed. Because that the first Covenant was broken in Adam, therefore the second
Covenant was put into surer hands, into the hands of the Son, the second Adam,
the Lord from heaven. Now I say that the great design and purpose of this
second Covenant is in reference to man's acquaintance with God, is clear. This
is held forth to us in that parable of the lost sheep, Luke 15.45. When the
shepherd had lost one sheep, he leaves the flock, and seeks for that which was
lost. So when man was lost by sin, Jesus Christ leaves all, to recover and
fetch home that which was lost, We are all gone astray like lost sheep, as David
says of himself, Psalm. 119. Christ is come to seek and to save that which was
lost, Luke 19.10. and Ephesians. 2.13, 14. But now in Christ Jesus they who
sometimes were afar-off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ; for he is our
peace, who has made both one. In verse the tenth, is a description of our
state withour Christ, being aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, being
strangers from the Covenant of promise, and having no hope, and without God in
the world. This is a description of our unacquaintance with God. But Christ
makes up the breach, and that by a double Act.

First, by Covenant with the Father, to make man sit for communion with him.

Secondly, His giving man assurance that the Father will receive him upon his
return.

This then is the great design in all those glorious accomplishments of Christ
for this, he left his Fathers bosom, that he might bring us into acquaintance
with the Father; for this end did he who thought it no robbery to be equal with
the Father, make himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a
servant, and was made in the likeness of man; and being sound in fashion of a
man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
Cross, that he might bring man into a reunion with God; for this end did
Christ live a wearisome troublesome life among a company of Rebels and
Enemies, as if a man should live among Toads and Serpents: So that he cried
out, as weary of any longer abiding with them, Oh faithless generation! How
long shall I be with you? How long shall I suffer you? For this did he make
himself an offering for sin; that by taking away sin, he might bring men to
God. This is the great purpose of Christ in all his offices. Ye have heard of
the three Offices of the Mediator, that he is a Priest, a Prophet and a King.
This is the end of the Priestly Office. The purpose of Christ's offering up
himself a Sacrifice, was by satisfying the justice of God, to make way for
sinners return to God. This is the end of his prophetical Office, to lead men
into knowledge and acquaintance with God. This is the end of his Kingly Office;
that governing them, and ruling their hearts by his Spirit, he might
effectually bring men to God, to acquaintance with him. Now then, since this is
the great design of God in his great dispensation toward man, to keep men in
acquaintance with himself, and to reduce him when he had lost it; does it not
concern us to do our part for the bringing to pass this great work? shall God
lose his end in making us, and in setting man in the world every way furnished
for his service? and shall God lose his end in sending his Son to receive us,
when we had forsaken him? Shall Christ leave his Fathers bosom to bring us home
to the Father, and shall we refuse to return? Shall he pour out his soul, an
offering for sin, that he might make way for our access to God, that we who
were far off, might be made nigh by the blood of Christ? and shall we frustrate
all by our refusing to go to him? shall Christ come and offer us his help and
direction to come to the Father, and shall we abide still strangers? Shall the
Kings Son come into our Cottages to invite us to dwell with his Father at
Court, and shall we shut the door upon him, esteeming our Cottages better than
his Palace?

Secondly, It is the duty of man to acquaint himself with God, because therein
is the improvement of his highest excellency. Every one acknowledges an
excellency in man, above all the rest of this lower world: Now what is this
excellency of man? Is it not that he is made in a capacity of knowing God, and
enjoying God, and having Communion with God? This is the height of his glory,
Jer. 9.23, 24. Thus says the Lord, let not the wise man glory in his wisdom,
let not the mighty man glory in his might, nor the rich man in his riches; but
let him that glories glory in this, that he understands and knows me, that I
am the Lord that exercise loving kindness, and righteousness in the earth, and
judgment, for in these things I delight, says the Lord. Ye see here, wherein
man is to glory, for which he may value himself as truly glorious. In his
understanding, and knowing of God, man stands above the rest of the
Creatures, in that he is a rational intellectual Agent. This is part of the
Image of God, even knowledge, Col. 3.15 which is renewed in knowledge after the
Image of him that created him. The nigher any thing resembles God, the greater
is the excellency of that thing: now in this we resemble God more than any
other Creature, in that we are knowing, understanding Agents; and the highest
improvement of this excellency of man is in the knowledge of God, and
acquaintance with God, Prove. 20.27. The spirit of a man is called the candle of
the Lord; that is, it is a light set up in the soul, to direct the soul to a
discovery of God. This is the highest improvement of our greatest excellency,
and this is the excellency of man above other Creatures: this is that whereby
one man excels another. Who are those whose names are as precious ointment
poured forth? who are those which have obtained a good report? Are not they
those who were most acquainted with God? Enock is said to walk with God; an
expression which signifies intimate acquaintance with God; and therefore was
translated that he should not see death. And Noah, whose family alone was
preserved when God destroyed the old World by water, he was said to walk with
God, Genesis 6.9. Among all the sons of men he kept close to God; and God took
care of him alone. Abraham who was the Father of the Faithful, he was called
the Friend of God. Moses who was the Mediator of the old Covenant, he was said
to speak with God face to face, as a man speakoth to his friend. I might make
mention of many more, who were the excellent ones of the earth; because they
did delight in God, and God delighted in them, Mal. 3.16, 17. They that feared
the Lord, spoke often one to another; and the Lord hearkened and heard: and the
book of remembrance was written for them that fear the Lord, and that thought
upon his name: And they shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in the day when
I make up my Jewels. Ye see how God accounts of those that are of his
acquaintance, that met together and spoke of God, and that thought upon his
name; he reckons them amongst his Jewels his peculiar Treasure: Such honor
have all those that are acquainted with God. Ye see then the excellency of man
above all the rest of the other Creatures. Now if man fail in this which is his
highest excellency, he will become the vilest of Creatures. Every thing if it
fail in its chiefest end and purpose, and highest excellency, becomes base and
of no account: If salt lose its savor (says our Savior) it is good for
nothing. If man have lost his acquaintance with God, he is henceforth good for
nothing. The mind of man is his eye, by which he is to behold God; now if this
eye be blind, if the light be darkness, how great is that darkness! The Jews in
Ezekiel. 15.1. are likened to a Vine, which, if it be barren, is good for no use:
Shall wood be taken thereof for any work? It is fit for nothing but to burn. So
it is in man, his great use and excellency is his acquaintance with God: now if
he fails in this, he is good for nothing. Verily, man is a base, vile worthless
thing without acquaintance with God. None are less esteemed among men, than
they that want wisdom to converse among men. None are less esteemed before
God, than they that know him not, that have not acquaintance with him, to
converse with him. Ye see wherein the excellency and worth of man consists,
and that if there be a deformity, where ought to be our chiefest beauty, the
whole is accounted as a deformed piece. It concerns us then to look that we
keep our glory unspotted, our excellency in its due value; that we do not
degrade our selves below what God has placed us in. If we are not acquainted
with God, our souls serve us to little purpose: it is a causing the Prince, the
Soul, to go on foot, and to serve the body, which should be as a servant; it is
to let the candle of the Lord burn out in waste.

Thirdly, Another enforcement of this duty of Acquaintance with God, is this.
If we refuse acqaintance with God, it is a slighting the greatest of all the
mercies that God bestows. Favors are to be valued, either by their proper
excellencies, or according to the good will of him that bestows them: both
these ways this is to be accounted the greatest of mercies. In Gods giving us
leave to be acquainted with him, he gives out himself to be known, to be loved,
to be conversed with, to be enjoyed. What greater gift can God give then
himself? God is the portion of his people, he is the greatest portion, the
surest, the most suitable, and the only durable portion. Thus they that know
him esteem of him, Psalm. 73.26. My flesh and my heart fails, but God is the
strength of my heart, and portion for ever, Psalm. 16.5, 6. The Lord is the
portion of mine inheritance: the lines are fallen to me in a pleasant place;
yea, I have a goodly heritage. Blessed are the people that are in such a case;
yea, blessed are the people whose God is the Lord. No greater mercy can be
bestowed upon any people, family, or person, than this, for God to dwell among
them. If we value this mercy according to the excellency and worth of that
which is bestowed, it is the greatest; if we value it acording to the good will
of him that gives it, it will appear likewise to be the greatest favor. The
greatness of the good will of God in giving himself to be our acquaintance, is
evident in the nature of the gift. A man may give his estate to them to whom
his love is not very large; but he never gives himself but upon strong
affection. God gives abundantly to all the works of his hands, he causes the
Sun to shine upon the evil, and upon the good; and the rain to descend upon the
just and the unjust: But it cannot be conceived, that he should give himself to
be a Portion, a friend, Father, Husband, but in abundance of Love. Whosoever
therefore shall refuse acquaintance with God, slighted the greatest favor that
ever God did bestow upon man. Now consider what a high charge this is; to abuse
such a kindness from God, is an act of the greatest vileness. David was never
so provoked, as when the King of Ammon abused his kindness in his Ambassadors,
after his fathers death. And God is highly provoked when his greatest mercies,
bestowed in the greatest love, are rejected, and cast away. What could God give
more and better than himself? And how heavy will this imputation be! These are
those that look upon God, as not worth being acquainted with. Let us therefore
consider how we shall be able to stand to these Accusations. Shall we not be
speechless, when these things shall be charged upon us? Shall we not be
confounded, when we stand to the trial of him to whom we had offered these
great indignities? How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation, so
great a mercy?

Fourthly, It concerns us to acquaint our selves with God, for without it we
are in a necessity of sin, and misery.

1. The soul unacquainted with God is in a necessity of sinning, Ephesians. 4.14.
Having their understanding darkened, alienated from the life of God, through
the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their hearts. For
want of acquaintance with God, every thought and imagination of their heart is
evil continually, Romans 30.10, 11. There is none righteous, no not one. There is
none that understands, there is none that seeks after God. Not understanding,
nor seeking after God, is the necessary cause that there is none does good. The
soul of man is an Active being, which is continually in motion; if it be not in
motion to God and in God, it will be in motion from God. Hence it is that the
prayer of the wicked is an abomination: that which goes for prayer, God abhors,
because they are not acquainted with him, Isa. 1.3. The ox knows his owner, and
the ass his masters crib, but Israel does not know me, verse. 13, 14. To this,
says he, your incense is abomination unto me, their new moons and sabbaths,
the calling of assemblies, I cannot away with; it is iniquity, even your solemn
meetings. Now the reason why there is a necessity of sin without acquaintance
with God, is, because whatsoever is not done with a good heart, is not good,
Luke 6.45. The good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth
good fruit, and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart brings
forth evil fruit: for out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks. As
an evil tree cannot bring froth good fruit, so an evil heart cannot bring forth
a good action. Now without knowledge, the heart is not good, Prove. 19.2. That
the soul be without knowledge is not good. And there is no knowledge like the
knowledge of God, And acquaintance with him, to make the heart good, Hos. 4.2.
Because there is not truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land;
therefore by swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing
adultery, they break out, etc. Thus want of knowledge of God, and acquaintance
with God, we may plainly see, is the necessary cause of sin. Now there is no
greater evil on this side Hell then that of a necessity of sinning, 2, Pet.
2.14. Those of which it is said, they cannot cease from sinning, are called
cursed children. He that chooses any sin rather than affliction, does it
through the blindness of his mind. This is laid as a heavy accusation, Job
39.21. For this have thou chosen rather than affliction. To choose iniquity
rather than affliction, is the greatest folly imaginable. It is one great part
of the misery of Hell, that they never cease from sinning; and this is the
greatest misery on earth, our being so much under the power of sin. I appeal to
any gracious soul that has the feeling of the burden of sin; what is it is
great trouble and sorrow? is it not because of sin? What are his secret moans
to God? is it not the sense of corruption? Oh wrethed man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death, says Paul, Romans 7. He had been
complaining of the mass of corruption that did still press hard upon him, and
in the strong workings of his spirit against it, he calls it The body of death.
It was as grievous to him as if he had been bound to a stinking rotten carcass.
How wretched then is the state of every soul unacquainted with God? Who can do
nothing but sin, because they want the right rule of action, a right pattern of
imitation, a right principle for action, a right object for action, a right end
for action, the only assistance of action. It concerns us then as we make any
difference between good and evil, if we have any respect unto holiness and
purity before sin and iniquity, to see to get acquaintance with God; because
without acquaintance with God, we are in a woeful necessity of sinning.

2. Without acquaintance with God, we are in a necessity of misery. Indeed sin
is a great misery; and to be in a necessity of sinning, is part of the
necessity of misery. But besides that, there is a necessity of misery of
another kind. What is the great employment of men unacquainted with God? Men
labor in the very fire, and weany themselves for very vanity, Habak. 2.13.
This was the misery of men, because they know not God. But in verse 14. there
is a promise of better days, When the earth shall be filled with the glory of
the Lord, as the waters cover the sea. Then and not till then will there be a
deliverance from laboring in the fire when there is the knowledge of God. The
reason of it is, because true satisfaction and peace cannot be, till our
desires and enjoyments are alike; and this cannot be, till the soul is
acquainted with God: For nothing can fill up the desires of the soul but God.
The soul of man is mighty spacious, so that it cannot be filled with the world;
and while it feels an emptiness, it still cries out for more, and cannot be
filled till it be filled with the fullness of God, Ephesians. 3.19. The prodigal son
had nothing but husks to feed upon, when he was gone from his fathers house; he
would feign have filled his belly with the husks, but could not; they were not
food for the soul. When we are departed from God, we have nothing to feed on
but the world, and we would fill our souls with the world, but cannot; for it
is not food for the soul. Acquaintance with God is the food of the soul. Job
23.12. I have esteemed the words of his mouth, more then my necessary food. So
that a soul that is not acquainted with God, is famished for want of food,
Psalm. 42.2. My soul thirsts for God, for the living God. When shall I come
and appear before God? David was acquainted with God, but for want of an
actual enjoyment, how does he here breath out the trouble of his spirit? As the
Heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God. The
soul is still panting. Some pant after the dust of the earth, Amos 2.7. These
were of the Serpents seed, whose curse from God was, Dust shall thou eat: but
the seed of Christ, they pant for God, and they that pant after God shall be
filled with the fullness of God: but he that pants after any thing besides
God, will never find any fullness; he will feed as upon the dust of the earth.
And what can follow but dissatisfaction and misery? Acquaintance with God is
the only way to be freed from a necessity of sin and misery.

Fifthly, Acquaintance with God is the duty of man, because God himself does
acquaint himself with man. Shall the King seek after acquaintance with the
meanest of his Subjects, and he refuse acquaintance with his Sovereign? shall
God acquaint himself with man, and shall not man acquaint himself with God! It
is expected among men, that the inferior should seek for acquaintance with the
Superior, and not the Superior to the inferior; but yet God out of his
wonderful love has sought first to man for acquaintance. Thus Prove. 8.31. it
is said concerning the son of God, who is meant by the Eternal Wisdom of the
Father, that he rejoiced in the habitable parts of the earth, and his delight
was with the sons of men. If God thus delights in converse and acquaintance
with the sons of men, how much more ought men to rejoice in converse and
acquaintance with God, Isa. 65.1. God says, I am found of them that sought me
not. All men were departed from God, and not a man that did seek after God;
there is none that understands or seeks after God, yet God is found of them.
The good shepherd seeks his lost sheep, before the sheep sought him, Cant. 5.2.
When the soul is asleep, it hears the voice of its Beloved that knocks, saying,
Open to me my sister, my love, my dove, my underfiled, Revel. 3.20. There
Christ says to the revolting Church, that he was ready to spew them out of his
mouth, Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if any man will hear me, and
open the door, I will come in and sup with him, and he with me, Psalm 68 18.
Thou have ascended on high, thou have led captivity captive, thou have received
gifts for men, yea for the rebellious also that the Lord God might dwell among
them. Is it not becoming then that man should open when God knocks? He seeks to
dwell among the rebellious; is it not fit that man should enter into
acquaintance with God, when God does thus acquaint himself with man? Thus I
have opened to you the Nature of Acquaintance with God, and evidenced it to be
the Duty of Man, to acquaint himself with God; let us now make some improvement
of this Truth.

USE 1.
First, Is there to be an acquaintance between the soul and God? Let us then
stand and wonder at the great condescension of God! This may surprise our souls
with an ecstasy of admiration, that God should dwell with man; that the mighty
Jehovah should have such respect to the work of his hands, Psalm. 113.5, 6. Who
is like unto the Lord, who dwells on high, who humbled himself to behold the
things that are in heaven, and in earth? The Psalmist admireth God, that he
humbled himself to behold things that are in heaven; and how much more then is
he to be admired, that he humbled himself to acquaint himself with man? Let us
than be filled with admiration, that God should take us so nigh unto himself.
As Psalm. 8.4. What is man that thou art mindful of him! or the son of man that
thou should visit him! And Joh. 7.17, 18. What is man that thou should,
magnify him! and that thou should set thy heart upon him! and that thou
should visit him every morning! Man in the pride of his heart sees no such
great matter in it, but an humble soul is filled with astonishment, Isa: 57.15.
Thus says the high and lofty One, which inhahiteth eternity, whose name is
Holy; I dwell in the high and holy place: with him also that is of a contrite
and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart
of the contrite ones. Oh says the humble soul, will the Lord have respect unto
such a vile worm as I am? will the Lord acquaint himself with such a sinful
wretch as I am? Will the Lord open his arms, his bosom, his heart to me? shall
such a loathsome creature as I find savor in his eyes? In Ezekiel. 16.15. We have
a relation of the wonderful condescension of God to man, who is there resembled
to a wretched infant cast out in the day of its birth in its blood, and
filthiness, no eye pitying it; such loathsome creatures are we before God, and
yet when he passed by, and saw us polluted in our blood, he said unto us, live.
It is doubled, because of the strength of its nature, it was the time of Love,
verse. 8. This was love indeed, that God should take a filthy, wretched thing,
and spread his skirts over it, and cover its nakedness, and swear unto it, and
enter into a covenant with it, and make it his; that is, that he should espouse
this loathsome thing to himself, that he would be an husband to it; this is
love unfathomable, love unconceivable, self-principled love; this, is the love
of God to man; for God is love: Oh the depth of the riches of the bounty and
goodness of God! How is his love wonderful, and his grace past finding our! How
do you find and feel your hearts affected upon the report of these things? do
you not see matter of admiration, and cause of wonder? Are you not, as it were,
lanched forth into an Ocean of goodness, where you can see no shore, nor feel
no bottom? Ye may make a Judgment of your selves by the motions and affections
that ye feel in your selves at the mention of this. For thus Christ judged of
the Faith of the Centurion, that said unto him, Lord I am not worthy that thou
should come under my roof, Mat. 8.8. When Jesus heard this, he marvailed,
and said to them that followed him, I say unto you, I have not found so great
faith, no not in Israel. If then you feel not your souls mightily affected with
this condescension of God; Say thus unto your souls, What aileth thee, O my
soul, that thou art no more affected with the goodness of God? Art thou dead,
that thou can not feel? Or art thou blind, that thou can not see thy self
compassed about with astonishing goodness! Behold, the King of glory descending
from the habitation of his Majesty, and coming to visit thee; hear not thou
his voice, saying, Open to me my sister: behold, I stand at the door and knock.
Lift up your selves, O ye gates, and be ye lifted up ye everlasting doors, that
the king of glory may come in. Behold, O my soul, how he waits still while thou
have refused to open to him! O the wonder of his goodness! O the condescension
of his Love! to visit me, to sue unto me, to wait upon me, to be acquainted
with me! Thus work up your souls into an astonishment at the condescension of
God.

USE 2.
Secondly, Is there to be acquaintance between the soul and God? then let us
learn to make a right judgment of our own Excellency; let us judge of our
selves as too high and noble to converse with this base and beggarly world. I
am of a nobler original, then to debase my self to such mean things; I am the
offspring of God, and shall I acquaint my self with earth? I am of the family
of God, and shall I converse with Satan? Is there bread enough in my Fathers
house, and shall I perish for hunger? Lift up thy self, O my soul, shake off
the intanglements of the flesh, break out of that bondage of the Devil, trample
upon the glory of the world, and scorn to let out thy precious desires upon
dung and dross, get the Moon under thy feet, cloth thy self with the Sun, put
on the son of righteousness, come into the palace of God, and acquaint thy self
with him, for this is thy glory, this is thy excellency. Ye precious ones, who
can call God Father, and the son Brother, who have fellowship with the Father
and the Son, who may have communion with the Holy Ghost? What do you lying
among the Potts? What do you raking in Dunghills? What do you conversing with
the World? Have a holy scorn of these things, as below the dignity of your
souls: know your worth, esteem of your selves, as of more value then all these
lower Treasures. This is your glory and your excellency, that ye are of Gods
acquaintance, that ye are Sons of God, Heirs of God, and joynt-Heirs with
Christ, that ye understand and know God.

There are two things wherein most men are mistaken.

First, In the Nature of Pride. Some look upon that only as Pride, which
manifests it self in costly Apparel, and bodily Ornaments, beyond the degree
and rank of the person. Some look no further then the carriage of one man
toward another. Now favorably consider with me, that the greatest Pride in
the world is man's undue esteem of himself toward God; and this is in the heart
of every one by nature. Every one by nature does lift up himself against God,
goes about to dethrone God, and to crown himself: Every one takes counsel in
his heart against the Lord, saying, Let us break his hands asunder, and cast
his cords from us. This is the voice of every one that dares wilfully to sin.
We will not have God to rule over us. Yet this is the working of the Pride of a
man against God, to thurst God out of the Throne of his Majesty, and to set
himself in. For what is Gods glory and respect among his creatures? Is it not
this; that he being the beginning, and Author of all, should be likewise the
end of all? And this is the very purpose of God in making of man, that having
received himself from God, he should have what he might freely give up to God;
so that all man is, and all that he has, is to be offered to God, as the end
and center of all. Now a sinning creature brings God under to serve him, to
provide for him. Now though this Pride of man against God be not so much taken
notice of, yet it is the very daring sin of the World. It is indeed to be
wondered at, that ever creatures did cast out the first thoughts of such an
attempt. Now consider how far man's Pride is from his true Excellency in his
Union with God. We are therefore to distinguish between that high esteem that
man is to have of himself, and pride. For man to look upon himself as a noble
being, and of rank above all the natural world, it is not Pride, for thus he is
(being a Spiritual understanding Agent) in a capacity of being acquainted with
God, of being united to God, and, as I may say, of exchanging himself with God.

Secondly, Another mistake of most men, is, concerning their Dignity and
Excellency, and in the rule and measure of their Excellency. Most measure their
Dignity by the advantage which they have over others in this world; As some in
their Power and Authority; some in their Friends and Relations; some in their
Riches and Estates; some in their Wisdom and Faculties; some in their Strength
and power. And what more universal evil is there then this, for every one in to
something or other to lift himself up in his own esteem, and in his thoughts to
tread upon others, as something inferior to himself? But men lie blinded in
their own delusions, not considering what is the true Excellency of man; nor
know the right rule by which man's worth is to be judged of. The way for us to
judge rightly concerning our selves, is to see how we stand toward God. God is
the perfection of excellency; and the nigher we are to God, the greater is our
excellency. This is the greatness of a Nation, to be nigh to God, Deuteronomy. 4.7.
What nation is there so great which has God so nigh unto them? And Amos 8.7.
God is called the Excellency of Jacob. God swears not by any thing below
himself; therefore God is here meant, Isa. 60.19. God is called the Glory of
his people. The Lord shall be to thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy
Glory. Now God is the glory of those that are acquainted with him.

First, By virtue of the Relation wherein God stands toward them. An intimate
Relation to those that are persons of Dignity, and Worth, does communicate
Worth and Dignity to those who are so related to them. As the son of a mean man
is not so highly valued and esteemed as the son of a prince. David reckoned it
to be a great thing to be Son-in-law to a King, 1 Samuel 18.18. Who am I, and
what is my life, or my fathers family in Israel, that I should be son in-law to
the king? Thus are we to reckon it our Dignity and Excellency to be in nigh
relation to God, to be sons of God, to be heirs of God, and to be the friends
of God, what greater honor then this to be in such a nigh relation to the God
of Glory? Now the Excellency that we have from this Relation, arises from the
excellency of that Act which is the Foundation of this Relation, and that is
our being born of God, as we are Sons, Joh. 1.12, 13. God marrying us to
himself as he is our husband. Jer. 3. Turn, O back sliding children, says the
Lord, for I am married unto you. God takes us into fellowship, and communion,
and acquaintance with himself, as he makes us his friends, and his acqaintance.
This act of God does instamp a Worth and Excellency upon man, as the impression
of the Kings Seal upon Wax, and makes it of value, Rev. 22.4. It is here spoken
as the glory of the servants of God, Those that follow the Lamb, they shall see
his face, and his name shall be in their foreheads; that is, God has chosen,
and, as it were, marked them out for his own: and this marking them, and owing
them, it sets a high Dignity upon them, such as secures them from the Curse
that is to be upon all besides, as Revel. 9.4. They are commanded to hurt none
but those who have not the seal of God on their foreheads. This Relation of the
soul to God, gives the soul an excellency, as it does interest the soul in the
glory and excellency of God himself; they are Gods, and Gods is theirs, 2 Cor.
6.16. I will dwell in them, and walk with them, and I will be their God, and
they shall be my people, verse. 17. He argues from the dignity of this relation,
that they should count themselves too good to convers with the world; Wherefore
come out from among them, and be ye separated, says the Lord, and touch no
unclean thing: and I will receive you, and be a father to you, and you shall be
my sons and daughters, says the Lord. Thus you see the dignity that is upon
the soul by its acquaintance with God. Our relation to God in our acquaintance
with him, does ennoble us, lift us above the world, make us that we are too
good for the company of those that are not acquainted with God. It is then no
pride in us thus to esteem of our selves, to have high thoughts of our selves,
because of that acquaintance which our souls are to have with God. It is pride
for to think too highly of our selves: but it is sobriety to think of our
selves according to that acquaintance which we have with God. Romans 12.3. I say,
through the grace of God given to me, to every one that is among you, not to
think of himself more highly then he ought to think; but to think soberly
according as God has dealt to every man the measure of faith. Here the Apostle
commands them to measure the esteem which they have of themselves, by the
measure of faith which they have from God; because by faith they come to be
valued excellent in the eye of God. So likewise we are to measure our esteem
which we have of our selves, by the measure of our acquaintance which we have
with God: because by acquaintance with him, we come to be truly excellent.
And while we do thus, we shall not think more highly of our selves then we
ought to think: for while we account our selves excellent because of our
acqaintance with God, we in lifting up our selves magnify God; and while we
thus glory, we glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1.31. But now herein we are to beware
of two things.

First, That we distinguish carefully between our capacity of being acquainted
with God, and our being actually acquainted with him: for our capacity, or
being so as that we may be acquainted with God, is of no worth, unless we be
actually acquainted with him. We are in a remote capacity naturally as men, and
we are in a more nigh capacity by the mercy and covenant of God; but this adds
no true worth to the soul without the actual acquaintance of the soul with God.
Yea, man is the worse for this, if he be without the other; for if man being
made fit for enjoyment of God, and communion with him, never attain to an
enjoyment of him, he becomes more vile then those things whose nature is
inferior, if they attain to the perfection of that nature. And it is like to
fare worse with man, if he fall short of the glory of God, because he was
capable of the glory of God, then with beasts which are not capable of it. And
again, in regard of that more nigh capacity wherein we are by Jesus Christ of
acquaintance with God, if we are not really acquainted with God, we shall
thereby not only have no addition of excellency, but thereby we shall be more
vile and miserable: and therefore those who through the mercy of God have been
in the visible Church, and have heard of the good will of God to man through
Christ; and know that God is ready to entertain them into acquaintance with
himself; if they shall fall short of this, their condernnation will be greater
then that of those who never heard of Gods invitation, and his grace in Jesus
Christ. If we therefore shall glory in our capacity of being of the
acquaintance of God, and neglect to be really acquainted with him, we do but as
the Jews of old, who cried out, The temple of the Lord are these, Jer. 7.4. And
the nigher we are to God, if we do not come to a through closure with him, the
nigher we are to the stroke of his wrath: as the nigher any is to Musket Shot,
the greater will the force of it be upon him. Distinguish therefore between our
capacity of being acquainted with God, and our actual acquaintance with him.

Secondly, we must be ware lest in our esteem of our selves, we lay the
foundation of our glory in our selves. There is that in every ones corrupt
nature which does provoke him to it: so that I dare boldly say, that there is
not a man in his corrupt natural state, who does not some way or other lift up
himself in his own esteem for something of his own. And we are apt to make every
spiritual excellency to be matter for pride and self-conceitedness. We do not
sufficiently eye God as the Fountain, the Author, the Foundation, the Rule and
Pattern of all our Excellency. Such is the way wherein God receives man to
acquaintance with himself, that he might hide pride from his eyes, and that no
flesh might glory in his presence, 1 Cor. 1.29. If we therefore lay the
foundation of our glory in our selves, and please our selves in the sparks that
we have kindled, we shall glory in our shame, and lie down in sorrow. This high
esteem which we are to have of our selves, because of our acquaintance with
God, it does not at all contradict that precious grace of humility, but they
rather help forward one another; for the more any esteems of himself, because
of that relation which he has to God, the less is the esteem of himself,
because of any thing of his own; the more we make God the matter of our glory,
the less do we glory in our selves. The more we apprehend of our Excellency,
being from God, the less account do we make of all other seeming Excellencies.
When the light of the Sun arises, then all Starlight disappears.

First, All Dignity we have, seems to arise from that relation which we have to
God in acquaintance with him.

Secondly, By acquaintance with God, we come to have an absolute positive
Dignity which is real in our persons, yet still depending upon God a As by our
union with Christ we come to have a righteousness imputed, which is our
justification* and a righteousness likewise inherent, which is our
sanctification; so by our acquaintance with God, we have a dignity, as it were,
imputed by our relation to God, and a dignity real, which is that excellency
whereby we are made absolutely better. By acquaintance with God, we come to be
like God; and the Image of God in us, is the greatest excellency that we are
capable of. When Moses had been forty days in the Mount with God, his face did
shine with such a brightness, that the people could not behold him: so those
that converse with God, they retain a luster, which shines in their converse
with men. The Image or picture of any worthy person, is steemed by them that
esteem the person, and this esteem of it, is from a relation which it has to
that person; but now the children of any person whom we love, being a lively
image of their fathers person, have another value upon them, having not only a
relation worthy, because of their resemblance in the outward lineament, but a
real participation of nature and disposition, which they receive from their
father: So there is an excellency in those that are acquainted with God, not
only as being in Relation to him, but as receiving, and being partakers of the
Divine Nature. As Children learn to pronounce their words according to the
pronunciation of the Mother, or Nurse, with whom they converse, (as every one
is apt to be formed unto the manner and disposition of the company wherein they
must usually are) thus those who converse with God; they become in some measure
like unto God; and this is positive personal excellency which those have which
converse with God. Thus the Apostle John argues concerning that perfection of
glory and excellency, which hereafter is to be upon those that are the Sons of
God. But it does not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that when he
shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. In Heaven we
shall be like God, because we shall see God; and on earth those that converse
with God, shall in some measure be like God according to their measure of
acquaintance with him And so Paul argues concerning this present life, 2 Cor.
3.18. But we all with open face beholding as in a glass, the glory of the Lord,
are changed into the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the spirit the
Lord. Here we see clearly that beholding the glory of the Lord, does change
into the same image of God, and likewise that this image of God only is the
glory of man; for that is meant by, From glory to glory: that is, from one
degree of glorious similitude, to another degree gf glorious resemblance and
likeness to God. Thus ye have seen that the excellency of man consists in his
acquaintance with God; and that by the virtue of his relation to God, he has
an imputed excellency; and an excellency by his propriety in God, in whom is
all excellency; and that by his converse with God, and acquaintance with him,
he becomes really like God, which is his inherent excellency. Let us then
reckon of our selves as those who have their Dignity and Excellency from God,
and in this let us glory, That we know God, and are acquainted with God. This
is the Second Use of this Proposition.

USE 3.
Thirdly, If man ought to be acquainted with God; then let us all enquire into
our selves, whether we are acquainted with him or no. Let us every one turn
into our own bosoms, and ask our selves this question; Thou have heard, O my
soul, that which is thy great Duty, that which is the very end of thy Creation,
and thy Redemption, and that the highest perfection of thy noblest faculty
consists in knowing God, and being acquainted with him, which contains a nigh
union to him, and intimate converse with him, and mutual communion to God, and
from God, and radicated unmovable love to God, these are excellent things, O
my soul, what is thy case? Art thou one of those precious ones, which
conversest often with God, and talk often of God, whom he will make up with his
Jewels? Or art thou one of those wretched Creatures, who are alienated from the
life of God, by reason of the ignorance that is in thee? Or art thou one of
those who having been sometimes afar off, art now made nigh to God by the blood
of Christ, and so art lead into fellowship and communion with the Father and
the Son by the Spirit? Or art thou one of those who looks upon God afar off,
and upon whom God looks afar off? I beseech you every one of you, deal
seriously and accurately with your selves in this inquiry, for it is most
certain, that most men in the world, yea in the visible Church, are not
acquainted with God. Thus it has been in all generations from the beginning of
the world, and thus it is at this day: the people of God have been like a
little flock of sheep, while the rest are like locusts, covering the whole face
of the earth. The people of God have still complained that they are but as the
gleaning of the vintage, and as two or three Olive-berries in the top of the
utmost branches, when the rest have been gathered. The visible Church of God,
in respect of the rest of the world, ^^w small a part is it! In the visible
Church, how few live up to their Religion, by any considerable profession! How
little difference is there between most among us, and Heathens! And of those
that profess, and lay claim to something beyond others among whom they live,
how many betray their Profession by their wicked practice and worldly
conversation? So that when we have made enquiry, there will remain very few of
those that are really acquainted with God, it concerns us then to be very
diligent in enquiry, what is our case, how we stand toward God.

Secondly, I shall be the more earnest in pressing you upon a diligent search
into what acquaintance you have gotten with God; because, I know that those
that have least acquaintance with God, are most apt to neglect this enquiry. It
may be a tender soul that has been much with God, will be ready upon the first
hint to enter into the secrets of its own heart, to look over his evidences, to
call to mind, when have I drawn nigh to God? When have I conversed with God?
When have I communion with God? Has my life been a walking with God? Have I
dwelt with God, and made my abode with him? Thus the soul that makes high
account of its acquaintance with God, will be trying and examining it self; and
it may be upon its more a wakened signs of its sometimes departing from God, or
feeling some present strangeness, it will be apt to conclude of it self, surely
I am none of those precious ones, whose life is a converse with God. But the
common generation of the world, Oh how hardly will they be brought to ask
themselves this question, whether they are of the acquaintance of God or no!
How often have they been urged with a great and vehement affection upon trial,
how their souls stand toward God? and hitherto they have neglected it. Many
are so inconsiderate as to think what is spoken is nothing to them: they come
and sit in the Congregation, but their hearts are out of reach, out of the shot
of the Word; so they go away, and the word to them is, as if it had not been.
Many are so light, and vain, and frothy in their spirits, as that the streams
will almost as soon return to their fountain, as they will be persuaded to turn
in and enquire into their own souls. In all naturally there is an averseness to
come to the light, that their works and hearts may be manifested. If I should
come to you one by one, and beseech you with the greatest earnestness,
wherewith I were able, when you go from the congregation to take opportunity to
go in secret, and enter upon trial with your hearts, and ask your selves
thoroughly this question, and let them not alone till you have a clear
determinate answer, whether you are in a state of acquaintance with God; I fear
you would go, one to his pleasures, another to this vanity, and another to his
covetousness, and almost all of you neglect this work of so great concernment.
Let me therefore urge you with all earnestness, that you will not account it a
small matter, whether you be acquainted with God or not; and so neglect this
trial of your selves: But bring your hearts up roundly to the examination,
yield not to their unreasonable withdrawings, force them to answer. If you make
any account of the charge of God, if you make any account of the excellency of
man, if you would not lose the highest privilege of the Creature, if you have
any esteem of the life of heaven, know your selves in this, whether you are in
a state of acquaintance with God, and be serious and diligent in this enquiery.

Thirdly, Because men are so exceeding apt to be mistaken, and to misapprehend
concerning themselves, that they are in a state of acquaintance with God, while
they are mere strangers unto him; such as those whom our Savior speaks of,
Matthew. 7.22, 23. Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have cast out Devils, and in thy name
done many wonderful works? and then he will profess unto them, I never knew
you: depart from me ye workers of iniquity. They take it for granted, that
because of such privileges, and gifts, and common graces which they had,
therefore they were well acquainted with Christ; but our Savior answers, I
never knew you; that is, I never had any acquaintance with you. Such are those
who are resembled to us by five foolish Virgins, Matthew. 25.11. The five foolish
Virgins come when the door is shut, and say, Lord, Lord, open unto us; but he
answers, Verily I say unto you, I know you not; that is, never had
acquaintance with you: you never knew me in the time of your life, and I will
not know you now: you were ashamed to own me before men, and I will be ashamed
to own you before my Father. Men are so apt to be mistaken in Judgment of
themselves, that they think themselves rich and increasing with goods, and to
have need of nothing, when they are wretched, miserable and poor, and blind,
and naked. And this makes David, Psalm. 139.24. to cry out after he had been
trying himself, Search me, O God, and know my heart, try me, and know my
thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way
everlasting. This unaptness in us to make a right judgment of our selves in
our relation to God, arises

First, From that deep root of self-love that is in us by nature, whereby we
are apt to apprehend well of our selves, and please our selves with a good
conceit of our selves, though we are never so bad. And such is the nature of
this affection, that it blinds our eyes, and prejudiceth the mind, that it
cannot make a right judgment. As affection in some Parents to their Children,
makes them reckon that which is a blemish, to be a beauty in their children; so
does inordinate self-love work in men, in the judgment of themselves. Men when
they judge themselves, they look into a flattering glass which presents them in
greater beauty then that which is their own.

Secondly, we judge amiss of our selves, because we take not a right rule for
our judgments, as those whom Paul speaks of, 2 Corinthians 10.12. Some commend
themselves, but they measure themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves
with themselves, are not wise. If we take our selves to be the rule and
measure, then we cannot discern our own crookedness and irregularness.

Thirdly, We judge amiss of our selves, because of the deceitfulness of our
hearts. The heart of man is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked;
who can know it? Jer. 17.9. Gross wickedness is apparent to the pur-blind eye;
but where there is an abstaining from gross outward sins, there are special
workings of Corruption, such as pride, self-love, distrust of God, and love of
the world; any of which shut up the soul against God, as with bolts and bars;
and these lying inward are not discerned. Other accounts may be given of the
unaptness to make a due judgment of our selves: it concerns us therefore to be
exact in our trial, and trust not to a sudden answer; for we are ready to make
a short work of it, and to save our selves the labor, and to sit down with
charitable thoughts of our selves. Whatsoever answer therefore our hearts give
us, let us see cleared, and have such reason for it, that we may know how to
proceed with our selves, upon a right judgment of our selves. The chief work of
trial in this particular acquaintance with God, will be from those particulars
wherein I opened the nature of the souls acquaintance with God. Let us
therefore take those Heads and our own Experience of our selves, and by a
rational deduction, let us find out our own estate.

As thus, Those that are acquainted with God are brought nigh to God. Whereas
sometimes there was a strangeness and remoteness, a vast separation, now the
partition is taken out of the way, and I am made one in Christ. I have took God
to be my portion, and my Father; I have been a Prodigal, and have departed from
him, but I finding my self lost and undone, and that nothing could satisfy my
soul in the world, therefore I resolved I would return to my Fathers house, and
try if he would receive me again into his family; and so I have done. I have
cast off my old converse with the world, and with corruption; I have broken my
league with Hell, and have entered into a covenant with the Father, through his
Son Jesus Christ; therefore I may comfortably conclude that I am now in a state
of acquaintance with God.

But if in the enquiry into my self I find not these things, if I find that now
I am as in former days; I have felt no such change in my self, and that all
things are with me as they were of old; I never was sensible of any loss in my
self; I never knew what strangeness and nighness to God meant; I never
understood what union with God, and distance from God was; this signifies ill,
it is a symptom of a bad state; of a state of unacquaintance with God.

2. So again, for our converse with God. He that is acquainted with God, he
has had his converse with God, he has dwelt with God, and God with him; he
has supped with Christ, and Christ with him; his great business and employment
has been nigh God, in those things wherein is most of God. If I find my soul
much conversing with God, often sending out breathings to Heaven, often casting my
eye toward God, if I find the great work of my mind to be with God, my great
business lies in Heaven, my treasure is laid up there, and my thoughts, and
desires, and joys, and delights, and meditations are there; I may comfortably
conclude that I am in some measure acquainted with God. But if in the inquiry
into my self, I find that I have my whole converse with the world, that I can
afford no time for Prayer to God in my family, and in secret; If I find all the
day long my cares, and desires, and thoughts, run out most naturally and fully
without control toward the things of the world, or that I will mind my self
in a natural carnal way, and mind not the things of God; this signifies to me
my unacquaintance with God, and it will be an ungrounded presumption in me to
reckon of my self any other then a stranger to him.

3. So for communion and fellowship, which is in acquaintance. Those that are
intimately acquainted, their communion in the way of discourse is very
frequent, in making known their thoughts and apprehensions, their fears and
wants; their minds are open one to another, and that which is the propriety of
one, is by their acquaintance communicated to the use of both. If then I can
find in reviewing the workings of my soul, that there has been this sight of
Heaven, this Spiritual Communion between my soul and God; that my heart has
been open to God; that I have gone to God when my heart has been burdened with
sorrow, I have discharged it into the bosom of God, as into the bosom of a
friend; that in my doubts I have betaken my self to him, expecting comfort from
him; that upon hearing his voice I have opened to him, and upon my opening he
has come in with smiles of love, and given me tokens of his favor: these
things signify a state of acquaintance with God: but if I know not what it is
to have given up my soul to God, to be his, and to have taken God to be mine,
if I have had experience of receiving nothing else from God, but a partaking of
the things of the world: if I have not been wont to communicate the workings of
my mind to God, it betokens my unacquaintance with God.

4. And again, for that friendly working of love and affection in the soul
toward God. Those that are in a state of acquaintance are supposed to comply
with each other in kindness, and love, and good will, and affection. If then I
can upon search into my self, find that God has the highest room in my
affections, that my heart is his, that his love is prevailing with me, above
the love of all things beside, and that I love those that are his beloved for
his sake, then I have in me a sign of regal acquaintance with God; for love is
the very quintessence of acquaintance: but if in the search into the workings
of my mind I can find no such friendly compliance, but that God was still
thwarting and crossing my designs, that I should find my self better content if
there were no God, and that those workings of my mind that are about God are
sower, harsh, and tearing upon my spirit, then it is to be feared, that I have
no acquaintance with God.

And have thou made an impartial inquiry into thy state? And how stand things
between thy Soul and God? Art thou acquainted with him, or art thou not?
Consider seriously O sinners, that this is one of the weightiest questions in
the world; and if this question were but well resolved, it would put an end to
a thousand other questions. He that can say of God and Christ, this is my
beloved, and this is my friend, he need not very solicitously ask, what news?
He has heard good news from Heaven, which will easily balance all, come what
will come, he need not much pass, as long as there stands that one Text in the
Bible; That all shall work together for good to them that love God. He has no
cause to go a begging to the world, and to say, who will show me any good? As
long as the Lord has shined upon him with the light of his countenance. He
need not complain, what shall I do: I have lost this or that dear friend; when
he has found him, who can make up all with one look, whom he can never lose.
In a word, he need not ask, how shall I do to live? and what shall I eat, and
what shall I drink, and wherewithal shall I be clothed? So long as he knows
that he has a noble friend, who will ease him of all this care, and never see
him want. Well then, have thou answered this great question or not? Or will thou do by thy conscience, as Felix, put it off, and say, thou will hear of
these matters, at some more convenient season; and I wonder when that more
convenient season will be; and why not now, I pray? What season more fit then
the present? I am sure God says, Now is the acceptable time; and do you know
better then he? What have thou to do that is more necessary? Speak out I pray,
is the following of thy pleasures? Is the serving of Satan? Is the damming of
thy Soul, more necessary then the saving of it? Is the life and death of a Soul
nothing? Are everlasting glory and misery small matters? Is the love or hatred
of thy God so inconsiderable a thing? Awake O sinner, what meanest thou? Arise
speedily, and look about thee man. Consider seriously as thou valuest thy Soul,
what best becomes a sinner in thy condition: What answer shall I return to my
Master? Are not these things worth the thinking of? Shall I say for all this,
that thou art not at leisure to look after an interest in his favor, or any
thing that rends to it? Shall I tell him that thou have something of greater
weight, and higher importance to trouble your head with? And do you in sober
sadness think so? For you make account, that excuse is sufficient? I pray then
make use of it your self (for I dare not.) When God shall come to ask you, why
you did no more vigorously mind the getting acquaintance with himself, tell him
then if you think that answer will serve your turn, that you were not at
leisure, you had such urges occasions which took up the whole of your time,
such and such a friend you had, who sent for you to the Tavern, and you could
not possibly come when he invited you, tell him if you believe that plea will
hold water, that you would have been glad to have come upon his invitation, but
that you were taken up with such good old friends, the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil. How do you think such an answer will be taken? You may think to put
us off with such kind of reasons as this: but do you hope by this answer to
satisfy your Judge? Believe it sinner, God will not thus be put off. Wherefore
I do again with all the earnestness I can for my soul renew by suit to thee,
that thou would act like a man in his wits; make some serious inquiry into
the state and condition of thy soul. And consider for the Lords sake again and
again, before you send me away thus, what errand I come to you on: It is to
treat with you about a rich match for thy poor undone soul: therefore consider
well what you do before you make light of this business, and know when you are
well offered; believe it, God will not long send after you in this manner, and
you are not like every day to have such proffers; Divine Patience and Goodness
will not always plead at this rate with you; God will ere long say, let them
alone: the Lord will ere long speak to scornful sinners in such language that
will make their ears to tingle; he will despise and slight as well as they: and
who is like to have the worst of it at last? I leave to any rational man to
judge. The time is coming, when your ungodly hearts shall ache to see him whom
you might have had for your husband; when you shall have him for your Judge,
whom you might have had for your Advocate. And though we could not get you to
be willing to be acquainted with him, no, not so much as to have any serious
thoughts about it, or to make any enquiry after him to inform your self
concerning him; yet you shall have him for your enemy whether you will or no.
But O let us not part thus! let me, a man like thy self, reason the case a
little more with thee; come tell me poor ignorant creature, thou that still
stand demurring, and say, Shall I, shall I? what evil is there in thy God
that thou should be thus hardly brought, so much as to discourse this
business with thy own soul? What is the reason that thou scarce think it
worth the while to trouble thy head about any thing that does concern your
interest in his love? Thou that mindest his love so little, tell me what do
thou think had become of thee long before this, if God had regarded thee as
little as thou do him? What would thou have done, had the Lord said to any
Disease, the least of his Messengers, fetch that Rebel before me, that values
not my favor; he shall know what my anger is, seeing he will not prize my
love. O what a lamentable case had thou been in, had God but done by thee as
thou have by him? Acquaintance with God! methinks sinful man should stand and
wonder at such a word; methinks he should be even surprised with an ecstasy of
admiration; and say, and will God indeed be acquainted with such a Worm, such a
dead Dog, such a Rebel as I? Lord, what is man that thou art mindful of him, or
the son of man, that thou should make such an offer to him? One would think
thou should no more dispute the matter then Esther did, when that great
Monarch made her his Queen. Were it but in sensible things, that nothing near
such an offer were made (which is impossible) man would think the very
questioning in such a case a strange folly. One would think that every one of
Gods enemies that have been in open Rebellion against him, and are utterly
unable to make their part good against him, when they hear of such terms of
mercy from their Prince, who has all their lives in their hand, should rejoice
at this news, and say, How beautiful are the feet of them which bring such
tidings? How did Benhadad look, when instead of a Halter he had a Coach? When
instead of Rebel, he heard Brother? Whatever we may think of these things,
David thought it high time for him to bid such a Messenger welcome, and to open
his heart for the receiving his God: Hear what he says to his own heart and
others, Psalm. 24. Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lifted up ye
everlasting doors, that tht king of glory may come in. And because the door of
men's hearts is locked and barred, and bolted, and men are in a deep sleep, and
will not hear the knocking that is at the gate, though it be loud, though it be
a King: therefore David knocks again, Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye
lifted up ye everlasting doors: Why, what haste, says the sinner? What haste?
Why, here is the King at your Gates; and that not an ordinary King neither, he
is a glorious King that will honor you so far, if you open quickly, as to
lodge within, to take up his abode in your house, to dwell with you; but the
soul for all this does not yet open, but stands still questioning, as if it
were an enemy, rather then a friend that stood there, and ask, who is this King
of glory? Who? he answers again, It is the Lord of hosts; he, that if you will
not open quickly and thankfully, can easily pull your house down about your
ears; He is the Lord of Hosts, that King who has a mighty Army always at his
command, who stand ready for their Commission, and then you should soon know
who it is you might have had for your friend; Lift up therefore your heads, O
ye gates; open quickly, ye that had rather have God for your friend then for
your enemy. O why should not the soul of every sinner cry out, Lord, the Door
is locked, and thou have the key, I have been trying what I can do, but the
Wards are so rusty that I cannot possibly turn the Key; but Lord, throw the
Door off the Hinges, any thing in the world, so thou will but come in and dwell
here: Come, O mighty God, break through Doors of Iron, and Bars of Brass, and
make way for thy self by thy love and power. Come, Lord, and make thy self
welcome, all that I have is at thy service: O fit my soul to entertain thee!
But where is the sinner that is in this note? How seldom do poor Creatures
desire Gods company, or bewail his absence? Where almost are the men and women
to be found, that do in good earnest long to be acquainted with God? Men are
naturally strangers to God, and it is a wonderful difficult thing to persuade
men to enter into so much as a serious deliberate consideration of these
things. Though it be so infinitely for their interest; though the God that made
them, out of pity to their souls desires it, though he send his Ambassadors in
his name to beseech them to be reconciled unto God, against whom they have been
in open arms; though in infinite mercy he persuade them to lay down their
weapons, and promise them Free and General Pardon, and to receive them into
Favor, and to forget and forgive; yet where is the sinner almost to be found
that with any thankfulness does close with these tenders? Now it being a
business of such infinite concernment, and it being the very work and business
of a Minister of Christ to bring God and man into union, to get man acquainted
with God, I shall in the next place labor to enforce this Exhortation upon the
hearts of sinners, and do what I can possible to prevail with them that are as
yet strangers, to get acquainted with God, that they may have peace, and that
thereby good might come unto them.

EXHORTATION.
Once more, poor sinners, That God which can in a moment stop thy breath, and
send thee into Hell, does offer to be friends with thee. If thou will come upon
his invitation, well and good, thou art a happy man for ever; if not, thou will
rue the day that ever thou were born: yet, through mercy the matter is not gone
so far, but that thou may (if you will now at last in good earnest humble
thy self to him) be received into favor. Behold, a Pardon, Mercy, and Grace!
stand astonished, O ye Heavens, at this infinite condescension, wonder O ye
Angels, and pry into this kindness. Was there ever such condescension, love,
and goodness heard of? If thou did but understand, O stupid sinner, what an
offer is made to thee, thou could not but adore that goodness that can
pardon and forget such offenses, and receive such a Creature into favor* thou
would also cry out with as great admiration as he did; what manner of love!
you would think it a mercy not to be paralelled, a kindness never to be
forgotten, a proposal by no means to be refused. Now that I may, if possible,
prevail with some that are yet afar off, to come near, I shall enforce this
Exhortation with many powerful Motives, the least of which (were men but well
in their wits as to Spiritual matters, were the world not to a wonder fools, in
the great affairs of their souls and eternity) might easily prevail. O that I
might prevail! O that some might be persuaded! O that God would put life and
power into these words, that they might prove effectual to the intended ends! O
that some poor rebellious sinners might be made to close with the most
advantageous offers that ever were, or could be made to Creatures in our
condition!

MOTIVES.
The first Head of Motives that I shall insist upon to enforce this
Exhortation, shall be taken from the nature of the Person that I would have you
acquainted with. Consider well what kind of friend you are like to have of him;
and if, after you have well weighed what I shall (with Gods leave) say, you can
find out any one in Heaven or in Earth that will be a better friend to you, and
stand you in more stead; if in all the world you bring one that deserves better
at your hands, and is more worthy of your choicest love, and acquaintance, if I
bid you to your loss, why then let me bare the blame of a Cheater for ever. And
if after trial, through trial, and intimate acquaintance, you find your self
deceived, and that it was not worth the while to give your self so much
trouble, why then let me be branded to Eternity for the veriest Liar and
Impostor in the world. For my part, I envy not men their happiness, but I wish
with all my heart, that men would do that which may be most for their interest.
It was the counsel of Epicbetus, none of the weakest men, though a Heathen,
Make choice of that which is really most Excellent; and if there be a Friend to
be found better then thy God, the first thing thou do, get an interest in
him. But consider whether there be not a contradiction in the terms, Better
then the best; it is perfect nonsense. I know it is impossible for any one that
has right apprehensions of God to undervalue him. Wherefore it is a grand
piece of Religion, to have clear apprehensions of God; such cannot but believe
him to be infinitely Lovely, Wise, and powerful, and to be obeyed in all
things; and all the reason in the world to acquiesce in his will, who is so
good and so wise; such will place happiness in nothing below his favor.
Wherefore I think Plutarch was not mistaken, who affirmed, That man's life was
given him of God, only to get the knowledge of God. But I shall be a little
more particular in speaking to the excellent qualifications of him, whom I
would fain get every poor sinner acquainted with.

First, He is the most loving and kind friend. Poor ignorant Creatures that are
strangers to him, they talk at a mad rate concerning him: those that know him
not will be speaking bad, and thinking worse of him; but, O did they but know
what God is to them that are acquainted with him, had they bur conversed with
him themselves, did they but see what entertainment he gives, had they but
been in his company, and experienced what some have experienced, had they but
beheld how affectionately he embraces them which come to him; they would
quickly say that it was a false report, and wicked scandal, that the Devil and
the World, which know not God, had raised of him, they would soon cry out, that
they would not for a world but that they had been at his house, and that they
have cause to bless God for the day that ever they knew such and such who
brought them acquainted with such a friend; they will never while they live,
for the future, believe any thing that is spoken against God or Christ, let who
will speak it. Is this the God they had such hard thoughts of? Is the kindness
that they did so slight? Is this the friend that they were so loath to come to?
And thus an ingenious soul will even be ashamed that it should ever harbor
such low thoughts of him, whom now to their comfort they have found beyond
apprehension kind. Believe it Sirs, you cannot conceive what a friend you shall
have of God, would you bus be persuaded to enter into Covenant with him, to be
his, wholly his; I tell you money, that did sometimes think, and do as you do
now, this is, set light by Christ and hate God, and saw no loveliness in him,
are now quite of another mind, they would not for ten thousand worlds quit
their interest in him. O who dare say that he is a hard master? Who that knows
him, will say he is an unkind friend? O what do poor creatures ail that they do
entertain such harsh, sower thoughts of God? What, do you think there is
nothing in that Scripture, Psalm. 31.19. O how great is thy goodness which thou
have laid up for them that fear thee! Does the Psalmist speak too largely? Does
he say more then he and others could prove? Ask him, and he will tell you in
verse. 21. that he blesses God these were things he could speak to, from his
own personal experience, and many thousands as well as he, to whom the Lord
has showed his mavelous kindness; and therefore he does very passionately
plead with the people of God to love him, and more highly to express their
sense of his goodness, that the world might be encouraged also to have good
thoughts of him. What Nation under Heaven can say they have not tasted of his
goodness, Psalm. 33.5. All the carth is full of the goodness of the Lord. Read
over the hundred forty fifth Psalm, and let us hear then what you have to say
against God. Some indeed may speak of the might of Gods terrible acts; some
that have despised his love, have felt his power and justice; as for these we
cannot think them competent Judges, in this case; they will not, it may be,
commend Gods goodness: yet even they cannot, will not condemn God of injustice,
but exclaim against themselves for their unspeakable folly in slighting his
kindness when it was tendered to them. But as for others, ask them, and they
will declare the goodness of God, they will abundantly utter the memory of his
great goodness, and sing of his righteousness. Do but try poor sinner, do but
try, come a little nearer, and believe your own experience; and if after a
through knowledge of God, and a real acquaintance with him, you can say that his
favor is not to be sought after, his love not worth the desiring; why then I
have done* I have no more to say. I am sure if God were, as the Devil and the
world represent him to be; in so many thousand of years, among so many
thousands and millions that have been acquainted with him, and entertained by
him, some of them would have complained before this, we should at one time or
other have heard something against him. Now I challenge all the world to produce
me but an experienced solid Saint, that when he acted like himself, and after
he had been in the company of God, and had been seasted by him, could say that
he kept a short house, especially could we but enquire of those that sit down
at his Table, and are always in his presence; which of them all have a word to
say against him? but of that more hereafter. No, no, it is in sinners
themselves, there lies the fault; they believe the malicious father of lies,
they easily credit the unexperienced ignorant world: and how little reason you
have to believe so malicious enemies before the Word of Truth, I leave your
selves to determine. O why will you take up a slander against your Creator so
easily? Why will you receive such great things wherein your eternal welfare is
concerned upon trust? Do but search diligently, turn over the Bible, consult
the experiences of wiser men, and see whether things be not as I tell you. And
how does the matter stand now poor heart? what must the Devil be believed
before God? what is God a hard master still? of all the Creatures in the world,
some of you have little reason to say so. Have thou not been fed, clothed, and
delivered a thousand times by him? Who is it that provided so richly for you?
Who filled your barns? Who restored your health at such and such a time, when
the Doctor gave you over? Was that one of his unkindnesses? Are these the
things for which you slight him? God himself makes a challenge in Jer. 25 What
iniquity have your fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me, and
have walked after vanity, and become vain? neither said they, where is the God
that brought us out of the land of Egypt, and let us through the wilderness,
through a land of desert and pits, through a land of drought, and of the shadow
of death, where no man dwelt: and I brought you into a plentiful country, to
eat the fruit thereof, and the goodness thereof, and yet you know not me, says
the Lord. Was there ever such ingratitude heard of? Pass ye over the Isles of
chittim, and send unto Kedar, and consider diligently, and see if there be such
a thing: has a nation changed their gods? but my people has changed their
glory for that which does not profit. And what say thou, O ungrateful Israel?
have the Heathens more reason to cleave to their idols? Are the Pagans more
beholding to their stocks and stones then thon art to the living God? And now
what have thou got by all this? have thou increased thy riches? Are thy barns
more full of Corn? Are there ever the more Cattle in thy Pastures? Are thy
Presses more full of Grapes? Art thou not now grown poor? Is not the Heaven
become as Brass, and the Earth as Iron? Do not thy Catten groan for want of
food? Are not thy Vines and Fields grown barren? Why, you may thank your selves
for all this; you did not know when you were well. Return therefore, O
backsliding Israel, and thou shall know the difference between my service, and
the service of Devils, Jer. 2.30, 31. Let me therefore again plead with thee, O
God-despising sinner. If for all this thou will not be persuaded, let me
expostulate the case with thee, as God did with Israel. Did not God bring thee
into a world every way furnished for thy use? Has he not subjected the
Creatures of the world to thee? Who waters thy Fields out of his treasuries?
Who opens the clods of the Earth, and sends thee out of his storehouse
provisions year by year? What would quickly become of thee, if thou had not a
fresh suppy from him every year, nay, every moment? O, is this his unkindness
for which thou hate him? And it is for this that thou have such sower
thoughts of him? And if all this were too little, he would do greater things
then these; has he not sent his Son out of his bosom? Does he not offer thee
Heaven and Glory? What can thou in reason ask, that is good for thee, that he
would deny thee, if thou would but be acquainted with him? And if this be an
unkind friend, I do not know who is kind: if this be not love, I know not what
is. What could he have done more to express his love to the world then he has
done, Isa. 44. Ask David what he thinks of God; he was well acquainted with
him, he dwelt in his house, and by his good will would he never out of his more
immediate presence, and company: enquire, I pray, what he found amiss in him?
That you may know his mind the better, he has left it upon Record in more then
one or two places, what a friend he has had of God, Psalm. 16.6. The lines are
fallen to me in pleasant places: yea, I have a goodly heritage. Why, what is
that you boast of so much, O David? have not others had Kingdoms as well as
you? No, that is not the thing, a Crown is one of the least Jewels in my
Cabinet, The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup. So in
Psalm. 23. quite through. Nay, does he not sometimes come out and beckon to the
poor beggarly starved world, to come and eat their fill of the same dish; O
taste and see that the Lord is good, Psalm. 34.8. If you will give any credit to
his word, he will tell you, No friend like to God, Psalm. 73.25, 26, 27, 28.
Whom have I in heaven but thee, and there is none in earth that I can desire
besides thee. My flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my
heart, and my portion for ever. For, lo, they that are far from him shall
perish: Thou have destroyed all them that go a whoring from thee; but it is
good for me to draw near to God. Let others think, or do as they please, as for
him he values the light of Gods countenance above corn, and wine, and oil,
Psalm. 4.6, 7.1 Joh. 3.1. Cant. 1.4. And what say thou now. poor creature? Art
thou still of the same mind? Will thou have God for thy God and Friend, or no?
Is he good and kind, or not? Is his favor worth the desiring and seeking
after? Psalm. 94.8. Under stand O ye brutish among the people, and ye fools when
will you be wise: If God himself may not be believed, if David his servant may
not be credited, hear what one of your brethren, a Heathen I mean, says in
this case. I shall translate his words into English; they are as follows: The
goodness and providence of God to man is so great, that if he were well in his
wits, he would do nothing publicly or privately, but praise God, and speak
well of his name, Ar. Epic. l. 1. c. 16. Does it not become man, while he his
plowing, and digging, and eating, etc. to be singing, Great is that God that
has given us land to till, instruments to work with; great is that God who
has given us hands and feet, and other members, above all, that he has given
us an understanding soul? And seeing most men are blind in these things, is it
not fit that some that are more wise and able should publicly praise God for
all these things? and now I am a lame old man, but partaker of Reason, God is
to be praised by me, this is my work, and this I will do, and I will not leave
this station as long as I live; and I wish that all the world would join with
me in singing a song of thankfulness to this good God. Hear what a testimony he
gives of the goodness of God; Hark how he invites you to join in that sweet
consort of singing praises to your Maker: hark at what a rate he talks, that
never read a Bible, or heard of a Christ, or knew what this acquaintance with
God that I am speaking of, meant; how bravely does he set out the goodness of
God? What say you, will you yet be persuaded to think well of God? Methinks I
am loath to see my good master thus slighted and undervalued; methinks it
grieves me to see thee too, so foolishly to refuse such an offer. I shall
conclude what I have to say upon this head, with another notable expression of
the same divine and God-admiring Stoic, Idem c. 6. If men would study the
nature of things, and had but grateful minds, they might see cause sufficient
to praise God from every creature in the world. It is not therefore because God
has no goodness or beauty in him, that men do no more earnestly desire
acquaintance with him; but because their eyes are shut, or they look upon him
through a wrong perspective. This is the first qualification of this Friend,
which may command his acquaintance to you, that he is the most loving and good
Friend.

Secondly, He is a most comfortable Friend. It is a vulgar, and yet a dangerous
error, which the Devil would fain keep up the credit of, That a Religious life
is a sad, melancholy, pensive life; and that upon our acquaintance with God, we
must bid an everlasting farewell to joy, pleasure, and comforts. And is it true,
that a Christians life is so uncomfortable a life? What then does David mean to
take his Harp so often in his hand? What makes him so frequently to warble out
those melodious Notes? How seldom is his Viol out of tune? Why is he so often
singing and rejoicing? Read the last Psalms at your leisure, and then tell me
whether that be the language of a sad mournful melancholy man? Do you never
hear him speak of God, his exceeding joy? Does he not tell God plainly
sometimes, that he can scarce relish any thing but that which comes from his
Table? Nothing else can comfort him. Hence it is in Psalm. 119.76, 77. that he
puts up this earnest request to God; Let I pray thee, thy merciful kindness be
for my comfort. As for his part he could take comfort in nothing below that,
and that was it that the Lord had graciously promised to feed his servant with,
as long as he lived; whereupon he urges God with his promise, According to thy
word unto thy servant. And that none might think this to be only Gods common
kindness that he means, he adds, Let thy tender mercies come unto me, that I
may live. Gods common mercies would not serve his turn. that was a Dish that
the World fed upon as well as he; if he might not have these sweet dainties,
peculiar, spiritual, fatherly mercies, he could not live, he should even pine
away for hunger. Wherefore he says a little after, That his soul did even
faint for Gods salvation. And the soul that has had a full meal here; O how is
it raised? How does it cry roast-meat, Cant. 4.1. The King has brought me into
his chambers; and what had you there? nay, that is more then the soul can
express; only this she can say, The taste of that mercy, she hopes to keep in
her mouth for ever; she shall remember his love more then wine. Nay, so
comfortable a Friend is God, that those who have an interest in him can rejoice
in such times, when others would be weeping and wringing their hands. Gods
company is so refreshing, that it turns a prison into a palace; it brings joy
and pleasure into a dungeon. Stand forth O ye suffering Saints, and speak your
experiences; the world objects your state to us a sad state, and they think you
have good reason to accuse God, and if any have any thing to say against the
comfortableness of a religious life, and this friend, it is you. Well then,
will you promise, O sinners, to stand to the judgment of the greatest
sufferers. We will enquire of them that have been sawn asunder, tormented,
roasted for Gods sake; look into that little Book of Martyrs, and you shall
find as uncomfortable as their state was, yet they would not accept of
deliverance; none of them all that would open his mouth against this Friend for
all this. What say you, O Paul and Silus, now your backs are raw, and your feet
are in the stocks? their singing speaks significantly enough for them that they
were not over sad; and they are so busy in crying Hallelujahs, that they cannot
attend to give an answer to so sorry a question. What say the Martyrs out of
the Flames. Does not their love burn as hot then as ever? Did ever any of them
from Abel to the least that suffered in Christ's cause, say that God was an
uncomfortable Friend? Do not all the children of Wisdom, from first to last
justify Wisdom, and say, That all her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all
her paths, peace? Of those that have God for their Friend and know it, bring me
any of them all that complains of God. How does he come and cheer them up when
all the world is against them? Joh. 16.33. What made that Holy Man in Psalm 23.
say, That though he should walk through the valley of the shadow of death, he
would fear no evil. What, not fear then? Why, what Friend is it that keeps up
your spirits? that bares you company in that black and dismal Regions; he will
soon tell you God was with him, and in those slippery ways he leaned upon his
staff, and these were the Cordials that kept his heart from fainting. I
challenge all the Gallants in the world out of all their Merry Jovial Clubs, to
find such a company of merry cheerful Creatures as the friends of God are. It Is
not the company of God, but the want of it that makes sad. Alas, you know not
what their comforts he; and strangers intermeddle not with their joy. You think
they cannot be merry when their countenance is so grave, but they are sure you
cannot be truly merry when you smile with a curse upon your souls. They know
that he spoke that sentence who could not be mistaken, Prove. 14.13. Even in
laughter the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is heaviness. Then
call your roaring, and your singing, and laughter mirth, but the Spirit of God
calls it madness, Eccl. 2.2. When a carnal man's heart is ready to die within
him, and with Nabal to become like a stone; how cheerfully then can those look
that have God for their friend! Which of the valiant ones of the world can
outface. Death, look joyfully into Eternity? Which of them can hug a Faggot,
embrace the Flames? This the Saint, can do, and more too; for he can look
infinite Justice in the face with a cheerful heart, he can hear of Hell with
joy and thankfulness, he can think of the day of Judgment with great delight
and comfort. I again challenge all the world to produce one out of all their
merry Companies, one that can do all this; come muster up all your jovial
Blades together; call for your Harps and Viols, add what you will to make the
consort complete; bring in your richest Wines; come lay your heads together,
and study what may still add to your comfort; well, is it done? Now come away
sinner, this night thy soul must-appear before God. Well now, what say you man?
What, does your courage fail you? Now call for your merry Companions, and let
them cheer thy heart. Now call for a Cup, a Whore, never be daunted man; shall
one of thy courage quail, that could make a mock at the threatenings of the
Almighty God? what so boon and jolly but now, and now down in the mouth? Here Is
a sudden change indeed! Where Is thy merry companions. I say again? all fled!
Where are thy darling pleasures? have all forsaken thee? Why should thou be
dejected, there is a poor man in rags that is smiling? What, art thou quite
bereft of all comfort? What Is the matter man? What Is the matter? There Is a
question with all my heart, to ask a man that must appear before a God to
morrow morning. Well then, it seems your heart misgives you, what then did you
mean to talk of joy and pleasures? are they all come to this? Why, there stands
one that now has his heart as full of comfort as ever it can hold; and the
very thoughts of Eternity, which do so daunt your soul, raise his; and would
you know the reason? he knows he is going to his friend, nay, his friend bears
him company through that dirty Lane. Behold, how good and how pleasant a thing
it is for God and the soul to dwell together in unity! This it is to have God
for a friend. O blessed is the soul that is in such a case; yea, blessed is the
soul whose God is the Lord, Psalm. 144.15. Psalm. 69.15, 16 2 Cor. 1.3. Joh.
14.16. Isa. 51.11, 12, Neh. 8.10. Psalm. 30.5. Psalm, 43.4. Prove. 14.10. Isa.
29.19. Romans 14.17, 1 Pet. 1.8. Nay, David when he seemed to be somewhat out of
tune, leaves this upon Record as undoubted truth, Psalm. 73.1. That God is good
to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart; Let the Devil and his
Instruments say what they will to the contrary, I will never believe them; I
have said it before, and I see no reason to reverse my sentence; Truly God is
good. Though sometimes he may hide his face for a while, yet he does that in
faithfulness, and love; there is kindness in his very scourges, and love bound
up in his rods; he is good to Israel: do but mark it first or last, The true
Israelite in whom there is no guile, shall be refreshed by this Savior. The
Israelite that wrestles with tears with God, and values his love above the
whole world, that will not be put off without his Fathers blessing, he shall
have it with a witness; He shall reap in joy, though he may at present sow in
tears. Even to such as are of a clean heart. The false-hearted hypocrite indeed
that gives God only his tongue and lip, cap and knee, but reserves his heart
and love for sin and the world, that has much of complement, but nothing of
affection and reality; why, let such a one never expect, while in such a state,
to taste those reviving comforts that I have been treating of: while he drives
such a trade, he must not expect much of Gods company; but of that hereafter.
What a charge does God give to his Ministers to keep up the spirits of his
people. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says their God, speak ye comfortably
to Jerusalem. It Is a gross mistake, to think that God loves to see his,
drooping and hanging down their heads; no, no, he counts it his honor to have
his servants cheerful. O why then should any of the precious sons and daughters
of Zion walk up and down, as if their friends company were not sufficient to
solace them, even in the lowest state that a child of God can be conceived to
be in. While you think God is honored by you, you cannot imagine what wrong you
do him. The world stands by and looks upon you, the Devil bids them look on
still, and ask them, how they like such a dumpish life, and the service of such
a Master, all whose servants and friends lead such a doleful life. Stay, hold
these Satan, that is a lie, and a loud one too; there are and have been
thousands of Gods Children that have lived, as it were in the Suburbs of
Heaven, while they have been upon Earth; many thousands there have been, that
have spent their days in true solid joy and peace; many that have gone from one
Heaven of comfort here, to another of glory and comfort in that other world. As
I said before, so I say again, It is not the company of God, but the want of
it, makes those sad which you see so; besides, let me tell you, tears and joy
are no way inconsistent. It may be also those tears, that sad countenance may
be for thy sake; when he sees what comfort thou despisest, and knows what a
God, what a Friend thou refusest, he cannot but weep; it is no rarity for the
people of God in the midst of their spiritual enjoyments to pity poor foolish
sinners, that slight those things which they know to be so refreshing: Thus
David did when his heart was solaced with the love of God, when his soul was
ready to be over-burdened, overpowered with the abundant incomes of Gods
kindness, he cannot but with grief and pity think of their state, who have
nothing to live upon but husks, whilst he seeds thus high. O let my soul be
but acquainted with God, let me but taste more of those true comforts, drink of
that river of pleasures that is at his right hand, and then I could spare these
lower sensual pleasures, then I should scarce envy the most merry ranting
Blades their comforts; I will not say but then I should with sorrow think of
their wants. It was spoken by Galeacius Caraxiola, one that sometimes had none
of the least shares of worldly enjoyments, and might have had more, could he
have dispensed with the absence of this friend, could he but have been willing
to have wanted those spiritual comforts. Let him perish that values not one
hours communion with God, and the comforts of a divine life, above all the
pleasures and comforts that the earth can afford. Give me such comforts, such a
friend, whose smiles may refresh me upon a deathbed, whose presence may revive
me when nothing else can. Naturalists tells us of a Bird called Charadius, that
being brought into the room where any one lies sick, if he look upon the sick
person with a fixed eye, he recovereth, but if he turn away his eyes, the
person dies. It is true, I am sure, of this friend, in whose favor is life,
and in whose frowns there is death. [ Ar. Epic. l. 3. cap. 24.] Can you help me
to such a friend (may all say with as good reason as he) that can keep me from
all fears. O for such a friend! This is instead of all pleasures to me, to
think that God is my Father, and to know that I have loved and obeyed him to
the utmost of my power, not only in words but in deeds; this, this is the
pleasure, here is a friend indeed. Now what do you say to all this, is God to be
desired? Is his acquaintance to be sought after? Can such a friend be too much
valued? The truth of it is, I would not give a rush for any of your comforts
which come not from a sense of our interest in Christ, and which have not a
solid foundation, Scripture-cousolations. It is not he that smiles, but he that
can look up to God as his, and look into his soul, and see things there in a
good composure, and kept in a cheerful subjection to his maker and Redeemer;
this, this is the state, here dwells joys, and comforts that deserve such a
name. This lower Region sometimes is stormy, but above there is a constant
calm. Sen. And is God still to be slighted? are his favors, is his
acquaintance little worth? I know you cannot be an enemy to comfort and joys;
why, let me tell you here is the Well of Consolation, here is the Fountain, and
all other joys which are drawn out of the Cisterns will ere long be dry. Come
away therefore, poor soul, and do not refuse such joys as all the carnal world
cannot parallel for their hearts. And this is the next Motive, taken from the
consideration of the Nature of this Friend, which I would persuade you to get
acquainted with.

First, He is a loving and kind Friend.

Secondly, He is the most chearing, comforting Friend.

Thirdly, He is the most able and powerful Friend. He has all power in his
hand; and as long as he is but thy Friend, who ere is thy Foe, thou shall never
be overpowred, never be crushed. Thou may challenge all the Devils in Hell,
and all his instruments upon earth to do their worst, God is on thy side, thou
needst not fear. Thou art in thy self a poor weak Creature, easily conquered
and broken by a thousand enemies; but if thou have a God to fly to, thou also
may sing as well as those did, Isa. 26.1. Thou have a strong City, salvation
will God appoint for Walls and Bulwarks. No wonder then, if every wise man
think it abundantly worth his while to secure this great Privilege to himself
that God may be his friend; This is his best hold, his One thing necessary,
verse 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after; that I
may dwell in the house of God all the days of my life to behold the beauty of
the Lord, and to inquire in his Temple.

Sin, the World, and the Devil, may tempt a sinner, but they can never guard
him from the power of this Great and Almighty God.

And now, you that are contented to live as without God in the world, let me
request you to consider:

Can thou spread out the Heavens as a curtain, or cover the Sun with
darkness? Can thou call to the Lightnings, and will they answer thee, and
say, here we are? Should thou speak to that hasty Champion, and command him
to stand still one quarter of an hour, would he obey thee? If these things be
too much, why do thou boast, that art but a worm? Alas poor sinner, when this
great God appears in judgment, thou art not able to deal with a Fly or a Frogg.

O then, Is it not good prudence for all the sons of men, to come and agree
quickly with this Adversary while he is in the way, for whoever goes on in an
Enmity and Rebellion against this Lord of Heaven and Earth, shall not prosper,
but be sure his sin shall find him out.

And this is another qualification of this Friend which I would commend to your
acquaintance, he is an able Friend.

First, he is the most kind and loving Friend.

Secondly, he is the most comfortable Friend.

Thirdly, he is the most able and powerful Friend.

Fourthly, he is the most active Friend: He commands his to be diligent and
industrious, always abounding in the work of the Lord, surely he will not be
slow.

If the inanimate creature, such as the sinner, resolves as a strong man to
run his race; how active then must the maker of that sinner be, if he command
him not to deal with a slack hand, surely he himself will not deal with a slack
hand, should you behold this friend of yours riding upon the wings of the Wind,
and making the clouds his Chariot, would you not say, O how swift, O how active
is this glorious friend of mine! the feet of this beloved One are as Hinds
feet, for the good of his friends. Yea, his very eyes run too and fro through
the whole world; for their good he keeps constant watch and ward about them,
and he that can injure any of his our of his sight shall go unpunished, Esa.
27.3.

The Lord speaks this under the Metaphor of a Vineyard, and does this great
Husbandman neglect his Vineyard? does he not Digg, Manure, and stone it, and
keep out the wild Boar, and Foxes? Does he not prune it, and tender it
charily? I the Lord do keep it night and day, none shall come into it to gather
the Fruit of it without lay leave. I will water it every moment: So that you
see what pains God takes for his. Do you believe, this friend sits in Heaven,
and looks down upon the Earth for nothing? Be not deceived O sinner, that wilt
not be persuaded to get reconsiliation with this Great and Holy Majesty. The
Lord is not slack concerning his coming, as some account slackness: Let his
stay be never so long, when he comes to judge the world, it will be before the
sinner looks for him. Indeed there is nothing that a wicked man more pleases
himself with, than the thoughts that it will be a long time before God and he
meet, but he little considers that a Thousand years are but as One day compared
to the days of Eternity. Now, by faith, these things are made real to the
considerate Christian; and as for the supplying of his wants, he knows if he
comes at midnight to borrow bread of him, he will not put you off with this
excuse, that he is a Bed and cannot rise from his Children, but will presently
help, making their necessity his own opportunity to give them what shall be
convenient for them, as knowing, that let the wind sit in what corner it will,
it shall fit their Sails, and bring them nearer the Harbor.

The worlds friends, are infinitely below this Friend: One has chosen Silver
and Gold, and a great Estate, and such a one in the worlds Calendar may be writ
down for one of the wisest in his Choice: Well, lets us see now what this
friend can do for you, your body is on the Rack, your hands are weak, your
legs tremble, your stomach fails, your sleep departs from you; Where is now
your friend? call for him speedily, come let us now see if he be a friend
indeed, let us see it, can he give you one hours sleep, can be help you to one
moments rest, can he give you no refreshment no help? Take him, lay him by you
on your O its so heavy I cannot endure it: lay it in your bosom, O, I cannot
breath for it; take it away, take it away, it will not do; why Sir, do you know
what you say? It is your old friend which you valued above God himself, it is a
bag of gold; I know it, I know it, it presses me down; it is so heavy I cannot
bear it, away with it, away with it; And is this the friend you prized so very
highly? Is this all the kindness that he has for you now? Is this all the help
he can give you at such a time when a friend should stand one in some stead?
Were you not told as much long ago, how you should be served at last?

Fifthly, He is the most Humble and Condescending Friend, he does not scorn to
be acquainted with the meanest; the Beggar may be as welcome to him as the
Prince: The Poor and Rich are all one to Him, he takes as much notice of Job on
the Dunghill, as David on the Throne: He knows any of his Friends in Rags, as
well as in Silks; in Sheepskins and Goat Skins, as well as in Scarlet and fine
Linen.

Look up poor Creature, and see what a Privilege thou have, God himself the
King of Glory is willing to be acquainted with thee; what say thou to this?
Does not thy Heart leap within thee for joy, when you consider the Infinite
Goodness of God, that Reveals these things to Babes, which are hid from the
Wise and Prudent: Even so Father, for it has seemed good in thy Eyes. That Is a
strong Expression; yet he spoke it that cannot Lie: Therefore, O you Humble
Ones, that value the Favor of this Friend, Hear and Read it, and make the Best
of it: It Is Yours; feed upon it: It Is a sweet hit indeed, Is. 66.1, 2. Thus
says the Lord, Heaven is my Throne, and Earth is my foot stool; where is the
house that ye will build me, and where is the place of my rest? for all these
things has mine hand made, and all those things have been, says the Lord: but
to this man will I look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and
trembles at my word. I shall have occasion hereafter, a little to open these
words under another Head, wherefore I shall now but name it. O what
encouragement is here for the most despicable Creature in the world, that may
be as happy in the acquaintance with God, as the mightiest Lord in the World.
Here Is one that will not be ashamed to own thee, when others will take little
notice of thee. Thou think these things strange, it may be, and so they be
indeed, but yet not more strange then true. In does not a little engage the
affections of the meaner rank, if a person of quality do but give them a kind
look; especially if they may have freedom of access to him, O what a privilege
they count it; but such a one to undertake the whole managing of a poor man's
affairs, for him to come to his house, and to look into his cupboard, and to
take care of supplying all his wants, and coming frequently to him, and supping
with him, and he with him, and to make a great provision for him as if he were
a Prince; where is such a thing as this heard of? but if such a thing were, it
were a light matter in comparison of what I am speaking? Where do we ever read
of a great Kings sending Ambassador after Ambassador to a poor beggar? What
history does record such a story at this, that a great Monarch should make
earnest suit for many years together to a worthless slave, that he can hang
when he will, that has not a rag to her back, to make her his Queen; this is
rare indeed, this is beyond president among men; but yet it is that which the
great God does not disdain to do; Nay, let me tell thee whosoever thou art
remaining in a state of Nature, that read these lines, that at this very
time God is doing no less then all this comes to for thee; and I in the name of
my great Master do come to expostulate the case with thee; that God that gave
thee thy breath, and can take it away as soon as he pleases; that God that
made heaven and earth, to whom all the Nations of the earth are but as the drop
of a bucket to the vast Ocean, who holds the Sea in the hollow of his hands,
that weighs the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance: that God
that has no less then a heaven to reward with, and a hell and everlasting
flames to punish with, he it is, that does by me beseech thee to be reconciled
unto him, he it is that would be your Friend, your Acquaintance. O unheard of
mercy! O infinite and unparalled condescension! I have often thought there are
two great astonishing wonders in the world, The one is Gods infinite mercy and
condescension to rebellious apostatized man; and the other is man's
insensibility and ingratitude; that there needs such a stir, and so many words
to persuade him to close with this wonder of kindness, and that so very few
should be prevailed with. See this set forth to the life in Ezekiel. 16. Isa. 1.2,
3. Psalm. 11.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. The Lord is high above all nations, and his glory
above the heavens. Who is like unto the Lord our God, who dwells on high, who
humbles himself to behold the things that are in heaven, and the things that
are in the earth: he raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifted the needy
out of the dunghill, that he may sit with Princes, etc. The Psalmist therefore
had no small reason to cry out with admiration, Psalm. 8.4. What is man that
thou art mindful of him, and the son of man, that thou visitest him? What is
man that thou take knowledge of him, or the son of man, that thou make
account of him? Psalm. 144.3. Job 17.17, 18. What is man that thou should
magnify him, and that thou should set thy heart upon him, and that thou
should visit him every morning, and try him every moment? Behold his
Majesty, and yet how he stoops? Nahum 1.4. Psalm. 18. Job 37, 38. an 39
Chapters, Isa. 40. Psalm. 138.6. Though the Lord be high, yet has be respect
unto the lowly: but the proud he knows afar off. That which ( Seneca, Epist.
17.) the Moralist speaks of Wisdom may be said of God, Epist. 61. It is lawful
to come to him without rich attire and great attendance, come naked and you
shall be as kindly entertained, as if you did shine in cloth of gold, and were
besparkled with Diamonds. He will not give freer access to the rich then the
poor, neither does he value a strong healthful person, before a sick and crazie
one, a beautiful and well-trimm'd gallant, before a cankered, old, deformed
creature. Thus far Seneca and the Scripture speaks the same language. Neither
Job's boyls, nor Lazarus's sores made God keep ever the further off from them.
I knew one all of a cleave with the small Pox, whom this friend came to visit,
and in that condition, how many kisses, had that sweet creature from God? O it
would do ones heart good to have such a friend? And this is the next
qualification of this Friend, which may commend him to thy acquaintance, be
thou never so poor, never so vile and sinful in thy own eyes, such as thy self
he has made welcome; and upon his Word, will thou but come away speedily, thou
shall be welcome too.

Sixthly, He is the most Faithful friend. Where is the man that can tax him of
the least unfaithfulness? Which is the man that can say that he ever forsook
any of his in their greatest exigency? he has been trusted more then once with
more then the world is worth a thousand times over; and they which trusted him
most, never accuses, never thought their choicest Jewels, their whole estate
could be left in safer hands; his promise, and his performance have kept touch,
he never failed his in the least punctilio, or circumstance of time. Ask
Abraham, who was one of Gods friends, God tells him that his seed shall inherit
Canaan, and that they shall be strangers in a Land that was not theirs four
hundred years; and did he not at the expiring of that time, though it was at
midnight almost, bring them out of Egypt: God keeps his time with them to a
minute. Ask Joshua whether he did not live to see this promise made good?
inquire of David, and he will tell you again, that no friend is so trusty. The
unfaithfulness is on man's side there indeed, there I say is many an unhandsome
thing done, and yet for all God does not (as you shall hear hereafter)
presently break with them; if they forget that they are Children, he will not
forget that he is their Father; if God should have done thus by them, many
thousands of them that are now in Glory had been somewhere else. He promises
indeed great things unto his Friend; but does he not do as he says, if not in
the very thing, yet in that which is better; and who would account himself
wronged, if one that promised him ten pound in silver, should in the stead of
it give him ten thousand pound in Gold and Jewels; I believe such a one would
not be thought to be worse then his word, nor the person to whom he made this
promise, count himself injured. And this God does frequently, did men but
understand the worth of what God pays them with. It may be God does not cloth
them in Silks and Sattins, (neither do I know that he ever promised to do so)
but yet he clothes them with the Righteousness of Christ, and bestows those
glorious robes upon them, in which they look more trim and neat then in clothes
of Gold; he has made him such a Suit that is the handsomer for the much
wearing; he may eat and drink, sleep, and work in it, and keep it on his back
day and night, and it shall not he wrinkled; it is the better for use: He is a
faithful Friend, and none that ever had to do with him can say any thing to
the contrary; he never forgot any business that any of his Friends desired him
to do for them, he never neglected it, or did it by the halves; where did any
of them come to him to reveal some secret loathsome distemper to him, that he
reproached them with it? To which of them did he promise a heaven, and put them
off with this World: when this Pilot undertakes to steer their course, there
their vessel shall never split upon the Rock, run upon the Sands, or spring a
Leak, so as to sink in the Seas, to be sure he will see them safe in the
harbor. Ar. Epist. l.c. 26. He was no Christian, yet I suppose none will deny
but he spoke good Divinity, who said, If a man will choose God for his Friend,
he shall travel securely through a Wilderness that has many beasts of prey in
it, he shall pass safely through this World, for be only is safe that has God
for his guide. Does he not speak a little like David himself, Psalm. 37.26. Who
never expected to come to glory, except he were guided by his counsel! Now if a
poor Heathen could say thus, and see good reason to trust God, and admire his
Faithfulness as he does frequently; and so does Seneca, justifying Gods
Faithfulness in all his dealings with the best men in all their sufferings, and
the prosperity of the wicked; what then shall the heavenly Christian say, who
has experienced so much of Gods faithfulness in answering his Prayers, in
fulfilling his promises, and supplying all his exigencies. David will tell you
as much, and justify God in his most severe dispensations toward him: In very
Faithfulness have thou afflicted me, Psalm. 119.75. In our earthly and bodily
affairs, we should never count that Physician faithful that will rather open a
vein, or put his Patient to exquisite torture to save his life, then let him
dye easily. We believe a Father may whip his stubborn Child with more love then
let him alone. To prevent the ax or halter with a rod, is no cruelty. Faithful
are the wounds of a friend, Prove. 2.7, 6. It was not for nothing that the
Psalmist sticks so close to god, he had a little experience of the
unfaithfulness of other friends, Psalm. 38.9, 11. His Lovers and his Friends
stood aloof from his sore, and his Kinsmen stood afar off. May not a great many
complain as well as Job, That their Brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook,
and as the stream of brooks they pass away, Job 6.15. A friend may forget one,
a brother may disown one, father and mother may cast one off, but here is a
friend that sticks closer then all. Nay, he is a better friend to his then they
are to themselves; when they love themselves so little as to undo themselves,
he loved them so well as to save them; when they loved themselves, so as to
poison themselves; he loved them, so as to give them a powerful Antidote; when
they like children would have the knife, he takes it out of their hands least
they should cut their fingers; when they are so careless as to surfit
themselves, he is so faithful as to keep them short, and diet them; and all
this I hope they that understand themselves will not call unkindness or
infidelity. David had in his time some friends that made no bones of hazarding
their lives for him; some of them were willing to quench his thirst though with
their blood, and yet for all that in all his life he never met with so
faithful a friend as his God, Psalm. 89.8. O Lord God of hosts, who is a strong
God like unto thee, or to thy faithfulness round about thee? He had rather
trust his God then any of them all. God is a real true faithful Friend; he
tells us things as they be; he does not speak of more things then the nature of
them does require; he does not tell the best, and hide the worst; he does not
speak all of Heaven, and nothing of suffering, but says plainly, all that will
live godly in Christ Jesus, they must suffer persecution: and Christ says,
Those that will be his Disciples, must take up their Cross and follow him, and
that through many tribulations, they must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. He
speaks of sowing in tears, as well as reaping in joy; of fliction as well as
glory. And when he speaks of the glory of another world, he does not too highly
advance his excellency. When he speaks of his Wrath, or Hell, or Sin, he does
not make them greater evils then they be. The Lord is faithful in all his
dealings, and that they which love him, know right well. Whatsoever does happen
in the world, does happen justly and faithfully; and so if thou will but well
observe, thou shall find. And what say thou after all this, thou who have
tried many and many a friend, so called, and have by sad experience first or
last found them all unfaithful, and art almost ready to say of all men, that
they are liars, and that truth and reality are rarities; thou think there is
scarce a man upon the earth to be trusted? and will thou never be afraid of
such a friend? will thou at last be wise and be acquainted with a friend that
never proved unfaithful? behold, such a one that would be glad with all his
heart to entertain you, would you but forsake your old treacherous
acquaintance. Here, here is one that never fails, nor forsakes those that put
their trust in him. The Heavens shall depart, and the Hills be removed out of
their places, but his faithfulness, his love shall never depart from his; and
will thou not think such a friend after all this worth the having? Come, come,
never stand fretting thy heart out with discontents, men will be men, that is,
unfaithful as long as the world lasts. Do you expect as long as sin reigns in
men's souls, that as long as Satan does so much act therein, that they should
forget to be selfish, covetous, deceitful? but now God will always, be like
himself a God, faithful, true, holy, just? and if any one in Heaven, or in
Earth can condemn God justly, of the least unfaithfulness, my mouth shall soon
he stopped. In this thing I confess my self to be of Antoninus his mind, who
said, That if there be a God as there is most certainly, why that God must
necessarily be most faithful, most wise, most good; but if there be no God, it
is not worth the while to live in a world, in which there is nothing but sin,
confusion, disorder, and no hopes of a redress; the excellency of our being,
our Reason, would make our misery more exquisite, and our lives less desirable.
But blessed be God it is not come to that pass, that we should need question
the being of a God; for as one says wisely, Thou have far more reason to
question thy own being then Gods. Now I say again, methinks he that has been
so often perplexed with many unfaithful, unworthy carriages from them which he
called friends, should be at last persuaded to try what this one friend would
do for him. O what abundance of sorrow would it prevent, if men would but trust
God more, and men less. This, this is the friend sick and well, rich and poor,
living and dying, always the same. Make sure of this Friend, and thou art safe;
thy All is then in safe and faithful hands.

Seventhly, He is a rich Friend, the earth is the Lords, and the Fullness
thereof; cattle upon a thousand hills is his. He it is that has the absolute
disposal of Crowns and Scepters, he it is that can easily raise all his
Favorites to a high estate; if the world and all its glory can do his any
good, if Kingdoms and vast Dominions can advantage them, he can with better
reason then he did to Christ, say, All this is mine, and if thou will love me
and worship me, I will give you as much of it as will do thee good; and who
would account it a kindness to be given that which will do one hurt? but these
are but toys and trifles in comparison of what God has to bestow upon his
friends, List up thine eyes, and behold those glistering Stars; look upon that
stately Canopy that hangs over thy head; why, all this is nothing almost to the
glory which shall be revealed; there is a far greater disproportion between
what we see and enjoy at the best here below, then there is between the
footstool and the Crown. O could you but by faith draw the curtain and see what
is within; O did you but know what is behind those hangings which you see
wrought so curiously, the work of his fingers! O that, that is the place,
there is a house indeed, there is a palace, could thou but by faith and
meditation take a view of it; could you but make a voyage into that far
Country, and see that City of God, and discourse with the inhabitants of the
New Jerusalem; what discoveries should you then have of the Riches, State, and
Granduer of that Princes Court; should thou but see those Treasuries opened,
and know the worth of Gods Jewels, thou would wonder what men and women
meant, that they should need so much persuading to be acquainted with him that
had such things to, bestow; you would judge him worse then mad, who should not
joyfully embrace any Overtures of this nature; in a word, they would reckon
that person besotted that should not with all possible gratitude, close with
such kind of proposals. Come along therefore with me, poor soul, thou that art
not worth a groat, and have never a friend that can or will give you any thing
to speak of, come along with me, and take a short prospect of the Territories
of this mighty Monarch, let us get up to mount Pisgah, and make a survey of that
goodly land, let us take a turn or two in the Courts of his place, consider well
the pleasantness of this seat, how rarely it is accommodated, the richness of
the furniture, the nobleness of the inhabitants, the sweetness of that harmony
that founds night and day in that Temple, the unconceivable costliness, riches,
glory, and excellency of every thing. Do but look a little about thee, are not
thine eyes even dazelled at the sight? do you see what building that is, whose
walls are Jasper, and the City is all of pure Gold, like unto clear glass, and
the foundation of the walls of that City are garnished with all manner of
precious stones, Rev. 21 etc. And what think you now where is the Prince upon
earth that ever was master of such an estate? what are his attendants? the the
meanest of those that stand in his presence, is no less then a King; the least
of his servants is more rich and glorious then the mightiest Potentate that
ever trod upon earthly mold, that was a stranger to God. This God does not
grudge to give that which is more worth then a thousand Kingdoms to his
Darlings. I might tell also at what a rate they live, who are fed always at his
Table, and what dainty dishes they feed upon, I might speak of their Clothing
and Robes, all which speak the riches of that Lord which maintains his servants
so highly. But what am I doing, Can I Grasp the heavens in my arms? or take up
the Sea in the hollow of my hands? Can I measure the heaven of heavens, or
weigh the mountains in scales, or the hills in a balance? Could I do all and a
thousand times more, yea could not give you an account of the Estate of him who
would be your Friend, your husband: at the best, I can but give you a
superficial gross relation of it, and when I have said all that I can speak of,
and all the men in the world with all their tongues have spoke what they can
too, nay, let Angels with their heavenly Rhetoric do what they can to set out
the glory of his Kingdom; I say, when all this is done, you must remember all
falls short of what it is, and that since the beginning of the world men have
not heard, neither can it enter into the heart of man, to conceive what a God
is worth, what a friend you may have of him, if you will but speedily be
acquainted with him. His Kingdom has no bounds, and his Dominions reach futher
then both the Indies. The small love tokens that he sends now and then to his
Beloved into a far country, are of infinitely more value then all the Lockets
of Diamonds and richest Pearls and Jewels in the world, Pro. 8. Behold how
merrily Rebeccah looks upon a sorry Jewel or two presented by Eliezer from his
Master, how soon is her heart conquered? and why should we not be more taken
with things of far greater worth? What, is all this, as much as nothing with
you? Methinks your hearts should be all in a fire: methinks, you should quickly
say, O that I could but see him! who will bring me acquainted with him, he
shall have my heart, my dearest love? Methinks, should I ask you the same
question that they did Rebeccah, Will thou go a long with me to such a friend?
you should readily, without any further dispute say, yea, with all my heart,
and think long to be up and going. Why then do you talk of a year, a mouth
longer? O what ail poor Creatures to make us stand waiting so long for an
answer? Do you ever expect a better offer? Do you look to advance your selves
somewhere else? Can you hope for a better, a richer match? Go thee and search
out among all thy Lovers which make suit to thee, which of them can feed thee
with such costly viands, which of them can cloth you in such Royal Apparel?
which of then can make you such a Jointure? Consider wisely and speedily, that
I may turn to the right hand or the left. What, says thou, can thou amongst
them all better thy self? Is there any one like him? Is there any of the Sons
of the mighty comparable to him? Are any of the Kings, or great ones of the
Earth able to make you such an offer, or should they, can any of them make it
good? What, have you yet resolved upon the point or not? What it is you stand
for, I pray do you question the truth of what I speak? Do you make account I
speak of the highest, and make the best of things? Why, then let me tell you
further, I have not, I cannot tell you the half of what you will find to be
true, if you would come to be thoroughly resolved, or of what you will believe
hereafter, to your sorrow if you still refuse him. And I must further add to
what I said before, that whatever riches God possesses, he will jointure you
in, as soon as you shall in good earnest be willing to accept him for your
Friend; all that I can speak of, and more too, you may call your own. Ask, and
it shall be given without prescribing how much more then you can ask or think
shall be given you. Your Lord and husband is not so niggardly as Ahashuerus,
who said, What is thy request, and what is thy petition, Queen Esther, and it
shall be given thee, to the half of my Kingdom? But God says what is thy
request, and what is thy petition poor Soul, and it shall be granted to the
whole of my Kingdom; what is it thou want, what attendants do thou lack to
wait upon thee to my Court? are they Prophets, Apostles, Ministers, Angels,
they shall be given, 1 Cor 3.21. Do but try him; he bids you ask, and you shall
have: Let me give you this one memento, Ask like one that has to do with a
rick King, who hates to do any thing below himself; remember it is he that
delights to give like a God: widen therefore thy desires as large as Heaven, be
bold and speak a great word, and I warrant thee thou shall not be denied; tell
God, that seeing in his infinite goodness and condescension, he has been
pleased to give thee leave to ask without restraint, thou do humbly request
his Son for thy Lord and Husband, himself for thy Father, God, and Friend, his
Kingdom for thy Dowry, the Righteousness of his Son for thy Ornament,
Clothing, and Beauty, the comforts of his Spirit, and abundance of his grace
to bear thy charges handsomely, till thou come to his house. This is high
indeed! but thy great and noble Lord loves dearly to hear such covetous
Petitioners, who will be put off with nothing but such great things. When do
any of these go sad from his Court? When do any of the seed of Jacob seek his
face in vain? This, this is the generation of thriving ones, who seek for life,
immortality and glory; who seek thy face, O God of Jacob. And now what do you
say. will you believe all this? Dare you take my word? I am persuaded none of
you all think I dare tell you a lie, and do you any wrong; but for all that, I
do not desire you should take my word, nor the word of any man living in a
thing that concerns Eternity; but take his word who cannot lie, Psalm. 8.18.
Riches and honor are with me; yea durable riches and righteousness. verse. 19.
My fruits is better then gold; yea, then fine gold; and my revenue then choice
silver. The Wise man tells us, That wealth makes many friends, Prove. 19. 4,6.
And that many will entreat the favor of the Prince; and that every one is a
Friend to him that gives gifts. If this might be in Spirituals, I should not
fear, but that I should prevail with all my hearers to seek the friendship of
God; if their real interest did weigh with them, if true riches and wealth
could win their affections, if the most substantial good things might signify
any thing, if solid reasons might bias them, I should not fear going away
without them. But, alas, alas, how little power have all these things with the
sensual world? What are men and women turned to? What sots and bruits are they
in the concerns of their souls, and the affairs of that other world? Men run up
and down hunting after good things, and have taken a false seat, they hope to
catch that at last which they will feed upon, and satisfy themselves with. I
tell thee, O man, who ask, who will show us* any good? Here, here it is;
riches thou meanest: well then, let it be so; and if I do not prove that what I
offer thee from my great Master, to be a thousand times more worth thy seeking
then gold or silver, and better coin then that which bore Cesaers stamp upon
it, then say you were cheated. Thou tellest over thy moneys very fast methinks,
but are you sure all that is Gold which does so glister? Is all that current
Silver? Will it go in another Country? Is it not possible, but that you may be
mistaken. Here, here is the Gold that is tried, it will go any where; here is
one that will give you, will you but desire earnestly his acquaintance, such
treasure that will not perish, such silver that has no tin, such gold which
has no dross, such true riches that cannot be taken away from you. Ask that
Saint which looks so merrily, that lives so bravely, how he got his estate, and
how he came to be so rich all of a sudden; he will soon tell you how, and where
his treasure lies, and yet not fear being robbed. He has of late been
acquainted with a Friend that has given him that which makes him esteem
himself more worth then if he were possessest of ten times more then ever
Alexander or Cesars was. A Friend of Cyrus in Xeniphon being asked where his
Treasure was, which made him to think so highly of himself? his answer was,
Where Cyrus his Friend was. A Christian may with much better reason and
cheerfulness, if asked, where his Riches and Estate lies, answer, Where God his
Friend is. Ask the poorest of them that are acquainted with God, the weakest of
all his Children, what they will sell their portion for, and what you shall
give them for to resign up all their interest in God, to quit their claim to
this inheritance: Would they not all be of Paul's mind, and even scorn the
motion, and count the glory of a thousand worlds but as dung and dross in
comparison of the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus their Lord, Phil.
3.8. Nay, hear what one says that was far less acquainted with God then any of
them which I have been speaking of, when he talks of such a kind of bargain as
this. (Epict.) Offer me a Kingdom, and you offer me to my loss. For, says the
same Author in another place, A good man may look up to Heaven, as the seat of
his Friend, and not fear want. Inquire of David what portion God gave him? and
he will soon answer you, A goodly portion indeed; and that he gave him no less
then himself, and that the lines are fallen to him in pleasant places, and that
he has a goodly heritage, Psalm. 16, and therefore he counts himself richer
then if he had all his Enemies in chains, and their Royalties at his disposal;
he takes himself to be a far happier man then if he were absolute Monarch of
the Universe, and were to give Laws to the inferior World; he reckons himself
now as well to pass and better too then Adam, when he was sole Landlord of the
World. It was true spoken of some body, I do well remember who. He that has
rich Friends, must not look upon himself as poor. O then that you would be
indeed friends to your selves, and have respect to your own real interests! And
what, will not this mighty and powerful Argument, which weighs as much as a
thousand others, prevail? And do you still say, what profit will there be in
serving the Lord, and what advantage shall I get if I be acquainted with him?
To what account will it return? I again answer, To a very good account every
way. Try but this trade with the wise Merchant* and you shall soon feel the
benefit of it. (Bolton) Conreive to thy self mountains of Gold, and rocks of
Diamonds? monds; and to this a vast unmeasurable tract of ground, land of
inheritance, the most fertile soil in the world, bringing in such a burden
every year that shall trouble the owner to reap it; imagine his Pasture as
great as his Arable, and all clothed with thousands of Cattle, small and
great, and none of them barren neither; suppose his Barns and Storehouses
could never be emptied, and his Presses should burst out every year with new
Wine. Again, let the Merchant store his Cellars with the most pure Oil, and
furnish him with such rich Spices as the Queen of Sheba brought to Solomon;
suppose he were provided with all the exquisite Rarities that the Air, Sea, or
Earth can afford, yet for all this he were a beggar, in comparison of one that
has God for his Friend: Such a one possesses him that possesses all things.
Well then, be persuaded at last to be wise. I remember the Moralist (Sen.
Epist. 6.) brings in one acting like a wise man, and a good proficient in
Philosophy, who begins to be a friend to himself. And this is that that I am
pleading with you for. If I came to rob you of all hopes of happiness, and to
give away all that you have or expect, and to turn Mendicants; if I came to
persuade you to espouse a beggarly interest, and to march your self so as that
you should be sure to be undone, I should not wonder, if after I had spoke
much, I should prevail but little. But when it is such a Cause that I am
pleading, when it is for your own unspeakable advantage, when it is riches,
true riches that I would have you look after, an estate that I would have you
mind, which may be had for the looking after, have I not cause to admire what
need a man should have to use so many words? Had you money to spare, and could
I tell you of a brave purchase that you might have an excellent penniworth, I
am persuaded I should not be very unwelcome. Could I tell you of a vast Estate
that you might have, upon the matter, for accepting or looking after, I believe
I need not spend ten years in earnest begging and entreating you to look after
such a thing. Should I offer to bring you to the place and person of whom you
might buy it, should I not soon have your company? should not your necessaries
be quickly made ready for such a journey? would you not be up betimes in the
morning? nay, would you not travel all night, and think it no folly nor
madness, both to lose some rest, and to take some pains, so you might but come
to possess what I speak of. Nay, were there but a possibility of obtaining of
it, at least a probability, I persuade my self you would not fail to look after
it the very first thing you did. I am ready to think you would neither spare
for pains or costs, so that after all you might but make sure of enjoying it.
Why, what then is the matter that I can do no more in the business that I am
about? I am sure I bring you tidings of a better bargain, a braver purchase,
and surer inheritance, and what need I then spend so much time in arguing with
you? Good Lord what mean people? Are they out of their wits, and quite beside
themselves? What, is a Feather better then a Crown, Brass then Gold? Is a Glass
to be preferred before a Diamond, finite Enjoyments before everlasting Riches,
Darkness before Light, the World before God? O how is man sunk below himself?
What has sin made men and women? If this be not folly and madness, what is?
Such may go for wise men in the worlds account that makes such choices; and
it is possible a man in Bedlam may say his neighbor that tore all his hair off
from his head, is well in his wits. O that this were not the condition of the
far greater part of the world. And what meanest thou, O my soul, that thou art
no more affected to see such vast multitudes of brainsick frantic sinners,
that make light of the tender of the Gospel, that take them for their enemies,
who would do their utmost to make them happy for ever. I must profess I am even
ashamed of my own heart, that I do not mingle my words with tears; that I
should speak for God and souls, with so indifferent a spirit! Well, now you
have heard of a great match by which you may be made for ever; are you for all
this of the same mind you were: Well then, complain not if you be a beggar.
Remember how you were offered, remember you might have been worth more then a
world. O that inconsiderate souls did but know; and indeed know what an offer
this is! O that they would not carelessly undervalue such a proposal! O what
shall I do? How shall I persuade you? What Arguments will prevail? O thou great
and mighty God, give men and women but a spiritual understanding of these
things, make them deeply apprehensive of their excellency and reality, and then
I should soon have them with thankfulness complying with these tenders which
thou command me to make unto them. O when shall it once be! How long shall
the Devil and an unbelieving heart undo so many millions? How long shall Satan
triumph over souls, and cheat them thus miserably of their All? O pity, pity
dear Lord, the besotted foolish world, and give me more compassion to souls,
that I may with incomparably greater earnestness and tenderness plead thy cause
with them, and resolve to give them no rest, till I have persuaded some of them
in good earnest, to look after the great and weighty affairs of Eternity, and
the making sure of this Friend.

Eighthly, He is a sympathizing Friend. It goes to his heart (with Reverence be
it spoken) when any injuries are done to any of his; when his friends are
wronged, it touches him to the quick: He is as tender of them, as of the apple
of his eye. Again, He that despises you, despises me. Never was tender --
hearted Mother more pitiful over her only Child, then God is to them which love
him; never was any friend so much concerned for another as God for his. What
else mean those high expressions of pity in Isa. 63.9. In all their afflictions
he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved them: in his love and in
his pity he redeemed them, and he bare them, and carried them all the days of
old. It was not once or twice that God did so by them; but in all their
afflictions, he was afflicted; which was not expressed in some cold formal
words, such as these. Alas poor creatures, they are quite undone, their enemies
are very barbarous, but he showed it in that most real demonstration, by saving
of them by the Angel of his presence. A verbal kindness costs little, and helps
little. But suppose his friends are carried Captive, are they not quite out of
the reach of his help? No, his love, pity and power, will find them out in any
place under Heaven; and if they be slaves, he will redeem them, though he gives
Kingdoms and Nations for their Ransom. In his love and in his pity he redeemed
them; and when by hard usage they are grown so weak and feeble, that they can
scarce go nor creep, why, he will carry them in his arms, and bare them. And
thus he did of old; and his affections are rather greater then lesser now, then
they were then. The mother can be weary of carrying a dirty screaming child;
she thinks it less trouble to whip him, or to let him lie till he has cried
himself weary; she is loath to lug such a troublesome thing up and down all the
day long. But yet such is the tenderness of this Father, that he carries his
all the day long, though they be so heavy, so unquiet, so dirty. But of that
presently. How often do you read of strange pity in the book of the Judges; when
they had by their own folly more then once brought themselves into calamity,
how do his bowels yern over them; and when any of his are groaning under any
trials or temptation, what sending and running is there? how many Cordials are
prepared for them? what calling to this servant and that servant to attend them
with all the care that may be, and to comfort them in this state? and in case
of abuse, how does he show his love to them? If you should ask Pharaoh, he
would tell you, that Gods Friends are edge tools: why else does the Lord lay
about him with so much indignation, when they are oppressed. Nay, for their
sakes he rebukes Kings, saying, Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no
harm; if they do, be it on their peril. How did he bare the afflictions of his
people Israel in Egypt? did he stand still as if he were unconcerned? did he
shut his eyes and not see? or did he stop his ears to their cries? No, no, he
sees, he sees the sufferings of his in Egypt, and that both enemies and friends
too shall know the one to their comfort, and the other to their cost, Exodus
3.7. How does he awaken for their help, and gird on his sword upon his thigh,
and march out with fury? how does he cloth himself with vengeance, as with a
robe, and brandish his glittering sword, and sheath it in the hearts of his and
their enemies? Wherefore is it that God has so many controversies with Edom,
Ammon, and Amalek? Why does he muster up his forces with violence against
Babylon? Whose quarrel does he engage in? What was the ground of that War? If
you read over all the indictments that are before this great Judge, you will
find this a common one their hatred of his people; and this to be sure he will
not put up. And that which puts an Accent upon all this, is the unworthy
carriage of most of them toward him all this while. But of that under the next
Head, which is this.

Ninthly, He is the most patient Friend: Never any one in the world could have
disgested such affronts, born such indignities, as God has many a time, and
even from the best of those that he takes into this intimacy with himself. Had
it not been for this Covenant of Friendship, Judah and Ephraim too had been
soon unpeopled; as for them they soon forgot their Covenant, yet for all that
God remembers his; though Ephraim forget to be a Child, yet God cannot forget to
be a Father. Read that Text and wonder, Hos. 11.7, 8. And my people are bent to
back sliding: though they called them to the most high, yet none at all would
exalt him. Though they had many compassionate Prophets that called after them
day and night, when they saw them turning their backs upon God, yet they were
not minded. Who now would conceive that God should ever think a thought of
kindness toward them more? yet hear what God says, How shall I give thee up,
O Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, O Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah?
and how shall I seat thee as Zebulon? My heart is turned within me, my
repentings are kindled together. I will not execute the fierceness of mine
anger. I will not return to destroy Ephraim; for I am God and not man; the holy
One in the midst of thee, and I will not enter into the City. Well, now tell me
if ever there were such a compassionate, meek, patient Friend. Ephraim was up
in open Arms against his maker, he did rebel most unworthily against his good
Lord and Friend, to whom he was bound by infinite Engagements. Ephraim had
quite cast off God, and he will have nothing to do with him; and Judah is not
far inferior to his treacherous Brother; and what will God do? One would
think, as I said before, he should ease himself quickly of such false friends;
one would think that after such unfaithfulness, he should for ever banish them
his Court; one would soon conceive that he should think of dis-inheriting such
rebellious Children; for theirs was not the first, second, nor third time that
they had served God thus; who then could imagine that he should ever trouble
himself with them any more? Should one not look every day when he should quite
cast them off? Why, God seems sometimes to threaten as much, and seems ever and
anon to act toward them, as if he would never look upon them more while the
world stands. Go says God to your Idols, let them save you? what do you come
to me; for you have resused to have me for your God; go cry to your gods, and
let them deliver you. Thus he seems to turn away his face; yea, for all that,
see how soon he forgets his displeasure, Ephraim is his Child, his dear Child,
and he cannot but pity him; and how shall I give thee up, O Ephraim, etc. how
hardly is God brought so much as to chastise his Children; he never corrects
them, but when there is an absolute need of it; ask the Church under the rod,
and she cannot but say as much, Lam. 3.32, 33. For though he cause grief, yet
will he have compassion according to the multitude of his mercies. For he does
not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of men. He calls judgment his
work, his strange work: and when he does correct his stubborn Children, how
does he many times give them a lash and a kiss, a frown, and a smile? O what
would have become of the holiest men living, if God should upon every
provocation have broke with them. If God should mark iniquities, O who should
stand? Which of the fallen Sons of Adam has not abused his high kindness? and
yet for all that, how is his Patience and goodness exercised toward them; well
might the Psalmist make that the burden of one of his songs, O that men would
praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works toward the
children of men; and that of another, For his mercy endures for ever. What
created being could have born the thousandth part of that from any hand that
God does every day from his dearest children? What peevishness, and unfriendly
quarrelling, what murmuring and repining, does he bear, even from them for whom
he has done such great things? How strangely do they carry themselves! how
seldom and complemental in their visits of him! how cold and formal in their
addresses to him! how frequently are they conversing with his basest enemies!
How much treachery and underhand-dealing does he find in them! yet for all
this, how great are his kindnesses, and how open are his arms, upon their
acknowledgement, to receive them again! Little do we think what unkindness the
Lord overlooks; and indeed except we knew what it was to be infinite in
holiness, could we any way conceive how infinite his Patience is, Psalm. 106*
43, 44. Many times did he deliver them: but they provoked him with their
counsel, and were brought low for their iniquities. Nevertheless he regarded
their affliction, when he heard their cry, and he remembered for them his
Covenant, etc. Here, here is Patience, here is love and goodness with a witness!
What Prince under Heaven would trust a Rebel, that has been in arms a hundred
times against him, and that at the best does serve him with so little delight?
What friend would continue his familiarity and kindness there, where he has
found abundance of falseness? and who but thou, O God, is so merciful and
gracious, Long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth? As for the
trouble that any of his meet with, most commonly they may thank themselves for
it; and it is always sent them in kindness: there is none of them all but may
say, this is my iniquity, this is the fruit of my backsliding, this I have got
by my estrangment from God.

Tenthly, He is an honorable friend, and to be acquainted with him is the
highest honor in the world. This word, honor, sounds great in the ears of
this proud world; what running and catching to get a little of it! How do many
undervalue their lives, and make nothing to hazard their blood for a little of
that men call Honor; some prize it above riches and wealth, and care not
almost at what rate they purchase it; and yet in the meanwhile they are
furthest from that which they so gr^^dily desire, and they run away from that
which they seem to pursue. Poor ignorant man is fearfully mistaken, he calls
that his honor which degrades him, and takes that for his glory which is his
shame: How is he pleased with that which when he has, he neither sees nor
feels, and scarce knows what it is! (Epict.) What is it, O man, that thou
loosest thy sleep for? what is it that thou art at so much charge to buy? that
rather then you will want it, Estate, Blood, Life and Soul, and all must go for
it? Knight, Lord, Earl, etc. Worshipful, Right-worshipful, Honorable,
Excellent, Gracious, are big words, and make a great noise; but is this the
true honor? will these words without the thing do a man so much good? a man, I
said, and so does God say too, and death will make the biggest of them all know
as much ere it be long; for all those big words? what if his breath stinks that
speaks these words, and his that hears them, be not much sweeter. (Antoninus)
Is it such an honor to have a company of fools to call him wise that it may be
is like themselves? is it worth a Soul to have it said when I am in hell, there
lived a brave Gentleman, that kept a Noble house, and brave Table, his Cellar
was always open, one might come when one would, and drink as long as one could
stand, and never hear, why do you so? and be always welcome; that is, in plain
English, where a man might be encouraged to damn his Soul. There lived a Noble
gallant Person who bid defiance to the Almighty, that had courage enough to go
to hell merrily, and had a desire to carry as many along with him as might be;
damning: swearing, cursing was their Language; eating, drinking, sleeping,
whoring and persecuting the people of God their business. And are these your
honorable Persons? Nay, Go higher, to bustle up and down in Cloth of Gold with
a vast retinue; to have men on this side, and that side, bowing and cringing;
and is this such a business? Is it worth the while to keep such a stir about
that which a wise man may want, and a fool have? (Anton.) Will those Names,
that Grandeur and state, those high Titles, render you more acceptable to God?
will they procure you a freer access into the presence of that great King? will
those great words scare death? will he say when he comes to your house, this is
a person of quality, I must not be so bold as to come near him? will your
honor procure you a protection from the arrests of this Sergeant? Where is the
Honorable Personage, the Gentleman, Knight, Lord, King, or Monarch, that has
lived a thousand years: (Lucian) Are the worms afraid to gnaw thy heart? Will
thy flesh never putrisie? Will your Servants, or your Master either honor you
in Hell? And is this all that you keep so much a stir for, that can do you no
good in the grave, or in another world? Can that be better worth then Heaven,
then God? O that we might but know what it is, that great thing is, which is
preferred before Christ and everlasting glory? Again, I ask what is it that the
Grandees of the world do so much idolize? Is it to be called Wise, Great, and
Noble? But what if the wise God call such a one a fool? (Epict.) What if he
know neither himself, nor his God, nor his interest? Has he much greater
reason to boast then a feather that some body will say it is heavy; or dung,
that the Swine says it is sweet. (Juven.) What profit is it for a man to be
made great for betraying his Country, and flattering a Tyrant, who yesterday
was the son of a Stage Player, and to morrow shall be shorter by the head? What
good will it do a beggar that is ready to be starved, to be told that he is a
Prince, a brave fellow, worth some thousands by the year? But would yon know
which is the ready way to true honor? I tell you, it consists not in the favor
of them that must die like themselves, and before that few years be over, must
stand but upon even ground with the meanest; it consists not in the sorry
acclamations of them which measure a man's worth by his estate, and their
dependence upon him; it consists not in the praise of them whose commendations
some wise men have counted a discredit. But he has showed thee, O man, what is
truly honorable; to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God,
Micah. 6.8. To bare relation to God as a Father, and to carry themselves as his
Children, to be a Servant, and Friend of God, this, this is honorable, truly
honorable, this is the height, the top of the Creatures preferment. To
converse with, and delight in his Maker. To love, admire, and rejoice in God,
and to love God, to take complacency in the soul; this is something indeed,
this is honor, a wise man would not grutch to venture his Estate, his Blood,
his All for this. And how few of the Gallants of the world understand the
nature of this honor? How do most of them account that which is the only true
badge of Nobility, a term of disgrace; and that which speaks a person highly
honorable, and to have brave blood running in his veins, to be low, sorbid,
and much beneath them; as if it were below a Creature to serve his Maker, and a
pitiful preferment to be advanced to glory. O that men of parts and learning,
that persons of Quality should be so mistaken! O what is become of their Reason?
Is it an honor, a preferment for a man to become a brute? We are ready to pity
mad men, and to laugh at fools; but whether there be not more reason to bemoan
the condition of most of the honorable persons in the world, I leave Christ
and Christians to judge. Well then, will you be informed after all this by him,
who has all preferments and honors in his gift, I mean the great King, and he
will tell you that Glory and honor are in his presence, 1 Chronicles. 16.27. Man's
only honor and true dignity lies in his nearness, and acquaintance with God.
A practical knowledge of his Maker is the Creatures groatest preferment. David
was of the mind, that it was none of the lowest honors to be Gods servant,
Psalm. 84. It is upon the account of Isreal's near Relation to God that Moses
reckons them the happiest, the most honorable people in the world. Because God
had avouched them to be his peculiar people, therefore they might well be said
to be high above all the Nations which God had made, in praise, in name, and in
honor, Deuteronomy. 26.18* 19. And upon this account, might a wise man have his
choice, whether he will wear a Crown, and he a stranger to God, or rags, and be
one of his nearest servants; he will not stand long before he determine the
case, he will soon answer with him, That he had rather be a doorkeeper in the
house of God, then dwell in tabernacles of wickedness. If men's actions may
speak their Judgments, most of the Gallants of the world are of a far
different opinion. But, O let me dwell for ever in his house, and stand always
in his presence; happy are they that see his face, happy are they that behold
his beauty. This, this man's Crown, this is his highest honor and dignity, for
God to be mindful of man, and for his Maker to visit him; this sets him but
little below the Angels, this Crowns him with Glory and Honor, Psalm. 8.45.
This is that which puts a true personal worth upon any one; and therefore the
Psalmist thinks those the excellent persons, in whom is his delight. Upon this
account the Scripture says, The righteous man, who is in covenant with God, is
more excellent then his neighbor. The pur-blind World, they judge altogether
by the outward garb; they see the face, the rich apparel, they see the estate,
but they see not that inward excellency and beauty that may be under but mean
habit: they are ready to despise the Noble Worthies of the World, such as can
look upon Kingdoms as small things in comparison of what they have an interest
in, who can call God Father, and Christ Brother. Have you never heard of a King
in mean apparel, of a Prince without his Robes upon his back, or his Crown upon
his head? and will you say that therefore he was but a common person? But those
heavenly Creatures that have a more spiritual resined sense, that understands
something of things and Persons, are quite of another mind, they can look upon
great ones in the midst of their gallantry, without a friend in Heaven, as mean
persons that have no interest to speak of, and many of them, for all their
greatness, to be in a far worse condition then Dogs and Toads. They can also
look upon a poor despised Saint, a contemned Christian, though as to a carnal
eye, he should look as if he could scarce speak sense, to be a favorite of
Heaven, a person of quality; such a one as this he values as the Son of a King,
a Citizen of Zion, one of the Royal Race, one of that glorious Retinue, that
stand always in the presence of God to serve him, the least of which are Kings
and Priests to their great Lord, Rev. 1.6. By faith he sees their Crown, and
looks upon that Royal Diadem, which shall ere long be put upon their princely
heads. This was the great preferment they sought, this was the honor they most
desired; as for the world and all its glory, they can well spare it for those
that shall never be advanced to any higher dignity, to any better preferment.
As for the Saint, as contemptible as he looks, he has higher designs, nobler
things, greater honors in his eye; and if that which the world so admires were
the highest glory that a rational creature were capable of, the top of man's
preferment, why then he could look upon brutes themselves as his equals, except
in this, that their pleasures are more certain, and their miseries less
understood.

It is storied of Constantine and Valentinian two Roman Emperors, that they
subscribed themselves Vassellos Christi, the vassels of Christ; and that Numa
Pompilius esteemed it a higher honor to be a Friend of God, then a Lord of
Men. Consider poor sinner, consider what honors you slight, what preserments
you refuse, what dignity you undervalue, when you make light of acquaintance
with God. Had that brave Stoic, Epictetus I mean, known God in Christ, he
would much more have wondered at the inconsiderateness of them which make
nothing of being related to God as a Father, he would much more have pitty'd
them which cleave to their lower, meaner kindred, beast, who had rather be like
Swine then God, and rather be companions to their servants then their Maker.
Seems it to you but a light matter to be a Kings Son? is it but a small matter,
think you, to call God Father? is it nothing to be born to a Crown Immortal,
that sadeth not away? This is honor, this is preferment worth the having,
worth the looking after, worth the venturing ones life for. This is true
Nobility to stand thus nearly related to him, before whom the Angels do vail
their glorious Faces, and at whose feet the four and twenty Elders lay their
Crowns. The Queen of Sheba thought Solomon's Servants, happy, who stood always
in his presence, and heard this wisdom; but what would she have said, had she
but known the Honor and Glory of his Prince! O blessed are those that stand
always in thy presence O God blessed are thy servants, blessed are those which
see thy Glory, and hear thy wisdom; blessed are they that may have free access
to thee. O let me have this preferment, though I live like Job at his lowest,
and dye like Lazarus. Let others sue for the favor of Princes, let them make
the best of what the world can give, let them desire that which has been
dangerous to more then Haman; I hope I should never envy them, might I but have
more frequent and intimate converse with God, may I be but acquainted with him;
O may I have but a heart more to admire, love, and delight in him, and serve
him with the strength and inrensenss of my Soul while I am here, and stand for
ever in his presence, and behold his glorious Face with joy hereafter. O my
Soul what meanest thou, that thou still speak so faintly and coldly of such
infinitely glorious things? Why does not a new life animate thee at the very
mention of these things? Have thou not far more cause to raise up thy
desponding Spirits with cheerfulness, then old Lacob, when his Son Joseph, who
was Lord of that Land, sent for him into Egypt? Thy Father O my Soul, thy
Brother is Lord, not of Egypt, nor of Goshen, but of Eden, of Zion; he is the
King of that glorious City, the new Jerusalem; Heaven is his Throne, and Earth
is his Footstool, and yet behold the wagons that he has sent for thee,
behold the provision that he has sent to maintain thee comfortably in thy
journey from Egypt to Canaan; is not this enough? O my Soul awake, up and see
him before thou dyest; behold, he is coming, the Bridegroom is coming, Joseph
is coming, to meet thee with a gallant Train, in a glorious Equipage; It is but
yet a little while, and thy husband will come and fetch thee in Royal State,
attended with a numberless retinue of Saints and Angels. O had thou but an
eye to behold their Chariots and Horsemen coming upon the mountains; he is
coming, he is coming, he will be here quickly, he will not tarry, he is at the
door. Contemplate sometimes on these things, and a little antedate that Glory by
Spiritual mediation, do but think what a brave sight that will be to see the
mountains covered with Chariots of fire, and Horses of fire, when the heavens
shall bow before thy friend, and the earth shall melt at his presence, and yet
thy heart not faint within thee; when the King shall come in the Clouds to
fetch his Friends to his own house, where they shall dwell for ever. This
honor have all the Saints.

Eleventhly, He is a suitable friend. It is suitableness that sweetens Society.
I can easily believe a poor Country Peasant can take as much content in the
company of a poor man like himself, as in the Society of a Prince, an unlearned
Country man is no way fit to convers with Courtiers, and Statesmen; the
vastness of the distance would so much swallow his mind, and the unsuitableness
of his Spirit to such company takes off that content which otherwise he might
enjoy. But yet in Spirituals, though the distance between God and man beyond a
possibility of our conception, and the disproportion infinite; yet the Soul of
man being immediately from God, and Spiritual like God, and having a Divine new
Nature infused into it by the Spirit in Regeneration, it finds an infinite
suitableness, pleasure and content in the enjoyment of Gods presence, and it is
not sunk, but raised by an Union, converse and Society with it is maker. The
truth of it is, did man but understand his own Original aright, he would think
it infinitely below his noble Parentage to converse with, and have intimate
delightful Society with any but God and those which bare the same relation to
God with himself, or to bring poor strangers acquainted with him as well as
themselves. There is not a match upon earth fit for the Soul of man to be
matched to: but in that other Country there is a match indeed every way
suitable; a Spirit for a Spirit, and everlasting God for an everlasting Soul; a
precious Jesus for a precious Soul, a holy God for those which he has made
holy like himself, and that is none of the least of man's happiness, that
notwithstanding that infinite distance that is Naturally between him and his
God, yet that God should make in his Creature such Noble Dispositions, and such
Divine Qualifications, that there should be the greatest suitableness in the
World between God and the Soul, and the Soul and God; and they both take
wonderful content in the enjoyment of one another. This is in part here, but
completed in Glory. This we may find often in Scripture expressed in the nearest
Relations, and dearest Affections. Hence God is said to be a Father, and they
his Children; a Husband, and they his Spouse. Now what greater suitableness can
there be then between Father and Children, Husband and Wife? God is also said
to delight in them, and they in him; to rejoice in their company, and they in
his; and how could this be, except there was a suitableness in them one to
another. Their wills are suited; what God wills they will; and what God loves,
they love; and so what they love, as his Friends, God loves; one does not
thwart and contradict the other. O how sweet then must the company, the
communion of such Friends be! O were our hearts as they should be! were we more
like God, we should quickly experience the unspeakable joy of our Souls, how
suitable a Friend he is to a soul: we should soon find, that as clay and stones
are as unsuitable sood for the body, so the world is unsuitable food for the
soul to feed on, and that it is God alone that can fill and satisfy the vast
desires of it. O, I say again, were we but as we came out of our Makers hands,
or rather were we trimmed up in our eldest brothers Robes, and brought into the
immediate presence of this great King, where we set before that glorious
Throne, where the infinite brightness of his Majesty shines so that the Angels
themselves do vail their faces before him; yet for all that we should not long
stand silent, as if the place and company were unsuitable to us, it would not
be long before we should carry it as those that were nearly related, and had
intimate acquaintance with him that sits upon the throne. O the unspeakable
sweetness that will be the enjoyment of his company! no tediousness, no
irksomness at all upon our Spirits. We shall quickly understand our work, our
privilege. O infinite goodness! O boundless love! O let me be always solacing
my soul in the contemplation of these things! O let the very thoughts of them
be a Heaven upon earth to my soul! but here, O here is the grief while we are
here in a strange Country, there is something (in all the poor fallen children
of Adam, nay, in those of them that are recovered, and by grace brought into a
reunion with God) there is, I say, something in God unsuitable to them, and in
them unsuitable to God; and this, O this makes our lives so uncomfortable: but
convers with God will wear off a great deal of that. When thou come to lay
off thy rages, and to put off thy old suit, and to put on that new one that is
making for thee, I mean after death, when thou come to glory, thou will find
the case strangly altered with thee. In Heaven there will be a perfect Harmony,
Suitableness and Agreement between God and thee for ever; and thou will take
infinite complacency and delight in him, and he in thee. And thus shall thou
spend Eternity in unconceivable joy, delight and pleasures. This is Heaven, a
perfect suitableness to God, and enjoying him for ever. O when, when, when
shall it once be? Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Come O blessed Father by thy
Spirit, and burn up what is unlike thee! O create a greater suitableness
between my Soul and thee! O come thou down to me, or take me up to thee! O
could we but talk with one of those happy Creatures that has been in the very
presence of God in glory, and should we ask him, whether he were not weary of
the same work, of the same company, the same place; what answer, do you think
he would make you? No more weary than a man upon the Rack, but just before
would be of perfect ease; no more then a healthful hungry man is of eating; no
more weary than the Sun is of running, than the Fire of ascending, or a Stone
of falling toward the Center. Sen. Epist. 10. I know not where I had rather be
then with him. I was once upon Earth as you are now; and now I am in Heaven,
and in neither of both these places can I find one that I can take more delight
in then God. I must say as he, Psalm. 73.24. Whom have I in Heaven but him? and
there is none upon earth that I can desire in comparison of him. I cannot desire
a better employment then a delightful constant attending upon my God: Can I
have better Company then such a Father? Cana greater happiness be conceived
then Eternal Glory, a pleasanter place then Heaven? That which I can speak, you
cannot hear; and could you (though in this perfect glory) I cannot express what
you will find and feel when you come hither. O had I but known so much as I do
now, when I was in your condition upon earth, I should with incomparable
greater earnestness have sought after acquaintance with God then I did. In his
presence is fullness of joy, at his right hand are pleasures for evermore: Now I
feel, now I know it. I thought one smile sweet upon earth, but now I see and
feel infinitely more what you enjoy now, is a shadow, in comparison of what you
will enjoy hereafter. O what do you mean, that you prize his favor no more,
that you get no more intimate acquaintance with him? What do you mean that you
are so unwilling to come to this place of joy? O, were you but possessed of what
I speak of, you would say what I say, you would never be weary of praising and
serving him, you would never wish your self out of his presence, and think it
not possible to be in more suitable society. Is it so, O my soul, what then
do thou here? Make have, O my soul, stay no longer here below, but know thy
privilege, understand where thy comforts are.

Twelfthly, He is a wise Friend, All the men and women in the world have great,
mighty affairs to manage; and they want Skill, Wisdom and Discretion for the
right mannagement of these things, they are woefully to seek as to their great
business; they are wise to do evil, but in Spirituals; they become stupid,
sottish fools, and as to the carrying on of their great work, they do it with
the greatest imprudence in the world: and they will most certainly for ever
undo themselves, except one that is wiser then themselves undertake to help
them. All things go backward with them, and they labor in the very Fire whilst
they act without God, and it is impossible it should be otherwise as long as
there is such a disproportion between man's business, and his Spirit? Man is
carnal, and his work is Spiritual. Would an ignorant poor Creature that is but
one remove above a beast, be fit to manage the great matters of Government?
How ridiculously would he behave himself in a Chair of State! how strangely
would an unlearned man bungle, should he go about to open one of the profound
Demonstrations of Mathematics! But a natural man is far more unskilful then
any of these, as to the carrying on of that great Employment that he has to
look after, while he is on this side Eternity; his business is to serve his
Maker, but what pitiful work does he make of it? man is made for an
everlasting State, he is sent into this world to provide for another; a Good, a
happiness there is, which he is to look after; he once had a fair estate, but
he has spent and lost it all, and he is to see to the recovering of it again.
He has been in arms against his lawful Sovereign, and been guilty of the
highest Treason, and thereby has forfeited his Life, his Soul; now he has his
pardon to sue out, and how does he go to work in this one thing? to mention no
more. Why he goes to beg a pardon armed Capa-pe, and with his Sword drawn, he
comes to ask pardon for one Treason, and he is found acting of another. Lord
have mercy upon me, and give me leave to break thy laws, is the sum of all his
prayer. He talks of Heaven, and yet makes all the have he can to Hell; he is
told he is out of the way, but he laughs at him that tells him so; and that is
his best; Sometimes he rages, and desires with all speed to remove him that
would set him in the road to Zion; he calls for a Hatchet to cut down the bough
upon which himself stands. And this is your man of Wisdom. The man is under
sail in the midst of Rocks and Sands; and if he would but look, he might see
many doleful Spectacles, the tops of Masts, ship-wacked souls I mean; and
though the Pilots tell him of the danger, yet he says, he will never believe;
but that is the best and the safest road to the harbor, and so on he goes as if
he were sure he could not miscarry; and all this while he will not be persuaded
but that he acts every wisely; he judges it one of his greatest comforts, that
he runs to misery without any hinderance; and how can it otherwise be, except
men were spiritually wise? and who can teach man this wisdom? who shall
instruct him? who shall help him, now his affairs are upon the matter almost
desperate? why, if thou will but hear, here is one that will yet undertake
their foul cause if you will be advised by him, for this he will set all at
right. And O how does he call after you! how willing to give you his advice!
how desirous to assist you, Prove. 1.20. etc. Wisdom cries without, she
utters her voice in the streets: She cries in the chief places of concourse,
in the openings of the Gates, she utters her words, saying, How long, ye
simple ones, will ye love simplicity? And ye scorners delight in scorning, and
fools hate Knowledge? Turn ye at my reproof: Behold, I will pour out my Spirit
upon you, I will make known my words unto you. And will you set at naught all
his Counsels, and have none of his reproofs! Will you rather be ruined then
beholding to him for advice. Let me put in one word, if this wise Counselor be
not for you, he will be against you, and if you find any that can order your
sad affairs more to your advantage, I pray make use of him; but if you will be
ruled by him, you cannot miscarry, as ill a condition as you are in; though thou
be quite broke, yet he will give you such a stock as that you may set up
again, and such directions as that you cannot but thrive, if you will but follow
them. It is he that teaches his Spiritual Frugality, not to part with that for
a trifle, which will be a rich commodity ere long; it is he who persuades us to
make the best use of every thing; it is he that teaches Fools more true wisdom
then the great Politicians of the World; though the world judge them weak, yet
they have wit enough to make a good bargain; to value Heaven before Hell, to
fly from everlasting burnings. They are wise enough to know what is for their
real advantage, and what not. This is he that would bring thee acquainted with
him. It is he who give his so much understanding, as to know the true worth of
things, and the difference between good and evil; finite and infinite, time and
eternity. Who is it that David goes to for counsel, when his politic Enemies
combined against him? where does he advise? who brings him out of all his
intricacies? Is it not He that I am persuading you to go to, who was never
outwitted, who can easily turn the council of Achitophels into foolishness; It
is he who can infatuate the great Sages of the World, and make them weaker then
children in their Counsels. And this is he who will be a constant Councellor to
all those that are his friends, his acquaintance. Seneca, Epist. 41.81. gives
excellent counsel indeed, which if we will precisely follow, our matters cannot,
but succeed. Art thou never in any straights? are all thy affairs carried on
with so much prudence, both as to time and eternity, that thou standst in no
need of advice? Art thou sure that this will always be thy condition? If not,
why then will thou not be persuaded to strike in here? Why if you will believe
them, which to their comfort have tried him again, and again, it is your
unspeakable interest and wisdom to get God for your Friend, and then what
soever you do, shall prosper by his advice; a poor Christian can out-wit all
the policy of Hell, and show himself more wise than those which call himself
Fool, and count him mad, Psalm. 73.24. David durst trust none else to guide him;
but with his conduct he does not fear but that he shall come sase to his
journeys end, Thou shall guide me by thy counsels, and bring me to thy glory.
And again he says, by the help of this Counselor he was wiser than his
treachers, Psalm. 119.18. Here therefore what you had best to do as matters
stand with you, Prove. 4.11. He will teach thee in the way of wisdom: he will
lead thee in the right paths. When thou go, thy steps shall not be
straightned, and when thou runnest, thou shall not stumble, etc. 1 Cor. 1.15.
Because the foolishness of God is wiser than men. That which looks most
contemptibly, if thoroughly understood, will be found to have more depth in it
than the wisest men of the world can reach. To choose such a friend, this is
wisdom, this is prudence. The godly man knows that he has a great cause to be
decided ere long, and it will be no lost labor to make the Judge his Friend.
Well, what say you sinners, is this considerable that I do now propound, or is
it not? Can you plead your own cause, can you clear your title to glory without
him? if not, be well advised before you slight such a motion, as I now do make
to you.

13. He is an immortal Friend. I, that is a Friend indeed. If one friend could
be sure to live just as long as the other; and were friends sure never to want
the advice, comfort, society, and help one of another, it would not a little
advance the worth of a friend. But where is such a one to be found? What
Histories can give us an account of such amities? Let persons be united in
never so close an union, conjoined in the fastest knot that nature can tie, yet
death will First or last dissolve it. So that sometimes I have been almost of
this mind, as to all worldly friends, considering them abstract from God (for
grace in any friend does unspeakably sweeten the relation, and such a relation
will not dye) if we compare the shortness and uncertainty of possessing, and
the bitterness in losing, with the sweetness of enjoying; that it is somewhat
difficult to resolve, whether such short-lived comforts are worth the looking
after. Not but that I think a friend, a true friend, a great mercy, and much to
be desired; but really, if our affections be not for Gods sake, if our love be
not regulated by Religion I can easily believe that the bitterness in losing
does overbalance the pleasure in enjoying. And who would much trouble himself
to get that with care, which must be possessed with fears, and will be parted
with with tears? All wordly enjoyments will serve us thus. When we expect most
from them, and please our selves to think what content we enjoy in them, ten to
one, if God love us, but that he either imbitters, or takes away that comfort
from us. One faith, I had a dear Husband, such a one as never woman had, but he
is dead, I have lost him. Another says, I had a precious Child, a Brother, but
he is gone. And every body, will be in this note first or last. And if the case
be thus, who would be so foolish as to let out the strength of his soul, upon
that which he may soon be deprived. of? But here, here is a friend, whom you
need not fear over-loving or losing a never dying friend, one that will be sure
to outlive you. ( Ar. Epict. 1.3. c. 22.) Say of what you will, that it is
mortal, and you have disgraced it enough; for how can that he of any great
worth which can die, and when I have most need of it I may want; but this cannot
be said of God, he only is Immortal, and not subject to changes. As for the
favor of Princes and great Ones, at the best, it is but an uncertainty; for it
may be all thy hopes are bound up in this life, and that hour which puts an end
to his days, puts a period to thy comfort? But it is another kind of friend
that I would have you acquainted with. O why do Christians dote upon that which
is so short lived? Make but choice of: this friend, and you shall never say of
him, he is dead, I have lost him. Wherefore put not your trust in the Son of
man, in whom there is no help; for his breath goes forth, and he returns to
his earth. But happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope
and love is sixed upon the Lord his God which made Heaven and earth, etc. That
God who is called the Living God, Psalm. 146.3, 4, 5, 6.

14thly, He is a present friend, a friend that is always in all places. Man's
condition may possible be such, as that he may be deprived of the company of
his dearest worldly relations, he may be sequestered from the society of his
most helpful and necessary friends! How often have the dear children of God been
clapped up in Dungeons, not only from the sight, but from the knowledge of their
most affectionate acquaintance? It Is no unusual thing for them to be banished
from their native Country. Wives and Children, among Savage Men and beast; they
have no man to make their complaints to, but such as will increase their
sorrows. How frequently may they be in such a condition, as that they may not
see, hear or speak to any friend? what Bolts and Bars, what Walls and Guards to
keep them from them, which if they could not free them from, yet might in some
measure alleviate their misery? But now God is such a friend, who cannot, who
will not be kept out from his by Walls of Brass, or bars of Iron, he will find
out his friends in the darkest hole, and bare them company there in spite of
all the powers of Hell. O how reviving are his visits? What Cordials does he
bring along with him. This is that which makes the people of God so very
cheerful, when their enemies make account their condition is such, as that it
has no mixture of joy or comfort in it. Was that a Prison or Heaven where
those Martyrs were singing Hallelujahs? Was that a time to be so merry, when
all the world disowned them, when they were loaded with reproaches, and irons,
and chains, counted the troublers of the nation, madmen, heretics? The case
is clear: the sight of this friend made them forget their Scorns, and think
their chains Gold, and their prison Liberty. It was God that spoke it, and he
has been found to be as good as his word, Isa. 43.1, 2. Thus says the Lord
that created thee, O Jacob, and that formed thee, O Israel: Fear not, for I
have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name, thou art mine: When thou
passost through the waters I will be with thee; and through the Rivers, they
shall not overflow thee: when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be
burnt; neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. Who was that which bore the
three children company in the fiery furnace? who was that which went into the
Lions Den to visit Daniel? who brought Paul alive to this shore when the ship
in which he went was wrak't? Was it not this Friend, that I am now speaking of?
I might be large in reciting the miraculous preservations which God has
vouchsased to his, which is a manifest token of his presence; when none can
come near, besides, he will not be far off. In the greatest extremities, which
none durst own them, then God reckons it time for him to show himself. It was
not for nothing that the Psalmist could speak so cheerfully when others were
quaking, Psalm. 64.12. etc. What was it that bore up his spirits, when there
were such dreadful Commotions? What refuge has he to shelter himself under in
time of such Calamity? In what does his strength lie, that he is so confident?
Whence does he expect a supply, that he holds it out so bravely, when his
enemies are so numerous, and his Friends so scarce? Why, David has his
invisible Friends, as well as visible enemies. Ask him, and he will tell you,
That God is his refuge and strength, and he is his confidence, and he will come
in when he has the greatest need; he will be a very present help in trouble.
And that is the reason that David will not fear, though the storm were far
greater then ever yet he was in, though the earth were removed, and the
mountains were cast into the midst of the Sea; though the foundations of the
earth were shaken, though the Sea should roar and threaten the earth with
another deluge, he can sleep as securely as a person little concerned; and this
he can speak, not only for himself, but for the whole city of God; God is in
the midst of her, she shall not be moved. The Saint has a Friend that will
bare him company in all places, in all dangers, and in his company he need not
be afraid. Let the least child that God has, give but one cry, and he will
soon awake. It cannot but be so from the spirituality of his nature, the
immensity of his being, and the infiniteness of his love. It was Orthodox
Divinity and Doctrine that Are. Epictetus l. 2. c. 14. preached (though but a
Heathen) when he said, That the first lesson that became a wise man to learn,
was, that there was a God, and then, that nothing in the world could be
concealed from him, and that he knew not only our outward actions, but our most
secret workings, our closest curtain businesses; and not only so, but even our
thoughts, projects and principles: which speaks him every where, and
consequently ready at hand to help his Friends at a dead lift. Wherefore (says
the same Author, Idem. l. 3. c. 22.) think not that thou art alone when thou
art in thy Chamber, in thy bed, when thy Curtains are drawn, when thou art
locked up in a prison never so dark under ground; if thou art good, thou shall
have two companions in spite of the malice of all thy enemies, a good
Conscience, and thy God. This made that brave Moralist to dare his enemies to
do their worst to exclude his Friends from him. Can (says he) any man be
banished out of the world? wheresoever you send me, there will be the Sun,
Moon, and Stars; but if not, God is there, I am sure, with whom I may talk, to
whom I may pray; he will bare me company, though all the rest of my Friends be
kept from me. And as long as you cannot banish me from God, nor keep him from
me, I shall reckon my self at liberty; and should I be sent out of this world
into another, even there I should find my Friend; and he will scarce complain
that is removed from a place where almost all are his enemies, to a place where
quite all are his Friends. One would have thought these poor Heathens had been
reading, Psalm. 139. Do you hear O Christians, what language those forementioned
persons speak? and shall these that never had the thousandth part of that
advantage for the knowing of God, speak and act thus, and shall Christians have
such low thoughts of God? because we do not see God, shall we therefore not
believe that he is present every where? he that denies Gods own presence, had
upon the matter as good deny his being; for were it not so, how could he Judge
the world with Justice? How could all things be sustained by his power? God
takes this as a very high indignity, that any should in the least question this
glorious attribute, Jer. 23.23, 24. Am I a God at hand, and not a God a far
off? Can any hide himself in secret places, that I shall not see him, says the
Lord? Do not I fill Heaven and Earth, says the Lord. And is not this a Friend
worth the having, who will be sure not to be absent when you have need of him?
the wicked indeed say, how does God know, and can he see through the thick
Clouds, and therefore they sin with confidence, and oppress the Friends of God
without any fear; they hope God does not behold, they think omniscience knows
not. I wish there were not something too like this sometimes in the thoughts of
Gods people too; but let me only leave that one Scripture with the first sort,
Psalm, 94.9, etc. He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? He that formed the
eye, shall he not see? He that teaches men knowledge, shall not he know. The
Lord knows, etc. As for the desponding Christian that begins to think God is
out of the reach of his Prayers, let me ask thee, O thou of little Faith, when
did God ever absent himself from his in a time of need: When was he quite out
of the hearing of their cry? I know indeed he may hide himself, yet then he is
near them also, to try their love, and hear their voice, for God loves to hear
his Children cry; (earthly Parents may correct their Children for crying, but
God chastises his Children usually for their silence.) When he seems furthest
off, he is but behind the Curtain, he is there where he with pleasure sees how
earnestly his Children look up and down for him: and then when they are ready
to sit down weeping, as if they had lost their Father; when they think they are
quite forgot, and their enemies begin to triumph, and to ask, where now is your
God? Then he lets both friends and foes know that he is near. And what say you
to all this, you that as yet are strangers to God? Have you gotten such a
friend as he is, that will always be at your elbow, that can and will come to
help you (when other friends are far enough off,) whether man will or no? have
you got such a friend? If not, why then will you not now accept of his
acquaintance, who will be such a friend to all that love him? No good man is
without the company of God, he walks with God, he talk with God, he cats with
God, he drinks with Gods and is entertained by him, and he sleeps in hi^ Arms.
God is with him in his Shop, in the Rode, at Home and Abroad, and who can mi^^
carry that has so helpful a companion alway^ with him? When thy burdens are
too heavy do but complain, and he will either take them off thy back, or put
under his own shoulders, and help thee to go away lighty with them; he will
assist thee in six troubles, and in seven he will give thee help.

15. He is a Soul Friend, Soul Friends are the best friends. As soul affairs
are the mightiest affairs; so those that give us the greatest help in those
matters ought to be valued. God is the great Soul Friend; expect not to find
him a friend to thy lust, this scares the wicked from him, who would be glad to
be acquainted with God, if he would gratify their lusts, and please their
wicked humors, and give them eternal happiness after a life of wickedness; that
is, would ungod himself for their sakes. But hold there man; you shall sooner
see the Sun black, and have fire cold, and find a heaven in hell, then have God
a friend to your Sin. God does not promise to furnish all his acquaintance with
provision for their sensuality, he will not put a knife into thy hands to stab
himself, or to cut thy own throat. There are too many of such friends in the
world, and men are generally so foolish as to count them friends, which deserve
another name; these are they which help men to Hell, and show them the shortest
cut to eternal misery, and this must go for a special kindness. Sure men and
woman will scarce be always of this mind. Must poison in a gilded cup go for a
Cordial, and a kiss, though with a dagger, be taken for true love, Seneca had
more wit then to reckon such among benefactors. He that can teach me the way to
true happiness, he that can help me to adorn, dress and trim my Soul; he by
whose instructions I shall be more in love with virtue, and out of love with
sin; he by whose directions I may be acquainted with my self, and made truly to
value that which is really most excellent, this shall be my friend, this shall
be my companion. And where are such friends to be found? How few of them in the
world? Do not most, that go under that sweet name of friends, do one another
the greatest unkindness that can be imagined! How do they encourage one another
in an evil way, Prove. 1. Psalm. 2. How do men tug and pull to get one another
apace into damnation; and if the wise world may be Judges, none must go for a
friend, but he that would do me most mischief; none must be counted an enemy,
but he that desires to do me the most real kindnesses. This sounds strangely:
yet for all that, did it lie in my way, I could easily prove it. Yet I must
confidently affirm, that every ones experience, first or last will say as much.
Something of this I have taken notice of, in my conversing with dying men. I
remember, once more particularly, being by a poor Creature that was just a
going into another world, one of his old friends looked in to see him, at the
sight of which person he gnashed his teeth, and could not endure him in the
room, but cry out, this was he that brought me to this, I may thank him, or I
had not been in so sad a condition upon a deathbed. But this by the by. Open
enemies are better then such friends. I say again, do not expect to have God
such a friend. God loves his too well to let them undo themselves; he knows the
worth of Souls; and pitties them that would part with their souls for a trifle,
and therefore he tells men plainly, that which may be really prejudicial to the
health of their Souls; he cannot but let them know what is food, and what is
poison: what else is the meaning of those vehement expostulations? Why does he
send so many messengers one after another? To what purpose else does he tender
such promises, such encouragement? Be it known therefore unto thee O man, if
thou understand'st the worth of thy own Soul, and would have that Soul of
thine to do well for ever, and would have a friend for thy Soul, that there
is but one such a friend to be found in the whole world, and that is God. O
have thou no regard at all for thy precious and immortal Soul? Do thou never
think of that excellent thing within thee? Do thou not care though thy Soul
starve, be naked and miserable for ever? Is it nothing to thee, that thy Soul
has not so much as a shelter to hide it self under, when a dreadful storm
shall rise, and death shall turn it our of his old Tenement? Do thou not
believe that it must have a being somewhere for ever, and that either in
everlasting glory or eternal burnings? and are these small matters with you?
What will you for all this take no care in the world about these grand affairs?
Had a special friend committed but a Dog to thee to take care of, you would
have thought your self engaged in gratitude and honor, to have suited your
care of him, to your respect to the person from whom you had him. (Epict.) But
do thou not know, O man, that thy God has committed a Soul to thy care, and
has told thee what thou shall do to preserve the life and health of this thy
soul, that it may be in good plight when he shall call for it. He does tell
thee what is its most natural food, and what is not wholesome. He tells thee
what thou shall do to have that soul within thee everlastingly happy. And is
all this of so little consequence, as to go in at one ear and out at the other?
Are these things to be indifferent in? If man's soul were like the soul of a
beast, the case were altered; if when his breath went out of his body there
were an end of him, the matter were the less considerable; if he had ever a
friend in another world, that could do as much for him as God can do, I should
have little to say in this business. But since this is impossible, how can I
bare to see thee neglect the making sure of such a friend? How can a Christian
with any patience think, that those that he lives with, and dearly loves,
should miss of such a friend, without whom their souls must be everlastingly
miserable. If it were only for your bodies or estates I should scarce use so
many words, neither I believe need I; but when it is for your souls and
eternity, who can be silent? Once more consider what a friend thou may have;
it is a friend for thy soul. Alas man, it is thy soul, thy precious soul that
lies at stake; that Spirit within thee, which is more worth then a world; it is
that which is in hazard, and here is a friend that offers thee to make that
soul of thine happy for ever. Thy soul has abundance of enemies: Some would
debase it, others would rob thee of it, others would clap up a hasty match
between that Noble Creature and a Servant, the World I mean: and there are very
few that have any true kindness for it, and thou know not the worth of that
Jewel, thy Soul; but here, here is a friend, if thou will but leave it with him,
he will take care of it, it shall not be marted away for nothing. Here Is one
will do that for its security, honor and happiness, that all the world besides
cannot do. If therefore thou have any love for thy poor soul, if thou set
any price upon that precious thing within thee; in a word, if thou would
have thy soul do well in another world, O strike in here, close with these
tenders, listen to the counsel of him who offers you the best advice in the
world. He, he it is that now offers thee that thou can never value enough; he
it is that will feed, cloth, and portion that Soul of thine, and after that
marry thee to his only Son; by which match you will be made for ever. O did
men and women but know what a Soul is, did they imagine what a dreadful
miscarriage of a Soul is, did they but in any measure understand the things of
their peace, could they but conceive what God could and would do for their
Souls, I need to spend but little time in persuading them to commit their Souls
to him, to be acquainted with him, who will be sure to take special care of
their Souls, that they may do well, whatever is neglected. O could you but see,
did you but know what a sad taking they are in, that go into the other world
with a poor naked Soul, and know no body in the world there, and have never a
friend that does take any notice of them, you would then think I spoke what I
do with reason enough, and that my words were too short, and my expostulations
too faint in a matter of such concernment. O sinners, I tell you, nay, God
tells you soul-matters are the greatest matters in the world. I am sure Christ
thought so, or else he would not have been at so much cost about them; those
that are in their wits and understand themselves, they know as much too, and so
will you, ere a few years, it may be hours, be past. Those that now make but a
pish of all this, when they have been but one quarter of an hour in another
world, will say as I do, that a Soul-friend is the only Friend, and that
Soul-concerns are the great concerns, things of weight and moment indeed; and
that it would have quitted the cost to have taken some pains to have looked out
for such a one that could have stood the Soul in some stead in that other
world; and that above all, it would have been no folly nor madness to have
accepted of the kindness of one that desired earnestly to be acquainted with
them, and to do their Soul a good turn. O that they had but been so
considerate, as to have embraced such a motion when it was offered! And this
brings me to the next Qualification of this Friend.

16. He is a necessary Friend. There is an absolute necessity of being
acquainted with him. It Is possible for a man that has very few friends upon
earth, to live as happily as he that has many. Multitude of acquaintance, such
as they are, may contribute much to a man's care and sorrow. And as for most
friends, such as are commonly so called, it is better to have their room than
their company. A man may live without the acquaintance of Nobles, he may be as
free, cheerful, and rich without the knowledge of such as them. One may live
holily, and die joyfully, and may be happy for ever, though he never saw the
face of a Prince, though he was never at Court, though he lived and died a
stranger to all worldly friends. One may be disowned by his Father, hatred by
his Mother, slighted by all his Relation, and have never a friend under the Snn
that will own him, and yet for all that be in a state of truer felicity, then
those that are daily attended with troops of visitors, whose gates are seldom
shut, whose houses are never empty: but amongst all that comes, God never comes
to them, as for his company they are strangers to it; this man I may write
miserable for all his great and many friends. And him that has the company of
God in acquaintance with his Redeemer I Will call happy, though he have never a
friend in the world besides. Multitude of friends seldom add much to our
comforts, but always to our cares. A man may go to Hell for all his great
acquaintance with men; but it is impossible, if we are greatly acquainted with
God, to miss of Heaven. When men are unkind, if God be kind, it is well
balanced; but if God frown, whose smiles can comfort? I may be happy, though I
am very little in man's favor; but it is impossible to be happy without Gods
favor. To be a stranger to God, is to be a stranger to peace, joy, Heaven. O
it is sad being without God! If I should declare the Judgment of most in the
world, at least if their practice may speak for them, they see very little need
of acquaintance with God. They do not write, Must, upon the things of Religion.
They must eat, they must drink, they must sleep, and if they want any of these
things, they count themselves in a sad condition. But further, they must riot,
they must be drunk, they must whore, they must have what their lust calls for,
let it be what it will, they must get into the favor of such and such a great
person whose displeasure they have incurred: These are things that the world
say must be; they are reckoned among the necessary things: but they do not say
they must have a Christ, they must be reconciled to God, they must deny
themselves, they must seek first the Kingdom of Heaven; No, these are
indifferent things amongst them, these are things minded by the by, if not
matter of scorn and jesting, these the world think unnecessary things. It Is
necessary their flesh should be pleased, it is necessary the Devil should be
obeyed, it is necessary they and theirs should be somebody in the world, these
are matters of weight, for these they think it worth the while to toil and
moil, to ride early and late, and to lose their sleep, and think they can never
do too much; and all this while they see no need at all of getting a friend for
their souls, no need at all of knowing, loving and delighting in God. Well,
seeing the case is thus, seeing it is no great matter whether you know God, or
be known of him; be not then troubled at the day of Judgment, if God look upon
you as a stranger then, be not grieved (seeing the knowledge of God is nothing
with you) if God say he knows you not; if Gods presence be no such material
thing, complain not then for the want of it; be content, if you can, to hear
him say, Depart I know you not. O, but shall I thus leave you, poor ignorant
sinners? Consider for the Lords sake, for thy soul sake, whether it be a
necessary thing to avoid everlasting burnings; is it a necessary thing to be
saved? Is Eternal Glory and Heaven necessary? dare you say these are
unnecessary things? If these be necessary, then I am sure God and Christ are
necessary; For this is Life Eternal to know God, and him whom he has sent,
Jesus Christ. O how will the case be a altered ere long, with the God-hating
and Christ-despising world? when they shall be quite despoiled of all that
which they prized above the knowledge of God, when all their friends shall
appear to be enemies, when all their hopes shall be swept down like a Spiders
web, O will they not then be of this mind, that it was no such slight matter
that I was so earnest with them about, that acquaintance with God was no such
unnecessary thing as they took it to be; and that there was more need of
getting an interest in Christ, than of running to a Playhouse, or a
Whore-house. How will they rend the skies with their fruitless wishes? How will
the Mountains echo with their doleful lamentations? O that God would but know
them! O that they might not hear that word, Depart! but seeing all that too
little purpose, how then will they exclaim against themselves? O that they
should be such fools, that they should be so madly besotted, as to neglect the
looking after acquaintance with God. Time was, that God would have had them to
come to him; he called after them, and sent for them again and again, but they
would none of his company, they desired not the knowledge of the most High;
they said to him, Depart from us: and now they have what they then desired; now
they see that the Ministers had cause enough to say what they did, and a
thousand times more. As troublesome as it was to hear of Hell, it is worse to
feel it. They see now Must is for the Soul, and not the Body. O that men and
women would be now as serious in their judgments about these things as they
will be shortly? Consider, O man, that as little as thou mindest these things,
these are the only things that are necessary. Thou must have a God for thy
Friend, a Christ for thy Savior to save thee from thy fins, or else thou Must
be damned, or else thou Must be cursed for ever. Thou may lie racked upon thy
bed of sickness, where none can help thee; thou may rot in a stinking
dungeon, where no man can relieve thee; thou may be roasted in the flames,
and yet for all this be a happy man. Worldly ease, pleasure, health, riches,
are none of those absolutely necessary things, A man may go to Hell and have
them all, and a man may go to Heaven and want them. Thou may have Eternal
Rest in another Life. though thou have scarce a day of ease in this. One may be
a Favorite of God, though as miserable as Job. But what will you say, of that
man that has not a God to go to? This, this is the miserable man with a
witness? that seeing men's lives are so short, they would wisely husband their
precious time in minding nothing but necessary things! O that unnecessaries
might be cut off. When I am about to undertake a business, let me ask my Soul
this question: O my soul, is this a business of absolute necessity? have thou
not something of greater importance that is yet undone? We enter not into the
Lists for honor, where it is no great matter, whether we conquer, or no; we
persuade not men to busy themselves about toys, we are not so importunate
about a thing of nothing. No Sirs, as unnecessary as you think these things we
speak of are, ere long you will say as much as we do, and more too; you will
shortly find, that it was as much as your life and happiness was worth that lay
at stake. These are things we must mind you of, or else we hazard our souls;
and they are things that you must mind also, or else you hazard yours. I want
significant words enough, to express the weight and importance of these things.
O that what is wanting of that nature, might be supplied with tears, groans and
compassions. I am through mercy ashamed of my own heart, (O that I were more
so) that I should speak of such serious matters so slightly. It is not now a
time to jest, O my soul, when thou art to discourse with miserable men and
women, which refuse their happiness, and dote upon their misery. Thou art now
about a work that concerns souls, and their eternal state. Tell me dear
friends, do you in sober sadness believe that you have immortal souls? do you
indeed know that your souls are naturally enemies to God, and that if yo^ be
not reconciled to God, that you must be dealt with as enemies? do you really
believe all this? do you believe what a dreadful thing it is to look such an
enemy in the face when he shall sit in Judgment? Further, do you believe what
it is to lie down in devouring flames, and to dwell with everlasting burnings?
do you not think it a fearful thing to fall into the hands of a living God; and
if you do not, let me tell you, you are worse than mad; if you do believe all
this, why, then let me ask you again, whether you conceive it unnecessary to
use the utmost care and diligence to get acquainted with him: who can deliver
you from the wrath to come? O friends, I call you so, and I believe most of you
love me dearly! O that you would do me one kindness; I should count it the
greatest kindness that you can do me, why, what is that you say! why, it is but
to pity your own Souls, and to mind that one thing necessary, and to pity them
that are mourning for your dry eyes, and hard hearts? What say you to all this?
if you have any thing to say against the necessity of these things, I am ready
to plead the case with you, etc. Well, if it be not necessary to know God and
Christ, and lay in provision for eternity, what then is necessary? If it be not
necessary to serve, love, and delight in him, who can deliver from everlasting
death, and reward with everlasting life, what then is? Once more, for your
Souls sakes consider what you do, when you vigorously pursue worldly things,
and look upon the favor, and displeasure of God, as small things! O write not
these things down amongst the superfluous things which are to be minded by the
by. Remember this, that it is very possible for a man to be exceeding holy, and
yet to be altogether unknown to the world; but it is altogether impossible to
be truly happy, and yet unacquainted with God.

17. He is a tried Friend. Thousands and Millions can from their own
experience, say all this, which I have said of him, and much more; but I shall
pass this over at present, having hinted it already, and because it may be I
may touch upon something of the same Nature hereafter.

18. He is an everlasting Friend. I shall be but brief in speaking to this
head, because what might have been spoken of this, fell under that of his
immorality. Yet because it is possible to conceive God immortal in himself, and
yet by reason of man's default, his kindness to him to be finite; so it was in
respect of the Angels that fell from him. But now Blessed be free Grace, man
stands upon surer ground then ever he did, the children of God have a firmer
bottom by far then Adam had when he was in Paradise; his state is more secure,
being once united to God in Christ, then that of the Angels of Heaven in their
first Creation. For that their State was mutable, is de facto proved; but now
blessed be rich goodness, if we can but make sure of reconciliation with God,
again it is impossible for us to miscarry. God has sworn, and he will perform
it, that the heirs of glory might have the more strong consolation, Isa. 54, 9,
10. For this is as the waters of Noah: for I have sworn that the waters of Noah
should no more go over the earth, so have I sworn that I would not be wrath
with thee, nor rebuke thee. For the mountains shall depart, and the Hills be
removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant
of my peace be removed, says the Lord, that has mercy on thee. Gods children
need not fear dis-inheriting; his gifts, and callings are without repentence.
If God loved us while we were enemies, how much more being reconciled will he
continue his love to us; once a Child of God, and a Child of God for ever; once
in favor, and never out of it again, Romans 8.35, 39. Who shall separate us from
the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine,
or nakedness, or peril or sword. Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature
shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord. Who can pluck us our of the Arms of the Almighty? Who, or what is that
which can alienate our Fathers affections from us? If the promise of God, which
says, I will never, never, never, never, never leave nor forsake you, be
valid, if his oath bind him, if the blood of Christ continue always to be
satisfactory, if his mediation can prevail, if the nature of God be
unchangeable, we are well enough, we are safe, if this be but clear that we are
really reconciled to God, if we be acquainted with him. We are kept by the
mighty power of God through Faith unto Salvation. If they had been of us, says
the Apostle, no doubt they would have continued with us. It is possible indeed,
yea, common for men to pretend love to God, and to seem to have a true
friendship for him, and yet not to be truly so. To have a name to live, and to
live, are two things. It is not unsual to bare God company (as I may say)
abroad, and yet at home to have some body that they have a greater kindness
for. It is common to go along with God (if I may so call it) in the external
actions of Religion, and yet to desert him at last, Isa. 58.1, 2, 3. Mat. 7.21.
There are many that seem to bid fair for Heaven, and if cap and knee will do,
God shall have that; they will give him the husk and shell, that they may keep
the kernel for one that they love better. Thousands there are of such persons
in the world; and these profess abundance of kindness for God, they come often to
his house, and sit down there, and make as if they were his friends, and his
acquaintance, and some of Gods servants, by a mistake, may bid them welcome,
but yet for all this they may be strangers; only they have heard of God, and
can talk of him, and it may be have given him many transient visits, but yet
they want the real properties of friends: they never knew what it was to be
brought nigh to the Father, by the Son; to have a fence of their lost state and
estrangement from God, and under a fence of this, to make earnest inquiry after
him; they never knew what it was to converse with God, to have an intimate
acquaintance with him; to be sending out the breathings of their Souls after
him, and to be unsatisfied without him; they took up a trade of lifeless
duties, and that was all. As for the life and power of Religion, they never
understood it; communion with God, they heard often of, but never understood what
it meant, they never savoured, and rellished the things of God, nor with any
suitableness or complacency engaged in his service: And as for those more
secret actings of Religion, to take up the interest of God, to design his
glory, to be deeply concerned for his honor, observing their affections, and
the workings of their hearts in duty; to take notice of answers of prayers, or
to look after their petitions, when they are out of their mouths, they know not
what these things are. So that from hence it appears, that God, and they, were
never really acquainted; no wonder then that they do forsake God, and are
forsaken of him. The building might look neatly, and the house seem to be
strong; but because it was built upon the sands, it need not seem strange, if
it fall when the winds rise, and the waves beat against it: but I say it, and
say it again, the house that is built upon a rock will not, cannot fall: If a
man be really united to God in Christ, and the work of Grace thoroughly wrought
upon him, it is impossible that God should forsake such a one. God cannot but be
true though man be false, he cannot but value the satisfaction and intercession
of his Son, he cannot forget his own nature, Isa. 44.15, 16. Can a woman forget
her sucking Child, that she should not have compassion on the Son of her Womb?
Yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee. Behold I have graven thee
upon the palms of my hands: thy walls are continually before me, etc. I do not
say but that God may suspend the refreshing intimations of his love; nay, he
may quite hide his face, and his dearest ones may look upon themselves as free
among the dead, they may reckon themselves such as have no acquaintance with
God, and yet for all this be exceeding dear to God; this is cleared by every
days experience. Nay, I may say, I believe that there are very few of them
which know what Gods presence, smiles, and love is, but know in some measure
what it is to have his face hid, to walk in the dark, and see no light. It is
no unusual thing of a Child of God to question his state, to fear whether all
that he ever did were not in hypocrisy and formality; have not the best been
made sometimes to question (especially upon some notable fall) whether, what
they did formerly, did not proceed from mere common grace, or some less
spiritual principle then the life of grace, and a divine nature within them.
Were there ever any of the Sons of Adam, whom rich mercy has plucked as
Firebrarnds out of the fire, to whom the Lord has showed his mavelous
kindness, and love in Christ, that has kept their watch so exactly, that have
walked so closely with God, so as never to have the least frown from him? were
their ever any that lived all their days under a constant lively sense of their
interest in divine everlasting love? If there be, they have fared better then
Job did, they enjoyed more then ever Heman or David did. A Child of God may often
be in a sad state, but yet he is always in a safe state: the purpose of God
stands firm. Though for a small moment he seem to forsake them, yet with
everlasting mercies will he gather them? O Everlasting! That Is a sweet word
indeed in the Saints ear; he would not that one word should have been out of
the Bible, left out of the promise, for a world, Isa. 54. If thou be once
truly acquainted with God, thy state is as safe, thy condition as sure as if
thou were already in Heaven. God may and will chastise his with rods, but his
loving kindness he will never remove from them, his mercy indures for ever. All
that God gives to his friends and acquaintance; that is spiritual, is like
himself, Everlasting. God is not like short-spirited man, every moment
changing, one day doting upon an object, and the next day hating it as much.
An earthly Prince may one moment set his Favorite at his Table, and the next
command that he should be hanged. But far be it from the unchangable God, that
he should do thus. As for the great ones of the world, it has been counted by
some, and those none of the weakest, no small piece of policy, to keep out of
their knowledge: their favors are so dearly bought, their kindness so
uncertain, their displeasure so dangerous, and yet so easily procured. But here
it is far otherwise. It is God, and God alone that is an everlasting Friend, in
whose presence there is fullness of Joy, and Pleasure for ever more. O these
everlasting things are great things! An everlasting friend, an everlasting
inheritance, everlasting glory, everlasting joy, everlasting life, and
everlasting death, they are matters of weight! O why should not our very Souls
be over-powred with the very thoughts of such things! O this unbelief, this
unbelief!

19. He is one that is willing and desirous to be acquainted with you. What I
have said before had signified little to us, were it not for this. It Is a
misery, and no comfort, to hear and know the great things which we must go
without. But this is that which puts life into all those powerful Motives which
I handled before. God is the most loving, most strong and rich Friend, and
withal he has in him a sweet inclination to be acquainted with us. The terms
that he offers are the most reasonable in the world. This, this is the comfort
of the poor fallen Sons and Daughters of Adam; that though they have run away
from God, though they have left their Fathers house, and turned Prodigals; yet
their tenderhearted compassionate Father is ready to receive them again, his
arms are open, he meets them; while they are yet a great way off, he runs to
them and falls upon their neck and kisses them, and expresses the greatest
kindness to them, and joy for their return. O unparalleled love! O infinite
goodness! God has expressed this his willingness to receive poor lost Sinners
abundantly throughout all the Scripture. If God had not been willing to have
been friends again with man, what needed he to have given himself the trouble
of parting with his dearest Son, and sending him into the world to manage this
great work of reconciling man to himself? why else was that precious blood
shed? and to what purpose should he send so many Prophets, Apostles, and
Ministers, for so many hundreds of years, rising up early, and sitting up late?
why are they commanded to cry aloud, to use so much earnestness, to compel poor
wandering strangers to come to his house, but that he might be acqainted with
them? Can any one conceive that he should do all this without the least design
of kindness? If all that God has done to the reconciling man to himself, does
not speak his willingness to be reconciled to them, what can? Isa. 5.4. Nay, so
willing is he to receive them, notwithstanding all their backslidings, that he
teaches them how they may address themselves to him most acceptably, he puts
words in their mouths which they may use with good success when they come
before him, Hos. 14.1, 2, 4. Nay, that sinners may be the more confirmed in
their expectation of his favor, he has most solemnly sworn, That he delights
not in the death of sinners, but had rather that they should return and live.
Wherefore else is it that we are so straightly commanded, as we will answer the
neglect upon our peril before God at that terrible day, that we preach the
World in season and out of season? To what purpose should Paul expose himself
to so many hazards both by Sea and Land? Why should he teach this Doctrine of
Reconciliation night and day with tears? Does he not tell you that he did all
this by Divine Dispensation, and that it was as much as his Soul was worth to
wave this work? And does not all this speak his willingness to be friends again
with man? Could not God have sent Legions of Angels with flaming swords in
their hands, when he sent his Son and thousands of Prophets, Apostles,
Ministers and Teachers? might he not have proclaimed war against them for ever,
when he followed them with the Ambassadors of peace? If he had had no thoughts
of Agreement with them, could he not have spoken to them in thunder and
lightning, with fire and brimstone, as well as in the still voice of the
Gospel? He could if he had pleased have made them to have known the breach of
his Covenant, by giving them up to the will of their cruel enemies. God could
as easily have cut off a whole world of us, as we can crush a moth, and easier
too. But he is willing to show forth the riches of his patience and goodness,
that thereby sinners might be brought to Repentance. How does God further
express his willingness to receive returning sinners, by engaging them by many
temporal favors? Who preserved that tender creature in the Womb, and brought
it out of those dark Chambers into light? Who kept that helpless infant after
it was in the world? Whose flax and wool do we wear upon our backs? To whom is
it that we are beholding for every crumb we eat, and every drop we drink? Who
spreads our table for us, and makes our cups to overflow? Who brought us from
the brink of the grave, when we had received the sentence from our Doctor and
our Disease? And what is the Language of all these mercies, but return, O
backsliding Sinner, for in me is thy help found. Love, delight in, and be
acquainted with him, from whom thou have received so many kindnesses. If thou
would accept of him for thy Lord, Husband, and Friend, who has sent thee
these tokens, thou shall have other favors then these be. Is not this the
meaning of all the common mercies that we daily receive from him? Why? was not
thy breath stopped with an Oath in thy mouth? Why is it that so many thousands
that were born since thy self, are gone to their eternal state, when thou art
still standing? What have thou done to engage God more then others, that Worms
should not be feeding on thee, when thou art feeding upon the fat and sweet?
What is the English of all this? what are all these droves of mercies which God
sends to thee, but to cool thy enmity against him, and to make thee, who art
marching out in thy warlike furniture, to meet him with tears of joy and
friendly embraces? Is not, Love the Giver, written upon all his tokens? What
means his frequent visiting of thee, but desire of acquaintance with thee? Had
he had no desire at all to know you, and to be known of you, do you think he
would have called so often and so kindly at your door, would he have stood
knocking with so much patience, and have spoke to you so lovingly if he desired
still to be a stranger to you? Is this like one that desires your ruin? Did
God never plead with thee by his Ministers, and urge the same Argument that I
do now? Did you never hear such kind of expostulations as these? Why will thou
go on to despise thy God, and to refuse his love? what reason have thou to
harbor such hard thoughts of him? does he deserve such unkindness at your
hands? How long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity? why will ye make light
of that you cannot possibly overvalue? the favor of God, and acquaintance with
thy maker. How often have you grieved his Spirit by your unworthy contempts? how
many times have you given him cause to complain of your unhandsome usage, when
he in very pity and compassion came to visit you: He has reason to say now, as
well as of old, Hear O Heavens, and give ear O Earth, for I have nourished and
brought up Children, and they have Rebelled against me, Isa. 1.2. Do ye thus
requite the Lord, O foolish people, and unwise? is not he thy Father that
bought thee? has he not made thee and established thee? Deuteronomy. 32.6. O that
they were wise. And be instructed O Jerusalem, least my Soul depart from thee,
Jer. 6.8. Is not this the voice of mercy? have not these been Expostulations of
the mighty God with his Rebellious Creatures? and yet how do they stand it out
all this while, as if God were like to get so much by their acquaintance?
Return, O foolish Sinner, if thou make any thing of Salvation and Damnation,
if thou valuest everlasting glory, if thou think the commands, threatenings,
and promises of the Almighty to be minded, come away and make no delay. O why
will thou go on thus madly to undo thy self? come away poor Soul, for all this
it is not yet quite too late, thy glass is not yet quite run, thy Soul is not
yet fully fixed in its unchangeable state. Once more I make such an offer to
thee, as I am sure none but a mad man will refuse; such an offer as none of the
Kings and Lords of the world can make. The great and mighty Monarch of Heaven
tenders thee an Alliance with himself; he sees how far thou art spent, how poor
and low thou have brought thy self by a dangerous and long war against thy
maker; he foresees what a condition thou will be in after a few more merry
hours, except thou repent and turn. Wherefore in compassion to thy precious
soul he has commanded us to follow thee, and not to let thee be at quiet till
thou have given us a promise, that thou will return and humble thy self to thy
God; and what, shall we still lose our labor! shall all this come to nothing!
O prodigy of unkindness! O wonder of patience! thou have slighted the
friendship of thy God, thou have set light by Christ, and undervalued Heaven
and Eternity for ten, twenty, thirty years already, and yet the Lord send us
once more in his name to ask you whether you are willing to have God for your
Friend; God has not yet said, Cut him down, bind him hand and soot, and cast
him into that lake that burns for ever. Bring those mine enemies that would not
that I should reign over them, and slay them before my face. God has not yet
spoke that dreadful word, Depart. O what is it thou stayest for? What is it
that makes this business to hang so long? What Lover is it that does so long
hold back thy heart? What is the matter that we can no more speedily and
effectually manage this great affair? What is it that thou do prefer before
God? What is it that thou think more worthy of thy warmest love then Christ?
What is that great thing that thou stickest not to venture thy soul for? Act
like a man that is rational and not beside himself. If the World be God, if
Earth be better then Christ, then choose that; if Christ be God, then choose
him. How long will you stand halting between two? love that which will last
longest, be acquainted with him that is willing and able to do most for thee.
Is the world worth more now then it was in David's time, when he preferred the
favor of God before thousands of Gold and Silver? Is the price of it raised?
Can it bribe death, and stop the mouth of Divine Justice, and procure thee a
rea^ respect in another world? Go chaffer and see what bargain thou can make;
tell God that thou will give him thousands for thy brothers life, and as much
more for the lengthning the lease of thy own to Eternity. What does God say? is
the bargain made? is it not enough? why, add a world to it, will that do? If it
will not do this, if this purchase be too great for thy purse, then go lower;
can all thou have keep thee from fears, get thee a stomach, procure thee ease,
rectify thy constitution; will it do this, or will it not? if not, why
should thou value that which can do so little for thee, before that which can
do all things for thee? Be persuaded at last to be wise. What is God like to
get by your love, or lose by your hatred? What have you to boast of? What
excellencies to set you out? what portion to advance you, that you stand thus
upon your terms? Come, let us hear a little what it is thou think so highly
of thy self for. I am sure your overgreat beauty cannot commend you; for a
Black-moor may with better reason brag of comeliness, then such a deformed
loathsome creature can of beauty. I am sure your helpfulness will not speak for
you; for thou art a crazy, decrepid, sickly creature, that will cost God more
to cure thee, then thou art worth a thousand times. It cannot be for thy Estate
that thou art so much desired, for all thy Gold is adulterate, thy Jewels
counterfeit, thy All forfeited; and what is it then that thou have yet to boast
of? come and set it before us, that we may acknowledge our mistakes. Are the
Clothes upon thy back (as fine as thou art) thy own? is the Food that thou
eatest paid for? and is this the Creature that must be wooed with so much
earnestnes? Behold all ye Inhabitants of the world, and admire! hear, O
Heavens! this is that -- (I want a name to call her by) which thinks it below
her to be matched to Christ, and an undervaluing to be acquainted with her
Maker, and a shame to have God for her Father! from the crown of the head to
the sole of the foot there is nothing but wounds and bruises, and putrified
sores; running plague-sores that are broken, are her greatest beauty: and
here is a thing to be loved with all my heart! Ezck. 16. Whosoever thou art that
read these lines, this was once thy condition, in these ornaments he found
thee, when God came to ask thy heart, this was thy dress, though thou art thus
highly advanced. And such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are
cleansed.

And after all this, O Sinner, art thou still as stout and proud as ever? Is
Christ so willing to bring thee to his Father? is he willing to Cloth thee
from head to foot with glorious Robes, such a dress as may become thee in the
presence of a King? does he offer to lead thee in his hands to his own Palace?
is God so willing and desirous to be your Father, and Christ to be your
Husband? are all the Ministers of Christ so willing to do their utmost to bring
this match to protection? shall they lie at you day and night to give your
consent, and to be willing; and are you still unwilling? Well, if all this
signify little, and you miss of Christ at last, and be not acquainted with
God; after all, remember it was your own doings: and that you thought it
greater wisdom to marry the Servant then the Master, to obey the Rebel rather
then your loving Prince. Remember you preferred Darkness before Light, Hell
before Heaven. I call Heaven and Earth to Record this day, that I have set Life
and Death before you, and you stand as if it were so difficult a matter to
resolve which were the best. This sounds strangely, and every one will be ready
to write Fool upon that man's forehead that acts thus. Hold man, be not too
ready to pass thy censure before thou look within thee. Do thou see an
absolute need of Christ? Do thou adore his infinite love and kindness? Do
thou give up thy self to him for thy Lord, and receive him for better for
worse, come on it what will? Or do thou not rather spend thy thoughts, and
let out thy affections upon the vanities and pleasures of the world? Do thou
not love Father and Mother, Wife and Children? Brethren and Sisters, House and
Lands more then him? Why, if this be thy case, I must say thou art one of the
Fools that loves Death and hate Life, thou call that folly in another,
which in thy self thou countest wisdom. I wonder who it is that you strive to
please all this while! Is not the hand of Joab in all this? has not Satan been
deep in retarding this match? has not he a design to marry thee to some
painted Lust, though he undo thee for ever? and must he be pleased rather then
Is it more necessary to gratify him that never yet intended to do any of the
Sons of Adam any kindness, rather then thy best friends? Come away for shame,
and let us lose our breath no longer; and let that time we spend in pleading
with you for God, be spent in singing with you, and praising God for you, and
congratulating your happy acquaintance with God, and you, matching to his only
Son.

20. But because man is so wedded to the world, and dotes upon his lust, that
all the arguments that we can use, are most commonly unsuccesseful, I shall add
one more upon this sort of motives drawn from the qualifications of him whom I
would fain have you acquainted with, and that shall take in all that can be
said on this head, and that is this; Consider that he is altogether lovely, he
is made up of love, goodness, and all excellencies; and whatsoever pleasure,
delight and content you find in the Creature, it is transcendently in him, he
is the chiefest of ten thousands: ask of them that by Faith have seen him,
inquire of the Spouse in the Canticles, and ask her what is her beloved, more
then another beloved? what there is in God and Christ more then in the world,
and she will almost wonder, that any one that is rational should ask so foolish
a question; she thinks you might with as much judgment and reason have asked,
what there is in Heaven, more desirable then in Hell? What is there is in ease
more then in torments? in Gold and Jewels, more then in dross; in a living,
healthful, beautiful Creature, more then in a stinking rotten carcass? Did you
but see his face, you would soon think there were something in him more then in
another; could you but see his eye, your heart would be in a flame: did you but
understand what it is to be brought into his banqueting house, you would say
that they are neither fools nor madmen, that can find in their hearts to scorn
the beauties and glories of this world in comparison of one look or smile from
God; and believe that his love was better then wine, to be preferred infinitely
before the greatest worldly pleasures, and think that the Virgins had reason
enough to love him, Cant. 1.4. How high does the Church run in his
commendations? How does she endeavor to set him out to the life, that every
one may admire his excellencies, and be taken with his beauties as well as her
self; neither does she fear to lose him by this, nor indeed is unwilling that
others should fall in love with him as well as she, Cant. 5.9, 10. etc. She
begins first with his face it is white and ruddy, the most exact beauty, so
that she must be blind that is not taken with him, and so she goes on as well
as she can to set him out; but he is so infinitely above her commendations,
that she wants words to express her self, therefore she speaks one great one,
He is altogether lovely; and if you will not believe, come and see. Do but look
upon him by Faith and meditation, contemplate his beauties, and then if you
have any thing yet to object, if after you have had a true sight of him, and
have well weighed all, you do not find that there is in him, infinitely more
then I can tell you, why then let me bear the blame for ever.

Well, now let us gather up all these things together; and if a multitude of
arguments, and if weight and reason, if vehemence and earnestness may prevail;
I should have some good hopes that I should not want success in this work, nor
you of the acquaintance with God, and everlasting glory. Therefore I say again,
if kindness and love be taking, who so sweet and obliging as he? If comfort,
joy and pleasure be desirable, who is there, when the Soul is surrounded with
a multitude of perplexities that can so much delight, refresh and raise it? If
Power, Glory and Majesty, if ability to defend from injuries, and revenge
wrongs, might signify any thing with poor shiftless Creatures; who is there
that ever yet prevailed against him? Who ever contended with God and prospered?
If vigor, activity and care in all the affairs of his friends, can entice the
dull helpless sinner to receive him; who will take more care for, and do more
for them then he? If his humility may engage us, if freedom of access,
notwithstanding that infinite distance that is between us and him, signify any
thing as to the commending of him to our acquaintance; where can a poor beggar
be more welcome then at the house of this mighty Prince? Can Faithfulness in
the greatest straight raise the esteem of a friend? who ever yet trusted him
that was deceived? Are riches and wealth taking? Who is there that can give a
Kingdom for a portion, a love-token, and give everlasting glory, and Heaven
for a jointure, but God? Does pity in misery, simpathy in suffering,
compassion in distress, indear and commend a friend, who is more tenderhearted
then he? Are Honors and preferments such great things? Who is that which will
make all his favorites Kings and Priests, and set them upon Thrones, and
reward, and commend them before the whole World? is suitableness a considerable
qualification to make up this match? who so suitable for the Soul, a Spirit, as
God a Spirit? Who can satisfy it is vast and infinite desires, but infinity it
self? Have poor simple Creatures that have quite undone themselves by their
folly and indiscretion need of a wise Counselor to wind them out of their sad
intricacies? who is there among the profound Politicians and grave Sages of the
world to be compared unto him? Does a dying man that has a never-dying Soul,
that is to pass speedily into an eternal state, lack an ever-dying and immortal
friend, that may stand him in some stead, when immortal? Are not friends
sometimes furthest off from one, when one has most need of them? Is not he
then a friend highly to be prized, who can, who will never be absent? Does not
God fill heaven and earth? What think you of a Soul-friend? Is not such a one
worth the looking after, who takes care that your Soul to be sure shall not
miscarry? Who ever did more for Souls then Christ? Will it not be true prudence
to make sure of such a friend as we must have for our friend, or we are
miserable for ever? and where is such a one to be found, but he that has the
keys of heaven an hell? which is most considerable, Time, or Eternity? and whom
shall I most value, him that promises present pleasures that are lost as soon
as felt, or him that will bestow everlasting favors? and are there not at Gods
right hand pleasures for evermore? If the trial and experience of so many
millions may speak his commendation, will not all that ever knew God say, truly
God is good to Israel. Will Gods willingness, desire, and earnestness prevail
with you to come to him? What is the substance of the whole Bible? does not
almost every Chapter speak the desire that God has to be reconciled to man? if
the perfection of all excellencies meeting in one can render him amiable; how
can he be slighted, who is altogether lovely; And what say you now, are you
resolved, or are you not? Shall the infinite Majesty of Heaven condescend to
offer himself to be loved and embraced by sinful dust? shall God say, I will be
thy Father? and shall not the sinner say, I would be thy Child? Why should not
the heart of every Apostate rebellious Traitor, that has forfeited Estate,
Life and Soul, leap at such good news, and say, will God for all this lay aside
the controversy, and conclude a peace? Will he receive the rebel to mercy?
will he open his doors to his prodigal? and is there yet any hope? Is it
possible that such sins as mine should be forgiven? Can it be conceived that
such a Creature as I should be embraced? what, look upon me, will God indeed
take me into favor? Yes, thee, behold he calls thee, he offers thee his Son, a
Kingdom, a Crown; behold the Father meets, he makes have to meet his returning
prodigal; behold, the King has sent to invite thee to the feast: nay, he will
give thee his only Son in marriage, the wedding garment is made ready, the
Bridegroom is coming, the wheels of his Chariot run-apace, the friends of the
Bridegroom are come to bid you make ready: up, deck your self, put on your
glorious Apparel, make have, make have ye Virgins, your companions are ready,
all stay for you, the Bridegroom is at the door: Behold he is at the door, and
will you still let him knock? What! Father, Husband, a Kingdom? What words are
these? Will thou O mighty Jehovah be my Father? Will thou O blessed Jesus be my
Husband? shall I have a Kingdom? What, me a Child, a Spouse for the King of
glory, an Heir of glory! Grace! Grace! Amen, Hallelujah. Be it to thy servants
according to thy word! but who are we, and what is our fathers house, that thou
have brought us hitherto? and now O Lord God, what shall thy servants say unto
thee? for we are silenced with wonder, and must sit down with astonishment, for
we cannot utter the least tittle of thy praises? What means the highth of
this strange love? O that the God of heaven and earth should condescend to
enter into Covenant with his dust, and to take into his bosom the viperous
brood, that have often spit their venom in his face! We are not worthy to be
as the handmaids, to wash the feet of the servants of our Lord? How much less
to be thy Sons and Heirs, and to be made partakers of all those blessed
Liberties and Privileges which thou have settled upon us; but for thy goodness,
sake, and according to thy own heart, have thou done all these great things.
Even so Father, because so it seemed good in thy fight. Wherefore thou art
great, O God, for there is none like thee, neither is there any God besides
thee, and what nation on earth is like thy people, whom God went to redeem for
a people to himself, and to make him a name, and to do for them great things
and terrible? for thou have confirmed them to thy self, to be a people unto
thee for ever, and thou Lord, art become their God. Wonder, O Heavens, and be
moved, O Earth, at this great thing! For, behold, the Tabernacle of God is with
men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself
shall be with them, and be their God. Be astonished and ravished with wonder,
for the infinite breach is made up, the offender is received, and God and man
are reconciled, and a Covenant of peace entered, and Heaven and Earth are agreed
upon the terms, and have struck their hands, and sealed the Indentures. O
happy conclusion! O blessed conjunction! Shall the Stars dwell with the dust?
Or the wide distant Poles be brought to mutual embraces and cohabitation? But
here the distance of the terms is infinitely greater, Rejoice O Angels! shout
O Seraphims! O all the friends of the Bridegroom and Bride, prepare an
Epithalamium, be ready with the marriage Song. Lo, here is the wonder of
wonders! for Jehovah has betrothed himself for ever to his hopeless Captives,
and owns the marriage before all the world, and is become one with us, and we
with him; he has bequeathed to us the precious things of the earth beneath,
with the fullness thereof, and has kept back nothing from us. And now, O Lord,
thou art that God, and thy words be true, and thou have promised this goodness
unto thy servants, and have left us nothing to ask at thy hands, but what thou
have already freely granted. Only the word which thou have spoken concerning
thy servants, establish it for ever, and do as thou have said, and let thy Name
be magnified for ever, saying, The Lord of Host he is the God of Israel. Amen.
Hallelujah. And how do you like this music, O ye the lost Sons and Daughters
of Adam? how do you relish these Dainties? what do you think of this march?
Some you see have been so wise, as with the greatest gratitude they can for
their souls, to close with those happy offers of grace. You hear how bravely
such and such have bestowed themselves, and now they are made for ever. And
what do you say to the same proposals? have they so much reason to bless the
day that ever such a motion was made? have they cause to rejoice for ever for
those blessed overtures, or are they all to be slighted by you? will Christ be
worse to you then them? is Heaven and happiness less necessary for you then
them? will the loss of a Soul be more inconsiderable to you, then it would have
been to them? Will not Heaven, Christ an Glory be as well worth your acceptance
as theirs? What, are you willing to be shut out when the Bridegroom comes to
fetch his Spouse home: Can you bare it, to see such, as you thought your
inferiors, advanced, and your self despised? What shall I say? what words
shall I use? what shall I do to prevail? O that I could pity you a thousand
times more than I do! O that my eyes might weep in secret for thy folly! O that
you also might do as some have done before you? though indeed they be but few
that be so wise! O that you would also bestow your heart upon Christ! give him
your heart-love, or he will have your heart-bloody. Do not make your self
miserable to please any living; do not slight Christ, because must do so; go
not with them to Hell for company. But that, if it be possible, I might
persuade you, I shall add some more motives, to prevail with you to get
acquainted with God, which I am certain will either work that blessed effect,
or rise up against you to the aggravation of your confusion, in that great and
terrible day.

II. HEAD OF MOTIVES.
The next Head of Motives which I shall insist upon, for the enforcing of this
Duty of acquainting your selves with God, I shall take from the glorious effect
of this acquaintance with God.

1. The first effect of this acquaintance with God is, it makes the soul
humble, and consequently fits the soul for greater communications from God
still, and to do God the greater service; but of that particular afterward.
Acquaintance with God, it makes the Soul humble. When God comes into the Soul,
he brings such a glorious light along with him, that he makes the Soul to see,
not only his beauty, but its own deformity. Psalm. 119.130. The entrance of thy
word gives light: it gives understanding to the simple. Before the Soul was
acquainted with the word of God, and by that had some discoveries of God made
to it out of the Word, why it was in the dark, and saw nothing at all of its
own vileness, it took no notice of that Sink, that Hell that was within it,
consider not its own Treason against the Lord of Heaven and Earth, and the
dangerous hazzards that it did run every moment upon that account; but the Soul
thought very well of its own state, it slattered it self in its own
in-iniquity, the man thinks he is rich and increased in goods, and has need of
nothing; but when he comes to look into his Purse, to open his Treasury, and to
tell over all his Gold and Silver in the light, why then he perceives a sad
mistake: all his Silver is drossie, and the best Riches that he has is but
dung: When the light comes in, he sees the darkness of his Understanding, the
perverseness of his will, the disorderliness of his Affections, the distemper
of the whole soul. He before took himself for a beautiful creature, but by his
light and this glass he sees his beauty is great deformity, he beholds heaps of
lusts crawling up and down, which before lay undiscerned, and then that man
that reckoned himself so happy, cries out, O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me? what shall I do to be saved? I am undone, undone, how shall I live,
where shall I dwell for ever? Time was, that the man admired what the Ministers
ailed to Keep such a stir about sin, but now he wonders that they are no more
earnest in their preaching of it down. It was a little while ago, that he
thought himself whole, but now he feels himself sick to the very heart,
wounded, sainting and ready to dye; he made full account that he was pure, but
now he cries out unclean, unclean; it was not long since he said with
indignation, am I blind also? but now he cries out, and will not be silenced,
have mercy upon me Jesus, thou Son of David, and grant that I may receive my
sight. His language is much altered; he can now say, was ever such a sinner as
I pardoned? Will such a prodigal ever be received? shall such foul offenses as
mine be forgiven? if God should look upon me, and give me a Christ, and pity
me, and cast his skirts over me, while I lie in my blood, if the Lord should
look upon me, it would be such a wonder that all that ever heard of it may
justly admire. Now the man which thought himself the best of Saints, believes
himself as bad as the worst of sinners! When a man begins to be acquainted with
God, he begins also to know himself; He that saw no need of washing by Christ,
would now have hands, feet, head and heart all washed. He that thought himself
sometimes far enough from Hell, now begins to admire that he did not fall into
it, and although there be a sweet alteration in him for the better, and Saints
begin to delight very much in him, yet he wonders that any one should see any
thing in him, that should cause any affection in them toward him, much more to
inflame their hearts in such vehement love to him; if he hear of any reproaches
that are cast upon him, he is ready to say with that wise stoic (Epist.) If he
had known me better, he would have spoke much worse of me. If any praise him,
he judge^h that it proceeds from their ignorance of his weakness, rather then
from any knowledge of his worth; and if he hear any such language, he is ready
to tremble for fear of his own heart, and cries out, not unto me, not unto me,
but unto his name be the praise: yet not I, but Christ which dwells in me.
Thus it is with one that begins to have some saving knowledge of God; and the
nearer he comes to God, the further he goes from himself; the more he sees of
him and his righteousness, the less he sees of his own; the more he is exalted,
the more he debateth himself; like those four and twenty Elders, he lays his
Crown at the feet of God. Thus it was with Job, when God, as I may so say,
stood at a greater distance from him, he is ready to speak a little too highly,
he stands much upon his own righteousness, he stiffly justifies himself; but
when the holy God comes a little nearer to him, when he throws off that dark
cloud with which he had mantled himself, and when he caused that glorious
brightness to break forth upon Job, and made him to see a glance of his
Holiness, Wisdom and Justice, then how is he even ashamed and confounded within
himself, that he should ever stand so much upon his own justification, Job
42.5, 6. I have heard of thee, by the hearing of the ear: but now mine eye
sees thee. Wherefore I abbor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. When he
comes to be better acquainted with God, how strangely is his note changed; and
I might say, when he was thus abased! how speedily does God raise him to a
wonder. A man may hear of God twenty years together, and yet never abhor
himself with dust and ashes, never see any vileness that is in his nature,
never be brought off from his own righteousness, never admire that he is kept
out of hell! O but when he comes to see God, and to be acquainted with him, how
does he cry out of himself as unworthy to breath in the air, as deserving
nothing but wrath; then he has not a word to say for the goodness of his own
heart, now he can say with astonishement! O infinite patience! O unmeasureable
goodness! O the dephts of Gods love! He must be merciful indeed that can pardon
such sins! That must be goodness indeed that can be so to me! That is love with
a witness, that can embrace such a loathsome monster? What was it that made
Abraham call himself dust and ashes? What made David to say he was a worm and
no man? What made Isaiah speak so debasingly of himself? why these were the
Friends of God, they had visions of that holy One. When is it that the people
of God are most ingenuous in their confesions? when do they most freely pour
our their souls before God? When is it that they most readily open their soars
and desire that they should be searched, but when this great Chyrurgion comes
to their chamber? those which before where whole, are now sick, full of plague
soars, head and heart sick, dangerously sick, and no whole part in them, they
can say more against themselves now, then ever the Minister could; they can
aggravate their sins, and lay loads upon themselves; and they see themselves
vile, and even are ready to wonder that the earth did not open and swallow them
up before this, they admire that God should endure them so long, and think it
no small miracle that they were not crushed in the Egg, that they were not
cast from the darkness of the Womb, to the darkness of Hell. Now they can cry
out of Original Sin, and the indisposition of their souls to any thing that is
good, and inclination to that which is bad: They say as well as David, That
they were born in sin, and in iniquity did their mother conceive them; they
think every thing too good for them, all mercy on this side everlasting misery.
They count every bit they eat, and every drop they drink more then they
deserve. They think themselves unworthy of the least of Gods mercies, Genesis
32.10. Others say thanksgivings, but he feels them; others say confessions, but
he feels them. It is one thing for a man to speak of his own unworthiness, and
another thing to lie under the sense of it. The heart and tongue are to
distinct members. The heart may speak that which the tongue cannot utter, and
the tongue may utter that which the heart never felt. But a man that is brought
into acquaintance with God, speaks what he experiences, or that he does not
dissemble with God, when he confesses his sin before him. They lay themselves
as low as Hell; this is humility, and this an effect of acquaintance with God.
Hence it is that Paul says of himself. Ephesians. 3.8. Unto me who am less then the
least of all Saints is this grace given, that I should preach among the
Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ; and to make all men see what is the
fellowship, etc. He wants words to express Gods greatness, and his own
smallness. Now, what was it that made Paul speak and think thus of himself?
There was a time when Paul would have spit in any ones face that should have
spoke as much against him, as he did against himself. What is it that has
wrought such a strange alteration in this great Rabbi, and made him so little?
Why, this acquaintance with God, the sight of Christ was the thing that laid
this proud Pharisee in the dust, and made him blind also. Mark this, always the
more heavenly any man is, the more humble, See Exodus 3.11. 2 Samuel 7.18. If I
should appeal to the experiences of Saints, and ask them, when they had the
lowest thoughts of themselves, would they not say, when they were nearest God?
Now, would you walk humbly, you must walk with your God; would you see more of
your own deformity; why then you must labor to see more of his holiness, more
of his beauty. Contraries set near one another, appear more visibly.

2. Another excellent effect of Acquaintance with God, is, that it will make a
man fall upon sin in good earnest. When the soul sees how infinitely good God
is, it cannot but see an unspeakable evil in sin, when is so directly contrary
to him. When the soul has really entered into a League with God, it presently
bids defiance to all his enemies; when he begins to be at peace with God, he
presently commenceth a war against his adversaries. Friendship with God makes
enmity against Satan. That which formerly the man rolled under his tongue as a
sweet morsel, is now like gall and wormwood to him. He that sometimes did
commit iniquity with greediness, can now say, that it is the greatest folly and
madness in the world; he knows that it is an evil and a bitter thing, as sweet
as it tasted when his palate was distempered; he that gloried in his
wickedness, now accounts it the greatest shame in the world; and hates the
garments which are bespotted with the flesh, which sometimes he took for
beautiful raiments. The burnt child dreads the fire; sin has cost his friend
dear, and him dear too. The child cannot love that knife which stabbed his
Father. He knows how sweet God is, and how much he hates sin, and that if he
would have Gods company, he must bid an everlasting farewell to his dearest
beloved sin; and therefore rather then he will offend so dear a friend, he
will hew Agag in pieces before the Lord. He will as soon cut off one hand with
the other, and be pulled limb from limb, as again draw his sword against his
covenanted friend and again venture into the field in the cause that sometimes
he did so deeply engage body and soul in. He that thought before that it was no
great matter to Damn, Curse, and Tear; but a trick of youth to Whore, and no
harm to do what one had a mind to; to Eat and Drink, and Talk, and sleep as one
lists, to give ones Lust whatsoever it called for; he that could once make a
mock of sin, and Sleep securely upon the top of a mast, and thought it a piece
of Gallantry to dare the Almighty, and was ready to laugh at them which durst
not be so Prodigal of their Souls, as himself; the case is now wonderful
altered with him, he now sees the Harlot stripped naked, he beholds how loathsome
the whore is now her paint is washed of, sin and hell are a like to him; tempt
him to folly, and he will soon answer in Joseph's language, How shall I do this
great wickedness, and sin against God? He that sometimes thought sin the only
pleasure, and looked upon the Devil and the world as the only Friends, now sees
his dangerous mistake, and blesses God that his eyes are opened before he
comes into another world; he knows now that holiness is the only pleasure, and
God is the only Friend, and sin, and the world are as mortal enemies as the
Devil himself; he believes that if he venture upon sin, he must venture upon
the displeasure of his Friend, whose favor he set more store by than all the
delights under Heaven, and whose loving kindness he judges to be better then
life it self. When the Soul is once acquainted with God, how strangely are its
apprehensions of thing altered? Now he calls Things and Persons by their right
Name; good he calls good, and evil evil, where as before he called evil good,
and good evil, and put light for darkness, and darkness for light; he now
believes that the zealous compassionate Ministers that spoke so much against
sin, had reason enough to have said ten times as much as they did; he sees that
it was not for nothing that they were so earnest with him; he has tasted the
Gall, Wormwood, and poison that is in, sin; he plainly sees what is the great
Makebate between God and Man, he has now the wit to understand what it is that
has kept good things so long from him: Tell him now of a Revel, a Whore, he
had as live thou should persuade him to part with his strength and liberty
and grind in a mill, he reckons you might as rationally desire him to leap into
a bottomless pit, to take up his everlasting lodging in a Bed of flames, and to
make light of Damnation. Let Men and Devils use what Arguments they will to
prevail with him, now to close with temptations, he is sure he has a stronger
against them, he has a sensible Argument within, which will answer all, if
they had ten thousand times as many more then they can produce: The love of
Christ makes him abhor the motion; God is my Friend, dashes all. Shall such a
one as I take up Arms against God? shall I that have found him so infinitely
good? shall I that have experienced the Faithfulness of this friend to me, be
so infinitely ungrateful as to be thus abominably unfaithful to him? Shall I
that have forfeited my Life and Soul, and instead of Hell have received Heaven,
instead of Damnation, Salvation; shall I instead of thankfulness again rebel?
because the Grace of God abounds, shall sin abound? God forbid. To argue from
mercy to sin is the Devils logic: To argue from mercy to duty is true
Christianity: One that is acquainted with God can expostulate the case with his
own Soul, and say! What meanest thou O my Soul to stand parlying with Satan?
have thou known what that has cost thee already? look back to Eden. Who was it
that dispossessed thy Grand Father of that brave seat? What did Eve get by
discoursing with such a Cheater; have you not lost enough already, but you must
be venturing still? was it nothing for God of a friend to become a stranger and
enemy? was it a slight matter to be divested of all that glory that once thou
did shine in, but that now again after thou art brought into some favor,
thou must be tampering with that gamester who had like to have robbed thee of
all? art thou talking of returning again to Egypt? what, have thou so soon
forgotten the Iron, and the Clay? Is this all the thanks that you give the Lord
for his unspeakable mercy? Does he that has done such things for you deserve
no better at your hands? Is this your kindness to your friend? What was it O my
soul, that that undone Creature said unto thee? Did he say, it is a little one,
and thy Soul shall live? what, did he ask a few merry hours that I should spare
my self, that I should not be righteous overmuch? Did he so? a special Friend!
I Thank you for nothing? and why did thou not answer the Tempter as Solomon
did Bathsheba when she asked a small thing (as she thought) for A donijah? and
why do thou not ask the Kingdom also? and why did not Satan ask thee to part
with heaven, and thy interest in Christ, and those favors? as the Lord lives,
as small a request as thou think his was, that word was spoken against thy
life, thy Soul. A virtuous man, or as the Stoic calls him, Auton.) One that
has God for his friend, when temptations are presented, he remembers who he
is, and how he stands related to God, and how little grateful such an action
would be to his Friend. And thus he does resist the Temptation with a great
deal of gallantry, when he remembers himself. Nay, sometimes, Temptations to
sin do make Grace more to abound? the water which was intended to cool divine
love, proves oil, and makes that noble flame to burn more vehemently, Cant.
8.6, 7. He desires to exercise that Grace which is contrary to the vice which
he is tempted to with more then ordinary vigor. He stands like a rock in the
midst of the Sea unshaken; he is steadfast and unmovable, like a pillar in the
Temple of his God. He is much of the same mind, in that point, with that brave
Heathen, who spoke thus to himself when Temptation was strong. ( Ar. Epist.
1.2. c. 18.) Deliberate man, yield not rashly, it is a great work that lies upon
thy hands, it is a divine work. it is for a Kingdom, the Kingdom of God. Now
remember thy God, let us see what thy love to thy God is, remember his presence,
he beholds how thou stand deliberating whether thou should fight for him
or against him, for shame show not thy self so basely disingenious: Remember
what thy God, thy Friend did for thee at such and such a time: Remember how
kindly you were entertained by him the last time you were at his house. Whose
Sword is that you wear by your side? who gave you it? did not God give it you
to fight against his enemies? and will you draw it against himself? Remember
from whence you had all that you do enjoy, and can you find in your heart to
take Gods mercies, Gold, Silver, and Food, and bestow them all upon that which
he hates? will you quarter and keep in pay with Gods coin, his greatest enemy?
And if you feel your heart still staggering, and scarce able to keep it is
ground, then remember God stands by, Christ looks on, and sees how gallantly
any Champion of his will demean themselves on his quarrel; and that there is
not a more lovely sight upon the Earth, then to behold one of his Friends,
rather venturing their lives then they will bare that the least indignity or
affront should be put upon their God! O happy are they that can always act as
in the sight of God! and if the Soul can have but a constant fresh sense of
it is relation to God, and his eye, it is impossible but that it should hate
sin, which is so directly opposite to him: happy are those who by the thoughts
of God are enraged against sin! Is it not enough says that heavenly Soul that
is acquainted with God, that I have done such and such things against God, when
I knew him not, but that I should again engage against him after I have been
obliged by a thousand mercies, after I have tasted and seen how good the Lord
is? is it a light matter that I did so long fight against him then? and shall I
now renew my rebellions, when I have had so much experience of the folly and
madness of such a war, where I shall be as surely conquered as I draw my sword?
and has God kept me by a miracle of mercy out of Hell, and after I had run out
so wretchedly, and undon my self, set me up again, after I had played the
prodigal, received me again into favor, and shall I after all deal thus basely
by him: No, I Will die a thousand deaths before I will willingly yield to any
thing that may be in the least offensive to him, whom my Soul has such an
infinite reason to love above the whole world. The knowledge of Gods service,
and Satan's too, makes a Soul to distinguish; he that knows what it is to be
made free by Christ abhors his old Master, he remembers full well the great
hardship that he then underwent, when he had nothing to live upon but Husks, he
calls to mind the Clay and Mortar, he cannot forget the cruel vassalage that he
served under; Garlic and Onions were his dainties, and truly he cannot desire
to leave his Manna for such kind of Food; he is not in love with the Whip and
Scourge, he does not dote upon the fetters, the Iron which went into his Soul,
but he is glad with all his heart to be free from those Taskmasters, which
made him to serve with rigor, he has no mind to return to his old Work: My
meaning in all this is, he that was a servant and a drudg of Satan's, and a
slave to his lust, when he once comes to taste the sweetness of Spiritual
liberty, to ^^^^de free by Christ, he has no desire again to be inslaved, but
does with the greatest detestation, reject all the proposals and promises that
the Devil makes, to bring this business about; he knows Satan too well to love
his service, he remembers that all his pay was promises and no more, he
remembers that he fed him with poison, and made him do that which had like to
break his bones, and undone him for ever; he sees what Satan's designs were, and
what had become of him quickly, if he had gone on in his service; he believes
chains to be chains, though they be of Gold, believes that poison will kill
him, though it may be sweet in the mouth; he has now such a sense of the evil
and baseness of sin, as being so infinitely loathsome to God, as that he hates
it with a perfect hatred; he has a will in some measure conformed to the will
of God; and what his friend, the Lord loves, he cannot hate, and where his God
hates he cannot love. Psalm. 139.22. Do not I hate them O Lord which hate thee?
and am I not grieved with them which rise up against thee? I hate them with a
perfect hatred, I count them mine enemies. Now what is it that stirs the
Psalmists choler so much? Why, he had been working upon his own heart, in the
former part of the Psalm, the doctrine of Gods omnisciency and goodness, and by
meditation upon this subject he was brought under a lively sense of the
greatness of Divine kindness; and while his heart did thus muse, the fire
burnt, his soul was in a flame against sin, verse 17. How precious are thy
thoughts unto me O God! O when the soul has sweet thoughts of God, it will
have sower thoughts of sin. When the soul loves God dearly, it cannot choose but
hate sin entirely. None behold such deformity in sin, as those which behold
most beauty in God. Hence it is that some of the people of God have (nay all of
them which are really acquainted with God, are of the same mind) counted it
more desirable to leap into the flames, then to venture upon a known sin. It
was no untruth in the absolute position, though falsely applied by Job's friend,
that it is a great wickedness to choose the least sin before the greatest
suffering, Job 36.21. What was it that made Paul so weary of himself? what
burden was it that made his back so ache? what pains, caused those bitter
groans? Romans 7. was it not sin? and why did not Paul groan before as well as
then? was it because he then had no sin at all, or less sin then when he made
that bitter complaint? no such matter, but because he had then less
acquaintance with God. But now he is become acquainted with God, the more he
does abhor himself for sin. He now knows better then he did, his eyes are
opened, and he sees sin in its colors, and he looks upon it as so great an
evil, that he does want words to express the odious nature of it; therefore
because he cannot find a worse word, he calls sin by its own name, Sinful Sin;
which he thought a more significant Epithet, then if he had called it
Devilish Sin. What makes the children of God to be so weary of this world, and
so desirous to be upon the wing? why it is because of better acquaintance else
where; they know that then they shall put off that carrion that now they carry
about with them; Sin I mean, which like a dead carcass bound to a living, does
now stink so abominably in their nostrils; they know that then they shall have
a sweeter smell, and themselves also smell more savoury in the nostrils of God.
They know that poverty shall be swallowed up with riches, want with fullness,
sin with holiness, misery with happiness, they have an inheritance, a City,
wherein dwells righteousness, and nothing that is unclean shall enter into
it; and when they come thither, they know the case will be altered with them,
and that though now they bare about with them a body of death and sin, yet then
they shall have a body as pure, as bright and glorious as the Sun, they shall
be presented by Christ to the Father without spot or wrinkle, or any such
thing. He knows that as long as he is thus sullied by his sin, his great friend
will not take so much pleasure in his company. Isaac and Ishmael, the Ark and
Dagon, God and Sin cannot dwell in the same heart; therefore he desires to have
less of sins company, that he may have more of Gods; none of sins company, that
he may have always Gods company. Observe that constantly in your own experience
and others, those which walk most close with God are most tender, as to the
matter of sin; and those which are less in converse with God, are more bold in
their venturing upon sin, and after it is committed they have less regret. What
is the reason that one can swallow any thing almost, and another is afraid of
the least appearance of evil; he hates the garment spotted with the flesh, he
is as fearful of clothing himself with wickedness, as of putting on the
garments of one that has had the Leprosy or Plague upon him; he hates vain
thoughts, because he loves God and his laws, Ps. 119.104.113.

3. Another glorious effect of Acquaintance with God, is, that it makes one to
have very low and undervaluing thoughts of the world. When the Saint has been
with Paul raised up to the third Heaven, when he has had some intimate
converse with God, he can look the world into almost nothing; nay, if it stand
in competition with Christ, he counts it but as dung and dross in comparison of
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus his Lord, Phil. 3.8. he can
then set a higher value upon the light of Gods countenance, than upon Corn, and
Wine, and Oil. It is because that poor Creatures know no better, that they dote
so much upon the world; did they but know what it is to have one look of love
from God, were they but acquainted with the glory of another world, they would
soon disrelish every thing else; nothing will down with them which have been
feasted in Gods House, but those royal dainties. Taste the world who will,
says the Saint, give me but more Grace, more of Christ's company, let me but
maintain an intimate familiarity with God, let me be but better acquainted with
him, and be more frequently refreshed with the smiles, this is all that I
desire upon earth, this is all that I expect to make my happiness complete in
Heaven. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And there is none upon Earth that I can
desire in comparison of thee. It was not without good reason that the Psalmist
prizes the Commands of God above Gold and Silver; it was no mistake in Solomon
to count Wisdom more excellent than the finest Gold, and more precious than
Rubies. That spiritual Merchant knew what he did when he sold all that he had
for that Pearl of great price; he was sure he should be no loser by such a
bargain. Bring me a heavenly Creature that has had a view by Faith, of the
Glory of Gods countenance, that has been in his company, that has been
brought into his Banqueting house, such a one I am confident can easily spare
that which most keep such a fearful stir about, he can spare the world for them
which are like to have no better a portion. Give him but more of those
spiritual pleasures which he has had in communion with God, and he desires no
more. He can now speak it, and speak it in good earnest, that there is no
comparison between this world and another; he can now call this world a shadow,
and the glory of it grass, and write Vanity, Emptiness, and Vexation upon its
beautiful Face, and contemn all its smiles and frowns, and look upon its
greatest Lovers, as persons that deserve to be pitied rather than envied,
whose portion is so small, whose happiness so short, and whose misery and
mistake is so great and dismal. It is a common thing for men to declaim against
the world, and to say, it is but a little muck; it is no unusual thing for its
greatest Lovers to speak against it, and say, that it is that which passes
away; but yet for all that they pursue it more than Heaven, and are more
earnest for it, than the Salvation of their Souls, and more troubled at the
thought of parting with it, than at the thought of their parting with God; and
the loss of it troubles them more than if we tell them of the loss of their
souls: Such as these will not say, but that God is infinitely more to be loved
than the whole world; but yet if the World and God stand in competition, they
stand not long disputing which must give place, the World has the uppermost
room in the heart. But whence is this mistake? How comes the Servant to Ride,
and the Master to go on foot? Why is the world preferred before God? Why hence
it is, men know not God, they are not acquainted with his excellency; the World
is sensible, he sees it, he feels it, he tastes it, and so he does not the
things that are invisible: And no wonder then, that sense bares the sway; the
man wants Faith to realize invisibles, he wants senses spiritually exercised.
But now he that knows God, and is acquainted with spiritual things, he has
quite another apprehension of the World, and that not only from Faith, but
sometimes from a spiritual sense, and he can say that Divine Pleasures, Riches,
and Enjoyments do as sensibly refresh him, yea, abundantly more then ever the
world did. And when he has been newly taking a walk in that heavenly Paradise,
he looks back upon this World with grief and indignation, that he should ever
love the world with his heart, when there was one that did infinitely more
deserve his love, when there was a God, Christ, and Holiness to be loved; that
he should be such a child, such a fool as to run after Butterflies, quarrel for
a feather, hunt for a shadow, while God, Christ, and Glory, those great
Substances lay by unregarded. Now he grudges that any thing should have his
love but his God; his dearest Relations, if they stand in Gods way, must be run
over, despised, hated. That which the men of the world fight, and kill, and
spare not to damn their souls for, he sees now to be a pitiful worthless thing,
which cannot defer Death a moment, nor stand him in any stead in another world.
He is all for that coin which will go current in another Country; and if he be
but rich in promises, rich in spiritual relations, rich in grace, he takes
himself for no unhappy man; let the world speak or think what they will of him,
he does not much pass upon it, he believes that he is but a pilgrim and
stranger here, and if he meet with no great kindness, it is but that which he
expected. The truth of it is, he is almost afraid of the smiles of the world,
not being ignorant of this, that whom it kisses, it intends to betray, he cannot
be overfond of that which in all probability will keep God and him at a greater
distance, and make his passage to glory next to impossible. He reckons that
it is better being rich in grace, then rich in purse; and he that which lay up
for his body, and provides not for his soul, is the greatest fool in the world.
Tell such a one as Moses of riches, honors, and preferments, he thinks them
but poor sorry things for a man of Israel to be taken with, and he will rather
see them in the dirt, then part company with his suffering brethren, much less
with God. It is storied of Anaxagoras, that he seemed to be very little
concerned when his country was in a flame, upon which being taxed by some, he
made this reply, There is none of you all care more for your country then I do
for nine; pointing with his finger up to heaven. Thus it is with the people of
God; let others talk of Riches and Honor, but there is none of them all do
value true Riches as they do; but here is the difference, one thinks he has
Riches when he has the command of a great deal of Gold and Silver, the other
knows he has Riches when he has Christ, and Grace, and can have good returns
out of that other World. And which of these are the wisest will ere long be
seen. One looks upon heaven and glory as a shadow, a fable, and the things of
this World, as the only realities; the other he looks upon Heaven, God and
Eternity, as the greatest realities, and most worthy of his highest valuation,
and the things of this world as flying shaddows, which cannot fill the arms of
him that does embrace them: And under this apprehension, and sense of things,
no marvel that he does prefer the substance before the shadow. He believes with
that Worthy, that he was born for other things than to eat and drink, and
sleep, or to take his pleasure, or to get an estate; he knows that the business
in this world, is to provide for another, to get his peace made with God, to
contemplate Heaven, and to get thither; and therefore you must not count it
strange, that such a person as this is somewhat cold, and remiss in his
carrying on of lower designs; he knows that the disproportion between Finite
and Infinite, Times, and Eternity, is no such inconsiderable one as the most
count upon. Again, he has more than once experienced this, that the very joys
and comforts that are to be had in the enjoying of Communion with God, even in
this world, are unspeakably more intence and refreshing, than the highest
sensual pleasures in the world. One that is acquainted with God, will take the
word of his Friend for true, which word tells him that whatsoever is presented
to his sense, the world and all that is therein, must ere long be burnt up,
whereupon he thinks it no imprudence at all to hazard present enjoyments for
future hopes; no folly to look after something that will bear the flame. He
thinks it scarce worth the while to be born to possess, if it were a whole
world, except he were sure of having something after it that were better than
what he met with here; he had rather have one smile from his friend, than
thousands of Gold and Silver: he would not for a world be to have his portion
here, though it be never so large a one: he had rather by far be with Lazarus
upon a dunghill, than sit with Dives in a chair of State, before the richest
fare that the Sea, or Air, or Earth could afford him: he would not change
conditions with those which enjoy the most of the things of this world: he can
thankfully want that which most commonly makes its possessors miserable. O
could you but talk with a man that lives in Heaven while he is upon earth, and
could you but see and here how much he slights that which you adore! Give me
neither poverty nor riches, but Food convenient for me is the highest that he
dare pray for: He had rather live in a smoking Cottage, and have God for his
companion, than dwell in the greatest palace, and have the Devil for his
Neighbor, Counselor, Master. When a man has been in Heaven by contemplation,
though his body be upon the Earth, yet the best part of him, his affections,
his love, joy, and heart, is still there. Sen. Ep. 41. One that does converse
with God here, he is indeed that earthly lump, his body is below; but could you
see his thoughts, could you look into his heart, and see the inward actings of
his soul, you should see the man out of the world discoursing with God, he
sticks close to the company of his Friend: He is like the Sunbeams, who though
they touch the earth, yet they still abide there from whence they are sent, and
are most intensly hot nearest the fountain, the Sun. So the soul and thoughts
of a child of God, they may, nay, they cannot but glance upon the world: but
it is most vigorous spiteful actings are toward God, and the heat of its
affections are abundantly more remiss and cool when they beat upon earthly
objects. He that knows what it is to have the company of God, is almost ready
to wonder how any one can be content with any thing below God: and as for
himself, he takes himself for little better then a prisoner, while his soul is
pent up in a body which is so unwildly as to all spiritual employments, till it
be refined by the grave. He would not be to dwell here for ever for a world,
though he might enjoy more content then ever any since the Fall did. A Soul
acquainted with God is a noble Creature indeed, it scorns petty low things, it
thinks no Estate big enough for it, but that which is infinite; he looks upon
himself as a Citizen of no mean City, a Denizen of Zion, a Freeman of the New
Jerusalem, one of the Royal Society, over which Christ, that King of Glory, is
the President, his inheritance is greater than that which the Sun compasses in
its course. O when (says such a one) shall I leave these Cities of Cabul, and
dwell with the King at Jerusalem! O when shall my soul be sasely ark'd! O when
shall I be upon the wing for Heaven! O when shall I leave this body there
whence it first came! When shall I go out of this cell, this cage! O that I
were once safe in Heaven! O that I were in the immediate presence of God, and
might stand for ever before him, and have his blessed society for ever and
ever. Neither am I now quite without him; but how little, O how little is it
that now I enjoy! O when shall I enter into the possession of that better
longer life! I stay and long for that separating, or rather uniting hour, which
will separate my soul from my body, from my dross, but perfectly unite me to
God. Look then, O my Soul, upon all that thou see below, but as so many Inns
and resting places for a Pilgrim to take some little refreshment in, and then
to be gone. That day, O my fearful Soul, which thou sometimes fear as my
last, is the birthday of eternity. O what mean we to love our prisons,
fetter-burdens! What ad we to be so much pleased with our miseries, and afraid
of our happiness? O this unbelief! O were Christians but more in the company of
God by Faith and Meditation, they would look upon God as great, and the world
as a very small thing. He that knows God to be great, sees every thing below
him little. It is an infallible argument of a Divine and Excellent Soul, and
one that has Acquaintance with God, when he can judge all beneath God, as low,
sordid, base, and utterly unworthy of the respect of his soul.

4. Another glorious effect of acquaintance with God, is, that it will ease us
of all sorrows, or cure all sorrows. As soon as any one has but a saving
knowledge of Christ, he is in such a condition as that he need not trouble his
head with care, nor his heart with fear; no more then a rich Heir that has a
tenderhearted, loving, wise Father, need not trouble himself what he shall do
for bread and clothing: as long as the great cause of fear is taken away, so
long he is well enough. As for those that are unacquainted with God, they
either are always afraid, or have cause always to be afraid: but as for a Child
of God, that Scripture bears up his Soul under the mightiest waves of fear,
There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. He that
is in Covenant with God, may in this world undergo some petty injures, some
insurrections may be made against him; but this is his comfort, he is sure
never to be quite overpowered, never to be finally conquered! O the
disquietments and fears that strangers and enemies are compassed with, or will
be! And O the joys, the security, the true security that some have; at what a
rate do they live! and how bravely do they die! mark the perfect, and behold
the upright man; for the end of that man is peace. This was touched upon
before, when I opened the nature and qualifications of this friend, and
therefore I need say the less hear; yet it being the great inquiry of the
wisest, how they may be sheltered from this storm? What shall they do to be
cured of these heart qualms? How they may be freed from fears? I shall not
altogether pass it over in this place. I cannot but encourage poor strangers, as
they value the truest comforts, as they would be free from fear and trembling
when the Foundations of the Earth shall be shaken, when the Mountains shall
tremble, and melt at the presence of God, the mighty God of Jacob, when the
Heavens shall be rouled together as a Scroul, and be all of a flame. Make sure
of this Friend! it is impossible that one that has such a one for his friend
should much be daunted, when he hears of Wars, and Rumors of Wars, when the
Pestilence rages, when there are dreadful Earthquakes in sundry places, and
such distress of Nations and perplexities, that the stoutest heart shall sink
that has not this to support: Then a Child of God may lift up his head with
comfort, because his redemption draws near. There is a vast difference
between a godly man and a wicked, as to their affections, fears, joys, desires,
hope. The godly thinks long for that, which the wicked wishes withal his heart
might never be; the Day of Judgment. The righteous man is even delighted with
the forethoughts of that, the thoughts of which does put a damp upon all the
comforts of the ungodly, he rejoices in that which makes his Neighbor to
tremble. As for death, a gracious heart that has kept his watch, and
maintained a sweet and constant correspondency with God, and has had his heart
in heaven, and can look upon the great Jehovah as his friend, cannot be very
much affrighted at his approach: He is not much appaled, when he looks out at
the window, and sees this messenger making have to his house; and when he
knocks at his door, he dares let him in, and can heartily bid him welcome; he
understands whence he comes, and what his errand is, and though he look somewhat
grimly, yet as long as he comes to conduct him to his friends house, he can
dispense with that: he has more reason to speak it then he which did. (
Plotinus) Let me make haste away to my Country; there are my excellent
Ancestors, there dwell my noble Relations, there is the constant residence of
my dearest Friends. (Tull.) O happy will that day be when I shall come into
that glorious assembly, when I shall have better company then Homer, Orpheus,
Socrat. Cato, when I shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the
Palace of their Friend and mine! O happy day when I shall come to my Fathers
house, to that general Assembly, the Church of the First born, to an
innumerable company of Angels, to Jesus, the Mediator of the New Covenant, and
to the Spirits of just Men made perfect. A man's knowledge of other things may
add to his fears, and make his miseries greater: But the more knowledge we have
of God, the less our fears and sorrows must needs be: and when our knowledge of
God is perfect, all our fears and sorrow shall be for ever blown over. I cannot
omit a brave speech of that noble Stoic which comes to my mind, Ar. Epist. l.
1. c. 7. ( If the acquaintance and favor of Caesar can keep you (as you are
made to believe) from some fears? how much rather to have God for your Father
and Friend? how little cause have such to be afraid at any time of any thing.
Death it self is not evil to a friend of God; he may say, come, let us go
quickly to our Fathers house, our Father calls us. And does this seem a small
matter to you; believe it, when you come to dye, you will be of another mind
then: you will think that's a cordial worth any money, that will raise your
spirits at such a time, and make you with a smiling countenance, to pass into
an everlasting state. It is but a folly, to expect that any thing in the world
should do this for us, but the knowledge of our interest in God. It Is possible
indeed to get some stupifying intoxicating stuff, that makes a man to dye like
a beast, without any great horror, the Devils shop will furnish poor dying
Creatures with enough of that; Nay, he is glad if he can keep men a sleep till
death awaken them; but miserable is that man who is beholding to the Devil for
his Cordials; miserable is he who has nothing to keep him from a Hell upon
Earth, but his own ignorance, and the Devils word. I promise you, it is none of
the joyfullest spectacles to an enlightened Soul, to look upon one that lived
wickedly, and died peaceably. You would think, that a poor man, that is going
to Execution, had little cause to smile, though he should Ride to the Gallows
upon an easy going Horse, or in a Coach. The Swine is usually very still, when
the Butcher is scraping away the hair of his Throat in order to the Sticking of
him. It Is no unusual thing for a vile unsanctified sinner, to leap with a mad
confidence into eternity; but he alone has a soild peace, who has God for his
friend. This is the only man has just cause to sing for joy, when his soul is
going into another world. It was none of the worst counsel which he gave,
whosoever he was who said, that it does highly concern us seriously to think of
terrible things which we must most certainly see ere long, and to lay in such
provision as may make us fit to grapple with them when they come, O for that
which will keeps us, from crying out hereafter? what shall I do? woe is me, I am
undon: were it so that there were such rare extraction to be made which would
certainly prolong our lives as long as we would, and make us always cheerful,
what striving would there be to get such a receipt! O how would the great ones
bring out their bags to purchase it at any rate! How willingly would they
mortgage all their Lands, part with their richest Jewels to buy it! and yet how
little will they exspend for that, which if they had, would prove far more
effectual! O would men and women but understand themselves, and mind their
business, what sweet lives might they lead, what a calm might there be
constantly upon their Spirits! How cheerfully might they live! and how joyfully
might they dye! Tully says, that he and many others had been gathering the
most powerful herbs that they could find to cure all fears: but, says he, I
know not what is the matter, the disease is still stronger then the remedy. And
do thou not know, O Tully, what is the matter? why then I will tell thee, One
principal Ingredient was left out, viz, Faith in the Blood of Christ, and Union
with God by virtue of that blood. He that is by Christ brought acquainted with
God, need not much fear griefs, sorrows, and such things Christ was acquainted
with for him; he has unsting'd Death, and sweetened the Grave: all his
troubles are now but as Physic, the Poison of them is corrected; though the
Pill be bitter, yet it is of his Friends composing, and therefore you may take
it without any turning away of your head. Show me a man (said old Epictetus)
that is happy, truly in his life, and happy in his death; happy in his health,
and in his sickness; happy when poor, scorned, tormented and banished; in a
word, happy in all conditions. O that I could but talk with such a man! O that
I could see such a spectacle! such a one as my eyes never yet beheld. Why, I
will tell thee the reason of it, O Epictetus, It is because thou never saw a
Christian, one that was acquainted with God; for let me tell the world, Through
Grace I have seen such a sight, and do believe it to be the most lovely sight
on this side Heaven. I have seen one smiling when his Jaws have been falling,
and eye-strings breaking; rejoicing, when most about him were weeping, and
accounting it a high act of patience to be willing to live; and how do you like
such a condition? Is it better to lie quivering, shaking and groaning, or
rejoicing and praising, and admiring of free grace, and setting forth the
riches of Gods love and goodness: which of these would you choose? I can easily
believe that few are so bad, but that they could be contented as well as Balaam
to dye the death of the righteous, and to have their latter end like his? But
would you dye joyfully? why then, you must live holily; get acquainted with
God, and then this may be your state. I remember Seneca speaks of one Pacuvius,
who when he was drunk, cried out (...) (I have been alive) very merrily. But
had he well understood himself, he would have thought be bad had much better
reason to have cried out, I am dead, I am dead. But however, what he said
ungroundly and wickedly, a child of God may easily and thankfully say; when he
is going to his last sleep, he may with joy and cheerfulness say, I have lived,
and through grace, I have kept a fair correspondency with my God, my Friend,
whom I am now going to dwell with for ever. Do not think therefore that I come
to take away your comforts and joys, when I come to persuade you to get
acquaintance with God, no such matter, I would have you learn to rejoice, but
yet I would that that joy, should be born from above, that the foundation of it
should be the knowledge of your interest in Gods love. Other joys may make you
have a smiling countenance, but they do not raise and fill the Soul; for I must
tell you, I am far from thinking that every one that laughs, is joyful, and
without fears. Give me a man that knows that God is his portion, and Heaven his
inheritance, that knows with what Friend, and in what a happy state he shall
live in after death; this, this is the cheerful man: such one as this is can
overlook momentany sorrows, he understands full well that the case will be
quickly altered with him; and the thoughts of Eternal happiness do swallow up
his temporal miseries: Tell one of Gods acquaintance, of poverty, he values is
not, as long as he knows he has a brave estate that cannot be confiscated,
riches that none can take from him, a treasure that thieves cannot break through
to, and steal. As for all worldly things, he knows that before a few years are
over, he must part with them however; he is of that man's mind, who having a
considerable sum of money, and precious Jewels hid in his saddle, and a little
odd money in his pocket, was set upon by thieves; who readily went to his
pocket, and took what was there, and looked no further: Now the man scaping
clear with his main treasure, is so joyful that he takes no notice of what was
stole from him. Thus a child of God, if he lose his estate, his liberty, and
all his outward enjoyments, he counts all these but inconsiderable, as long as
his Soul is fafe, his great treasure is out of their reach. Tell him of
torments, racks, flames, or what the policy of Hell can invent, he is not
ignorant of this, that the more he suffers for Christ's sake, the greater cause
he has to rejoice, to be exceeding glad, for great shall be his reward in
heaven, and while they add to his sufferings, they add to his glory; and,
though against their will, while they would injure him, they do him the
greatest kindness; this light affliction works for him, a far more exceeding
and eternal weight of glory. As long as his torments want that dreadful
Epithet, Eternal, he does not much pass; the thoughts of Gods love makes man's
hatred inconsiderable? O how sweet are the thoughts of his Friend, when his
enemies are most bitter. Blessed be God as for those intolerable torments, he
knows it is beyond man's power, and far from Gods will to inflict them upon him,
and so long he cares not much. All other tortures are but a Flea-bite to the
pains of Hell, and an enraged Conscience; he can almost dare the world and the
devil to do their worst, as being confident of this, that as long as he is dear
to God, his Soul is out of their reach. Threaten him with banishment, he
remembers, that he has a friend that will find him out, and bear him company
wheresoever he is. Tell him of the barbarous unkindness and treachery of former
Friends; he reads that his betters have been worse handled by their pretended
Friends; above all, this cheers him, to think that all his Friends will not
serve him so, he has one Friend that will never forsake him, never be
unfaithful to him. Now bring a wicked man upon Earth, that is without his
sorrows, I know there is none, no not one; there is none of them all, but if he
were within the sight of those devouring flames, would tremble. Those that have
wickedness enough to dare God, will not have courage enough to look him in the
face, when he shall appear in flaming fire, to execute vengeance upon the
ungodly; he that will not now be troubled at the doing of wickedness, will be
troubled hereafter at the suffering for it. Let sinners say what they will, I
am sure they cannot be long without fears, to behold Christ, and his dear
Servants coming together in the Clouds with Millions of mighty Angels to judge
the world; I am confident it will be such an amazing sight as cannot choose but
cool their courage, and make the stoutest heart of them all to ache; I am sure
that as light as they make of Damnation, and Gods displeasure, that the day is
coming, when they will believe it was no such cowardice to be afraid of an
angry God, to fly from the wath to come, and to run away from so formidable an
enemy as sin. So that it is clear, that a wicked man will first or last be a
fearful man, a Magor missakib, Fear on every side, shall be his name. But now
he that does exceedingly fear to offend God, need not exceedingly to fear any
thing else; and he that fears no God, has cause enough to fear every thing? O
Sirs, it is a brave thing to be able to take death cheerfully by the hand, and
to walk with him joyfully into another world; and this I say again a man
acquainted with God may do; he has this to comfort him, death does more
properly give him life, then take it away from him; and that as soon as he is
dead his sin shall dye too, and his grace live and act without control; then
he shall live a life, of joy, a life of perfect holiness, such a life as Saints
and Angels live, such a life as Christ lives, the life of God, a life without
death, an everlasting life; and why then should he be afraid of dying? As for
his old Companion the body, it is gone to rest, and will ere long be awakened,
and rise from his bed more vigorous and fit for those Noble employments which
it must be engaged in for ever: and Soul and Body shall meet with more comfort,
then now they part with pain, when the body shall be in another kind of dress
then now it wears, and that also shall in some respects be like the Soul, agil,
holy, immortal. This is such a man that I can call happy, and so ere long will
those that now scorn and persecute him, call him too. Blessed is he that in his
life is holy, and cheerful, but most cheerful and perfect at his death. This is
the happy portion of Gods acquaintance, this is the heritage of the Friends of
the Bridegroom. I have read of a wise man, that would commend, and be thankful
for every thing, because he was sure a friend of his had the management of
every thing, whose understanding was infinite, and whose wisdom was
unsearchable, who could and would work his own honor and his Friends comfort
out of every thing, yea, though seemingly evil; for the greater the evil seems
to be, the greater will be the real kindness which makes so much good out of
it. O but I have lately lost many of my most near and precious relations? If
thou art one of Gods Friends, let me tell thee for thy comfort, you will meet
them at your Friends house, when you come thither. It was no unsuitable advice
that he gave to his Friend Lucilius, to cheer him up after the loss of a dear
Friend, Let us consider my dear Lucilius, that we our selves should be glad to
be in that place, and to enjoy that company, which you are so sad that your
Friend is gone to; and he that you say is lost, is not so, but happy before you.
We do not judge rightly of things. Well then, would you know what a man is?
would you pass a true estimate of him, and understand his worth and value? Why
then consider the man without his riches, lay aside his honors, take away all
his externals from him; nay further, lets see the man raked out of his body,
and how does the Soul look? is it now rich, beautiful, joyful? can it stand
confidently before God? does it appear cheerfully in the presence of it is
maker? Why, this is something; It matters not much whether his body were fed
with Pulse or Dainties, clothed with Rags or Scarlet, it matters not whether
his Soul went out of his mouth, or at a wound; whether he dyed in bed of down,
or in flames. Methinks, by this time you should be ready to think that Religion
is an excellent thing, that Gods acquaintance is desirable, and that no life is
like the life of a Christian, all whose sorrows end in joys, whose miseries
make him more happy, whose shame for Christ will make for his glory; In a word,
whose death brings him into life. This is the generation of them that seek
thee, that seek thy face, O Jacob.

5. Another effect of acquaintance with God, is, That it will make us more
highly to honor him. Here familiarity is far from breeding contempt. Those
that are stangers to God see not his worth and excellency, they honor him not,
but they have the most vile, low, contemptible thoughts of the infinitely
glorious Majesty, and they think any thing will serve his turn, they make more
bold with him then they would do with a man like themselves, they put him off
with the leavings of the world: When they have been feeding their lusts, and
serving their pleasures, and gratifying the Devil all the day long, then they
come between sleep and awake, and pretend a great deal of love to him, and
anger with themselves for their sin, whereas God knows, they do but play the
hyprocrites in all they do, and mean nothing that they say: Lip-devotion,
knee-religion God shall have, and but a little of that too; and that pitiful
stuff that they present him with, they think God is very much beholding to them
for. As for the sanctifying the Lord God in their hearts; as for inward
hearty-love; as for high prizings and admirings of God, as for a real honoring
of God, and worshipping of him in Spirit, and in Truth, it is that which they
understand not; and as for them which do, they laugh at them, as if they were
guilty of the greatest folly in the world. But now he which converseth with
God, beholds such a beauty, excellency, majesty, and glory in him, that it is
ready quite to swallow up his soul; he speaks much of God, but yet he thinks
more; he wonders that a God of such infinite goodness should be no more loved,
that a God of such infinite greatness, justice and holiness should be no more
feared, that a God of such unspeakable power should be no more obeyed; and
while he remembers his own contempt of God in former times, and the too mean
thoughts that he has at present of him, he does even stand astonished to think
that he should be on this side the state of the damned. He that before thought
every thing too much for God, now thinks nothing enough for him. The man is
strangely changed by his new acquaintance, so that he may not improperly be
called a New man, all things are new with him. In honor to this new guest, he
has got on new clothes, he is cl^^ with Righteousness, as with a garment: new
food, it is his meat and drink to do the will of his Father which is in Heaven;
new drink, Wine on the Lees well refined, he draws all out of those wells of
Consolation, the Promises: he has new thoughts, words, and actions; God,
invisibles, and all the things of faith are now Substances with him. Now the
threats or promises of a God are not counted small matters; Heaven, Hell, and
Eternity go for the greatest Realities, because God says they are such. So he
that sometimes lived without God in the world, had no respect at all to his
glory, but valued himself and his most base lust, and the Devil himself before
God, does now respect Gods glory in all that he does, he ventures upon nothing
deliberately, but what may please him; Religion runs through all he does; he
eats, he drinks, and sleeps, and clothes himself, he prays, he works, he
recreates himself with a design for God. The grand project he still is carrying
on, is the honor of God. He will undertake nothing of importance, before he
consult with, and has the advice and direction of his Friend. Whatsoever he
has that is worth any thing, he sends it to this Friend, he presents him with
his first fruits, he sacrifices his male, the best of his flock; desires that
his Friend may be always at his house, and that he may have the best
entertainment that he can possibly give; and he is ashamed at the best, that he
can make him no more welcome, whom he so highly honors; he is grieved that his
entertainment is no better; he would fain give God his first and last thoughts,
his warmest affections; he would gladly have the strength and vigor of body
and soul spent in his service; he studies how to improve all mercies and
enjoyments, for God, to take hold of all opportunities that he can possibly,
and to make the best of them for the promoting that grand Design which he has
on foot, his Honor. He thinks not wife and children, houses and lands, body,
soul, and all that he can make in the world too good for him. Whatever
temptations he conquers, whatsoever sin he slayes, whatsover piece of gallantry
or prowess he has done in his inrods upon Satan's Kingdom, he gives the honor
of all to the valor, conduct, and assistance of this his noble Ally and
Friend. He sets the Crown of the King of Ammon, like Joab, upon the head of
this King David. He has such a high esteem for God, that he thinks nothing
well done but when it is done exactly as he would have it; he thinks every
thing then best, when it is done, according to Gods will: and he counts it no
small weakness to be unwilling that infinite Wisdom rather then folly should
have the managing of all the affairs of the world. He desires to maintain a
quick and lively sense of the Divine Majesty upon his Soul, and that he may
here and hereafter give him, as he has infinite cause, all honor, glory, and
praise.

6. Another effect of this Acquaintance with God is this, It would put
abundance of, life and vigor into the soul; it would, as it were, oil the
wheels, and set them a running. There are none in the world that act at so high
a rate as those do, which are most acquainted with God. O how undefatigable are
they in their pains! with what earnestness and faith do they pray! as if they
saw the glorious God before them, and were talking with him: with what
reverence, seriousness and delight do they read, meditate and hear the Word,
and do all that they do! They know in some measure what it is to present their
bodies and souls as a living sacrifice to God through Christ; they understand
what it means to be fervent in spirit serving the Lord: they will not serve God
with that which cost them nothing, kneeling down, and saying a few formal words
before God in the evening, repeating the Lords Prayer, and the Creed, and the
Ten Commandments between sleeping and waking, doing no body any wrong, and the
like, is not enough to serve his turn, his conscience will not be thus put off;
but he labors with all his might to stir up his soul to lay hold upon God, he
is not content to go off from his knees without his Fathers blessing. This is
the Friend and Acquaintance of God, this is the brave Israelite, that spiritual
Prince that will not let God go till he has prevailed with him. He does not go
to his work, as if he caved not whether he worked or no; he is not sick of the
service of God, but he rejoices and works righteousness; his work is his
pleasure, and he goes on merrily with his business. Those that are intimately
acquainted with God, are not so cold, faint, and dull in the service of God, as
others be. Such a one as knows God very well, and has been often made welcome by
him; why, he comes with a great deal of confidence, and knocks at Gods door,
and, for his part, he will not go away, though the door be not presently
opened, but he continues knocking because he is sure that his Friend is within,
he knows that he is never from home, and that he can never come unseasonably to
him. He comes to Prayer as if he were going to storm Heaven, he gets spiritual
things by violence, he comes to Duty as to fight for a Crown, he is ashamed to
offer the lame and the blind to God, but he chooses for the best in his flock;
he desires to improve his interest in God to the height, this favorite of
Heaven comes frequently to the King to beg some great thing or other, and he is
sure that his Friend will deny him nothing, that it is not a greater kindness
to deny then give; he knows that his King has a large purse, and as large a
heart, and he is not willing to lose such excellent things that are to be had
for the asking for; he is not ignorant that Spiritual things are worth the
seeking for, and therefore he will seek and seek earnestly; he has tried more
then once, and he remembers to his joy, that wonderful things are to be had, if
we will but take pains for them, and prefer our Petitions, or rather get them
preferred by that great Master of Request, the Lord Jesus Christ, and follow
our business close, that it cannot possibly miscarry let it be what it will; the
comfort in enjoying will abundantly pay all the charges we can be at in
seeking; therefore he lays about him as one that is in good earnest; the
confidence that he has in the good will of God, it puts life into all his
petitions. A poor Creature that very rarely injoys any communion with God, that
is very little or not at all acquainted with him, is ready to take up with a
few formal complemental performances, he is weary of his work before he has
well begun it, he is quickly out of breath; but now one that is very well
acquainted with God, is not so soon weary of his company; it may be, he may be
somewhat cold when he sets out, but by that time he has gone a few turns with
his Friend, his blood grows warm, he is sometimes so taken up with God in duty,
that he can scare tell when to have don? O he thinks it is good being there? O
it was a sweet season! These are the actings and experiences some Noble Soul.
I have heard some Christians say, that had not God made it their duty to follow
their callings, they could be glad with all their hearts to do nothing else,
day nor night, but hear the mysteries of Gods love in Christ opened, Read,
Pray, Meditate, and be immediately engaged in the service of God, Sure
something is the matter with these persons more then ordinary, that their
Palate should be so Spiritualised, as that it is their Food, their Wine, their
Dainties, to be actually employed in the great acts of Religion. The more any
one is acquainted with God, the more delight he takes in the Ordinances of God;
as one of Gods Children, he desires the sincere milk of the word: before he was
acquainted with God, he found it far otherwise; then nothing almost would down
with him, the pure word could not be relished, except it was adulterated with
flourishes of humane wit. He had very little appetite to good wholesome Food,
his stomach was ready to turn at it, except it were so cook't and sawc't, and
set out, that an understanding man could scarce tell what to make of it! What
do you say to this, you that are so faint and cold, in what you do, in the
service of God? Come a little nearer, get better acquainted with God, and you
shall find such entertainment from him, that you will scarce be able to keep
long from his house; get often into his company, and you shall feel, your Soul
strengthened with new spirits, animated with a strange life, Heat and Warmth.
You will not complain that the Sabbath is the longest day in the week; you will
not say, what a weariness is it? When will the new Moons and Sabbaths be at an
end? But you would think long till the Sabbath day come, and when it is come,
the pleasure that you take in the work of that day would make you to think it
the shortest day, and gone too soon; and when you have spent it in the most
diligent attendance upon God, you would wish it were to begin again, or that
you were to begin such a Sabbath, that would never have an end. This is the
condition of one that is very intimately acquainted with God; his nearness to
his Master, makes him to follow his work, and he knows he shall lose nothing by
it; something will be coming in ere and anon, which will more then quit his
cost: So that when God calls, he is at hand, and readily answers, Speak Lord,
for thy Servant hears. When God has any message, any hot service to do, he
accounts it his great honor to be employed in it, and says, here I am, send
me. I believe he that spoke it (Ar. Ep. l. c. 9.) might be a little confident,
when he said, Lay what thou will upon me, O God, I have power to bear it, it
shall not be my Burden, but my Ornament: Yet I am persuaded one that is
acquainted with God, can say it, and say it again in good earnest; Lord what
will thou have me to do? will thou have me to preach for thee, to run through
Fire and Water for thee, to dye for thee, to go or come? O Lord do but bare me
company, and give me strength, and it shall be don: I can do all things through
Christ that strengthens me. This is one of Gods Champions, he watches, he
keeps upon his guard, he fights stoutly, he stands his ground, in every thing
he demeans himself gallantly, he quits himself like a Soldier of Christ; and
that which makes him thus valiant, is because he is so near his Captain. Ask
Epictetus what made Socrates do as he did, and he will tell you ( l. 3. c. 22)
It was because he was a Friend of God, his Servant, and partaker of his
Kingdom. This is strange Language of a Heathen! but had he known what it was to
live under the most lively sense of Gods love, to have had such intimate
converse with him, as some Christians have had, what would he have said? As for
the Saint that keeps close to God, he keeps close to duty; his work is to
serve, love, and praise God: this is his business, both by himself, and with
others.

7. Another excellent effect of this acquaintance with God, is, it will make a
man Patient under all the dispensations of Gods providence, in all conditions
to be content, in quietness to possess his Spirit: Acquaintance with God will
make him be at peace, not to open his mouth against God, whatsoever he lays
upon him. What was it that kept such a calm in Paul's heart, when there was such
a constant storm without him? was it not his sense of his interest in Gods
love? though all the world were his enemies, yet as long as Christ was his
Friend, he does not care; though men and devils be against him, yet if God be
for him, he passes not much upon it: though men be never so unjust: yet God
will never be so, that is his comfort. It Is a small matter for him to be judged
with man's judgment, as long as he is sure that God will acquit him; he knows
that justice it self will do him no wrong, infinite goodness could not be
unkind, and that wisdom it self could work glorious effects out of these
things, which the world call evil; if he do receive evil at the hands of God,
he is confident he deserves more; if it be good, and but a little, he is
thankful, because he deserved none at all. Let the worst come to the worst, if
all the Devils in Hell, and all his instruments upon Earth should combine
against him, as long as he is sure of the love of God, and that none of them
all, can pluck him out of the Arms of the Almighty, he is not very much
concerned; Heaven will make amends for all: whatsoever he suffers, it is
nothing to the displeasure of a God, it is nothing to everlasting burnings. He
believes that if his persecutors did know what he knows, they would as soon eat
fire, as do as they do; therefore he rather pitties them, then is angry with
them, as seeing that their day is coming! How seldom have you eitheir Paul or
Silas complaining of their sufferings! How rarely bemoaning their condition?
And what is it that makes them so patient? what have they to sweeten such
bitter draughts? Why, God loves them; and so long, they do not much care though
others hate them. Man's frown cannot sink a Soul to Hell, nor his favor make one
happy for ever. It is but a little while, and all tears shall be wiped away
from their eyes. The kindness, and faithfulness of God is enough to make a man
cheerfully to hold up his head, when all the world is against him: When the
most Spiritual Christians do complain, it is more of themselves, then of their
persecutors! O my unbelieving heart! O that I should love God no more! O that
my heart should be no more taken up with the great things of Eternity! This is
the condition which those that are most Spiritual, are in Poverty,
Imprisonment, Banishment, and all these things which most call dreadful, when
they come to a man that is much in Communion with God, they find him Patient,
Meek and Calm, these are not the things which put him upon the rack; God is his
Friend, and that answers all.

8. Another glorious effect of Acquaintance with God, is, That it will make all
our enjoyments doubly sweet. He has what he has in love; he need not be
afraid of poison in any of those Dainties which comes from his dearest Friends
Table; he may eat his meat with a joyful heart, and not tremble for fear of the
reckoning at last; what he enjoys is freely given him; all his Dishes have this
brave Sauce, they are seasoned with Love, and come out of the hand of a Father.
He that is the great Proprietor, has given him leaven to use these things, and
has promised also to give him better things then these. He knows that this is
not his portion, that this is nothing to what he shall possess; it is no small
comfort to him, to think that he shall never want any thing that is needful for
him, or that if he be brought into some exigences, he has a Friend that he can
go to when he will, and be heartily welcome; he has a portion, an estate in
another Country that can never be spent, though he live at never so high a
rate, and the more he spends upon it, the greater it is; he has a key to that
storehouse which can never be emptied; he has an interest in him in whom all
fullness does dwell: his Friend is noble, let him but ask and he shall have,
seek and he shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto him. God is so free
that he takes care of all his creatures; yea, so great is his Royal Bounty,
that it does largely provide for his enemies? and shall his friends, his
children starve? Has he not done so in ancient days? when his people were in
the wilderness he sent them their Diet from his own house, he fed them with
Angels food. But if this should not be, if he kept them short, that may be done
with as great kindness to them as the former: fasting may fatten the soul more
then feasting does the body; and this makes all welcome. if he have a great
deal, he rejoices to think that he shall have more still one day; if he have
but a little he is satisfied; and so his condition is made more comfortable to
him, then the greatest enjoyments of the wicked are to them.

9. Another effect of this Acquaintance with God, is, That it will make a man
wise. He that before he was acquainted with God had not the wit to know his
Friends from his Foes, by his converse with God is made more wise then the
great Sages and grand Politicians of the world. Upon his acquaintance with God,
he is soon able to know right from wrong, to distinguish between good and evil.
He has now the wisdom to look after the salvation of his soul, to seek the
Kingdom of Heaven in the first place, and not to be laughed and jeered into
Hell. He is so wise, that he does outwit the Devil himself; he does get so much
wisdom by his acquaintance with God, that God will reveal many of his great
secrets to him. I know one my self that was little different from those which
are commonly called Naturals, whom when the Lord had wonderfully wrought upon,
and brought near to himself after his converse and acquaintance with God, his
very natural understanding was exceedingly refined, and afterward he became
more discreet and fit to manage worldly affairs. But however this be, I am sure
the knowledge of God gives understanding to the simple. A good under standing
have they which love the Lord: and the fear of the Lord is the beginning of
wisdom. Converse with men of wisdom does not a little improve a man; but
converse with the wise God it makes a strange alteration indeed, they are made
wise unto Salvation. Of such as these David thought it best to make his privy
Council. These are the persons that are the fittest to advise with in
businesses of the greatest importance in the world; they have learned the art
of managing the affairs of greatest concernment with the greatest care and
prudence. I know the wise world usually look upon these persons, as the veriest
fools living. To converse with God, to take all possible care to make their
calling and election sure, to do what one can to be happy for ever, goes
amongst them for a ridiculous thing, and more then needs. But it is no great
matter, they will not be beat from their work thus; they should be fools
indeed, if such things as these should make them turn their backs upon God;
they will not be jeered out of Heaven, they pass not upon man's censures. He is
wise that God calls so, and he will be sound to be a fool which God faith is
so. As for the man that is acquainted with God, all his actions speak him a man
of prudence, one that has a deep reach with him, he is a man of an excellent
foresight, he sees the clouds a gathering a great way off, the storm before it
rises, and he hides himself, in him are hid the treasures of wisdom, he makes
no foolish choice, he is a child of wisdom; he does in some measure understand
himself, and knows where his interest lies, and is faithful to it; he makes no
foolish bargains, when he parts with Dung for Diamonds, Brass for Gold, Earth
for Heaven, Sin for Holiness, present short-lived Pleasures for sure and
everlasting Delights, the Devil for God. How say you, ye mad Gallants, that
look upon the Saint as a Fool, and Religion as a ridiculous thing? Are these
such foolish actings? is it so undiscreet a choice to prefer Heaven before
Hell? If this be to be a fool, I wish I were more such a fool; if this be so
contemptible a thing, O that I may yet be more vile! Let me say further, as
great a folly as it is, there are none of you all, but ere long will wish you
had been such fools. A few years will make you all of another mind, when you
see what those that you counted fools have got, and what you with your wisdom
have lost; then let us hear you calling them fools for choosing Christ for their
portion; and your self wise for despising him, and choosing of this present
world for your portion. Now, it is their being acquainted with God, that has
made them thus wise; time was, that they were as very fools as any in the
world, till they fell into Gods company; and ever since that, they have acted
with a great deal more prudence: their being much in Gods company has much
improved them. They may thank God for all that skill that they have attained
to; for he it is that teached them, he is always at their elbow to direct them;
when they are about to be cheated, he whispers them in the ear, lets them
understand the fraud; and when God speaks, they lissen to his counsel. It was
no falsehood which Seneca spoke (though he understood not the meaning of this
Doctrine of Reconcilitation) in the commendation of Wisdom. Wisdom (faith be)
is a great spacious thing, it instructs us both in Divine and Humane things, it
teaches a man how to demean himself in relation to things, past, present, and
to come: it informs him about things that are fading, and things that are
lastening; and by it he knows how to put a true estimate and value on both:
this learns one the difference between Time and Eternity. Thus far Seneca, But
where is this Wisdom to be found? not in Aristorle nor Plato's writings. The
grand Maxims of this Wisdom were little understood in the Peripatetick or
St^ick schools, Flesh and Blood, Humane Wisdom improved to the height, reveal
not these things to us. Where then is this Wisdom to be found? and where is the
place of understanding? man knows not the price of it naturally. The Depth
says, It is not in me, it cannot be got for Silver; etc. Destruction and Death
say, we have heard the fame thereof with our ears. There is talk of Wisdom in
Hell, there they can say what reports were made to them of the Excellencies of
Christ, and how earnestly they were offered to be instructed in the ways of
Wisdom. But in Hell there is Wisdom, though the world of them, which by their
wisdom, knew not God be there: where then is wisdom? God understands the way of
it, and he teaches man wisdom, and those that will come to him, submit to his
instructions, may learn: the Lesson is short, yet learnt but by few; he tells
man, that to fear and love his Maker, and to be brought into Union, Friendship,
and Acquaintance with God, that is Wisdom, and to depart from iniquity, that is
understanding, Job 28.12.13, 14, etc.

10. Another effect of this Acquaintance with God, is* It will make a man rich.
As soon as any one is acquainted with God, he is set in a thriving way. Man at
the first had his estate in his own hands, and he kept up his Trade for a
little time, and but for a little time; for though his stock was great, yet
meeting with the Serpent that great Cheater, he was miserably overreached, and
so sadly impaired in his Spiritual Estate, that he broke presently; and had not
Jesus Christ stepped in and bayled him, and been his surety, he would soon have
had all his Creditors upon his back, and have been laid up in that dismal
prison, till he should have paid the utmost farthing; but through the kindness
of Christ the grand Creditor had patience and offers to make up the business,
and to compound upon better terms then the sinner could possibly expect.
Christ undertakes to heal the infinite breach, to bring God and Man acquainted,
and to set him up again, in case he will but accept of the gracious terms of
agreement; and thus undon man that was before in a beggarly condition, upon his
return to God, is set in a better way then ever; God his Friend now takes such
order for him, that he shall be sure never to break again; he will be his
Cash-keeper, he will have the oversight of all, he will teach him such an art,
that he shall be sure to get by every thing that he trades in, he shall gain by
his losses, grow rich by his poverty, and drive the best trade it may be, when
he is forced to shut his Shop doors, I mean in a time of a violent persecution.
Whatsoever losses or crosses come, he is sure he shall never be undon as long
as his Friend has so great a bank; he has a key, and he can go to an infinite
Treasury, when he pleases, and fetch out supplies for any exigencies or
occasions; and when all those that made such a great show in the World, and
that were taken for Merchants, that were exceeding well to pass, shall be
proclaimed Bankrupts, and be found not worth a Farthing, and be carried to
prison for debt; then he has money in his purse, coin that will go current in
any Country. In the mean time, though he be thought to be worth nothing, to
drive but a pitiful poor trade, yet when he comes to dye, and when an exact
inventory is taken of all that he is worth, he is found worth thousands: and no
wonder when he has such a Partner, that will be sure to see that his business
shall be managed to the best advantage, and that he shall never be out of
purse; upon this account, the man cannot choose but thrive; he will have
something to show for his gains, when others have nothing, When the rich ones
of the world shall be begging a drop of water, he is at the fountain. If we
should take a surview of that man's estate, that is acquainted with God, you
must lift up your eyes to those everlasting Hills, you must look East, West,
North and South; all this is his, things present, and things to come; mount up
to the top of Carmel, your sight is too short, you see not the hundredth part
of his inheritance, all this is nothing, he has a brave estate in another
Country; he is rich in Bills and Bonds, when he comes to age, he will have no
man know what falls to him; and whence has he all this wealth, has he not got
every penny of it since he was acquainted with God? But I shall be but brief
upon this Head, because I have handled, what might have fallen in here before;
but the world laughs when I speak at this rate, and think that I am much
mistaken; the godly man rich! that is strange! what, rich with scarce clothes to
their backs; rich, and fare so hardly; rich, and possess nothing! this is
strange wealth. I grant it, it is so, for their estate is in invisibles; it is
not he that possesses much, but he that wants little, is rich: Will you call
nothing riches, but Gold and Silver, and Houses and Lands? is Virtue, Grace,
Holiness no riches? And will you call these little because he has not so much
trouble and vexation with his estate as some have? is Heaven, Glory, the
everlasting enjoyment of God nothing? Is the possessing that which is more
worth then a thousand worlds, no riches; If to have all things that are good
for them; If to have more then their hearts can conceive; If to be filled with
all Spiritual plenty, be counted poverty; let me be thus poor, rather then
enjoy the Revenue of all the Princes, and great Ones of the World? And what do
you think of this, you that are worth never a penny? Are you desirous to have a
great Estate? you that go backward, and get nothing, would be set in such away,
as that you may be sure never to break? Why then, get acquainted with God, and
you cannot but grow rich.

11. Another glorious effect of acquaintance with God, is, that it makes a man
like God, which is the top of the Creatures honor. Company is of an
assimulating nature. He that before was unholy, and like the Devil; by
conversion to God, and converse with him is made holy like God. He that before
was cruel, fiery, unmerciful, by his acquaintance with God is made kind, meek,
and lovely. He that in his natural state, was a Nonconformist to the Laws of
his maker, when he is well studied in this point, is the stiffest Conformist,
he sticks close to the righteous Cannons of the holy God, and will not by his
good will turn to the right hand, or to the left. He that was sometimes very
unlike God, when he is brought nigh unto him, his countenance is changed, his
features are altered, and the lineaments of Gods image appear very lively in
his face; and the more he is in Gods company, and the older he grows, the more
he grows like him. O how does such a one shine! what a Majesty, Glory, and
Beauty is there in is face! the oftener he comes to God, the more he is taken
with his Excellency, the more he labors to imitate him. He studies what God
is; and as far as his nature is capable of it in this life, he desires to be
like him. If God be true and faithful, he dare not be salse; but he will hate
the way of lying; if God be free and bountiful, he thinks it very ill becomes
one of his children to hide his face from his own flesh, to shut up his bowels,
to be void of natural affection. If purity be so eminent in God, he knows that
impurity would not be commendable in himself. In a word, he desires in every
thing to carry himself, as one whose highest ambition is to speak, act, and
think as one that would be like God. It was bravely spoken of him ( Sen. 3.73.)
especially if we consider what the man was, who told his Friend that called him
to Heaven in compendium, To get as much happiness as this place, this soul,
while in this body is capable of; that is, to get God for his Friend, to be
like him. This is a short cut so glory, a Soul carried to Heaven, or Heaven
brought down to the Soul. A full and perfect conformity and likeness to God is
the very Glory of Glory; and a partial conformity to him upon earth, is his
unspeakable honor in this life, O were men and women better acquainted with
God, they would sparkle and shine in their Generation, so that their enemies,
should be forced to say, that a Saint is another kind of Creature then a
sensual sinner. O why stand you then so far off from God! come nearer him, and
the rays of his glorious Image will reflect from your lives! Be acquainted with
him, and you shall be like him; keep much in his company by Faith, secret
Prayer and Meditation, and you will be more Holy, Divine, Spiritual.

12. The last effect of this acquaintance with God, which I shall name, is
this, it will make a man better, far more Excellent in all states, and
relations; all his Friends will have the better life with him, the whole
Family, it may be where he dwells, will fare the better for him? If he be a
Child; he is more dutiful to his Parent then he was, while he was unacquainted
with God? If he be a Servant he is more diligent and Faithful then before, he
serves not with eye service, but does what he does with singleness of heart, as
unto the Lord? If he be a master, it makes him more exemplary, and makes him to
take care that his Household should serve the Lord; he had rather his servants
should make bold with him then God, he is concerned for the honor of God in
his Family, as much as his own; if he be a Father, he is careful to bring up
his children for God, he is more Spiritual in his affections to them, and
desirous to leave them God for their Father, Friend, Portion; as he is a
neighbor, he follows peace with all men, and holiness, because he has seen
God? How sweet and amiable does acquaintance with God make a man! how ready to
heal divisions! how full of goodness and charity! how ready to do good unto
all, but especially to those that be of the Household of Faith! how
compassionate, and tenderhearted! how ready to provoke others also to love,
and good works: so that the whole Parish lives the quieter, all the poor fare
the better, all the neighborhood, some way or other is beholding to him: one
that knows God himself, does what he can to get others acquainted with God too?
how sweetly does he commend the way of wisdom? with what earnestness, and pity
does he plead with sinners, and labor to teach transgressors, the paths of
God, that sinners may be converted unto him. How does he set before them the
necessity of a change, the danger of their present state, and the excellent
qualities of this Friend, that he would bring them acquainted with, telling
them, that time was, that he also was as they are, and thought his condition as
safe as they do their's: but that it pleased the Lord by his word to open his
eyes, and to reveal to him the need that he had of Christ, and to enable him to
accept of him, and to prize him above the whole world. In all conditions, and
relations, he commends Religion, and shows that godliness, where it is in the
power and life of it, is a brave thing, which makes so great an alteration in a
man for the better? If he be sick, he rejoices, and thinks cheerfully of
death, the grave and Eternity: and in this state demeans himself so, that
standers-by, cannot but be convinced of the reality of invisibles, and to think
sure there is something more then ordinary in acquaintance with God, which
makes men so undaunted, and with so much gallantry to meet death; sure their
condition is better then ours, or else they could never be so joyful at such a
time as this is: Then he tells of the use of a Christ, the benefit of a
Redeemer in a dying hour, and how infinitely it is for their interest, in Time
to provide for Eternity? if he be well, he desires to improve his health for
God, and to serve his Maker with the strength of Body, and Soul. If he be poor,
he shows a pattern of Patience, Meekness, Thankfulness, and lets the world
understand that godliness with content is great gain? if he be rich, he desires
to be rich in good works also, and to trade with such trifles as Gold and
Silver, for rich commodities, as Grace, Peace and Glory: with the things of
this world, for the things of another: To lay up for himself Treasure, which
neither Moth can corrupt, nor Thieves break through, and steal: and to make to
himself a Friend of the unrighteous Mammon: to be a Faithful steward of those
Talents that his great Lord and Master has committed to his trust: he shows
how great a good it is to be great and good too. This is the man which does
adorn the Gospel: this is the Christian which does credit his profession; this
it is to be intimately acquainted with God! O how useful might men and women be
in their generations, were they but more in Gods company? O what a savor would
there be of their Graces in the place where they live? How would poor Creatures
that receive good by their holy counsels, and suitable lives, bless God for the
day, that ever they were born, and adore that goodness, which brought them near
such and such a one, by whose means God has brought them out of the Vassalage
and Captivity of Satan, and by whose help they have got acquainted with a
Friend that is more worth to them then a world; for one that has God for his
Friend, cannot but desire that others also should have an interest in him; they
know how ill it will go with them that know not God, and this makes them to do
what they can to bring God and man acquainted; they would make those that are
good better, and them that are bad good? if those that he converseth with, or
stands related to, were enemies, he lets them know that a Christian can love
him dearly, whose sin he hates entirely, and that a child of God can pity
them, that have no pity at all for him. I might add how often are a great many
wicked ones spared from temporal judgments, for the sakes of the righteous
that are amongst them.

III. HEAD OF MOTIVES.
The next Head of Motives to enforce this Exhortation, might be taken from the
danger of not being acquainted with God. If you could live securely without
God, and be in a safe condition, though you still remained a stranger to him,
the business then were not so very considerable; if you could find any in
Heaven that could do as much for you as God can, I should not be so earnest
with you to get an interest in his favor; if you could by any means possible
be everlastingly happy any other way, if without this Friend get to Heaven, and
without his Alliance avoid utter ruin, I should have had the less reason to
use so much importunity; I might then possibly have spared my self the trouble
of speaking these things, and you the trouble of hearing of them. But when I
see and know that it is as much as their life and soul is worth, to slight and
undervalue the Motions that I am now a making to you in Christ's stead, how can
I with any faithfulness and love to your souls hold my peace? How can I stand
looking upon men and women that are about to murder their own souls, and
forbear crying out? How can I endure to see poor Creatures running with all the
speed they can to that dismal place, from whence there is no Redemption, and
not endeavor to stop them? Would you have me so cruel to your souls; as not to
tell that which does infinitely concern their well-being? for, let me tell you,
God will not stand neuter, he will be either for you, or against you; he is the
Lord of Hosts, and he will fight on one side or other. Now see to your matters,
as the nature of them does require. What do you think of having a God a against
you? if God be against you, who will be for you? There is no peace, says my
God, to the wicked. The safest conditions you can be in, while God is your
enemy, is sadly hazzardous; such a one hangs by a twined thread over
everlasting flames; he stands upon the brink of that bottomless pit, and one
shove, one slip, sends him going for ever; he stands upon a pinnacle, which one
little blast may blow him off, and then where is the man to all Eternity? if he
fall thence, there is no rising again; if he once go into that other world,
there is no recovery of him, if one would give a world to bring him back again.
I say it again, if God be not your Friend, he will be your Enemy: and what do
you think of such an Enemy? It is but a word, a look, and they fall. Let me
tell you, that except you speedily humble your selves, you shall find that we
do not make the danger greater then it is: according to his fear so is his
wrath: you may know soon enough to your cost, what the displeasure of a God is,
how dreadful his arrows, how sharp his sword. Not a man of them shall escape
that will not accept of peace upon his terms, and that quickly too. O that
will be a sad day, when God shall say, Bring them out and slay them before my
face. If God be your enemy, who do you think will be your friend? To which of
the Saints or Angels will you fly? where will you go for shelter against the
storm of that terrible one? what armor will defend you from the dint of his
weapons? what in the world can stand that man in any stead that has such an
Adversary? especially when he comes to give his definitivesentence against him
for high Treason. Dives may say, Father, and Abraham, Son: but what comfort for
all that had the miserable Child from his holy Father? does he not in stead of
cooling his tongue with a drop of water, lay more burning coals upon it, and if
it be possible, make the heat of it greater: son, remember that thou in thy
life time had thy good things. Thus Abraham by putting him in mind what his
condition was, makes him with the greater sorrow to feel what it is. The memory
of former joys under present sorrows, make them sting the more. Well then, if
you would not hereafter reflect with an aching heart upon your lost enjoyments,
think with a serious and thankful heart of the present offers, that you may in
Eternity reflect with joy upon your short sorrows in time. If you will not be
acquainted with God, you shall be acquainted with the Devil, and know whose
company is best by woeful experience, If you will not believe his Word, you
shall feel his Sword. If his kindness and goodness will not melt you, his power
and justice shall break you; for be that now is so patient, will ere long roar
like a Lion, and tear in pieces, and there shall be none to deliver; he will
break his stubborn enemies with a rod of iron, and dash them in pieces like a
potters vessel. Those that will not know his love, shall know something else; I
will not say what, for it is inexpressible. But only this remember, It is such
a God that you will have to deal with, before whom the mountains quake, and the
hills remove out of their places, before whom the great Tyrants, of the world
have fallen; and shall you stand? Where are all those Giants? Where are the
inhabitants of the old World? What is become of Nimrod that mighty hunter, and
all his fellows? Where are all those daring sinners, that scorned to accept of
a pardon, mercy and peace, and which had the courage to grapple with
omnipotency it self? who got the day? who had the worst of it at last? and art
thou stronger then they? is thy power greater, thy understanding deeper, thy
Allies more considerable then theirs? A fly may be too hard for Pharaoh; but
Pharaoh can never be too hard for God. Because judgment is not speedily
executed against thee, thou think therefore it may be it is because God
cannot deal with thee, and upon this account thy heart is fully set in thee to
do wickedly; but know thou, for all this that God will bring thee to judgment.
Consider this, that as far as it seems to be now, the winds may rise, the
clouds may gather of a sudden, the Heavens may be overcast in a moment; and
what will you do then? when Heaven and Earth shall be in a Flame; then you will
be scraping acquaintance with God, then you will be glad to be owned by him,
then you would willingly Christ should take notice of you, and say, You blessed
of my Father; then you will stand at the door and knock, and cry, and pray, and
plead, and say, Lord, Lord, have I not been often at thy house? have I not eat at
thy table, and taught in thy name in our streets? and yet thou shall be
dimissed with this short and sharp answer, Depart, I know you not. How do you
like such an answer as this is? how will you take it when you stand begging at
the door for one crumb of mercy, one drop of Christ's blood, to be sent away
with a bitter scorn and denial, or else to be answered with silence? Whereas
you were invited to the feast as well as those that went in, and you would not
hear, though God sent messenger after messenger to setch you, you thought your
oxen better company then your God, you took more pleasure in your dogs, then in
the hunting after those nobler things. What do you think of such expostulations
as these? what replice can you make to these accusations? ere long you will
find these things realities; ere long all your friends will be dead and gone,
and if they would help you, they cannot; your estate will be consumed. your
houses will all be burnt, all your attendants, except care and fear, will
shortly forsake you, your Gold and Silver will not ere long be worth a rush;
and what will you do then? nay, the greatest friends that you had will become
your enemies. Little do you think, as kind as they seem to be, what your good
fellows, the World, and the Devil will do against you; Little do you think how
false your friends will prove when it comes to that, that they see that all is
going? then they also will help forward your ruin. Those that you durst have
trusted your life with, will accuse you and help to cast you. Those which
encouraged to sin, will witness against for sin. Your good Fellows, your
Confederates in wickedness, your dear Friends, that you loved more then God,
that you did not spare to venture your life and soul for. O it will make your
heart ache to see such come in against you, which you thought loved you so
dearly! O to have a Wife, a Child, a Husband, an old Friend to come before the
Judge, and to make known such things as you hoped had been buried for ever. It
will make your ears to tingle, to hear one crying our, Lord, if it had not been
for him, I had turned and repented; it is long of him that I am in this woeful
condition; I was resolved many a time and often to seek after another world, and
to provide for my soul, but he would not let me alone, when I began to be
serious, he laughed and jeered me, and would never be at quiet till he had made
me as bad as himself; he carried me from the Alehouse to the Tavern, from
thence to a Playhouse, from a Playhouse to a Whore-house, from thence to the
Highway, from thence to the Gaol, from the Gaol to the Gallows, and from
thence I came hither; and I may thank him for all this. O how will men look
when they see the best friends that they had, come in thus against them! this
it is to trust to faithless friends; this it is to make light of acquaintance
with God. Your Gold and Silver will be a witness against you, and will eat your
flesh as with a canker; your Children, Relations good and bad, will speak
bitter things against you; your own Family, will curse you, and say, Lord, we
never heard any thing of God, except in an Oath from his mouth; we never heard
any thing of Religion, except it were in derision of it in his Family; and
those of us that were a little serious, and began to think of our souls, he
would snib and brow-beat, and never give us a kind look till we did as he did;
nay, the Devil who now does so much flatter sinners, and make them believe that
he is so much their friend, will then show himself; he will then be as cruel as
he now seems kind; he that now tempts to sin so impetuously, will hereafter
accuse for sin violently, and torment for sin unmercifully. The people of God
which weep over sinners, and pray for them, and wish them well with their
souls, will then see justice executed upon their nearest Relations, without the
least sorrow; nay, they also will come in against them too, and say, Lord I
told them of this woeful day, O Lord thou know I forewarned them of that
which is now come to pass, I pleaded with them with all the compassion that I
could, and they scorned my pity, they would not pity themselves, but made
light of that glory which they are going from, and of that Hell that they are
going to; and now, O Lord, thou art just and righteous, that thou have thus
judged them. This will be the language of those that are your best friends; the
people of God they will be your enemies one day, if you will not now mind the
making of your peace with God; they must and will, be on Gods side against all
the World, they must and will take part with their Friend, and clear him when
he judges, and justify him when he condemns you. O that you that are now
strangers to God, would but consider of these things! O that you would but
think what this battle may be, where the combatants are so unequal. Stand still
O Sun in the valley of Ajalom, till the Lord have avenged him of his enemies:
Muster your selves. Oye stars, and fight in your courses against those
miserable sinners, that have waged a war against their Maker; plant your mighty
Cannons, shoot down huge Hailstones, Arrows of fire, and hot Thunderbolts? O
how do the wounded fall? how many are the slains of the Lord, multitudes,
multitudes in the valley of Decision, for the day of the Lord is terrible.
Behold Gods enemies falling by thousands, behold the garments rouling in blood,
hear the prancing of his terrible ones, the mountains are covered with Horses
and Chariots of fire. Gods Soldiers run from one place to another with their
flaming Swords in their hands, Armed with the justice of God, jealousy, power
and indignation! O the dreadful slaughter that is made. Millions, millions
fall, there are not able to stand, not one of them can lift up his hand, their
hearts fail them, paleness and trembling has seized upon the stoutest of them
all. The bow of the Lord is strong: from the blood of the slain, from the fat
of the mighty, the bow of the Lord turns not back, the sword of the Almighty
returns not empty? How do the mighty Ones, fall in the midst of this battle! A
hot, battle indeed in which none escape? Who is he that comes from Edom with
dyed garments from Bosrah? This that is glorious in his apparel, and traveling
in the greatness of his strength, the Lord of Hosts is his Name. Wherefore art
thou red in thy apparel, and thy garments like him that treads the wine-fat?
I have trodden the wine press alone, and of the people there was none with me?
For I will tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury, and their
blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my raiment, for
the day of Vengeance is in my Heart, and the year of my Redeemed is come. And I
will tread down the people in mine anger, and make them drunk in my fury, and I
will bring down their strength to the Earth, the band of the Lord shall be
known, the power of the mighty Jehovah shall be felt, and his indignation
toward his Enemies, For behold he will come with fire, and with chariots like
a whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire:
For by fire, and by his sword will he plead with all flesh: and the slain of
the Lord shall be many, and the Saints shall go forth and look upon the
Carcasses of the men that have transgressed against me: for their worm shall
not dye, neither shall their fire be quenched, and they shall be an abhorring
unto all flesh. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and
horrible tempest. This shall be the portion of their Cup! This it is to fight
against God! This it is to defy the Lord of Host! This it is to refuse a peace
that would have been so unspeakably advantageous! To speak a little plainer,
this is all that sinners are like to get by their standing it out against the
tenders of Grace and Mercy. And are you still desirous to engage in this
dreadful war? Will you still bid defiance to the Almighty, and make nothing of
such things as you have heard of? Is the loss of your blood, the loss of your
Soul, your utter undoing for ever, no great matter with you? Well then, go on
bold sinner, Arm thy self Cap-a-pee, gird thy sword upon thy thigh, get thy
shield and buckler ready, prepare to meet thy God: Go up, O thou valiant
Warrior, and let us see thy valor, behold thy enemy has taken the field; go
up, and look thy God in the face if thou dare; come show thy self a mark for
God, and turn not thy back like a coward, venture upon the mouth of the Cannon,
rush upon the thick bosses of Gods buckler, if you long to perish
everlastingly. You have heard what the war will cost you, and as you like it
now, do. And what do you laugh at all this? well then, go on, but be it upon
your peril, your blood be upon your own Soul: As for me I could not have said
much more then I have, to dissuade you from this desperate enterprise; I
foresee what a case you will be in, when you are in the heat of the battle,
and I desire to weep in secret for thee, as one that will most certainly be
undon, if thou do not speedily alter thy mind, wherefore my loins are filled
with pain, pangs have taken hold upon me as the pangs of a woman that
travelleth, I am bowed down at the thoughts of thy misery, I am dismayed at the
seeing of thy destruction. The sinner ventures for all this! He is marched into
the field! Set a watchman; let him declare what he sees. Who meets that
furious wretch? A Lion, a lion roareth, he is torn in pieces, and none can save
him, he is gone, he is gone! he is gone for ever! and who may the mad man thank
for all this? Who could help it? He would venture though he was told as much.
Well then, see what is like to befall the enemies of God: You hear what is like
to be the condition of all them that will not be aquainted with God, First, or
Last, you likewise may behold what a case you your self shall be in ere it be
long, except you do speedily repent of your folly, and meet your adversary in
the way, and humble your self before the mighty Jehovah; speak quickly? What
will you do? Turn, or Burn; Repent, or Dye. Yet you do but hear, you do not
feel; but thousands, and millions feel what the displeasure of God is, what the
breach of his Covenant is, and what effects of a war with the Lord of Hosts is.
O be wise by their falls, let their destruction be your instruction, take heed
what you do, lest you be the next that God shall deal with as an enemy: As yet
God offers to be Friends with you; but whether God will do as much to morrow as
he does to day, I do not know. I tell you but so, it is hard putting it to the
venture. Remember you had large proffers of Grace, and pardon made to you, God
has sent us to let you know his will and pleasure, and we demand of you from
him to give us your answer speedily. And what cannot you yet resolve? Is it so
difficult a business to determine what to fix upon? O foolish people, and
unwise? O unspeakable madness! How just must their condemnation needs be, who
are offered salvation so often, and refuse it? who are so often told of
damnation, and yet run into it? in a word, who might have God for their Friend,
and had rather have him for their enemy.

4. The next head of Motives, by which I might enforce this duty of
acquaintance with God, may be taken from the examples of them which made all
the Friends they can to get acquainted with God. Behold a cloud of witnesses,
which do all with one consent speak high in the commendation of this Friend,
that I am persuading you all that I can to be acquainted with. Are you wiser
then all your neighbors, is the ignorant objection of some that would take it
very heinously, if we should call them fools, when we put them upon a serious
diligence in pursuit of the best things? Why, let me retort this objection upon
themselves, are you wiser then Enoch and Noah? have you more understanding then
Abraham, Isaac and Jacoh? Have you more wit then David? Are you wiser then
Heman, Daniel, and many others of those brave worthies, which were the wonders
of the world, the Non-suches of their age, and a pattern to future Generations?
This was the greatest piece of their wisdom to walk with God, this was the best
of their policy to get so potent an Allie; this spoke them to be men of a
deeper reach, and a larger understanding then others, because they made it
their business to get acquainted with God, and thus to make their interest as
large as Heaven, and their peace and prosperity as sure as the oath of a God
could make it. Do you think that all these men were mistaken? did their wisdom
lie only in a prudent management of their worldly affairs to their best
advantage? what then, did they mean some of them to leave all that they had so
cheerfully upon the command of God? dare you say that they prized the favor of
God at too high a rate? as for their parts, they thought they could never value
such a friend as God too much. What else was the meaning of their longing,
panting, and breathing after him? Why else are they so glad of his company, his
presence? How loath were they to do any thing that might be in the least
displeasing to him? What bitter moans did they make, if he did but withdraw a
while, if he did but a little absent himself from them? how wonderful desirous
were they of enjoying communion with him? how earnest to live in his house for
ever? Dare you say that there were all fools and mad men for refusing the
embraces of this present world, for slghting its smiles, and undervaluing its
greatest kindnesses, and choosing that favor of God, though with the scorns
and reproaches of the world, rather then to hazard his anger, whose wrath burns
to the bottom of Hell. Behold, what a glorious company of these stand upon
mount Zion with Harps in their hands, with those hundred and forty and four
thousand, and the Lamb with an innumerable multitude of all Nations, People,
and Languages. Why all these were of the Friends and Acquaintance of God, or
else they had never had those Crowns, Robes, and Palms in their hands. Now, why
should not our souls be as dear to us as theirs were to them? Will not Heaven
be as good for us as them? is it not as needful for us to get a friend of God,
as them? Will not God do as much for us as them, if we will but do as they did,
walk with him. The truth of it is, the number of them which are saved is but
few, in comparison of the multitudes of them which know not God, and go the
broad way; yet for all that, take them absolutely, they are abundance; so many
that the Scripture says they are innumerable. Do but read over the History of
some of their Lives, turn over the holy Records, look sometimes into those
Sacred Chronicles, and behold how cheerfully they served God, how actively they
followed the Lamb wheresoever he goes, through thick and thin. Hear what their
language is now they are got home fafe, now Christ has brought them to glory,
and they are at their Friends house. What do they talk of? what is their
discourse about? do they complain what a sad journey they had of it through a
howling wilderness, after they had passed the Red Sea, through a thousand
sorrows and trials? do they say that now they are at their journeys end they
are weary, and wish they had never taken so long and tedious a journey? do they
not rather speak the quite contrary, and that if it were to go again they would
do it with far more speed and cheerfulness then they did? Lissen, hark,
methinks I hear them from the walls of the New Jerusalem, crying out, Come
away, come away, fall on bravely, follow your business gallantly but a little
while longer, and the City is your own; fetch your scaling ladders, run up
apace, mount the rampires, fear nothing though the Devil play his Artillery
upon them, yet it is but powder, he shall never give you a mortal would; resist
him and he will flee, and the field is yours; the Spoil, the Crown, the Honor
will pay for your pains, blood, and danger. Fall on brave souls, fall on; the
valianter you be, the more safe you are. Methinks I hear those noble Saints
encouraging of you to get acquaintance with God, and saying to you that are yet
afar off, come near, Come away poor souls, come away, what do you mean thus to
delay? O little do you think what a friend we now find of God; it was but a
little, a very little that was told us of the excellency of Christ, and the
glories of this place, to what we experience; It was no false report that we
heard when we was upon earth, of the happiness of Heaven: O here is a prize
worth the running for; a Kingdom, a Crown worth the fighting for, an Estate
worth the looking after. We have not now our stint; we are not dieted with
those Spiritual Dainties, we have not now and then a sip, a draught, a bit in a
corner, but we are at the fountain, we are daily feasted with infinite
pleasures, our hearts are full, brim full, they run over, we swim in an ocean
of spiritual enjoyments; these things are beyond your capacity now to
understand. Were we to live upon earth again, and did we know what we do now
know, we should ever pine with our earnest longing for God, the living God, to
be in his immediate presence, and to be at that angelical work of praising,
serving, and loving him for ever. Wherefore brethren, let us encourage one
another, Come let us go up to the house of the Lord; his dwelling is in Salem,
his palace is upon mount Zion. Why should not we go on as merrily in the paths
of Wisdom, as the wicked in the road of Hell? How do the Devils Champions
encourage and hearten one another up? How do they laugh, sing and roar, as if
their life were the only life; for shame let us tell them they lie in their
teeth. Who has the best company, they or we? the Patriarchs and Prophets, the
Apostles and thousands of Martyrs are gone finging before some of our dear
Relations, Fathers, Brethren and Sisters are newly welcomed by Christ to his
Fathers house; and they are blessing that rich mercy that has conducted them
to such a place, to such a friend! we have many thousands of Saints Militant
that are going along with us as fast as they can, and God himself will bear us
company, and why do we yet linger? O that we were upon the wing! O that our
souls were like the Chariots of Aminadab! O that the Lord would strengthen poor
short-winded Creatures? O that we could run and not be weary, and walk and not
faint! O that we might have now and then a hearty meal, and that in the
strength of them we could travel to the mount of God! O that that acquaintance
might now be happily begun, which may never have an end! O that God would visit
us often, and get into our hearts? O that he that gave those Worthies in former
times so much grace, would pour out of the same grace in abundance upon our
souls! O that he would shed abroad his love in our hearts! O that we could
maintain a constant intercourse with him here, till we come to a perfect
enjoyment of him in glory hereafter! O that we may see thy face, thy blessed
face by faith! O that thou would cause thy glory to pass before us! O that
thy mavelous loving kindness might be made known to a company of poor
Creatures of us, whose desire is to fear thee, who would fain love thee with
the strength of our souls! O blessed are they that love thee, that are beloved
by thee!.

5. I might also insist upon another Head of Motives, which is named in the
Text, which is this, Acquaint now thy self with him, and thou shall be at
peace. Though there be nothing but War on every side, you shall have peace.
This peace of God, whatsoever you may think of it, is unspeakably advantageous;
the benefits that would accrue to a soul upon this peace are infinite; It is a
peace that passes all under standing. When we have this peace concluded, we
may drive a brave Trade without desturbance for the richest Commodities. If we
were thus acquainted with God, we shall have such a peace as that we may laugh
at the shaking of the spear, and not be much disturbed when we hear of
dreadful things abroad in the World. He that is acquainted with God may safely
venture up and down, he has Gods pass, a strong man of war for his convoy, he
has such powerful allies that he need not fear; as long as he is at peace with
God, he is sure not to be quite overcome by man. He is at peace with himself,
when the Air echoes with Drums and Trumpets, and the roaring of Guns, a
music that pleases the Devils Ear; He may still rejoice, because he has a
bird within, which sings sweetly; there is a harmony between his will and Gods,
a harmony between his heart and his mouth. This is no such contemptable thing,
and if you knew what a wounded Spirit, a fire in the bosom is, you would say
so. This peace that such a one has, is a wel-grounded peace; not such a one as
is built upon ignorance, and hardness of heart; but such a peace as results
from the sense of the pardon of sin, and reconciliation with God, through the
blood of Christ; That blood of Christ has washed his conscience from dead
works. Sins he had, and has, but some of them he sees lying dead like the
Egyptians upon the shore, others striving for life, with a deaths wound upon
them; and though he have enemies still living, yet they are such as shall never
have the absolute dominion over him: as long as the great quarrel between him
and God is at an end, all is well enough, the Law has nothing against him, all
his accusers are silenced; Christ has fulfilled and satisfied the Law for him;
The great Creator has given a full and general acquittance, all debts are
discharged for him, and therefore the man has little reason to trouble his
head much with cares and fears; now he may go up and down any where, and not
fear the Senjeant, his noble surery has paid that vast debt, he has laid down
the ten thousand Talents upon the Nail, so that the man is at peace with God,
he is also at peace with all the Creatures in the world, from the glorious
Angels that are in Heaven, to the meanest insect or plant; they are so far from
doing him any real harm, that they all are servants to the Friends of God, they
all stand ready to oppose their Enemies; and those of them that are mortal are
ready to lay down their lives for one that stands thus related to God. For when
any enters into Covenant with God, God also makes a Covenant for them with the
beasts of the field. Great peace have they that love Gods law, and nothing
shall offend them; such a one is at peace with death and the grave. We read of
some profane Monsters that made a Covenant with death, and were at an agreement
with Hell: but this Covenant will soon be broken, because he that has the keys
of death and Hell, the power of life and death, never subscribed to the
Articles of their agreement. But now the godly man has a Friend that has made
a Covenant for him, a firm Covenant with death, and Hell, so that none of them
shall ever do him the least wrong. As for death, Christ has took out it is
sting; as for the grave, Christ has spiced, and seasoned it, it is Power is
mastered, it is Terribleness is taken away! it is now no prison, Christ has
opened the doors of it, and now it is but a Chamber of repose, a bed to rest
in; and he that has already opened this door, when it was bolted, barred and
double-locked, can and will ere long open it again, and awaken his from their
sleep; and is this inconsiderable? Is not such a peace as this is, desirable?
Who that is well in his wits, would not be glad to be in so secure a condition
as this peace will put him in? And who are like to have the benefit of this
peace, but the Friends of God! O therefore if you value your own peace, if you
would be undisturbed from storms without, and Heart-quakes within: If you would
have all the Creatures it Heaven and Earth, at peace with you: If you would
have Death unstung, and the Grave a Chamber, and not a Prison, why then, get
acquainted with God, and you shall be at peace.

6. The next head of Motives, I might take from these words, Thereby good shall
come unto you. Acquaint your self with him, and be at peace, and thereby good
shall come unto you. But I shall here be but brief. Think of what you will that
is good for you, and if you are acquainted with God, you shall have it for
asking for; or that which is far better than that which you desire: For the
Lord God is a Sun, and a Shield, he will give Grace and Glory, and no good
thing will he withold from them which walk uprightly; that is, from those
that are acquainted with him. All his ways are mercy and truth, to such as be
in covenant with him, and all shall work together for good, to them that love
him. Enlarge thy desires as wide as the Heavens, request what you will, ask
never so much, and you shall have it; And what would you have more? If it be
the good of prosit that you desire; What greater gain than Godliness? Who can
give such rewards to his servants as God? Who will give greater portions to his
children than this Father? Who is like to thrive better than he, who has such
a vast stock, such a great Trade, such quick and great returns, and above all
such a Partner? O that those that are all for profit and gain, that cry out,
what advantage shall it be to me, if I serve God? and what profit to me, if I
am acquainted with him? O that such would but do that which will be most for
their profit, I would desire no more of them than this. O that they would but
try what a gainful Trade Religion in it is power is (...) The greatest Merchants
that ever walked the Exchange, if they be not acquainted with God, and have not
Christ for their Factor, are but Pedlars to the Saint. One that is acquainted
with God, gets more in one Hour, in one Prayer, at one Sermon, in one
Meditation, then all the rich men of the world are worth, put all their estates
together: One receives his peace, the other his pounds; the one has by way of
return a great deal of troublesome Lumber, the other his Box of precious
Pearls, and a Jewel of an infinite value. O little does the laborious worldling
think what poor and small gains his are, when he gets most, to what this
Spiritual Merchant gets; he would not fell what he gets sometimes in one
morning, for all the riches of both the Indies. He trades in such Commodities
which will not suffer damage upon the Sea; his Vessel is light and strong, the
Master of it never made a loosing voyage. All his wares are unvaluable; and
though his ship be in many a dreadful storm, though sometimes she be becalmed,
though it be long before she return; yet as long as she has such Provisions
within, such a Pilot, such Anchors, she cannot miscarry, she will come into the
Harbor Richly Laden: The world will not believe this, but I am sure there is
never a man breathing, but will sooner say, that no gain is like the gain of
Christ and Glory. One return from Heaven, one answer of Prayer, one smile from
God, one look of love, the head of one Goliath, the death of one Sin, one Soul
brought home to Christ, one drooping soul comforted, is a greater mercy (for
all the ignorant world make nothing of such things as these) than to be
invested with the greatest Honors, than to be possessed of all the Riches,
than to enjoy all the Pleasures that the whole world can afford. But O, were
men's eyes opened, were men within sight of those devouring Flames, then they
would believe that a Christ were worth the having; Grace a Pearl that cannot be
overvalued, and that no Trade was comparable to a Spiritual Merchant, no Art
like that, by which one may turn every thing into Gold. But if it be the good
of pleasure you look more after; can there be greater pleasures than those
which are in the presence of God? Can there be any greater pleasures, than to
rejoice in God, and to be made welcome by him, than to drink Flagons of that
excellent Liquour, which is better than wine? Can there be better Music, than
to hear so many Millions of sweet Voices singing Halelujahs! O there is a
Confort! There Is Melody indeed! If you desire that other good, the good of
Honesty, a rare accomplishment, perfection of Grace, purity of Soul;
wherewithal shall a young man choose his ways, but by taking heed thereto,
according to his word. Well then, lay all these Motives together, and let us see
whether they will any whit prevail. If the nature of the person with whom I
would fain have you acquainted, if all these admirable qualities that are in
him (if I may so call them) may signify any thing, if all those glorious
effects of acquaintance with God. weigh any thing with you, one would think by
this time you should be well resolved. If the danger of not being acquainted
with God, may make you afraid of standing it out; if good or evil, if peace or
war, if life or death, If all this be as much as nothing, what then is
something? If the frequent pleading of mercy, if the blood of Christ have any
voice, if the expostulations of his Ambassadors may be heard, Why should you
not then be persuaded? If all this will not move you, what can we say more? If
we could show you Heaven, and the glories of another world, could we let you
see the Face of Christ, could we any way in the world reach you hearts, and
persuade you by any means to mind the things of Eternal peace, we would do it
with all our hearts. If we were sure to get you with us, and to bring you
acquainted with God, we could willingly come begging on our bare knees to you,
and beseech you to be reconciled to God. We see that dismal day a coming, and
are grieved to think, what a sad taking you will be in then; we know the case
will then be altered with them, which will not be persuaded to be reconciled to
God. O what a woeful condition will they be in, which have heard or read these
Sermons, and yet for all that, would not mind the looking after acquaintance
with God! How will such wish that they had never been born, or that they had
their being in some of the dark savage corners of the world, where they might
never have heard of the Doctrine of Reconciliation, being acquainted with God,
and union with Christ, peace with their offended Maker, rather than having
heard of these things to make light of them! O to hear of such a friend, and to
have him for an enemy; to hear of Peace, and to choose War; to hear of Heaven,
and go to Hell, this is sad indeed. It would have been far better for such,
that they had never known the ways of God, than after they have known them, to
go in the ways of Folly. O that men and women had but such serious thoughts of
these things as they will have ere long! O that they would but believe Heaven,
and Hell, and Eternity to be such Realities as shortly they will! O that men's
hearts were but affected with things, as they will be when their souls are just
a going, or a little after they are in another world! But O the miserable
condition of the world! O the lamentable state of Professors, that make no more
of the favor of displeasure of God! Nay, may I not say, O the folly of the
Children of God themselves, that are no more in Gods Company, when they know
they may be so welcome, when they have rasted so often of his kindness, when they
were made so much of the last time that they gave him a visit. Are not men in a
deep sleep, that they do not hear? Are they not blind, that they do not see?
Are they not ignorant, foolish, and mad, that they do not understand their
interest any better? It is not without good reason, that the Spirit of God does
so, often cry out upon sinners for their folly; the Scripture says not in vain,
That there is none that has understanding, no not one. No wonder that they
which have but half a cure see men like trees, that those which never hall a
through work, do not prize Christ. O but that those which have been brought
nigh by Grace, who were sometimes afar off, that such should be so much
strangers; for those that have met with such kind entertainment at his house,
for these to keep off so, to come so seldom, for them which have fed so high at
the Kings Table, to sall to their Trash, their Husks, this is a shame indeed;
as if the Devil kept a better house than God. Christians, does God deserve this
at your hands? How unkindly do you think he takes this from you? What will the
world say? Look how his own acquaintance despise him? How will the Devil
insult? O how do the hearts of your fellow Christians ache, to see how strange
your carriage is? How do they tremble to think, what if that fine House be
built upon the Sand? Christians, you which seldom or complementally visit God,
bethink your selves well what you do, when you begin to be cold in your
affections to this Friend; remember from whence you are fallen, and repent, and
do your first works; remember what entertainment you have sometimes had at Gods
House; forget not all his Kindnesses; of all the Creatures in the world, you
have no cause to carry your selves so toward God. I tell you again, the World
stands by, and looks on, to see what there is in you more than in others; they
mark your lives more than you are aware of, it may be: Wherefore look to your
selves, take heed how you carry your selves before them. O why should they see
your faces pale, when you may feed so highly? O show them by your countenance,
that you feed upon wholesome food! O let your breath smell sweet, let your
discourse be more savoury of the things of God! Labor to maintain a sweet,
constant, unintermitted intercourse with God, to walk with him. O little do you
think what you loose by your coming so seldom to this Friend. I appeal to your
own experience; was not that dish you eat last at his Table sweet? And what do
you think that God does not still keep as good a House as he did? Do you
believe that he has spent all his best Wines? Can that Fountain ever be
emptied? Is there not Bread and good Cheer enough in your Fathers house?
Believe it, God has other kind of Entertainment, richer Cheer, better Fare
still to make you welcome with, if you would not be so strange, if you will but
come oftener to him. As for Christians, methinks I need not use so many words
to persuade you, methinks you that know how sweet his company is, should desire
to be never out of it. Christians, I tell you plainly, if you ever expect true
peace in your life, and true joy and comfort at death, it is your only way to
keep close to God, visit him often by secret Prayer and other kind of Duties, and
then you shall ever and anon meet with that which will sweeten your greatest
diligence, and abundantly make amends for your pains. Knock at his door, ask
for him, and resolve to stay tili he come; though he come not at the first,
second, or third knocking, yet I am sure he is within, and will come at last,
if you will but wait; and when you have once again met with him, O let him not
go, but tell him seriously that you cannot bear his absence, he shall be your
God and Friend living and dying, death it self shall not part you. Go also and
tell your Friends, you have found him whom your soul loves, that you have met
with Jesus, and see if you can get them to come out and see him, bid them to
taste and see how good the Lord is; commend him all you can to your poor
Christ-less Friends. But you are not the persons that I intended to speak to,
only thus a little by the by, that I may a little warm my own heart and yours,
in this great duty of maintaining an intimate close converse and acquaintance
with God. But my business is to go out into the High ways and Hedges, and to
invite poor wandering strangers that have nothing to live upon themselves, and
that do not know what a noble open house God keeps, that never tasted of his
kindness in Christ, to come to this Royal Feast, and to Eat their fill of such
food as they can never eat too much of, never be surfeited with. Vuto you, O
men, I call, and my voice is unto the sons of men. O ye simple ones, understand
wisdom, and ye fools, he ye of an understanding heart, Prove. 8.4, 5. Hear O ye
deaf, and see O blind: let the dead hear the voice of God, and live. Then hear
what I have been speaking of: I have almost done my message, consider well of
these things, as you tender the displeasure of God, as you value your Souls, be
serious; remember what it is, that I have been discoursing to you about, Read
it over again, and study on it; Read and Pray, Pray and Read, and turn this
exhortation into Prayer; take with you words, and say: O that this might be the
Sermon that might bring me acquainted with God! O that this might be the man
that might bring me to some knowledge of Christ! O that this might be the happy
day wherein a Match may be concluded between my soul, and the precious Jesus!
But alas, alas, where are the hearts that are thus smitten? Where are the Souls
that are any white taken with this infinite Beauty? How few have any real love
or good will for Christ? O who has believed our report, and to whom is the Arm
of the Lord revealed? Though I and many hundreds more, have been pleading thus
with sinners; though some of the Ambassadors of peace weep bitterly, that their
message is no more kindly entertained, though their public Preaching be
followed with private Prayers and secret Groans; though they expostulate the
case with poor refractory Creatures, with all the earnestness that they can for
their lives, though we use the most powerful arguments that we can, and deliver
them with all the vehemence, seriousness and compassion that we can for our
Souls; Yet how are the greatest part of our hearers unconcerned? Is not a great
part of our Auditory as stupid and senceless, as the very stones they tread on?
The more is our sorrow; we fear as to the most of them that hear us, what we
speak, is lost. It may be they may be a little affected just at the hearing, or
for an hour or two; but O that these truths might have a lively, and abiding
impression on men's hearts! I fear, O that they were causeless fears! I fear
that most of you that have heard of these things will go away, and quickly
forget what, weighty things you have heard; perhaps some of you may say, the
man was very earnest, and some of his Expressions were piercing. O Friends, I
hope it is not your commendation that I desire? O that I may with a single
heart, respect Gods glory! I say again, I would not be pleased with your
praise, nor would I fear your dispraise; it is your Souls I want, and may but I
manage my great work in this successfully, and see you acquainted with God,
before I leave you for ever, I hope I should be contented to be trod in the
dirt. O that my heart may not deceive me! O that my compassion to your souls
were greater, a thousand times greater! O that I could never speak to you of
such things as these without tears. I must again, and again, profess I am
ashamed of my heart, that it is no more sensible of these weighty affairs! But
O mighty and glorious God, if thou please, thou can out of the mouth of a
Babe and Suckling, ordain strength! O that thou would make the worm Jacob to
thresh Mountains! O that thou would make me of the most unworthy and weakest
instrument, in that bonourable Service of bringing home some Souls to thy self.
O if but any one Soul, if but one Soul that was estranged from God, might by
these lines be brought acquainted with him, if I might prevail with any other
stubborn Enemy to lay down his weapons, and be Friends with him, I should think
my pains well bestowed, though (if that will make you to regard it ever the
more) this work has cost me many an hours study, and it has been interrupted
with many bodily distempers, groans and sorrows, fears and sighs. Yet if after
all my travel, I may hear of any Children born of God; if I may meet but one
soul the better for it, by it brought to Glory, I shall have abundant cause to
bless my God, and to rejoice that my labor has not been in vain in the Lord.
But if I might have more, I should have more cause to adore infinite Goodness,
and rich Grace! O my dear Friends! O precious and immortal Souls! What shall I
say to you? What shall I do for you? O did you but know how hardly I fetch my
breath at this time, did you but see what a crazy Creature he is that writes to
you; did you but know how faint he has been sometimes in speaking to you, you
would go nigh to pity him. O pity your selves! O pity your own Souls, that
ere long must be turned naked out of your Bodies, and hear the expostulations
of a dying man that would gladly live with you in everlasting glory, and meet
you all among the Friends of the Bridegroom, that I may see you among the Sons
of God, in your great meeting, when the Father shall send his Servants the
Angels to fetch all his children home to his own house. O pity your Souls, and
let not all my pains be lost, trample not under your feet the blood of the
Covenant, neither count it a common thing, remember that the slighting of
Christ is a dangerous thing, the loss of his favor, and the loss of your soul,
must go together? O how shall I leave you? How shall I part with you, shall I
go before my work is done? What shall I say more? What arguments shall I
further make use of? O that I knew what to say, that I might prevail! And are
you still resolved to put me off with frivolous excuses? Can you put off your
consciences thus? Are you still contented to be Aliens and Strangers? If you
are, know this, that I must leave these lines to bear witness against you;
Remember this, that you were told of these things again and again. Those that
can forget Sermons here, shall remember them hereafter; if you be not the
better for this discourse, you will curse the day that ever you heard it; it
will be a cutting reflection, when another day you shall say to your own Soul,
at such a time, such a one did beseech me in Christ's stead to be reconciled to
God, and I would not: Cursed man that I was! I made nothing of all the offers
of Grace and Mercy, I made little account of these intolerable Torments which
now make me to gnash my teeth. Hear, O unhappy Creature, that art yet alive, Be
not ye past hope! O that thou may see thy sad state before it be quite past
remedy! O let me take up a lamentation for thee, as one whose condition is
beyond expression deplorable! O that I could speak as affectionately to you as
one did lately, who spent his strength and life amongst you all, viz. That I
can neither eat nor drink, nor sleep quietly, whilst I think of the danger that
precious Souls run every moment, while they are unacquainted with God! O that
mine eyes were waters, and my head a fountain of Tears, that I might weep day
and night for poor Christ-less Creatures, that laugh and are as cheerful as if
no danger were near them, whereas that dismal day approaches apace, wherein
they must bid an everlasting farewell to all their pleasures, and lie down for
ever under the scalding wrath of an angry God! O stand astonished O Heavens,
and wonder O Earth! Here Is a man that had rather be a Beast than a man, a Devil
than a Saint, that prefers Hell before Heaven, that loves Death and hates Life;
Here Is a man that makes nothing of going to Hell, Damnation is a thing that he
jests with; it is but damning, he says: But damning! Is that so light a thing,
a thing to be laughed at? Well, if that damning be nothing, never complain of
it, when you feel it: If it be nothing, never groan nor bite your tongue, nor
gnash your teeth for it: If Heaven, and your Soul, the favor of God, eternal
happiness, be such small matters, never complain for the loss of them. Well
then, belike you are pleased very well with your choice, and you do choose
rather to enjoy the pleasures of sin, for a moment, than the pleasures of
Holiness, which last for ever. There stands a sinner that hears all this, and
frets and foameth at the hearing of it; it is a torture to his Soul to be within
the sound of such Truths? Why, act like one in his wits: If the hearing of Hell
and damnation be so troublesome, what will the feeling of it be think thou?
But that I may, if possible, prevail, I shall leave a few serious questions
with you, which I charge you in the presence of God, seriously to consider of,
and to give a wise answer to these following Questions.

Quest. 1. Are those things which you have heard, true, or are they not? Does
not the Scriptures speak the same things which I do? Dare you say that the word
of Truth is False? Do but open the Bible, dip where you will, what is that you
read there? Is it not something that has a tendency to what I have been
teaching of? O that you would but give your selves the trouble of searching the
Scriptures, to see whether these things are so. To what purpose do you think
should we spend our breath? To what purpose should we follow you with such
exhortations, if we had not some grounds for what we say? If there be no such
thing in the word of God, why then do you not say so? Why, do you not show us
it, if there be such a place that says; there is no need of repentance, that
man's condition is sase enough already, and that he may do well enough, though
he be never reconciled to God? Do you think that we take delight in vexing men
and women? Do you conceive that it pleases us to displease you, and to get
your hatred? Do you not believe that a great many of us, if it might consist
with Gods honor and your welfare, had not far rather be excused? Can any man
imagine that so many thousands of Prophets, Apostles, and Ministers, in such
distant ages, and in such distant places, should all agree in this, to impose a
falsity upon the world? Would any man be so mad as to invent such things as
these. which are so contrary to men's dispositions, if he had not abundant
warrant from God himself? Is it possible that men should make such complaint,
and shed so many tears, and be in such agonies about these things, if there
were nothing at all in them? Are all the experiences of so many thousands of
Saints, but mere fancies? Speak Christian, speak, What do you say to this? Are
all thy joys, thy answers of Prayers, those sweet dishes that thou have
sometimes fed upon, but dreams? Does not thy very blood stir in thee, at the
very putting such a question to thee? Can thou not say, that thou have seen,
that thou have felt, and that thou have known undoubtedly, that Spiritual
things are realities, the greatest realities in the world, and that thou have
been as much affected with them as ever thou were with the things of sense? Let
me, the meanest of ten thousand, tell the stiffest Athiest in the world, that I
have seen these things so realized, that I shall sooner believe that I am
turned to a stone, or am dead, then believe that Spirituals are nullities and
fancies. I am confident if there be any credit to be given to both eyes, and
ears, then these things are true; and had you seen but what I have seen in
dying Saints, and heard what I have heard, you would easily have been
convinced, that there is something in communion with God, something in
spiritual Joys. I am sure, if there be any truth in the Scriptures, if the word
of God be true, if Christ and the Apostles were not all mistaken, then these
things are true. If I should tell you a business that did concern your House,
or your Children, or Body, or any worldly thing whatever, upon my own personal
knowledge, would you not readily assent to what I say? I am persuaded you would
be far from suspecting the truth of what I affirmed; I am ready to think, that
there is none of you all that think that I dare tell you that which is false. O
then, Why will you not believe me in a business of sar greater consequence? And
if you ask me to what purpose do I spend so much time for nothing? What need I
speak at this rate? What will I make Infidels of you all? What do I think that
you are such Atheists, as not to believe that the word of God is true? Well
then, you your selves are witnesses that the word of God is true, and that you
do believe all that is contained in it, and by rational inferences deduced from
it: I shall therefore take it for granted, that you give your assent to these
things, if you be Christians in profession, your very Name speaks as much. Now
my next Question shall be this.

Quest. 2. Are these things of weight and importance, or are they not? You hear
that they are matters that concern your eternal life or death, Soul affairs;
and are not these matters of the greatest consequence? If acquaintance with
God, the happiness or misery of a Soul, your making or undoing for ever, be
inconsiderable things, What then are great things? Is it a matter of greater
importance, to lose the sight of a lascivious Play? Is it an affair of greater
weight to have the frowns of a wanton mistress, or the frown of a God? You said
even now, that the word of God was true, if you will stand to that, I desire no
more; How is it written? Read a verse or two, turn to Matthew 5.20. Except your
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall
in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: And John 3.3. Except a man be born
agian, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. And God will pour out his wrath upon
the Heathen, and upon the Families that call not upon his Name. Does not the
Scripture say, that is the one thing necessary? Are not these things called by
the Lord Christ, the weightier things? Mat. 23.23. I hope you will not say,
that God is mistaken, and that the Scripture speaks more of these matters than
needs: What are you gone from your word so soon; did you not say that the word
of God was true, and are you now of another mind, because you find that it
requires more strictness, you are willing to submit to? But are you ashamed of
that, and are you convinced of this also, that the Doctrine of Reconciliation,
Acquaintance, and Peace with God, are affairs of the highest importance in the
world? And do you indeed believe this? and, will you stand to it? well then, my
next Question shall be this.

Quest. 3. What do you mean then to mind such things as you acknowledge to be
most unquestionably true, and of the greatest consequence, with so much
indifferency and coldness? what reason have you then for your strange neglect
in your prosecuting of them? what, say they are the greatest things in the
world, and will you say they are least to be looked after? Is it any Prudence
and Wisdom to be very serious about trifles, and to triflle about the most
serious things? Are Heaven, the love of God, and the like, by your own
confession the most weighty, and will you make light of them? O folly and
Hyprocrisie! Out of thy own mouth thou shall be condemned. Do know that
Heaven and Hell are before you? do thou know that the one is unspeakably
glorious, and the other unspeakably dreadful? and yet for all this do thou
stand demurring which of these thou should choose? and dare thou for all
this venture on in a way which leads to the region of Eternal Darkness? and
though those that know the way better then you, and see you ride on so hastily
and merrily, call after you with earnestness, yet do thou still turn thy back
upon them? Consider whether you act in these affairs, like one that is well in
his wits. Is God the best friend in the world, and yet his kindness least to be
regarded? Man, what have thou to say for thy self? O What bruits, and how
irrational are men in their spiritual matters! how do they contradict
themselves! how do they say one thing, and do the quite contrary! O let me in a
word or two renew my Expostulation with them which are loath to be accounted
fools! What reason have thou to undervalue the favor of God so as you do? what
reason have you thus foolishly to cast away your selves, and to slight
acquaintance with your Maker? Let me plead with you in the language of a
Reverend Divine (R. B.) of our own. Look up your best and strongest Reasons;
and if you see a man put his hand into the fire till it burn off, you will marvel
at it: but this is a thing that a man may have reason for, as Bishop Cranmer
had when he burnt off his hand for subscribing to Popery. If you see a man cut
off a Leg or an Arm, it is a sad sight; but this is a thing that a man may have
good reason for, as many a man does it to save his life. If you see a man give
his body to be burnt to ashes, and to be tormented with Strappado's and Racks,
and refuse deliverance when it is offered: this is a hard case to flesh and
blood, but this a man may have good reason for, as you see in Heb. 11.33, 34,
35, 36. and as many an hundred Martyrs have done. But for a man to forsake the
Lord that made him, for a man to run into the fire of Hell when he is told of
it, and entreated to turn that he might be saved; this is a thing that can have
no reason in it, that is reason indeed, to justify or excuse it. For Heaven
will pay for the loss of any thing that we can lose to get it, or for any
labor that we bestow for it; but nothing can pay for the loss of Heaven. Read
on in Mr. R. B's. Call to the Unconverted, page 169. Do you still believe the
Word of God to be true, and the things contained in it to be the most weighty,
and yet will you still pass them over, as if there were nothing at all in them?

Quest. 4. My next Question that I shall propound to you, and desire your
serious and speedy answer to, is this, Do you believe that you can find a
better friend then God? can you mend your self any where else? is there in
Heaven or Earth any that can do as much for you as God can? is there any one
that can take you off when you come to be accused for High Treason against the
King of Heaven, and to be arraigned before that just Judge? have you got that
which will quit your cost in getting of it, and countervail the loss of a Soul?
what is it that still has an interest in your heart, that is thought to be an
equal competitor with God for your dearest love? If it be indeed that which
will shield you from the arrests of Death, and the wrath of the Almighty; if it
be that which can shelter you from the storm of his displeasure; if it be that
which will do you as much good as Heaven, and make you as happy as God can; why
then I have little to say; make your best of it. But consider well what you do
first, be sure that you be not mistaken, have not many thought as you think,
and have found their mistake when it was too late?

Quest. 5. Do you think that this world will last always with you? do you not
believe that ere long you must die, and your soul appear before God, and by him
be sentenced to its everlasting state? where is all the glory of those great
Monarchs which despised God, and oppressed his people? what is become of all
their pomp? which of them that flourished three thousand years ago stand alive
now in glory? and are you better then they? shall the worms which have made a
prey of them, spare you? is Death more favorable now a days, then he was
before? is not the world still as it was, but vanity? is not all flesh still
but grass, and the beauty of it as a flower that is cut down and withers
suddenly? Well then, this being granted, that nothing is more certain then
Death, and that it is appointed for all men once to die; would you not then be
glad of something that will stand you instead after death, a Friend in another
world? why then do you not speedily get acquainted with him who alone can
befriend you in that dreadful hour?

Quest. 6. What do you think will become of you, if after all this you go on in
your old ways? what will become of you do you think if you should die without
the knowledge of God? what hopes has you of life in peace, if you bid defiance
to the Lord of life, and contemn the Prince of peace? how shall you escape if
you neglect so great salvation? what do you think that those which did once as
you do now, slight Christ, and never look after Reconciliation with God, are
now a doing in another world? what would you do in this case? should one come
to you either out of Heaven, or out of Hell, how wonderfully do you think you
should be affected with the Narration which they would give you of the affairs
of the invisible world? why then will you not now be affected with what we say?
for assure your selves, whatever you may think, our testimony is as true, and
has a better foundation of credit, then if one should tell you he came from
the dead, and speak to you of these things.

Quest. 7. Another Question I would propound to you, is this; Are you willing
to bear the displeasure of God? can you undergo the weight of that wrath which
made his back to ache, who was mighty to do and suffer? can you with any
patience hear that dreadful word pronounced by the mouth of that Judge, which
will see to the execution of his sentence, Depart from me ye cursed unto
everlasting torment; Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, for I know you not?
Can you endure without any trouble that scalding hot wrath which is abundantly
more painful then Fire and Brimstone, more intolerable then to be shut up in a
burning fiery Furnace, or to be boiled in a Caldron of melted Lead, or
whatsoever torments the wit of men or Devils can invent? Can you with any
patience bear the Stone, Gout, Toothach, Chollick, or some such distempers of
body which last but for a while? O how long do you think the time when you are
in that condition? how do you toss and tumble? what lamentable moan do you
make? do not you think you cannot be too much pitied in that condition? how then
will you be able to lie down in those torments, the least drop of which is
abundantly more painful then the greatest torment that ever you felt in your
life? If these seem dreadful to you, why do you not go the way to avoid them?
which is by getting an interest in him who has the Keys of Hell at his gridle;
for there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, to them that
are brought into a state of Reconciliation and Acquaintance with God by his Son
our Mediator.

Quest. 8. Are you contented to lose everlasting happiness? Can you willingly
see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and a great many from all the quarters of
the world, to sit down in the Kingdom of Heaven, and your selves cast out? how
do you like to have those which you scorned to look upon, to be set at the
Table at the Feast, and your self shut out which the Dogs? would you not be glad
to have a word of comfort spoke to you, when your soul is just a taking its
leave of your body? would you not be glad then to be be conveyed by the blessed
Angels into the presence of God, and to be crowned with an immortal and
glorious Crown? would it do you any harm to be perfect in holiness and
happiness when you die? would you not be glad to be saved when others shall be
damned? In a word, do you not desire to be rejoicing and praising of God in
endless pleasures, when others shall be weeping and cursing of God in endless
torments? why then do not you live the lives of the righteous, if you would die
their deaths, and have your latter end like theirs? if you would be glorious
and happy for ever, why do you not endeavor to be holy and spiritual in time?
if you would have God your Friend in another world, what do you mean that you
labor no more to be acquainted with him in this world?

Quest. 9. How would you take it at any man's hands, to be served as you serve
God? Suppose you should take up a poor Child that came to your door to beg,
that had scarce a rag to cover his nakedness, nor a morsel of bread to put into
his mouth, and no where to hide his head; Suppose you should strip this poor
beggar of his rags and cloth him in very good apparel, and take him into your
own house, and take as much care of him, as if he were your own child: suppose
after this you should bid him do you some small piece of service, and he in
stead of it should say, Command your man, and do your work your self; and in
stead of answering your kindness, should offer you the greatest abuse in the
world, and afterward conspire with a company of Rogues to rob and murder you,
how would you like this? should you think that such a fellow as this did not
deserve a halter rather then your favor? But now, if after this you should
send after this ungrateful wretch, and tell him, that you are willing to forget
all that is past, and to receive him into the greatest favor, and never to
cast his former wickedness in his teeth; how would you take it at his hands, if
he should stand I know not how long disputing whether he should accept of your
kindness or no, whether he should choose the Gaol and Gallows, or your House?
but if after all this you should send messenger after messenger, and offer to
give him all that you have in the World, and to bestow your only Daughter upon
him, and to settle presently a great Estate upon him with her; how would you
take it if this vile ungrateful beggar should put you off a great while
together with some poor excuse or other? how would you like it if he should
make light of all your offers, and tell you he thanks you for nothing, and
should undervalue your kindness? Would you not soon resolve not to trouble your
self any longer with such an unthankful monster? would you not let him take his
course, and not much pity him, if he afterward see the difference serence
between a Fathers house and a Gaol, between Liberty and a Prison, between
Riches, Glory and Pleasure, and Poverty, Dishonor and Sorrows? would you not
bid him never expect kindness more at your hands; but seeing he would not be
ruled, to take what follows? What do you say, would you not do thus? I am
persuaded you would. But should I unriddle this Parable, who do you think would
be condemned? your own mouth would accuse you, and you would be your own Judge.
Thou art that man that have dealt thus disingeniously with God, thou art that
beggar to whom the Lord has showed much kindness, and offered more; he has
sent messenger after messenger, and at last he has sent his Son to invite thee
to his own house, and he offers to make you as happy as Heaven, Glory and
happiness it self can make you, and you stand still demurring, and add one
delay to another, and are far from that grateful and seedy compliance which the
nature of the thing does require; and in stead of coming at Gods call, and a
thankful owning of his mavelous kindness, how basely do thou prefer thy
company, thy lust before him, and offer the most intolerable affronts to his
Majesty, and make nothing of his unparal'd goodness, and continuest in open
rebellion against him? What then have thou to say for thy self, why God should
not with a just abhorrency cast thee off for ever? But now that God should
still offer thee as high as ever, and (in stead of doing as I have said, and as
you your self would have done in case of a less contempt) still follow you with
such a gracious proposal as this is, that I now make unto you; is it not a
miracle of mercy, a prodigy of kindness?

Quest. 10. And now what will you do? Will you still for all this go on in your
contempt of God? Will you still refuse to know him, and never mind acquaintance
with him? Will you still be indifferent whether you have God for your Friend,
or your enemy? Now you have been tendered such a match, will you make another
choice, will you bestow your heart somewhere else? And when you have don that,
dare you stand to your choice, and say, that you have don very wisely in
refusing God, and in embracing this present world? Will you maintain it at the
day of judgment, that you have don well to refuse acquaintance with himself,
and to run the hazard of his displeasure? But you will not, you say, trouble
your head with such melancholy fancies as these are; they are enough to put a
man besides his wits; you hope to do as well as others, and so long you care
not. Well then, it seems you are resolved; though, let me tell you, if you are
contented to fare as most shall fare at last, you must be contented to be
damned; for the Scripture is exceeding clear in this, that the number of those
that go to Heaven, is a very small number; and if you will not take my word for
it, (for indeed I would not that you should take my word, nor any man's
breathing without warrant from Gods word, in things of so high a nature) look
into the Scripture, and at your leisure, ponder a while upon these following
Texts, Luke 13.23, 24. Then said one unto him, Lord, are there few that shall
be saved? And he said unto them, Strive to enter in at the strait gate, for
many I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able, Mat. 20.16.
Many are called, but few are chosen. And Luke 12.32. Christ says, his flock is
a little flock. And the Church complains of the fewness of her number in this
Language. Mic. 7.1. Woe is me, for I am as when they have gathered the
summer-fruits. I might heap up abundance of Scriptures, of the same nature, all
which speak this to us; that it is not so common a thing to go to Heaven as
most people reckon upon. But yet if thou be resolved, come what will come, not
to change your mind; if after so many warnings, and pleadings, you still
continue of this judgment; I must speak a dreadful word. Your blood be upon
your own Soul. I have blown the Trumpet, I have don what in me lies to convince
thee of thy dangerous state. while thou art a stranger to God, and to bring
thee to a speedy acquaintance with him; but thou have after many and many a
tender given in this answer, that as for God thou do not desire to be
acquainted with him; as for your marching with his Son, it is that which thou
carest not for hearing of, except thou might have his estate without his
Sovereignty; thou will not have him for thy husband, except he will let thee do
as thou list, and run a whoring from him when thou please; Thou will not have
Heaven, except thou may have it without holiness; and as for the invitations
of God, thou still make light of them, neither promises nor threatenings
signify much with you. Well then, when you find by woeful experience what you
have don, know whom you must lay all the blame on. I call Heaven and Earth to
record, and you your selves are witnesses, that I have with all the pity and
earnestness that I could for my soul told you of these great things: but you
think the flattering offers that the Devil makes to be more advantageous then
those which God makes, and his service to be preferred before the service of
Christ, and the friendship of the world to be esteemed before the friendship of
God; and the pleasures of sin, which are but for a season, you value before
those rivers of pleasures which are at the right hand of God for evermore. Now,
if you continue in this mind, blame not me if you miscarry for ever; you must
whether you will or no stand to your choice. Do not say but you were told of
these things; this is not the first time by many, but it may be the last that
you may ever hear for all that I know. Remember you were once well offered. Do
you think that God will always bare with such unworthy abuses? shall Gods
Justice never be righted? yes, yes, be not deceived, flighted kindnesses will
cost dear at last. What have you yet to say for your self? do you think that I
mean you any hurt by all this? except you count Salvation a wrong, and kindness
it self an injury. But if all this will not do, go then and make the best thou
can of all thy Friends; let us see how well, and how long they will entertain
thee: ere a few days it may be, shall be at an end, we shall hear how you like
your choice; when they shall turn you out of doors, and tell you plainly, they
can do nothing for you, you must shift as well as you can, as for them, they
cannot provide for themselves, much less for you. And then let us see who has
made the best choice, he that is acquainted with God, and chosen him for his
Friend, or he that has taken the world for his friend? Let Us see who will do
most for their friends, when a time of trial comes. When Heaven and Earth are
all in a Flame, when the Trumpet is sounding, when the Judge and his
Attendants, Christ and all his holy Angels, are coming, when the Prisons the
Graves are opened, and the Prisoners are brought forth, then let us see who will
have the chearfullest countenance, he that holds up his hand at the bar, or
they that sit upon the bench with the Judge: for know you not that the Saints,
the Friends of the Judge, shall sit with him when he judges the world? We
shall know when the storm rises whose house was best, that which was built
upon the sand, or that which was built upon the rock. O that people were now of
the same mind that they will be of at the day of Judgment! O that they would
consider, that if they will not now be at leisure to think of these things,
they shall be at leisure to repent of them hereafter. Do not talk of scorns,
and reproaches, and suffering, what, do you think that Heaven will not make
amends for all that? which is most to be feared, the scorns of God, or the
scorns of men? which will do you must hurt, man's contempt, or Gods? where is
the man that will be laughed out of a great estate? because a fool says, that
a Jewel is not worth the taking up, will you therefore never stoop to take it
up? The truth of it is, if you intend to make any thing of your Profession, you
must be willing to be counted a fool, and a mad man: but you must remember, it
is by those that are so themselves. O be not affrighted from your duty by the
talk of the rabble. If the thing be evil, let the vice of it scare you; but if
it be good, let not the fear of them which are very incompetent judges in such
a case divert you from it. Do you think that such poor excuses will be taken at
the day of Judgment? What do you intend to say to God then? Lord, I would have
labored to have known thee, I would have taken some care of my soul, and I
would have taken some pains about the things of Eternity, but that I saw that
almost every one that did with any seriousness look after such matters, were
scorned, laughed at, etc. When I had had got into the company of those that
were godly, and I had half a mind to go with them to Heaven, then my friends
fell a jeering of me, and asked me whether I meaned to be mad to undo my self
to turn Puritan and Phanatick? Do you, I say, believe that such a plea will
stop the mouth of the Judge, and keep him from pronouncing the sentence against
you? will this hold the hands of Justice? will the thoughts of this quench or
cool these dreadful flames? Be better advised, O be better advised for your
souls sake, and consider how such creatures will befool themselves, Who would
upon such a trifle part with Heaven? that would be laughed out of Glory, and
jeered into Hell? Is your mind yet altered? have you any thoughts or
resolutions to look after your soul and acquaintance with God? Are there none
of you all that ask by this time, what shall I do to be acquainted with God?
are there none of you that begin to think that it is high time to look out for
a Friend in a time of need? have I all this while been bearing the air, and
labored in vain? shall I leave you all as I sound you? God forbid. Methinks I
hear some poor souls crying out by this time, O that I had but such a Friend
that would bring me acquainted with God! O that I had but a saving knowledge of
Jesus Christ! O that I did but understand what it means to have Communion with
the Father and the Son, through the Spirit! I see my self undone and lost for
ever, except I have an Interest in this Friend. O who will bring me to him? How
shall I get acquainted with him? O that is a sweet language! That Is a very good
question, What shall I do to be saved? but do you speak in sober sadness? do
you speak in jest or in earnest? If any one would give you advice and
direction, would you follow it in spite of all the opposition of Hell? What do
you say, will you labor to keep exactly to those Directions that shall be
given? if you will, I do not question but that you and God will be acquainted
before you die. But, O let not me take a great deal of pains and all to little
purpose, as to you; do not now serve me as the Jews did Jeremiah, come and ask
Counsel of God, and take the Devils. But in hopes that some poor souls may in
good earnest desire Directions with an intent to follow them, I shall give them
as follows.

I. DIRECTION.
If you would be acquainted with God, labor to get a through sense of your
great estrangment from him, and of the danger of such an estrangement. This is
that which makes people so well contented with their condition, because they
see no great evil nor danger in it. Men are ready to think very well of their
condition, although they be enemies to God, and no Friends to Christ. Exnemies
to God! they scorn your words, though all this while they express the greatest
contempt of him conceivable; though they regard neither his Commands,
Threatenings, nor Promises, though they value the company of a drunkard, a
whore, before the company of God; though they do all that they can against God,
Love nothing that he loves, though they side with Gods greatest enemies, yet
they abhor to be thought to be any others then well wishers to Christ, and the
Friends and Servants of God; though they never come near God, yet they take it
very ill if they be not reckoned amongst his acquaintance, and special
Friends. Where is the professor almost living, that does not count it a high
piece of uncharitableness, if one do not Canonize them among the Saints, though
they live more like bruites! How hainously do they take it, if any one do but
question their state? They ignorant of God! They enemies to the Cross of
Christ, they blind! they unconverted! Who is that man which dare question their
condition? They hope to fare as well as any precise Puritan of them all, they
will hope to be saved, say what you will then, you shall never beat then out of
their trust in God. And though in Faithfulness to their Souls, we beg of them
to make a more diligent inquiry into the state of their Souls, because we know
that the heart is so deceitful, and we have very great cause to suspect that
they know not God; yet they will go on very cheerfully with this confidence,
until Christ himself show them their mistake, and tell them plainly that he
knows them not, and that he never accounted them any of his Friends. But now
did men but thoroughly understand their natural estrangement from God, were they
but indeed sensible of the vileness of their hearts, did they but take notice
of the Rebellions and Treasons that are within, the case would be far otherwise
with them then it is. O this, this is the reason why so many millions of
professors miscarry everlastingly, and never come to desire the friendship of
God, because they never believed that they were any otherwise then friends,
they do not suspect themselves at all, but think that they are rich, and
increased in goods, and have need of nothing, whereas the Lord knows, and
Christians know too, that they are poor, and blind, and naked. But now, when
men begin to be thoroughly sensible of his enmity that is in their natures
against God; when they see what mutinies and rebellions there are in them
against their most gracious Lord and King; and when they are made to understand
the consequences of this War, then how sensibly do they cry out, what shall
they do? was there ever any poor wretched creatures in worse condition then
themselves? was ever any ones heart worse then theirs? are there any out of
hell that are such Monsters of sin as they are? O what shall they do? they see
the Fire kindled, and themselves hanging over everlasting burnings: now all the
world for a Christ; they believe now that God and Man are not equals; that
there is no contending with the Almighty: who can stand before his indignation?
and when they see Gods Sword drawn, and the point of it set against their
heart, when they behold the terrors of the Lord setting themselves in array
against them, and themselves like to lose all, then how welcome would the news
of a Parley be? How glad would they be then to hear of a Pardon? Then down go
their weapons; they will sooner come before God with a Halter about their
Necks, than a Sword by their sides; they will fight now with no other weapons
but Tears and Prayers: As for their Armor, they break it in pieces, and lay it
at the feet of their offended Prince; and O if they might but have any hopes of
pardon, it would revive their hearts; if they might have but a look of kindness
from God, it would be a greater comfort to them than all the whole World
besides could afford them. To whom can a skilful Physician be more welcome,
than to the sick? Christ came to seek the lost, and such as these we are sent
to encourage: But till the soul comes to this pass, a Christ is not valued at
all by it: If sinners be not made thus to understand themselves, why, though we
should plead with never so much earnestness with them, we do but beat the air;
all that we can say signifies very little. The man thinks his great work is
done, though his hands have been all this while in his bosom; he is far
onwards in his Journey to Heaven, though he never set one step out of his own
doors; he has an interest in God, and is very well acquainted with him, and
has an assured confidence of his condition, that he shall be happy, though he
have not one dram of grace. He is a good Churchman, he has sat at the Lords
Table, and the like: But O how many are there which shall see, and know that it
is more than possible, to come often before God, and to complement him much, and
to sit often at his Table, and yet not to be any of his peculiar Friends, and
special Acquaintance; now it ever you would make any thing of Religion, and be
made highly to praise Gods favor, and to be really acquainted with him; you
must labor to understand your distance from him, and the unconceivable hazard
that you run, while you are in a state of Separation from God; that there is
but one step between you, and the state of the Damned; for what would become of
you, if God should say to you, this night thy Soul shall be required of you.
How easily can God in a moment stop your breath, and send your Soul and Body
into that lake that burns for ever and ever? and is it not then time for you to
look about you? O this ignorance of our selves, how does it expose us? ( Ar.
Epict. l. i. c. 26.) He was not a whit mistaken, who said, That the not knowing
of our selves, was one of the chiefest causes of our sin and misery, and that
the consideration of the state of the Soul, and the through understanding it is
depravedness, was the beginning of Wisdom; for it is weakness being well known,
a man will not afterward trust it in the determination of the greatest things;
but man will be desirous to consult that great Oracle, the will of his Maker;
and finding his old guide is blind, and has often misled him, thereupon he is
the readier to be acquainted with such a one, who may direct him in the way to
true happiness. If you would therefore be acquainted with God, you must get
well acquainted with your selves; you will upon the knowledge of your self be
afraid of your self. He was none of the weakest men who said, That a true sense
of folly is no small sign of some proficiency in wisdom, Look into thy self, O
man, search every corner, behold what abundance of Armor, there is in such and
such a dark Celler; but is this Armor strong enough to encounter a God withal?
Can thou with these Fig Leaves defend thy self against the arrows of the
Almighty? behold what a condition thou art in, if thou stirrest a step further.
Yield speedily, and throw down thine Arms, or you are a dead man. Do you know
this? do you really believe this? Is it possible? what believe that your
Treason is found out, and that you are within a little of Execution, and yet
not tremble, and yet not seek nor desire pardon. When a man thoroughly
understands how things stand between him and God, and how unable he is to carry
on a War against him, he will speedily cast a bout, how he may conclude a Peace
upon any terms. As soon as Benhadad knew what a condition his Army was in, when
he saw the Crowns of his thirty Kings shaken, and his warlike Captains cut in
pieces, or to tremble, and be like women, when instead of a mighty Army of
gallant Warriors in martial order, behaving themselves bravely in the field, he
saw their karkases upon heaps, their garments rouled in blood, the Shields of
his mighty Ones cast away, and himself wosully deserted, how speedily does he
send away his Servants, with Ropes about their Necks, to beg Peace upon any
Terms? When the Gibeonites heard what dangerous fighting it was against
Joshuah, they were not long before they made means to make a Covenant with him.
So the Soul, when it does seriously consider what a sad Condition it is in,
while it continues in Rebellion against God; it is impossibility to stand it out
long, and utter inability to conquer him: When it perceives the designs of
Satan, who first caused this difference between the Soul and God, and has
still instigated and stirred it up to persecute with all the violence that
might be; I say, when the Soul sees this before it is quite too late! O how
does it bewail it is condition, how does it cry out, O wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me? O what will become of me, if I make War still against
God? And as for flying, whether shall I fly from his presence, and where shall
I Hide my self out of his sight? And how shall I look him in the face, whom I
have thus desperately and ungratefully opposed? Can such a Traitor as I
possibly expect any mercy; if the Lord should look upon me, and not immediately
cast me into Hell, it would be a miracle of Patience. And thus the man that
begins a little to understand himself. speaks to himself; and after that, he
with Ephraim, sinites upon his thigh, and bemoans his condition exceedingly! O
that he should ever take up Arms against his gracious Prince? O what shall
become of him? Well, I have heard that the God of Heaven is a merciful King, I
will go and cast my self at his feet, if I perish, I perish. If I continue in
this rebellion, there is no hopes; if I fly there is no escaping; and if I
yield, I can but perish! O sad, sad is my condition, Woe and alas, what shall I
do in these dreadful perplexities: But, why do I stay here? The avenger of
blood follows after me apace; well, I will go to my God, through Christ, and I
have heard that this is the only way, and that there is not the least hope in
the world, any other way to get a pardon, to escape the Wrath to come! O that
the precious and merciful Jesus would pity me, and stand my Frind now if ever!
O that he would speak a good word for me, Have mercy upon me, Jesus thou Son of
David have mercy me! O make peace for me, by thy blood; if thou will, thou
can do more with a word speaking, then all the Saints and Angels in the
world; if ever any poor Creature in the world had need of mercy, then have I. O
mercy, mercy, mercy for thy bloods sake! But because I shall speak to this
under another Direction, I shall be the briefer. Now when a man is at this
pass, he is in a fair way for peace; but now as long as a man is ignorant of
all this, he is quite in another note, he will never buckle, and therefore he
shall be broken. Therefore consider well your condition, observe the actings of
your own Soul; if you be one of the Friends and Acquaintance of God, what means
your breaking and hating of his Spiritual Laws? What Is the reason, if you love
God, that you can take no delight at all in his company, no pleasure in his
Sabbaths? If you are a Friend of God, how hap you come no oftener to his house,
when he dwells so near you? Why do you knock no oftener at his door? Why are you
so rare in your visits? Is this your kindness? Is this like a Friend? How comes
it to pass that there are so many Arms found hid in your house? What are they
all for? What is the meaning of all those Meetings that you give to Gods
Enemies? What do all those whisperings, plots, and projects signify? Is this
friendship? Can you mean any good by all this? What do you say of your
condition? Do you ever complain, and that feelingly of your enemy against God?
Did you ever observe what a desperate wicked spirit you have against your
Maker; and were you ever made sensible of the danger of such a state, and
ashamed and grieved to the very soul that you should ever engage against so
good a God? why then I am confident you cannot but cry out with all the strength
and earnestness of your soul for a peace, you cannot but desire to meet with
your adversary quickly, while he is in the way. But if you see nothing at all
of the Treachery and Baseness that is in your heart, search, and search again,
it is your Ignorance and Blindness, and not the goodness of your state, that
makes you to know nothing by your self. What, are you better than David? he was
so jealous of his own heart, that he dared not to trust to his own Examination
of it, but he desires the great Heart-searcher to help him in this work. Are
you more excellent than Paul after his Conversion? Had he more reason to
complain of himself than you have? O be at leisure to look within, and get
David's Candle and Lanthorn to go into those dark corners of your soul with it,
and it may be you may see that within which may make your heart to ache, and
your joints to quiver, and your spirits to faint within you. Paul was sometime
as confident as you, he took no notice of the Enmity that was within against
God, though he was as full of it as an Asp is of Poison; yet before he came
acquainted with God, the case was altered with him, he was of another mind when
that light shined about him, and he cried out, Lord, what will thou have me to
do? he now thinks it is hard kicking against the Pricks, dangerous opposing of
God, and persecuting of Christ in any of his Members; and he desires nothing in
the world so much as to be reconciled to God, and to have him for his friend,
whom before he fought against as an Enemy.

II. DIRECTION.
My next Direction to those which would be acquainted with God, shall be this:
Get an humble heart, which is the consequent of the former. God will exalt none
to this high honor of being his Friends, but such as have low Thoughts of
themselves. The humble are the persons that he will raise, these are they that
he will converse most with, these are the great Favorites of Heaven which God
does delight to honor, Psalm. 34.18. The Lord is nigh to them which are of a
broken heart, and saves such as be of a contrite spirit. God is nigh to them,
(with Reverence be it spoken) God takes so much complacency in the company of
such, that he cannot endure to have them far from him, he must have them always
nigh to him, always under his eyes; as for these broken ones, he will to be
sure not leave them long, not go far from them, but will be ready at hand to
set their bones, to bind up their wounds, to keep them from sestering. It may
be he may put them to much pain before he brings the Cure to perfection, but it
is to prevent future Aches. He is a foolish cruel Surgeon, who for fear of
putting his Patient to some pain, never searches the wound, but skins it over
presently: and a wise man will not think him unmerciful that puts him to
exquisite pain, so he make a through Cure of it. Thus God does by his Patients
sometimes, when the nature of their Distemper calls for it. But however, he
will be sure not to be out of the way when they want him most. It Is possible
they may look upon themselves as forgotten by God, they may not know their
Physician when he is by them, and they may take their Friend for an Enemy, they
may think God far often when he is near; but when their eyes are opened, and
their distemper is pretty well worn off, they will with shame and thankfulness
acknowledge their Error; nay, they do from their souls confess that they do not
deserve the least look of Kindness from God, but to be counted strangers and
enemies; but God will let them know that he loves to act like himself; that is,
like a God of Love, Mercy, and Goodness; and that they are the persons that he
has set his heart upon; he will have them in his Bosom, never leave them nor
forsake them; and though these contrite ones many times look upon themselves as
lost, yet God will save them, and they shall sing a Song of thankfulness
amongst his delivered ones. Again, the Sacrifices of God are a broken heart: A
broken and a contrite Spirit, O God, thou will not despise, Psalm. 51.17. The
proud sinner he may bring his stalled Oxen, multitudes of Rams and Sheep, und
his Rivers of Oil, and yet all this while not be accepted. There is another
kind of Sacrifice that would be ten thousand times more acceptable to God. We
read that Sacrifices have been despised, Prayers, long Prayers have been
rejected; Sabbaths, New Mons, and Solemn Assemblies the Lord has sometimes
abhorred; but we never read that he despised the Sacrifice of an humble heart,
the Prayers of such always have an answer one way or other; their poor
performances, their chatterings, and mournings, are sweet melody, and powerful
Rhetoric in Gods ear. Who are the men that have most of Gods company? who are
they which he does most frequently visit? Are they not such as look upon
themselves as the chiefest of sinners? These are they which are wrapped up into
the third Heaven. None have so much of Heaven upon Earth as those that wonder
that the Earth does not swallow them up, and that they are not in Hell. But, O
says the humble Soul, God is the high and mighty God, and infinite in his
Holiness and Justice; how then can such a Creature as I ever expect that he
should so much as cast his eye upon me? Yes, sweet soul, such is the infinite
condescension and goodness of God, that he will sooner look upon thee than
another. And if you cannot credit my words, here what he speaks himself, Isa.
7.15. Thus says the high and lofty one that inhabiteth Eternity, whose name is
Holy, I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite
and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart
of my contrite ones. The thoughts of Gods Majesty, Eternity, and Holiness may,
and with good reason too, awe that Soul that has low thought of it self. Every
sinner has cause enough to cry out with astonishment, Will God look upon such
a vile sinful wretch as I am? Will he that is infinite in holiness take any
notice of me, except to show his displeasure against me? What shall I do? sure
such a creature as I cannot without a miracle have a smile from God. God may
indeed look upon me in his Wrath, and vix me in his sore Displeasure. God may
justly look me into Hell; but that he should look upon me in kindness, or take
any special notice of me in love, that would be a Wonder indeed. What, God
dwell with me! Yes, with thee, if thou have but high thoughts of him, and low
thoughts of thy self; the meaner thou think of thy self, the greater worth
he sees in thee. God will not only look upon thee, nor will he only knock at
thy door, and call at your house, or give you a transitory visit, but he will
come and dwell with thee. Now dwelling speaks a continued abode with one, and
thus God will continue with the Humble; never remove from them, for any
considerable time, till eternity has an end, till himself, and the soul cease
to be, which will be never. God will not be a stranger to humble Souls, but he
will come to them, and bring that along with him that shall make him, and them
welcome too. God never comes to his Friends, but he brings good cheer along with
him. When the Soul gives God the best entertainment, it is all at his cost, his
bread, his fatlings, his wine, his oil, his cordials, his rich dainties. Where
God comes, he will keep a noble house, and there shall be mirth and rich cheer
good store, Isa. 66 1, 2. Thus says the Lord, Heaven is my throne, and Earth
is my footstool: Where is that house ye will build me? And where is the place
of my rest? For all these things has my had made, and all these things has
been, says the Lord; but to this man will I look even to him that is poor, and
of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my word. God seems to have low thoughts
of Heaven it self in comparison of an humble soul: This is the Palace, where
this great King will keep his Court; this is the place of his rest. God is not
so much delighted and pleased in any of his brave Seats, as in this of an
Humble Heart; here he dwells most commonly; this was the great purchase of
his own Son; this was the Masterpiece of his Power and Goodness; this was the
project of infinite wisdom and counsel. What shall I do to be saved? Is a
Language that makes Hell in a rage, and Heaven to rejoice. God is never so well
pleased as when he beholds the beauty of his own Grace shining in a poor lost
self-debasing Creature. The spouse is adorned with Humility, when Christ gives
her that visit, Cant. 1.4. God has far more kindness for one that lies under a
sense of his own Vileness, that thinks himself unworthy to tread upon Gods
Earth, or to breath in his Air, then for the most confident righteous Pharisee
in the World. Such an humble Soul will be much in admiring of God, and will set
a high price upon his kindness; a look, a smile, a visit! O how welcome are they
to those poor trembling Ones! Wherefore God does with frequency and love visit
them; he knows that he can never be unwelcome to such, they will count it the
highest honor, that the most high should come into them in their low
Condition. Wherefore if you desire to have any intimate acquaintance with God,
labor to be more and more sensible of your own unworthiness, study your heart
and nature well, and be more curious in the observance of the baseness and
treachery of your own Soul; endeavor to have as mean thoughts of your self as
Paul had, who did not stick to call himself the chiefest of sinners: Humble
your selves before the Lord, and he will exalt you; he that is little in his
own eye, is greater in Gods. When was it that Jacob met with God, but when he
had been humbling of himself? As you may read at your leisure, Genesis 23. There
is many a professor that holds out many a year in a course of external
performances, and yet never knows what it is to have any intimate acquaintance
or converse with God: whereas I am persuaded, if the business were thoroughly
examined, it would be found that they were never made deeply sensible of their
undone state out of Christ, never understood the desperate depravedness of
their hearts, and nature; that they never lay under any lively sense of their
separation from, and enmity against God, and they were never bronght off from
their own righteousness, and saw themselves poor, beggarly, starved Creatures;
and in this condition came to buy Wine and Milk without money, and without
price. But this humility, it is an excellent Grace, it makes the soul fit for
the richest enjoyments of God, and to do God the greatest service. Were it
possible that God should converse much with a proud man, he would make strange
use of it, he would steal God's Crown, and put it upon his own head; but God
would not endure proud Angels near him, and can it be expected that he should
take proud men in their places? The more any one grows in Grace, and
acquaintance with God, the more he sees of his own unworthiness, the more he
admires Free Grace. Why, me Lord! why me! will be the Language of those which
converse with God: And while they are thus admiring God, and laying themselves
low, he comes again with his soul-ravishing kindnesses; and thus by humility
they are more acquainted with God, and being more acquainted with God, they are
made more humble, and the one increases the other. Thus the humble soul is
raised higher and higher, till be come to an eternal possession of God in the
highest Heavens. When an humble Saint lives as it were in Heaven upon Earth, he
scarce thinks himself worthy to live upon the Earth. When any one speaks well
of him, and admireth the grace of God in him, he looks upon himself as an
unprofitable Servant, and he durst not assume the least glory to himself; not
unto me, not unto me, but unto the Lord be the praise given. Who am I poor
wretch? O did you but know what a heart I have, did you but see the workings of
my thoughts, could you but tell how things are, indeed you would rather admire
at Gods patience, than man's excellency. This he speaks, not that he is worse
than others, but because he has a more spiritual sense of his state than
others have: Neither does he speak thus in proud Policy, thinking to make
others to have a better esteem of him for his humility; but he does really feel
the pressure of that filthiness of sin, which makes him thus to groan out these
complaints. The reason why God does converse most with the humble, is because
they will be most thankful, and most fruitful, and make the wisest improvement
of his favors. Wherefore, if you value the comfort of a spiritual life, if you
desire communion with God, if you would have a Heaven upon Earth, endeavor to
get and humble heart: To walk humbly, and to walk with God, go together.

III. DIRECTION.
If you would be acquainted with God, you must visit him often, be much at his
house, knock at his door many times in a day, and resolve to continue knocking
till he open; and if he do not come presently, wait for him; you would do as
much for your Prince, and it may be to a meaner person. We cannot expect to be
acquainted with them that we will not come near. It is to no purpose for that
man to speak of acquaintance with God, who never speaks to him, comes at him,
or enquires after him. Neither will a slight visit or two in a Transitory
complemental manner serve the turn; a man may do this, and yet not be said to
be acquainted with God. A stranger may come once to your house that was never
there before, and never intends to come again; and I believe you will scarce
write such a own down amongst your special friends and intimate acquaintance.
So in Spirituals; for acquaintance and converse with God are no such slight
things as the world commonly take them to be. If you would make any thing of
this great work of getting acquaintance with God, you must not jest in it, you
must give God many solemn and set-visits, and carry your self with all the
observance and respect to him that you can for your soul. This is that which
keeps many thousands of strangers from the life of Grace, and intimate
acquaintance with God, because they know not what those more peculiar visits of
God mean; they understand not what it is to draw nigh to God in secret; they
come not to him with those more spiritual acts of Religion; they pray, it may
be, in their Families, and it may be that but seldom (but by the way, never let
such pretend to the Knowledge of God, who call not upon him in their Families)
but what they do, it is but in a poor formal perfunctory manner between sleep
and awake; and will you call this acquaintance with God? will you call this an
act of Adoration and spiritual Worship? Is it to bow down a while before God,
and to read or speak a few words, and there is an end? their work is over, their
task is done, and they are glad of it. But now such as these do not come into
Gods Chambers; they come to his House, as I may so say, but they regard not
whither he be at home, whether they speak to God, and have an answer from God
or no: they call indeed, but desire not much to be heard; they knock, but are
not very careful to stay till the door be opened. But alas, alas, such as these
cannot tell what it is to enjoy communion with God. They have got, it may be,
into some course of external performances, by reason of the Example of their
Superiors, Education, or by being under the sound of the Gospel, and from some
force that natural conscience does put upon them, which will not be content
except something be done. But such as these may not be said to visit God in
that manner that I would persuade them to, which would be acquainted with God;
for all this they stand a great way off from God, and may be termed strangers
and forraigners. How seldom are they upon their knees in secret? How rare a
thing is it for them with Isaac, to go into the field to meditate? They visit
their Farms, they visit their Flocks, they visit their Swine, they go often to
uisit their sottish drunken Companions, whilst God and Christ, their Bible,
their Closet* their Hearts are forgotten, and seldom or never visited. And is
this true kindness to ones self? Is it any wisdom to slight such a Friend as
God would be to us, and to make so much of such sorry Companions? O stupid and
dull souls! O what do we mean so strangely to forget our selves! For who is
like to get by it, God or we, when we come and feed at his Table, and spend
upon his cost? O little do people think what they might enjoy, would they
purposely set themselves to meet with God, and go to his house with a strong
resolution, not to come away from him till they have seen him, or heard from
him. Now the great duties in which the soul may be said to visit God in, and in
which God does many times give out much of himself to to the soul, are these:
1. Solemn Meditation. 2. Secret Prayer. 3. Fasting. 4. Community of
Experiences, and Communion with the Saints. 5. The Lord's Supper.


1. Meditation. When the Soul does fix it self upon the Thoughts of some
Spiritual and Divine object, such as the love of God in Christ, the glory of
another world, etc. This is, as it were, going out to meet the Lord, and to
take a walk with our Beloved; this is the getting up to Mount Pisgah, to take
a survey of that goodly Land. When the soul does, as it were, bathe it self in
the Contemplation of Christ's beauty, and labors to enamour it self more and
more with his love; and to throw it self, as I may so say, into that Ocean of
Divine goodness; it will scarce leave till it be wound up to the highest pitch
of admiration, of that infinite boundless love which should do such glorious
things for so vile and contemptible, for so rebellious and unthankful wretch as
that is. O what manner of love is this! O that I were sick of love! O that I
might die sick of love! O that I were once in the embraces of my dearest Lord
and Husband! O that I could do nothing else day and night, but praise, love,
and admire this infinite boundless love? And did Christ indeed offer up his
life for my sin? Did he not think his precious heart blood too dear for me? And
shall I think my heart-love too dear for him? What, for me, Lord, which am the
chiefest of sinners! Here, here is kindness with a witness. Stand still, O my
soul, and admire, stand looking upon this lovely sight till thou art all on
fire. These are the pure flames, here thou need not to fear to exceed; widen
thy soul, let thy affections run without control. More fire still, blow hard,
it does yet but smoke; O for some coals from the altar! O for more fire, more
fuel! O that my heart were vehemently inflamed in the strongest love to him,
who still deserves a thousand times more! Help me all ye Angels, to bless and
adore his mavelous loving kindness. Christ is a friend to Publicans and
Sinners indeed, or such a one as I had never been on this side of Hell. O love,
love, love! What shall I render unto the Lord? O that men would bless the Lord
for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men! O what
meanest thou, O my soul, that thou art yet so cold? Awake, awake Psaltery and
Harp, I my self will awake and praise, admire and love thee, O my God, whose
love to my soul is beyond expression. and thus while the soul is musing, the
Fire begins to burn; while the Spouse is thinking of her glorious Husband, he
knocks at the door, she draws the Latch, and be comes in smelling of Mirrhe,
Aloes, and Cassia; he comes and kisses the soul with the kisses of his lips,
his love is better than wine, he comes and takes the soul into his arms. O the
sweet pleasure of Divine Love, infinitely transcending all carnal Affections! O
the joy that is at this meeting, far surpassing humane apprehension! O the
sweet entertainment that God and the Soul gives each other at such a time! I
appeal to the experience of those that have been much exercised in this great
Duty of Meditation, if they have been in good earnest in the work, I am
confident they can say something to this point. What say thou, O Christian,
which art used to imitate Isaac? did thou never meet with another-guess
Companion than Rebeccah? As he met with a Wife, so thou have met with thy
Husband? When thou have been in the Field, or Closer, at this work, has not
Christ then taken you by the hand, and led you into his Garden, and made you to
taste of his pleasant Fruits? has he not brought you into his
Banqueting House, and brought out some of his choicest dainties? are not those
Flaggons more full of Spirit, more Cordial, and refreshing than Wine? O little
do any but those who have tried it, think what a life they might lead, if they
would with seriousness engage in this duty. Speak O ye gracious ones, that make
conscience of this Soul-ravishing duty; speak I beseech you, and do not smother
the kindnesses of God to you; speak, and let him have the praise: It may be by
your ventring your experience, hundreds may be encouraged to set upon the same
work, and hundreds may also have the same experiences. What do you say? have
you not found the benefit of this duty? did you never find Meditation a sweet
work? was it worth your while or no, to sequester your selves a while from the
world to talk with your Beloved? did you ever repent you of your Labor, and
think your time lost? have you not been able to say that at such and such a
time, when you were in the Mount, that it was good being there? could you not
have been almost content to have lest the dearest Relations, and to have
quitted your interest in all Creature-comfort, so you might have had fuller
enjoyments of God; could you not have been contented to pass from Contemplation
to Vision and Fruition? why, speak then for the Lords sake, and for the sake of
precious souls, and keep not such a thing as this is in; let your unexperienced
Neighbors know what a Soul-ravishing, and Soularaising Duty Meditation is. Let
me ask thee which read these Lines, did you ever try what there was in this
Duty of Meditation? I suppose, if you converse much with such Books as speak of
Communion with God, you cannot but desire something of it, and I am persuaded
you have sometimes wept since you began to read this Book, to think how little
you experience; I believe you would be glad with all your Soul, to know what it
is to be acquainted with God, and to have such a Friend as I have been speaking
of. Why let me ask you again, did you ever try what Meditation is? (You may
read much of the excellency of this Duty, and Directions about it in Mr.
Baxters Saints Everlasting Rest) did you ever get out of the world, and
intensely fix your heart and thoughts upon any of the glorious Attributes of
God? Did you ever set before your eyes his love in Christ? If not, O try and
fall to this work seriously and speedily, and you shall soon find the sweetness
of it; you will soon say that you lost many a good meeting, many a dainty bit
for want of going for it. A carnal worldly heart I must confess may possibly
spoil this Duty, as all others, and grow formal in it, and be weary of it, and
cast it off (though, let me put in this, I believe its mavelous rare for a
Hypocrit to have any thing to do in such a secret duty as this is) but if they
were true to the interest of their own souls in the management of this work, I
am confident they would be every day more and more in love with this duty: For
I am persuaded that when the soul is in good earnest, nay, I can speak it
positively, there is no duty does so much raise and warm the soul; there is no
duty wherein the people of God enjoy his sweet company more than in this. This
opens the treasures of Gods kindness; this takes his Love tokens and presents
them to the view of the soul; this unlocks the Cabinets, and fetches out those
precious Jewels; by this the soul does, as it were talk with its Beloved; and
in this Christ does, as it were, take the soul by the hand, and lead it into
his Palace, and shows it all those glorious things, which it shall shortly have
in her possession for ever. And how can this choose but engage the soul to
express its gratitude to the height in answer to such love; and when the soul
is in this frame, Christ will not be behind-hand with her, no love shall be
lost between them; If the Spouse walk out to look for her Beloved, she shall
find him before she has done.

2 Another duty by which the Soul does visit God in a special manner, is Secret
Prayer; by this the Soul knocks, and God is quick of hearing, and none of his
Friends shall wait without doors so long as to catch cold. By this the Soul
does as it were storm Heaven, by this it gets into the presence Chamber, and
presents its requests. In this duty, a Christian does as it were return the Key
of Heavens Doors, and by this he unlocks the door of his own Soul; and so there
is free access on both sides, the Soul visits God, and God visits the Soul, and
this creats an intimacy. The poor wounded Creature opens his wounds, and then
the great Physician comes with the Balm of Gilead. When Jacob is thus weeping
and praying alone, he meets with God, he meets a blessing, he wrestles, he
conquers. This duty of Secret Prayer, and that other of Meditation, are two
fatning duties, by which the Souls of Believers come to Gods Table, and eat,
and drink of strengthening food; and for want of these, many poor souls are
thin. O why do Christians, why do Professors maintain no fairer correspondency
with God in such duties wherein he does manifest himself more than ordinary to
the Soul? The reason of this may be because God accounts himself more highly
honored, and more truly loved by them which are much in these, than by others.
By this a man does as it were honor the goodness of God, in that it shows it
worth the while to steal out of the world, and to leave the best company on
Earth to go to God: He honors the Truth of God, by being earnest for what God
has promised though it be unseen; he honors the Omnisciency of God, by
contenting himself with his eye and his car alone; he sanctifies his
Omnipresence, by believing that his God can hear him and be with him in what
corner soever he creeps into. I might be large in speaking of the excellencies
of this duty, but I refer it rathes to another place. But I would not be
mistaken in what I have delivered, as if I would by this exclude Family Prayer,
no, far be it from me; for God in these does many times exceedingly refresh
his. But because a man cannot possibly judge so well of himself by public
prayer, as he can by secret: And hypocrisy and pride, do not usually so much
attend secret duty, as more public. Its possible in more public duty, that a
man may be much raised, and be very warm, and high in his expressions, and
almost ravish the hearts of his Hearers, whereas he may be all that while acted
only by a proud heart, and for all that I know, the Devil himself may help a
man thus to pray sometimes. This I am confident of, he is not afraid of such
prayers as these, which tend so much to the hardening of a sinner, and makes
him believe that his hear is warmed with communion with God, when as it is
possible it is nothing but a secret self-pleasing, that those that joined with
him, might think very highly of him, as one that was passing Spiritual in his
performances. O the heart of man is deep, and desperately full of deceit! But
now, there is none of this Temptation in secret Closet-prayer, and there a Soul
may be more particular in its complaints and petitions, more earnest in
pleading with God, and may use such expostulations, postures, and gestures,
such Intermissions, and groanings, such pauses as would be very unfit for more
public duty. Wherefore I lay somewhat the more stress upon this duty of Secret
Prayer. But this I say again, where one of them is practiced conscientiously,
the other will not be neglected. I might add the practice and experience of
Gods children to enforce this duty. David would never have been at it so often,
at midnight, if he had got nothing at all by it. Peter would scarce have forgot
to eat, when he was an hungry, except he had met with a bit in a Corner to stay
his stomach.

3. Fasting, especially private Fasting, is another duty, wherein God meets the
Soul, and the Soul visits God. This is as it were execution day, the day when
the Soul brings out all the Enemies of God to be crucified; this is the day
wherein the Idols are searched for, brought out, and buried, or ground to
powder, and these are things which God will come to see with much delight. By
this the Soul is as it were adorned, her deformities done away, and she is
trimmed up to meet her Beloved. When a Saint fasts from sin, and abstains from
sensual pleasures, then it is many times feasted by God, and refreshed with
Spiritual enjoyments.

4. Another season wherein God meets the soul, and the Soul is visited by God,
is, when Christians are met together to communicate experiences, or to
discourse together about the great things of God. What though most of the world
are ashamed to own Religion when it is out of fashion? What though but sew dare
meet together to speak of Gods goodness, and to praise him, and call upon his
Name? Why, Christ says, Though there be but two or three of them, he will make
the number one the more, he will be in the midst of them: And though they dare
but whisper, it may be, and their meetings to serve God, and do good to one
another, may be prohibited by the public Magistrate; and consequently what
they do in this kind, must be done in a great deal of hazard, yet the people of
God stand not long disputing, they know what to do in this case; yet they would
be wise in it too; Not to dare the Magistrate, and to do what they do to
confront Authority, but in the uprightness of their souls, they desire to meet
together to worship God according to his own will. Yet for all this, though
they manage their business with never so much secrecy, God will take notice of
them, he hearkens and hears, and a Book of remembrance is written for them that
call often upon his Name, and God will make them up among his Jewels. But I shall
have occasion to speak of something to this purpose afterward, and therefore I
pass it over the more briefly.

5. Another time wherein the Lord is pleased to discover much intimacy, and
indeared affection to his people, is in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. This
is the great passover, and it cannot be unwelcome News to the poor Israelite,
to hear of a Redemption from Wars, then Egyptian bondage, instead of being
burdened with barbarous Taskmasters, to be made free, rich, and honorable,
and to see the strength of the enemy laid in the dust. It is not for nothing
that this Passover it to be had in everlasting remembrance. If I should appeal
to the people of God that have kept this solemn Feast, and ask them how their
hearts were affected, do they not all bow their Heads, and Hearts, and adore
that Goodness that should Save, Feed, and Feast them, and Punish, Kill, and
Damn others. Are there not thousands that can tell you, that Christ's Flesh is
Bread indeed, and his Blood Drink indeed; no Provision so great, no Banquet so
sweet, so noble; no Intertainment comparable to that which the Princely Jesus
gives to his Spouse in that Ordinance: The King brings her into the
Banqueting House, and his Banner over her is Love; she is then made to
understand, that the Kisses of his Lips do breath Life, and that his Visits at
such a time, usually leave behind them more special testimonies of the
largeness of his Heart, the loveliness of his Nature, and of his matchless
Excellency. Speak Christian, what do thou say to this? Can thou not
subscribe to this? Art thou not able to say, that then thou have tasted and
seen, could thou not then go out and invite all the poor starved hungry souls
in the world, to come and see, and taste? Art thou not able to say, come, and I
will tell you what Christ has done for my soul. Let me ask that Saint that
has been feasted many a time, and often, what he thought of his Entertainment:
Were you not made welcome? Was not the joy of the Lord your strength? Was not
the Provision that the world entertains her friends with, but mean, course,
unsavory, compared with it? Which was best, the Husks, or the Bread, and fatted
Calf, the Garlic and Onions, or the Manna, the Milk and Honey? It Is not without
cause that the Faces of some do shine, their looks speak, their Fare none of
the meanest, and their Activity is not a disparagement to their Keeper; inquire
further, and you shall be informed if their experience be not too big for to be
clothed in words. How often have some of Christ favorites, after they have Dined
with their Lord, been led forth into the Garden to walk; and oh the delightful
shades that they have sat under! At another time, Christ, not Satan, has
carried them as it were in his Arms, and Bosom, and set them upon the Pinnacle
of the Temple, not to make them giddy, and hazard their fall, but to let them
understand how much he has preferred them before others, and as long as they
are upon that great Cornerstone, no Storms can shake, in Christ's Arms no fear
of falling: At another time, the Soul has been carried into the Mount of God,
and there it has seen Christ Transfigured, and beheld so much Brightness,
Glory, and Majesty in him, that has reflected a Glory upon it self, and even
Transfigured the Soul, that its scarce like it self, and there it could say,
its good being here; and then Christ has bid the Soul lift up its Eyes and
look up to the Heavens, look round from one side to the other, and look beyond
the visible Heavens by Faith, to the Seat of the Blessed; well, all this is
thine, to thee will I give it, I purchased it, I have paid for it, and it is
thine, and live like one that is worth more than a world; live up to your
Estate, expect that shortly I should set you in the Possession of all: And as
for the World, look down upon that if it be worth thy accepting so much of it
as is good for thee thou shall have also. O did weak Christians but know what
strength, joy, and comfort this Ordinance does afford, I believe they would not
be so hardly persuaded to come when they are invited? Did they but understand
how sweet, how wholesome, how dainty the Dishes are which Wisdom prepares; could
they but conceive what satisfaction, and fullness there is for the empty, what
joy, and sollace for the Mourning, and Disconsolate, what strength and
quickening for the Weak, I am ready to think that they would scarce be so long
absent from the Lords Table: but think not that every one that sits down is
made so welcome, nor that Christ gives his dainties to strangers, or enemies;
many may come and receive, and yet only feed upon a piece of Bread and Drink,
two or three spoonfuls of Wine, and and really, if this were all the Provision
that a Saint were to have, it were scarce worth so solemn an Invitation: It Is
possible to come thither to eat and drink your own Damnation, and instead of an
affectionate Treatment to be dismissed with a Friend, how come thou hither,
not having on the Wedding Garment. Yet the sensible Hungry burdened Souls,
notwithstanding all their fears may come, nay, they must, and its little less
than giving ascent to Satan's callumnies which he raises against Christ and
his ways to forbear; its too ungrateful a Contempt of one of the excellent
Cordials which the great Physician has provided for the recovering, and
strengthening of his poor swooning Patients, and in a word, its too like a
foolish, being fond of our Sin and Sorrow, when we refuse the comfor-fortable
Appointment; which the Goodness, and and Wisdom of a Father, the Love, and
Tenderness of a Husband, and the Sweetness of the Holy Spirit, does so freely
offer, persuade, command; the Spirit says, come, and the Bridegroom says
come, and why should not he that is a thirst come thankfully, humbly, speedily.
Well now poor weary Soul, what have thou to say against the excellency of rest?
Poor sick Soul, what Fault can thou find with Ease, Health, and Strength?
Poor guilty Soul, that looks upon thy self as next to condemned: What harm
would a Pardon, and the public sealing of it do thee? Who would think that
man hungry, that had rather eat Ashes than Bread; who would judge that person
thirsty, that had rather drink Gall Tears and Wormwood, than the clear
refreshing Streams that come from that Rock the Lord Christ: Will you, never
believe that Christ invites you, look into the Note that he has sent out his
servants wish, whose Name do I read there: Who are the persons that are
invited? of what Rank and Quality? Are they the Great ones of the World? Are
they the Learned? Are they the Proud, and Self-conceited Pharisees? Why, I find
none of these in the Writing? Who are they then that may come with Confidence
to draw water out of these Wells of Consolation. The Poor in Spirit, the
Hungry, the Sick, the Wounded, the Lost; these are Pools of Bethesdah, where
the Angel of the Covenant does often descend, and move the Waters; and where is
it fitter for the Impotent to lie, than there where they can not miss of a
Doctor, a visit, or Cure. What do you think of this poor Heart; are they but
flourishes, do I speak, or does Christ, and if he say it, who can dissanul it,
will he, can he be worse than his word; I know he is usually better, but never
short of his Promise; will you Credit, the Experiences of Christians, have they
not seen, have they not known, have they not felt; yea, have not all your
Spiritual senses, been exercised, and refreshed at that time when the King has
been at his Table? One is ready to say, if ever I could have left the World at
a minnutes warning, and have stepped immediately into Eternity, it was then when
mine eyes beheld the King in his beauty, when he held out his Golden Scepter
unto me, and took me into his Embraces. Yea, when the Ministers of Christ
presented me with the Jewels and Bracelets, and ask't me whither I would go
with them to Christ; my Soul made a speedy and thankful reply, my Heart and
Love is his, and his will I be for ever. O that I were once safe in his Arms!
O that I might live with him, and never part! O when shall it be! Come Lord
Jesus, come quickly. I remember I have heard it reported of that Reverend, and
Holy man of God Master Allen (who lived at as high a rate as most on this side
Perfection and Glory) that he was before he died in a very rare seraphique
raptures of Joy and Love, so that he could not choose but burst out into unusual
Expressions of Praise, such as these: Ten thousand praises to the King of
Saints, for the freeness, and riches of his Grace to any poor Soul; let every
corner of Heaven ring with Hallelujahs; let all the Angels help me to praise
thy incomparable, lovely, and glorious Jesus. O the Joys that he feasts my Soul
with I who would not be Christ's Servant! never did I feel such transcendent,
pure Divine Joys, except at the Lords Table; and then indeed I have been often so
raised in Spirit, that my Nature, except sustained by a Miracle, could scarce
bear a greater weight of Comfort. O the unspeakable vast satisfying Pleasures
that Christ in that Ordinance does afford some of his sometimes! I have heard
another dear Brother say, that for some years together, he scarce ever failed
of some notable Token of Love at that great Ordinance. But I would not, instead
of comforting, and encouraging the poor Saint; bring him into greater fears and
dispondings: Judge not therefore that this is the portion of all Gods Children,
nor of any at all times to have such large Discoveries as these. Heaven is
reserved for Heaven; some have a single Mess, some a double, some five times
more than their Brethren; let all be thankful if the great Joseph instead of a
Prison, give a Feast, and in it make himself known to us to be our brother;
let us love him, and admire his condescension, and be ready to wonder that he
does so much for us, rather than repine that he does more for others. If thou
have some drawings, and longings, and mournings after Christ, and a deep sense
of thy hardness, unbelief, and worldliness be thankful; it may be this is more
wholesome entertainment, and fitter for the present Temper and Constitution of
thy Soul than those Flagons of Wine, perhaps they would fly up into thy head,
and make thee giddy, proud, and wanton; if thou be but well wrought, poor, and
hungry, thou will be thankful for a little; and a Crumb that falls from the
Table to an humble Soul, is better Intertainment then it knows it deserves, or
could without a Miracle of Kindness have expected; mistake me not as if I would
have Christians sit down satisfied with little or no comfort at that Ordinance;
no, it is quite another design that I am carrying on; it is only a hint to quell
Ingratitude, my great work at present is, to quicken diligence in Preparation,
and to raise the Saints Valuation of that Ordinance, and his Expectations from
Christ in it. I say again, Christ usually proportions his Intertainment to the
diligent, faithful, humble preparations of the Soul to meet him; they that trim
their Lamps, and have Oil in them, are most like to meet that Bridegroom with
Joy; he that has on the Wedding Garment, cannot miss of a Welcome, and the good
and faithful Servant is most likely to have the Masters commendation, and to
enter into his Joy. But more or less, every sincere Soul at one time or
another, will meet with Refreshment at that Supper, and amongst all the rare
Dishes that are served up, no question but some will be suitable (if not all) to
a hungry, Spiritual Stomach. I can scarce leave this sweet Subject, the time
draws nigh, and the Servants are sent out to invite, and thou, O my Soul, art
one of the Guest that art bidden. Hark, methinks I hear a Royal Proclamation,
Whosoever is a thirst, let him come and drink of the Waters of Life freely:
Methinks the silver Trumpet of the Gospel, and Divine Love sounds a Jubilee:
Methinks the Air echoes with a strange Harmony, somewhat like that, Luke 2.14.
Glory to God in the highest, and on Earth, Peace, Good will toward men. Don't
the very Heavens ring with these Blessed Words, A Savior! a Savior! a mighty
Redeemer! a Pardon! a Pardon! Liberty! Liberty! a glorious Liberty! and again
the Congregations of the Saints, and Redeemed ones cry, Hallelujah, Hallelujah,
Hallelujah. I had thought to have done, but the Feast is so sweet I must fall
on again: Here no Surfeiting, the more I feed, the more hungry, and yet the
more satisfied, the more delighted: Here Is nothing but Fullness, Swectness, and
Love may be written upon every Dish; and Royal noble everlasting Bounty, may be
proclaimed before every Course: All the dismal Bonds are thrown in Cancelled;
all our Debts forgiven and paid, the great Surety shows the Acquittance long
since granted in the Court of Heaven, now its given in to the Court of
Conscience. The bloody War is concluded by a happy and firm Peace: God is no
longer a Judge an Enemy, but now the Soul hears such words, Friend, Father,
Husband. The Challenges of Law, Conscience, and Satan, are now silenced, the
Inditements against the Soul are all quashed, the Soul may walk now at liberty,
and fear no Arrest; who can lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect, its
Christ that justifies, who can condemn, Christ says it, swears it, seals it,
it cannot but be true, why art thou then cast down poor Soul, and why art thou
disquieted? Christ has made a blessed exchange, with thee he has drank the
bitter Cup, and offers thee the sweet, which is spiced with Grace and Love;
Christ both purchased the Crown for thee, and taken the Cross to himself, he
took the Rags, and gives thee the Robes, he became Poor, that thou may become
Rich, he emptied himself that thou may be filled; he was esteemed as
nothing, that thou might from worse than nothing, possess all things; and
what now remains, but that with the greatest Gratitude, you accept of Christ's
offer whenever he invites thee to his Table? what does better become thee
then the deepest resentment of the highest kindness, and a grateful closure
with all the overtures of Divine Goodness? O happy are the people that are
admitted to this Intimacy! happy are the Souls that know the worth, the use of
this Ordinance, and make it their business wisely to improve it. O what an
opportunity have such of Christ here! what Request may they not then have
granted! and when Christ is giving, what will he, what can he deny them which
have his heart already? I have been the more large in this, because it was the
particular request of one of my Brethren a Reverend Minister, that in the next
Edition, I would not forget that Ordinance in which God usually does most
signally discover his Love to his people.

III. DIRECTION.
If you would get acquainted with God, get Christ along with you, when you go
to God. You are like to speed no way so soon as this way; nay, let me say, all
that I have said before signifies nothing at all without this. There is no Name
under Heaven, by which we can be saved, but by the Name of Christ; and
whosoever comes to the Father by him, he will in no wise cast out, God cannot
deny his own Son any thing, he can never forget that great undertaking of his,
by which he glorified his Fathers infinite Justice, and infinite Love, and did
him more honor than all the Saints and Angels in the world. His Son, the Lord
Christ, has such an interest in his Father, that he can as soon despise his
own honor, as to refuse any request that is presented to him, by his Son. If
Christ come to him, and say, Father, here is a poor sinner that I have
undertaken for, and that flew to me for refuge, Look upon him for my sake; why
the Fathers Arms are presently open; he will not reject his Sons Petitions. The
truth of it is, this is the greatest cause of the miscarriage of poor
Creatures, that go about to do that themselves, and by themselves, which they
can never do alone. They go to God all alone, and no Wonder then they meet with
a frown; for there is no Name under Heaven, by which a man can be saved, but by
the Name of Christ; and out of Christ, God is a consuming fire; and there is
but one Mediator the man Christ Jesus. And there is but one Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. That which Joseph said of Benjamin, God
says of Christ, except you bring Benjamin along with you, you shall not see my
Face, except you bring Christ along with you, you shall not see my Face. There
is a notable story which is commonly by Divines applied to our present purpose,
and that not without good reason; it is concerning a Law among the Molossians,
where whosoever came to the King with his Son in his Arms, should be accepted
into favor, let his fault be what it will. So let a man be what he will
before, yet if ye come to God in Christ, he cannot be thrust away. O therefore
if thou would have any countenance from God, beg for a Christ to bear thee
company into the presence of God. I will tell you this for your comfort, Christ
has a loving design in his heart to do such offices of kindness for poor
Malefactors that understand something of their danger. If you see your self
lost for want of reconciliation with God, Christ he stands ready to lead you
into his Fathers house. O did you but know how willing he is to bring undone
lost Penitents to God, it would make your heart leap within you for joy.
Behold, how often he asks after you; what does that sinner mean to ruin himself?
I would with all my heart bring him out of all those perplexities, and
undertake to make God and him Friends, if he would be but ruled by me; and upon
this account he sends up and down many hundreds of his Ministers to tell
sinners as much, that they may not be undone everlastingly. Does not Wisdom
call? does not Christ plead the Case, and expostulate with sinners? and who
would not, that has any understanding at all of his state out of Christ, with
all possible thankfulness be encouraged to accept of his kindness? Christ has
done as much as this comes to already for many Millions, and his Father never
said to him, Son, why do you trouble your self and me with so many of these
wretched Creatures, let them alone to take their course. Where did God ever
express himself in this manner? did he ever take it unkindly that his Son
should every day bring such Guests to his house, and be continually begging one
Boon or other for them, or putting up some Petitions upon their account, or
pleading with his Father for them when they do offend. Is God displeased at
such work as this? is he not as willing to receive such, as his Son is to bring
them? and both Father and Son more willing to save the sinner than he is to be
saved? O kindness! Christ loves the sinner better than he loves himself! and as
I said before, so I say again, the Father does not grutch any thing that Christ
gives, or does for poor sinners. The Righteousness of Christ, it is that
Wedding Garment, in which we may sit at the Kings Table, and are welcome; these
are the Robes of our elder Brother, in which we cannot miss of our Fathers
Blessing. O how many poor Creatures have walked in the dark many years, because
they have not been brought off from themselves, but have sought that by
themselves, which is to be sought only by Christ; because they have looked for
that in the Law, which is to be found only in the Gospel; and no wonder their
business went on so slowly, when they went the quite contrary way to work. When
any comes to God without Christ, they come like Simon Magus, with their own
money in their hand to buy a great Commodity, which is not to be purchased with
such kind of Coin. If you come to God through Christ, you may come with
boldness to the Throne of Grace; but if you come without him, you do but come
with Madness upon the point of the flaming Sword.

V. DIRECTION.
If you would be acquainted with God, come much where he is wont to be,
frequent his house, lie always at the Doors of Wisdom, engage much in his
Ordinances. This was that course that David took when he wanted Gods company,
away he goes to the house of God; and, O what earnestness does he use when the
doors of the Lords Tabernacle were shut, to get them open again? what moan does
he make when he was for some time sequestered by his enemies, from the enjoyment
of God in his public Ordinances? As the Heart pants after the waterbrooks, so
did his soul pant after God, the living God. O when should he appear before
him? when should he again behold the outgoings of God in his Sanctury, as
sometimes he had? How amiable are thy tabernacles, says he, O Lord God of
Hosts! And one thing have I desired, and that will I seek after, that I may
dwell in thy house, and see thee, and enquire in thy tabernacle, Psalm. 42.
Psalm. 48. Psalm. 27.4. He thought God was like to be found no where so soon as
at his own house; he was sure he was never from home. David can never forget
what usage, and entertainment he was wont to have there, and that this great
Friend was used to have a standing Table, an open House, and that when his
Guests were set, he would come and bid them welcome; eat O friends, drink, yea,
drink abundantly O beloved. See therefore that you get into that part of Gods
house where he does most frequently come, get under the most powerful
Ministry; O hear the Word with all the Reverence, Attention, and affection
that you can for your soul; miss not any opportunities that God puts into your
hand, least that should be the time in which you might have met with God; Lie
at the pool of Bethesda, and wait for the moving of the Waters; set your selves
as in the house of God, and remember, though you see not God, that he is always
present in all places, but he is there more especially present where his people
meet together to attend upon him in his own Ordinances? Wherefore when you come
to hear the Word, set your self as in the presence of God, and hear as for your
life and soul, Deuteronomy. 32.46. Set your hearts to all the words that you shall
hear; for it is not a vain thing, it is your life, Isa. 55, 2, 3. Hearken
diligently unto me, and cat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight it
self in fatness. Incline your ear, and come unto me; hear, and your soul shall
live; and I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies
of David, He that has ears to hear, let him hear what the mighty Jehovah is
speaking to his soul. Wherefore I say it again, set your self as in the very
immediate presence of God; and when you hear a word that you are very nearly
concerned in, put up such a short Ejaculation as this. Now Lord, strike this
hard heart of mine; now Lord come in I beseech thee; O that this word might be
the key which might open my heart for the King of Glory to come in! O command
thy loving kindness this day to break into my soul! O that this might be the
day in which Salvation might come unto my house! O that this might be the man
that might be my Spiritual Father, that this might be the Messenger one among a
thousand, that may bring me good tidings! O that this might be the sentence,
that this might be the hour of Love! O that this might be the day that I may
have in everlasting remembrance! O that I might presently without any more
delay, set out for Canaan! Cry out with as much earnestness as that poor man
did, who brought his possessed child before Christ; O Lord I have brought my
unbeliving heart before thee to cure, it exposes me a thousand times to
unspeakable hazards; but Lord, if thou will but speak the word, it shall be
dispossessed: I would believe, Lord help my unbelief. I have brought my hard
heart before thee, Lord soften it, and let me not go from time to time with
these dreadful diseases hanging about me, to infect, and undo my self and
others. O melt me, O Lord, melt me, and let me have such a look from thee, as
Peter once had, which made him to go out and weep bitterly. But I shall speak a
little more of this nature under another Direction.

VI. DIRECTION.
If you would be acquainted with God, you must get acquainted with some of his
Friends, and they will do all they can, and be glad of it too, to help you to
be acquainted with him, they will not spare to give you their utmost assistance
in this great business. And when they shall hear you asking, what you shall do
to know God, they are glad at their Heart, and will not be at quiet till they
have got thee home with them to their Fathers House; they watch for your Soul,
and no greater Joy than to help forward such a work as this, then to be
employed any way in the service of your Souls. They are glad when they hear any
saying, let us go to the house of the Lord, and asking the way to Zion, with
their faces thither-ward. O! Christians society, good company is of exceeding
use; one good servant in a house, the whole Family may fare the better for him.
Laban and Potiphar, though ignorant enough in Spirituals, could not but observe
this, that the Lord blessed their Families, for the sake of one godly Servant.
I do not speak this only with respect to Temporals, because of that Diligence
and Faithfulness in their places, that Religion will put them upon; but with
respect to Spirituals, they will be dropping something that may tend to the
awakening, and convincing of their sleepy, unbelieving, ignorant companions:
they have an inward principle which puts them upon communicating what Grace
they have received; they know the more they impart to others, the more they
shall have themselves; they have a Compassion for Souls, and would fain have as
many as they can along with them to Heaven; they will be teaching little
Children to Pray, and Instilling something that the very Babes may set forth
Gods Praises, and they will be pleading with God for them. But this only by the
by. Now if those that are gracious, endeavor what they can to bring in those
that are open enemies; how much more will they be ready to give all the help
they can to you that earnestly desire it? Now when any one comes to this pass,
that he sees a difference between the godly and the wicked, and to say that the
righteous is more excellent than his Neighbor, and to have an earnest desire
to associate themselves with them, it is a very great sign that God has an
intention to do such a Soul good. Wherefore if you would be brought to the
knowledge of God, go speedily to them that know him well; and they will tell
you great things of him, and how they came first acquainted with him, and how
this acquaintance has been kept; they will tell you where they first met him,
they will give you to understand, that at such and such a time, when they
little thought of God, they were strangely brought acquainted with him. When
they came (out of Fashion, or curiosity, or to laugh at him that taught them,
or it may be to pick some Quarrel with him) to hear such a man; they were made
to see what they never took any great notice of before, that they were in an
undone condition by Nature, and that except Christ would pity them, there was
no remedy, but to Hell they must go; whereas before they thought themselves as
safe as could be: But then they saw that it was no light matter to be out of
Christ, and Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel. After this, they were made
to understand something of Christ's undertaking for poor lost sinners, and they
heard of his exceeding willingness to receive the chiefest of sinners, and that
then they began to see an excellency in his love, and goodness, and to be
somewhat more taken with the kindness of Christ than ever they were before, and
they felt some longings after the precious Jesus, O that they had but a Christ
for their Souls! and that after this they were by the Spirit of God, in some
measure enabled to cast themselves at the feet of Christ for mercy, and that
upon his own terms, knowing that if mercy came not that way to them, they must
sink for ever; and that upon this act of recumbency after they had for some
time waited upon God in the way of his ordinances, they began to taste and
relish the things of God, and at last they met him whom their Souls loved.
Inquire of them, I say, and they will talk thus to you, and tell you also, that
there was a time wherein they were foolish, disobedient, and unto every good
Work Reprobate, and miserably neglectful of their Souls, that they did not at
all mind their Eternal welfare, but made light of Christ, made a mock of sin,
and made nothing of Eternal Damnation, And they will direct, and encourage you
also. Let me tell you, they have an interest in God, and their prayers for you
may be more advantageous than you are aware of. Yet I would not that you should
make Christ's of the Saints, nor forget what is the work of the Mediator alone.
Saints are to be valued, but Christ is to be valued infinitely more. Get
acquainted with some warm rare experienced Christian, and make him your bosom
Friend, and observe him, and you shall see much of the beauty of Religion
shining in him, and you shall see how cheerfully, and comfortably he walks; now
ask him what his practice is, and go you, and do likewise; have a care of
harboring ill thoughts of the people of God, or for the sake of one Hypocrite
of censuring a thousand sincere Ones. Judge you whether this be just and equal
doing? How would you like it, if one that bears some Relation to you should do
some vile abominable thing, and bring himself to an untimely end, and people
should say all the whole Family is like him? though it may be you are grieved
to the very heart, that such a thing should be done by any in the world, much
more by any that bears any kind of Relation to your self. I tell you, as
contemptibly as the world speak of the godly, they are not such odious
Creatures as they are represented to be. The Saints they are not Troublers, but
Peacemakers, they love to make peace between man and man, and what in them
lies also between God and man: Your converse with such as fear the Lord, will
make you like them, at least they will endeavor as much. ( Ar. Epict. l. 3. c.
16.) He spoke no untruth, who said, That company is of an assimulating Nature.
A living coal laid to a heap of dead ones may kindle them all; but they are
more like, except it be blown up, to put the live one quite out; therefore
says the said Author, You must be very cautions of your company. It is stored
of Socrates, that he had a rare Art of making his familiar Friends of his mind.
Some active Christians take as much pains to make their familiars of Christ's
mind, Prove. 13.20. He that walks with the wise, shall yet be wiser, but a
Companion of Fools shall be destroyed, Prove. 10.10, 21, 33. The tongue of the
just is as choice Silver, but the heart of the wicked is little worth. The lips
of the Righteous feed many, but Fools die for want of wisdom. The lips of the
Righteous know what is acceptable, but the mouth of the wicked speaks froward
things. Such as these will do what they can to make you our of love with sin,
and in love with God. Such as these will from their own experience be setting
forth the goodness of God, and tell you that which may stand you instead as
long as you live; it may be they may tell you, that when God began first to
work upon their Soul, he was pleased to make use of the particular Application,
and the spiritual conversation of such a Christian Relation; and when God came
in with comfort, and spoke peace, such a one lead them to such a promise, which
was like a Cordial to their fainting Soul. When they were abroad (they will
tell you) and were necessitated to the company of them which were strangers to
the life of Religion; and were at such a time troubled with horrible
Temptations; that they were in a wilderness condition, and thought that never
any that walked Heavenward, could be in the like state; but now when they got
acquainted with the people of God, they found, that as Face answered Face in a
Glass, so their experience, and the experience of many of the dear Children of
God was exactly alike; and that, that which they thought none in the world
could parallel, they find that most of the Christians that they meet with, know
as well as themselves, and at the first hearing are able to go on with the
story before them, so that they have sometimes wondered how any one living
should know their Hearts and Thoughts so well, to whom they did not communicate
them. I think it not altogether impertinent here to insert an observation of
mine own. I remember when I was once speaking concerning the duty of Christians
in Relation to their Unconverted Friends, and urging them upon doing what they
could for God and Souls, in the places where God had set them: in speaking to
this subject, I said, that there was not the meanest Christian, but might be an
instrument of the Conversion of a Soul: Upon this, I rehearsed a couple of
Experiences that I had of two persons, strangers one to the other, who gave
this account of their Conversion; they were upon the matter both alike, and
therefore I shall tell but one of them, which take as follows. There was a
Poor, Civil, yet very Carnal Creature, a Servant in a Religious Family, who did
from his Soul abhor the Spiritual Conversation of those in the Family, insomuch
that he was resolved to run away from his Service, he was so weary of such
doings: But one Night, hearing a strange sound somewhere, he arose out of his
Bed, and went to listen what was the matter: upon which, he heard one
distinctly praying on the other side of the wall, he still harkening, heard one
praying very earnestly for him (who did not know but he might be asleep) and
opening the condition of his Soul so particularly, and with so much Tenderness,
that he was wonderfully awakened to think that one that he hated should so much
love him, and pity his Soul, and to consider how it was possible any one in
the world should know his Thoughts so well as that person did, who prayed for
him; upon this he began to be very much startled to think of his condition,
concluding thus, surely I am in a lamentable state, and they see it, or else
they would never do as they do; they are praying for me, when I am asleep, they
love me when I hate them; upon this the man was very much troubled, and his
trouble daily increased, till he was forced to open his condition to the
person, who had been praying for him, which was a poor Maidservant: upon which
the work of Regeneration was carried on very sweetly, and the man became an
excellent Christian, whereas the Instrument that God used in this great work
was but a poor servant. Now when I rehearsed this thing which was the condition
of two, as I said before, a third person stood by (whom I never saw in my life
before) who fell a sweating for trouble, that any of his Friends should tell
such a thing of him, to me, and thought I had meant himself in all the
particulars, though I heard not a word of the man before in my life. This by
the by, I could not but hint this for the encouragement of parents to get their
children into Families that are really Religious, and to encourage all to
associate themselves to such as fear the Lord. You see by what has been
spoken, that acquaintance with the people of God, may be of great use for the
bringing the Soul acquainted with God.

VII. DIRECTION.
If you would be acquainted with God; entertain all the Messengers that he
sends to you kindly. When God calls, answer; and when he sends any of his
servants to you, bid them welcome; let the feet of those which bring glad
tidings be beautiful in your eye; do not think much if they deal plainly and
roundly with you, know that it is out of love to your Souls (God is their
witness) they see that your condition requires it, and that a man in your state
is not to be jested with. The Lord knows that they take little pleasure in
grieving of people; they do it that you may rejoice for ever; they watch for
your Souls, and therefore you must account them worthy of double Honor. But of
all the Messengers that God sends, have the greatest care of dealing unkindly
with, and grieving his spirit; when you have any motions upon your Soul by the
Spirit, labor to cherish them with all the care and tenderness that you can:
Turn not Convictions away with, I am not at leisure; or I will hear you of
these things when I have a more convenient season: but as soon as you find your
heart begin to relent, cry out unto the Lord, and say, O Lord I beseech thee,
carry on thy work effectually upon my Soul! O that I may have through work! O
let not these convictions wear off from my Soul, till they end in a real
Conversion! O let me not prove but a Half-Christian! Any thing in the world,
Lord, so that I may but be made a Christian in good earnest! O let me not
return with the Dog to his Vomit, and with the Sow that is washed, to her
Wallowing in the Mire! Deliver me, O God, from sinning away these things, and
getting into a cold World, and from shaking off all, least I prove worse than
eyer, and my latter end be more miserable than my beginning. Labor to be very
curious in the taking notice of Gods absence or presence; and when you find
your Soul raised in any duty, and your Heart somewhat drawn out after God, then
be sure to own Gods goodness, and bless the Lord for it; Record his kindness,
forget not his mercy, pass not over such great things in silence, Little do men
think what a hazard they run, when they quench the Motions of God's Spirit, You
may read in the 5. Cant. how dearly the Spouse had like to have paid for such
an unkindness? What, shall God send his spirit to visit you? Shall the infinite
Majesty so far condesend as to knock at your Door, and will not you open? why
then, you may thank your selves if he never knock more. But if you will now
open to him, he will come into you, and sup with you, and you shall sup with
him.

VIII. DIRECTION.
Seek his Acquaintance most earnestly if you would have it. O why do men and
women jest with matters of the greatest weight and importance in the world?
What do people mean to play with their Souls, the wrath of God, and damnation?
O sinners, have you nothing else to play with? No lower matters to sport with?
Believe it, Sirs, Heaven and Glory are not got with sitting still with our
Hands in our pockets. We think it worth the while to rise early, and to sit up
late, to get an earthly Estate; we count it no foolish thing for a man to be
very diligent about his Worldly Affairs. The poor Countryman Plows and Sows,
Harrows, Weeds, Reaps, Inns, Thresheth, and a great deal more, before he can
eat his bread: and shall we look for a rich crop, and do nothing at all but
eat, and drink, and sleep? Is this the way to be rich? is this the way to be
happy for ever? If you intend to do any thing in Religion to any purpose, you
must buckle to your business at anothergess rate than most of the Professors of
the World do. We must take as much pains about our Souls, as men do about their
Bodies or Estates. Is there any comparison between the Soul and the Body;
between a Worldly Estate, and an Heavenly Inheritance? Has a man more reason
to look after tricking up his body that must Die, or look after the adorning
adorning of his soul that must live somewhere for ever? Which are matters of
the greatest consequence, eating and drinking, and pampering the flesh, and
taking our pleasure; or looking after Life, Salvation, and Eternal Joy? Do you
think that the Scripture faith in vain, That we must strive to enter in at the
strait Gate? Is it a bare seeking that will serve the turn? Will a Lord have
mercy upon me, and bowing the knee, do as well as the greatest seriousness and
diligence in the World? Do you think that God will be put off with the skin and
garbage instead of sacrifice, with the shell instead of the kernel, with chaff
instead of the corn? Does not Christ say, That many shall seek to enter in, and
shall not be able? O why do not lazy Professors read the Scriptures with
trembling? Let all those that are angry with us for putting them upon making
religion their business, and using all diligence to make their calling and
election sure, Read that one Scripture over again, Luke 13.24. Strive to enter
in at the strait Gate; for many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and
shall not be able, etc. It was Christ who spoke that word. If we tell you of
the danger of a formal Religion, you will soon fall upon us as Enemies to your
peace, and those which impose too much strictness upon you: We therefore do
here produce our Commission for what we say, or rather we desire you but to
read your selves what Christ spoke, as touching this matter. O it might justly
make a Christians heart to ache, to think how many thousands of Professors will
be disowned by Christ in that day, who will make many fair pleas for
themselves, and pretend a great deal of acquaintance with him. Consider I
beseech you, here is no fear of Excess; never any man in the World that was too
solicitous about his Salvation, never any man took too much pains for Heaven.
Awake, O sleeper, what meanest thou? arise, and call upon thy God. If you make
any thing of the loss of a Soul, look about you; if you think the wrath to come
considerable, be serious; if you would not be burnt by the fire of his
Indignation, you must take hold of his strength, and make peace with him, and
God will be at peace with you, Isa. 27.5. It is not without cause, that the
Prophet does complain, Isa. 64.7. There is none that calls upon thy Name, that
stirs up himself to take hold on thee. There is none that calls upon Gods Name!
One would think that that were strange; What none call upon his Name, when so
many of them made many Prayers, as you have it in the first of Isaiah? What did
they nothing but look upon one another, when they had their Solemn Assemblies?
Did they say nothing to God, when they came before him? Did they do nothing at
all in that 58. of Isaiah, when they are said to seek him daily, when they
seemed to delight in his way? Yet in Gods esteem, all this goes for nothing at
all, this prayer is no prayer, this is only wording of it with God. But prayer
it is another kind of thing, it is the stirring up of the Soul, and awakening
all it is strength to wrestle with God, to lay hold upon God, and to prevail
with the Almighty; and where are such as these to be found, who is this that
engages his heart in the service of God? It is one thing to engage the tongue,
and another thing to engage the heart. Men come to pray with a common Spirit,
and are many times weary of the work before they have well begun it; what they
do, they do it lifelessly: They can follow their worldly Employments with life
and delight. They have Male in their flock, but that is too good for God; a
lame, blind, starved weak thing must serve his turn: And is this the way to
have the blessing? Are such as these like to have any thanks for their
kindness? Let them try how any of their Friends would take such a present. Now
would you have the Blessing of Acquaintance with God, you must wrestle for it,
and not let God go without it: You must be Fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord;
you must fight the good fight of Faith, and lay hold on Eternal Life: You must
grasp about Christ as a man that is a drowning would grasp any thing that were
thrown out to save him: You must use all diligence to make your Calling and
Election sure: You must work out your Salvation with fear and trembling: You
must seek for Wisdom as for Silver, and search for her as for hid Treasure.
Then shall you understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God.
What excellent thing is there, that is got without pains? Whoever came to be an
Exquisite curious Artist in any skill whatever, that never served an
Apprentiship to it, nor at the least gave his mind to it? where is there a
famous Physician that never studied in his life? Who gets a Victory by sleeping
and carelesseness? Who expects to have riches drop into his mouth, when he goes
all the ways that can be to make himself a beggar? Does the Husbandman look for
a good Crop without plowing or sowing? Why then, should we expect such great
things as Heaven, Eternal happiness, and the favor of God, without out looking
after them. Whatsoever the lazy formal professor may say, the Kingdom of Heaven
is not obtained thus: there must be running, watching, fighting, conquering,
holding fast, holding out, and all little enough; it requires all the strength
of thy soul to engage in this great work; it requires some resolution to do
such a work, as every Christian must do, or else his Religion signifies little.
Further, it calls for some time too, it is not a thing to be minded, now and
then by the by, between sleep and wake, when the Devil and the World have had
as much service as they call for. Were it for your bodies that I were now
pleading; were you like to get any great matter in the world by following of my
directions; could you be showed a way how to get a great estate, honors, and
long life, I am verily persuaded a few words might prevail much. Why, if you
will believe the word of God, I am telling you of other kind of things then
these be, greater matters by far; and yet how little are Men and Women
affected? As if we spoke but in jest always, when we spoke about things that
did concern Souls! How little time do men spend in their inquiry into these
things? Ask Epictetus ( Ench. c. 63.) And he will tell you that it is a sign of
a low Soul; to bestow much time upon thy body, and the thoughts of it, and
little upon the Soul, to be long eating, and long drinking, and long a
dressing, and short in prayer, short in the thoughts of the Soul, and short in
the service of God; and that it is a sign of a base degenerate Spirit to be
very curious about toys, and inconsiderable trifles, and to be negligent about
matters of the greatest importance, to slubber over the great works of Religion
with the greatest slightness. Remember, O man, thy great work, it is to take
care of thy Soul, to look after a Companion, a Friend for thy Soul, to get food
and clothing for thy Soul, that that famish not with hunger and cold. To be
indifferent in all externals is the greatest prudence; but to be indifferent
about Spirituals and Eternals is the greatest madness. We are all Soudiers, and
must fight in such a War wherein we must never lay down our Arms. The favor of
God is worth the striving for, it is as much as Heaven and Glory is worth. If
your estate or life lay at stake, would you not be willing to use all the
interest you could to make the Judge your friend? would you go up and down
laughing as if you had nothing to do? would you eat and drink as merrily as
ever, and say, it is but dying, it is but being a beggar, it is but the undoing
of my wife and children? would you not look upon a man that should argue at
this rate to be little better than frantic? and I pray which is most
considerable, the death of the body, or the death of the soul; the loss of a
temporal, or the loss of an eternal inheritance. Most men's diligence in
Temporals will condemn their negligence in Spiritnals. Christ said, Seek ye
first the Kingdom of Heaven, and the righteousness thereof; but most men say, I
will seek first the Earth, and the glory thereof; and if God will give me
Heaven and happiness after I have served the Devil and the world as long as I
can, I shall be contented to have it. No such matter, never expect it, God must
sooner cease to be, than to gratify you in this. Wherefore do you think, did
David follow his work so close? Why did all those Noble Worthies in the Church
of old take so much pains? Why should they not much stick to venture estates,
and lives too? Will you condemn them all as guilty of too much curiosity, and
unnecessary preciseness? Do you think that their labor was in vain? Are all
those disappointed who willingly parted with present things for future things?
I must tell you, if you expect to sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in
the Kingdom of Heaven, you must do as they did. Heaven will not be obtained now
upon any lower Term than then. Your Souls are as precious as their's, and
Heaven will be as well worth your minding as theirs, and God will look upon you
as well as upon them, if you will value his favor as they did. Never look to
have God give you that which you will not thank him for. What do you say after
all this? will you sit down before your work is done? open thine eyes, and
consider what thou have to do, and then tell me if it be not the greatest folly
imaginable to be slight in these Affairs. O how can thou eat, or drink, or
sleep, whilst thou have such a great work to do which is undone! O give not
sleep to thine eyes, or slumber to thine eyelids, but deliver thy self from
the hand of the hunter, and as a bird from the hand of the fowler. Go to the
Ant thou sluggard: Consider her ways, and be wise; which having no guide,
over-seer, or ruler, provideth her meat in the Summer, and gathers her meat
in the Harvest. How long will thou sleep, O sluggard? When will thou arise out
of thy sleep? Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the
hands to sleep, so shall thy poverty come as one that travelleth, and thy want
as an armed man. and will you now labor to get acquaintance with God, as you
would to get food for your body? will you endeavor as much to make sure of his
love, as you would do to make sure of a pardon, in case of the forfeiture of
your life? If so, we have some hopes, the work may have some considerable issue.

IX. DIRECTION.
If you would be acquainted with God, be much in expostulating the case with
God, and in urging those arguments which the Scripture does afford you in such
a case. Take with you words, and come unto the Lord, and spread your requests
before him, and say, O Lord, thou have sent thy servant the Ministers, and have
invited me to come unto thee, and thou offeredst peace and reconciliation, and
to be acquainted with me. O God, I desire from my soul, to come upon thy call,
and would fain be acquainted with thee. I see myself in an undone state, while
I am a stranger to thee: but, O Lord, I have a cursed base heart that keeps me
back from thee, and I cannot tell what in the world to do. O Lord, I beseech
thee help thy poor Creature to come unto thee, lead me by the hand, let thy
goodness and love constrain me, conquer me by thy kindness; come Lord into my
soul, and let me see thy face, and look upon thee till I am in love with thee.
O why art thou as a stranger to me? will thou forsake me for ever? shall I be
one of those thine enemies which shall be slain before thy face? shall I be one
of those that shall dwell with everlasting burnings? O Lord, pity, pity, pity,
for Christ his sake, a poor creature that would fain love thee, and be
acquainted with thee. I am convinced that I must be damned without thee, and
come to thee of my self I cannot, O draw me! O carry me! O compel me! constrain
me, make me willing in the day of thy power: I cannot get loose, my heart is
too hard for me, my lasts are too strong for me, my temptations are too many
for me to conquer of my self. O Lord help me. Turn me, and I shall be turned.
Pluck my feet out of the snare, or I shall be utterly destroyed for ever.
Forgive mine iniquity, make me a clean heart, make me thy servant. Tell God
that thou have heard of his goodness and mercy, and that the King of Israel is
a merciful King; and that it is his nature to pity. Say to him, O I am a poor
undone creature, and will thou send me away without mercy? will the God of
Grace send me away without Grace? have thou not called me, O God? thy servants,
tell me so, O Lord speak and give me ears to hear; O Lord I am come in upon thy
merciful Proclamation, and I desire to lay my self at thy feet; mercy Lord,
mercy upon what terms thou please. Did thou not say in thy Word, Ho, every
one that thirsts, come, and buy Wine and Milk without Money, and without
price. Have not thy servants pleaded with me to come? and have thou not sent
for me? O! a blessing, a blessing for me, even for me, O my father! Have thou
not a blessing for me? shall I be sent away as I came? O Lord, I come at thy
word! Do not say unto me, Be gone out of my sight. I cannot go, I will not go;
whither shall I go from thee? For thou have the words of Eternal Life. Though I
cannot say, Be just to me a Saint, yet I will say, Be merciful to me a sinner.
You may read more in R. A. his first part of his Vindiciae Pietatis, page 232.
the whole Treatise is excellent. Plead the blood of Christ; you may safely say,
that if there be not enough in Christ to save you, you do not desire Salvation;
for in him there is all fullness. You may plead your own absolute necessity.
Tell God, that if ever poor creature in the world had need of mercy, you have;
tell him that you are resolved not to be content without his love. You may
plead his promise, in which he has said, That he will take away the heart of
stone, and give a heart of flesh; and that he will put his fear in our hearts,
and write his laws in our inward parts. You may plead also the power of God,
whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself; and many such like
arguments, you may find in many places in the Scripture. But because I have
touched upon this before, I shall pass this by.

X. DIRECTION.
If you would be acquainted with God, look after it speedily, defer not a
moment, your enemy is marching on apace, you may be surprised, your soul is
hasting upon it is Eternal state, your glass is almost run, there are but a few
sands behind; therefore seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him
while he is near: Ere long it will be too late; wherefore what thou do, do
quickly. What is the voice both of Scripture and Providence? Does not the Word
of God say Now, and commend the present time above all. Acquaint now thy self
with him; Remember now thy Creator; Turn now unto the Lord. Let a poor Heathen
( Epict. En. c. 75.) shame you into greater speed in this necessary work. I
shall translate his words into English: How long, says he, will you defer the
looking after the best things? How long will you abuse your reason? Have you
not heard such Precepts which you ought to agree to, and you seemed very well
to like of? What kind of Teacher is it that you stay for? For whose coming do
you defer before you will mend and turn? You are come now to years of
discretion (if I should say you were not, you would be angry) if you will
neglect and delay, and add one delay to another, if you will add one put off to
another, and make one resolution and purpose after another, and set one day
after another, in which you will think of these things; consider that all this
will do you no good, for all your resolutions and promises, for all that I see,
you are like to die a common man; therefore now live as a perfect growing man,
and follow that which is most excellent unalterably. If any thing of difficulty
intervene, remember that now is the time for you to show what respect you have
for your God and your soul. Remember the goal is not far off, and that now you
must not falter, and that as you demean your self now, it may be you may be
happy or miserable while you have a Being. This is the Language of that
excellent Moralist. I add, what is it, O sinner, that thou stayest for? Is it
for the day of Judgment? would you be taught by flames, the worth of time? You
may then indeed learn; but believe it, your knowledge and learning will do you
little good; you may then learn what it is to be miserable. but you cannot learn
how to get out of it; you will know what you have lost, but then will never
know how to repair your Losses. How many Thousands of them which have set a
day, in which they would return and repent, have set, and set, and set it
again, and what with one thing or other they could not be at leisure to repent
till they came to Hell; and there indeed they have leisure enough to repent,
and they do repent too, if Hell-Repentance would do any thing: I believe that
all that come there do repent and believe too more than they did while they
were alive; but then it is too late. They that are now in those dreadful Flames,
many of them thought, it may be, of repenting before they died as well as you,
and did just as you do. O that you would understand your selves before your
state be like theirs! how infinitely does it concern you to improve time, and
to comply with the present tender of mercy that are made to you: for ere long
it may be too late for you too. O know this therefore, that now thy God makes
thee a gracious offer of pardon; and if you refuse now, this may be the last
time, this may be the very cast for Eternity. God may say before to morrow,
This night thy soul shall be required of thee. Go to therefore, you that talk
of trading for the great things of Eternity, I do not know when, thirty or
forty years hence, Do you not know that your life is but a blast? When your
breath goes out of your Nostrils, you are not sure that you shall draw it in
again. What then do you mean to talk of delay? have you not staid long enough
already? consider man what thou do. He that says he will be good to morrow,
he says he will be wicked to day. And what if God should say, thou shall have
the pleasure of sin to day and the sorrow of sin to morrow? Thou shall be
hardened to day, and damned to morrow? If your house were on fire, you would
scare say, I will go and sleep four or five hours, and then I will rise and
call my Neighbors to help to quench it. If your Child were a drowning, you
would scarce say, I must needs stay till I have drunk a flaggon or two more,
and about half an hour hence it may be I may go and see whether I can get a
Boat to help him out. If you were condemned to dye to morrow, you would scarce
say, I will have Music, and Sack, and good company all night, and then I will
send a Messenger if I can get one to ride a Hundred Mile to try whether he can
get a Pardon for me. Yet thus for all the world thou do do in the great
affairs of thy immortal Soul. O the folly of man (says Seneca) who thinks to
begin to live, when a thousand to one but he will be dead and rotten! I may
say, O the madness of sinners, who make account to be looking after Heaven
then, when it is likely their souls may be in Hell! Judge now whether this be
wisdom. Now you think time one of the poorest commodities in the world, it is a
very drugg which lies upon your hand, a day or two, a week, a year is no great
matter with you: but believe it, the case will be altered with a witness ere
long. Seneca wondered when he heard some asking one of his friends for to spend
two or three weeks with them, when he saw how easily the request was granted,
as if they asked as little as nothing, when they asked time of him: Thus (says
he) one of the preciousest things in the world is thrown away as little worth.
When you come to lie upon your deathbed, we shall have you have other thoughts
of time: then, a world, if you had it, for one of those hours, that you could
not tell how to spend. You now study how to rob you self of your precious time,
you invent pastimes, not considering how swiftly time flies, and how much you
will prize it before long. O remember no body can give you a moment of that
time when you want it, that you are now so prodigal of. When time is past, if
you would give a world to recall it, it could not be: If you would give
thousands for the renewing of this Lease, it would be refused. Therefore live
quickly. Man's time runs away first. Optima quaequae dies miseris mortalibus
aevi, prima fugit... Seneca: And then my Author Comments very bravely upon the
whole verse.

I think that Proverb, though it be an Italian one, is worth our remembering, He
that will lodge well at night, must set out betimes in the morning. That which
keeps us from living to day, is the thoughts of living to morrow, so that we
lose this day while we expect the next. Comenius speaking of the Tiger, says,
That when he hears the sound of the Trumpet, he tears and bites himself. This
will be the work of the merciless Tigers of the world, that spend their time
(in which they should be providing for Eternity) in hunting Gods people, and
taking their pleasures; and it may be think to be a little more mild before
they die; but of a sudden the Trumpet sounds, away, away, and O then what a
lamentable taking are they in! how do they wish for time again, or that they
had spent that which they had better? Wicked men never knew the worth of time,
till they come to a Deathbed, or a while after. O then, they that made nothing
of spending thirty or forty years, would lay down all they are worth for one
year, one month, one day, one hour, but it is then too late. O how do they gnash
their teeth! with what horror do they think of past mercies, and future
miseries! Men fear generally that Death will come sooner than they would have
him; they bewail that their lives are short at the longest; whereas if men
would wisely husband that time that God has given them, it would be long
enough: O happy is that man that has done his great Work before his Sun is
set? O foolish men that complain of God for making their lives so short, and
complain not at all of themselves for making them ten times shorter: For most
men lives not at all the life of Religion, and may be called Dead. Others have
a name to live, and yet are little better than the former. Most that live
spiritually, begin their life after they have been many years dead: and though
we sit and condemn others as guilty of great imprudence in these affairs, yet,
how do we at the same time justify them, by being as profusely expensive of
precious time as they? O where is the man almost to be found, that does improve
time to as good advantage as he should? Among other Symptoms of a fool, this
is none of the least, To be always beginning to live. What an unhandsome sight
is it to see an old man learning his Letters? O remember man thou have a great
work to do! O remember thy precious time runs away with an unspeakable
swiftness! What do you mean, to sit with your hands in your bosoms? Look about
thee, O sinner, it is not time a day for you to be sleeping or playing; Methinks
a man in your condition should be up and doing with all the diligence that you
could for your soul, and laboring to make your calling and election sure;
methinks we should hear you asking, what you shall do to get a Pardon for your
sins, get God reconciled to you. Methinks you should be enquiring what you
should do to redeem your time, and to spend every moment of it so to the best
advantage, as that you may appear cheerfully before your Master at night. That
I may enforce this weighty Direction, I shall propound a few serious Questions
to you.

Quest. 1. Do you think that these things are necessary, or are they not? If
they be necessary, why do you not mind them speedily? If they be not necessary,
do not look after them at all.

Quest. 2. Do you expect to be in a better capacity to look after these things
hereafter? do you hope for more strength, when you are worn out with sin and
age, when your back begins to bend, and your joints to shake? Do you think you
shall be more at leisure, when your work will be much increased? Know this,
that sin grows upon you daily, it preys upon your Vitals: He that is not fit to
day, will be less fit to morrow. As for leisure, I must confess you may have
leisure enough in another World, to think of these things. But I wish you well
to consider whether it be great wisdom to repent in this world, or in another.
I would be loath to be repenting in another, it is sad weeping indeed there,
where tears shall never be dried up. I have told you often that God faith, to
day, and it is both wickedly and foolishly done of man to say, to morrow. I
must tell you but so, that it is a dreadful hazard that every delaying Sinner
does run: It is a question whether God may not deny his Grace, stop the
Preachers mouth, stop his ears, and stop your breath: And where are you then
with your to morrow? delays in these affairs always cost dear, they have cost
many thousands dear already, and if you make no more have than you have done,
they will cost you dear too.

Quest. 3. When would you get acquainted with God? When he has shut up his
door? When would you run this race? When you have lost your legs, or can but
creep with Crutches? Is that the best time to do your work in, when it is next
to impossible to do it?

Quest. 4. Who deserves best at your hands, the Devil, the World, and the
Flesh, or God? Resolve me this I pray? Whom do you call your Master? Whom have
you most reason to make have for?

Quest. 5. How would you take it, if any of them which depend upon you, should
serve you as you serve God?

Quest. 6. Do you think you can make too much have? Who is afraid of being Rich
too soon? Although a man may with reason good enough be afraid of that which
may make his happiness far more uncertain, and his miseries more intolerable.
Who fears to make too much have when his Prince sends for him with speed? O
that men did but know, who it is that calls them, and whether they are going,
and what they have to do, when they come to their journies end?

Quest. 7. Are you sure you shall live till you are an hour older? You are
strong and healthful it may be, but did you never hear that such have with a
very little warning? Have you never known a man well one hour, and dead the
next? If you have not, I tell you of one now, that was very well one moment,
and dead the next, my self being an eyewitness of it. It Is possible there may
be but one small moment between a strong working healthful man, and a
breathless Corpse.

Quest. 8. What do you think will become of you, I ask again, if you put off
till it be too late?

Quest. 9. What would you do, if you were sure you should dye, or the day of
Judgment come before you were a week older?

Quest. 10. Do you think to get acquainted with God in another world, when you
do not mind him here? Will God think you own them hereafter, that disown him
here? Will he know them in Heaven, who would not know him upon the Earth?

XI. DIRECTION.
If you would be acquainted with God, take heed of those things, which keep God
and man at a distance, and make the Lord take no pleasure in us. In general,
take heed of all sin, Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your
doings from mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do good, seek judgment,
relieve the oppressed, judge the Fatherless, and plead the cause of the Widow.
Come now, and let us reason together, says the Lord. Isa. 1.17, 18. You must
wash your hands in Innocence, if you intend to compass his Altar, to sit down
it his Table. In Psalm. 101. David is exceeding desirous of Gods company, and he
cries out, O when will thou come unto me! he thinks long to have a visit from
his old friend; he would gladly walk with him. Now what course does he take to
get Gods company? Why, he goes the best way to work in the world: He will set
no wicked thing before his eyes. He knows it is to no purpose for him to expect
much of Gods company, while he does entertain his greatest enemies; therefore
he turns them out of doors; I hate, says he, the works of them that turn
aside, it shall not cleave to me: And that God may dwell with him, and make his
house, as well as his heart, a Temple for himself, he will not suffer a wicked
person to live in it, he will have none in his Family, but such as shall be
ready to serve God, and bid this his great Friend welcome.

But more particular, if you would have much of Gods company, and be intimately
acquainted with him; take heed more especially of those particular sins which
make God most to estrange himself from. As,

First, Take heed of Pride: That was the sin which made the first breach
between the Creature and the Creator, the sin that sunk the Angels, that made
God and them, who were very good Friends once, to be bitter enemies; this has
made the breach infinite, the feud everlasting, the wound incurable. And this
made the first Quarrel between God and man. When man thinks himself too good to
be but a man, he must be a God; he quickly is too had to be a man, he is but
one remove from the Devil. To be a favorite of his Prince is not enough,
except he may step into the Throne; it is therefore high time for his Prince to
remove such from his presence to a Prison, from the Court to a Dungeon. It was
Pride that cast Adam out of Paradise; and do you think that that sin is less
hateful to God, and less dangerous to man than it was five thousand years ago?
Did it then spend all it is poison? And can it now do no harm? Do you believe
that God will take that into his bosom now that formerly he abhorred to look
upon? Now sin has increased it is strength and deformity, and heightened it is
enmity against the infinite Majesty of the holy Jehovah, shall his hatred
against it decrease? will he be more willing to accompany proud aspiring
Rebels now than then? no such matter: God is still as holy as ever, and hates
all sin, especially pride as much as ever. Do you think that it is for nothing
that the word of God speaks so much against this sin? Can it be that the
Holy Ghost would say, Prove. 11. That every one that is proud, is an abomination
to the Lord, except God did indeed hate them? Why should God threaten such so
much, if he took any pleasure in their Society? though hand join in hand, yet
the proud shall not go unpunished. Now we call the proud happy, but shall we
call him so, when the day of the Lord shall burn as fire, and all the proud
shall be as stubble: And the day that comes shall burn them up, says the
Lord, and it shall leave them neither root nor branch. When the Lord shall
tread down the wicked, and they shall be like Ashes under his feet, Mal. 3.15.
and 4.1, 3. There is not one proud man in Heaven, I am sure: Nor a proud man
upon the Earth, that shall have much of Gods acquaintance. And let me say, he
that sets himself above God (for that is the Pride I mean) whilst he stands in
that state, must never expect that God should look upon him with any kindness.
Heaven and Hell will as soon be agreed, as God and such a one shall be united.
The proud now overlook others that are their betters, and scorn their Maker;
but shortly they shall be paid in their own coin, they shall be scorned too. If
all the proud Nimrods, Pharaohs and Belshazzars in the world should enter into
a League, and combine against the Almighty, and say, they will cast away his
Cords from them, and that they will never debase their noble Spirits so low as
to stoop to his commands; yet none of them all shall go unpunished: They shall
be like stubble before the devouring flames, and like Chasse before a mighty
whirlwind: God is not afraid of their big looks, Prove. 21.4. Prove. 6.17. Prove.
15.25. Isa. 2.12. Luke 1.51. Jam. 4.6. God will cloth himself with vengeance,
and the mighty Jehovah will gird his weapon upon his thigh, and march out in
fury and Indignation, and draw his glittering Sword, and resist the proud, and
teach them what it is to bid defiance to the Lord of Host. We shall soon see,
who shall be uppermost, God or they. And when the proud sinner lies conquered
at his feet, how does he with infinite scorn look upon him, and say, behold,
the man is become like one of us! This it is for man to attempt the dethroning
of the Almighty! But it may be, most may think themselves little concerned in
that which I now speak; wherefore I must add this one word. Be it known unto
thee, O man, whosoever thou art, that think thou have no pride; I am sure
thou art one of those that are in that black Roll which have proclaimed War
against Heaven; thou art the man that shall never be acquainted with God whilst
thou art in that mind. It may be thou may speak Peace to thy self for all
this, and flatter thy self as if God and you were Friends; but let me tell
thee, I come with heavy tidings in my mouth to thee: If thou turn not, he will
whet his Sword, he has bent his Bow, and made it ready, he has prepared for
thee the Instruments of death, the day of thy Calamity is near: The dreadful
Jehovah is upon his march; and if you ask me whether there be not Peace for
thee, I answer as Jehu did to Jchoram, what peace, O haughty sinner, so long as
the pride of thy heart is so great, and thy Rebellions against thy Maker so
many? There is no peace says my God to the wicked. Wherefore as you value your
Soul, as you tender your everlasting Salvation, and desire to be owned by the
Lord in the day of your distress, take heed of pride. Go quickly, and humble
your self, and make sure your Friend; labor to pull down every high Thought,
and every proud Imagination; and let your Arrogant Spirit how before the mighty
God, there is no way will do but this; as ye have already heard: You must set
the Crown upon the Lords head, you must lay your selves at his feet, and lick
the very dust. Your betters have done so before you, and have thought it their
honor to lie at the feet of Christ; this they looked upon (as with good reason
too) as the first step to preferment. If therefore you would be acquainted with
God, take heed of pride.

Secondly, Take heed of a worldly mind. What concord is there between Earth and
Heaven? What agreement between God and the World? What delight can his Holiness
take in him, who had rather be wallowing in the Mud, and treading of Clay, then
bathing himself in Divine contemplation; that thinks it higher preferment to
sit by his bags of Gold, then to stand in the presence of his God: a greater
happiness to be rich, than to be holy; that had much rather be in a Fair,
Marker, or Exchange, getting money, than with his God, getting Pardon, Grace
and Heaven. How pregnant is the Scripture of proofs for the evidencing of this
truth? to name one or two of a hundred, Romans 8.7. To be carnally minded is
enmity against God: For it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can
it be. What do you say to this Scripture? Those which walk with God, live in
the world, and yet they live above the world; they all look for a City that
has foundations, whose builder and maker is God. It was not for nothing that
the Apostle John lays so strict a charge upon those which he wrote to, That
they should not love the world, nor the things of the world: For if any love
the world, the love fo the Father is not in them, 1 John 2.15. Whence is it
that so few great ones go to Heaven, and that it is next to impossible for such
to be saved? Is it not because they have chosen Mammon for their Friend, rather
than God? He has their heart, their Love, their Time, their Service, and they
have little to spare for God, and therefore God has but a little happiness, a
little heaven, a short glory for them; they shall have but a little of his
sweet company, little Acquaintance with him. Why does James speak so terribly
to the rich men, and bid them go, and weep and howl? was it not because their
riches were like to undo them? Did the wealthy man in the Parable live ever
the longer for his riches, or fare ever the better for his greatness, when he
came into another world? There is no question but he might have more
flatterers; there is no doubt but he has more worldly Friends; but bring me a
man upon the Earth, that lets his heart without control fly upon the world,
cleaves to it, and takes it to be his best friend, that knows God, that is
acquainted with his Maker, that prizeth his Redeemer. It was a wise man, who
said, that it is absolutely impossible to mind externals and internals, this
world and another, with earnestness at the same time: but it was wisdom it self
who said, That no Servant can serve two Masters; for either he will hate the
one, and love the other, or else he will hold to the one, and despise the
other; he cannot serve God and Mammon, Mat. 5.24. etc.

3. Take heed of Hypocrisy. Who are the persons that God does denounce his
dreadful threatenings against? Are they not such as honor him with their Lips,
when their Hearts is far from him? With what Abhorrency does he look upon such,
and all that they do? Isa. 1. They never bring their heart to visit God with,
and therefore they have little reason to expect that he should bring his
Dainties to entertain them with.

4. If you would be acquainted with God, take heed of being acquainted with
wicked company. We read that many wicked men have fared the better for the
company of the godly; but we scarce ever heard that any godly man ever fared
the better for being in the company of the wicked, except they went on Gods
Errand amongst them. This is clear in the case of Lot, who first lost his
goods, and was made a Captive by being in Sodom; and though they were restored
to him again for a while, (one would have thought that should have been a fair
warning how he came again into such company) yet because that would not do, a
while after you may read how dear Lot paid for dwelling in Sodom. Poor man! he
lost all that he had, and was fain to fly away without either. Flocks or Herds,
and little more than his clothes on his back; and that which was more sad, to
leave some of his own dear Relations behind him, roasting in those dismal
flames. Whereas had he never come to Sodom, or upon the sight of their
wickedness speedily left them, it had been much better with him in many
respects. Jehosaphat fared never the better for joining in affinity with his
wicked Neighbors, it had like to have cost him his life. But were it, only
loss of Temporals that a man hazarded by such society, the danger were not so
considerable; but the peril is greater than so, for by it they make God stand
at a distance; they must never look to have such company, and Gods company both
together; I mean, when they do unnecessarily or delightfully converse with God.
If therefore you intend to be acquainted with God, you must not have them
always in your company whom he hates, and which hate him, and will labor all
they can to cool your affections toward him. Wherefore, be ye not unequally
yoaked with unbelievers: For, what Fellowship has Righteousness with
unrighteousness? And what communion has light with darkness? And what concord
has Christ with Belial? Or what part has he that believes with an Infidel?
And what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? For ye are the Temple of
the living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I
will be their God, and they shall be my people; wherefore come out from among
them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and
I will receive you, and I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons
and Daughters, says the Lord Almighty, 2 Cor. 6.14. to the end. But I would
not here be mistaken, as if I would commend an ungodly proud separation from
all that are not just of our mind; or as if a man ought to have nothing at all
to do with wicked men; no, no: Every one ought to do what he can in his place
for the good of Souls. O that Christians would thus converse more with their
poor, ignorant, carnal, Christless neighbors! O that they would thus be more
acquainted with the wicked, and then they should have never the less of Gods
company, but the more; but it is an unnecessary delightful associating of our
selves with them that I mean, especially such of them which will stifle every
spiritual discourse, and divert you from any thing that tends to the promoting
of the interest of Religion; and such as have frequently expressed their
detestation of the way of Holiness, and make but a mock at your serious
Counsels, stop their ears so who some Advice, or make some undecent reflections
upon the strict prosession of godliness; such as labor to make you believe
that all Religion, but that which will consist with their wickedness, is but a
Fancy. As for such as those, abhor their company, fly from them as those that
have the plague, the marks of death are upon them, and you may write Lord have
mercy upon us upon their doors, but go not in, lest you be Infected.

5. If you would be acquainted with God, take heed of unbelief. Unbelief will
make your soul depart from God, and God quite to depart from your soul. This,
This is one of those dreadful and God-estranging sins, which leads on whole
Legions against the Almighty. This is that bold daring sin which gives Truth it
self the lie, and says, That the Word of God is false, his Promises airy, his
Threatenings but a Wind: But know this, O sinner, such a wind they be, that will
rise to a dreadful storm, and turn your strong confidence up by the roots, and
blow them into Hell, if you make no more of them than you do.

6. If you would be acquainted with God, beware of sensuality. To be sensual
and devilish are near akin. To be lovers of pleasures and haters of God, are
usually concomitants; in a word, to fare deliciously every day, and to be
despised of God, are no strange things. But I wave the further prosecution of
these things, because they are so largely and excellently handled already by so
many of our brave Worthies. See Mr. Baxters Saints Rest, and R. A. his Vindicia
Pietatis.

XII. DIRECTION.
If you would be acquainted with God, resolvedly and freely given up your self
to him, and enter into a most solemn Covenant with him. And here I shall make
bold with that Reverend Author which R. A. does mention in his Vindicia
Pietatis, and present you again with that excellent Form with the preparatories
to it, which I have lately met with in the forementioned Author. After your
most serious addresses to God, and after a deliberate consideration of the
terms of this Covenant; and after a through search of your own heart, whether
you either have already, or can now freely make such a closure with God in
Christ, as you have been exhorted to: And when you have composed your spirits
into the most serious frame possible, suitable to a transaction of so high a
nature, Lay hold upon the Covenant, and reply upon his promise of giving grace
and strength, whereby you may be enabled to perform your promise. Resolve in
the next place to be faithful, having engaged your hearts, and opened your
mouths, and subscribed with your hands to the Lord; resolve in his strength
never to go back. And being thus prepared, and some convenient time being set
apart for the purpose, set upon the work, and in the most solemn manner
possible, as if the Lord were visibly present before your eyes; fall down on
your knees, and spreading forth your hands toward Heaven, open your hearts to
the Lord in these or the like words.

O most dreadful God; for the Passion of thy Son, I beseech thee accept of thy
poor Prodigal, now prostrating himself at thy door; I have fallen from thee by
mine Iniquity, and am by Nature a Son of Death, and a thousand fold more the
Child of Hell by my Wicked Practice; but of thine infinite Grace thou have
promised Mercy to me in Christ, if I will but turn to thee with all my Heart:
Therefore upon the Call of the Gospel I am now come in, and throwing down my
Weapons, submit my self to thy mercy. And because thou requirest as the
Condition of my Peace with thee, that I should put away mine Idols, and be at
defiance with all thine Enemies, which I acknowledge I have wickedly sided with
against thee; I here from the bottom of mine Heart renounce them all, freely
covenanting with thee, not to allow my self in any known Sin, but
conscientiously to use all the means that I know thou have prescribed for the
Death and utter Destruction of all my Corruptions; And whereas I have formerly
inordinately and Idolatriously let out my Affections upon the World, I do here
resign my heart to thee that made it; Humbly protesting before thy glorious
Majesty, that it is the firm Resolution of my Heart, and that I do unfeignedly
desire grace from thee, that when thou shall call me hereunto, I may practice
this my Resolution, through thy Assistance, to forsake all that is dear unto me
in this World, rather than to turn from thee to the ways of sin; And that I
will watch against all its Temptations, whether of Prosperity or Adversity,
lest they should withdraw my Heart from thee; beseeching thee also to help me
against the Temptations of Satan, to whose suggestions. I resolve, by thy Grace
never to yield my self a Servant. And because mine own Righteousness is but
menstruous Rags, I renounce all Confidence therein, and acknowledge that I am
of my self a hopeless, helpless undone Creature, without righteousness or
strength. And for as much as thou have of thy bottomless Mercy offered most
graciously to me wretched sinner, to be again my God through Christ, if I would
accept of thee; I call Heaven and Earth to record this day, that I do here
solemnly avouch thee for the Lord my God, and with all possible Veneration,
bowing the Neck of my Soul under the Feet of thy most Sacred Majesty, I do here
take thee the Lord Jehovah, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for my Portion, and
chief good, and do give up my self, Body, and Soul for thy Servant; promising
and vowing to serve thee in holiness and righteousness all the days of my life.

And since thou have appointed the Lord Jesus Christ, the only means of coming
unto thee, I do here upon the bended Knees of my Soul, accept of him as the
only new and living way, by which sinners may have access to thee; and do here
solemnly join my self in a Marriage Covenant to him.

O blessed Jesus, I come to thee hungry and hardly bestead, poor, and wretched,
and miserable, and blind, and naked, a most loathsome polluted wretch, a guilty
condemned Malefactor unworthy for ever to wash the feet of the Servants of my
Lord, much more to be solemnly Married to the King of Glory; But since such is
thine unparall'd Love, I do here with all my power accept thee for my Head and
Husband, for better for worse, for richer for poor, for all times and
conditions, to Love and Honor, and Obey thee before all others, and this to
the Death. I embrace thee in all thy Offices, I renounce mine own worthiness,
and do here avow thee to be the Lord my righteousness; I renounce mine own
wisdom, and do here take thee for mine only Guide; I renounce mine own will,
and take the will for my Law.

And since thou have told me that I must suffer if I will reign, I do here
covenant with thee, to take my Lot as it falls with thee, and by thy Grace
assisting, to run all hazards with thee, verily supposing, that neither life
nor death shall part between thee and me.

And because thou have been pleased to give me thy Holy Law, as the rule of my
life, and the way in which I should walk to thy Kingdom; I do here willingly
put my Neck under thy Yoke, and set my shoulders to thy Burden, and subscribing
to all thy Laws, as Holy, Just, and Good; I solemnly take them as the rule of
my Words, Thoughts, and Actions: Promising, that though my flesh contradict and
rebel, yet I will endeavor to order and govern my whole life according to thy
direction, and will not allow my self in the neglect of any thing that I know
to be my duty.

Only because through the frailty of my flesh, I am subject to many failings, I
am bold humbly to protest, that unhallowed miscarriages contrary to the settled
bent and resolution of my heart, shall not make void this Covenant; for so thou
have said.

Now Almighty God, searcher of hearts, thou know that I make this Covenant
with thee this day, without any known guile, or reservation; beseeching thee,
that if thou espiest any flaw or falsehood herein, thou would discover it to
me, and help me to do it a right.

And now glory be to thee, O God the Father, whom I shall be bold from this day
forward, to look upon thee as my God and Father, That ever thou should find
out such a way for the recovery of undone sinners. Glory be to thee, O God the
Son, who have loved me, and washed me from my sins in thine own Blood, and art
now become my Savior and Redeemer. Glory he to thee, O God the Holy Ghost, who
by the finger of thine Almighty power have turned about my Heart from sin to
God.

O dreadful Jehovah, the Lord God Omnipotent, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, thou
art now become my Covenant-Friend, and I through thine infinite Grace, am
become thy Covenant-Servant. Amen. So be it. And the Covenant which I have made
on Earth, let it be ratified in Heaven.

The Conclusion.
AND now my Work is done, I must leave you; and whether I shall ever speak to
you, or see you, or write to you again while the world stands, I know not: My
body is frail, and I am a poor dying man, and before it be long, my mouth will
be more stopped than it is, and yours too: And therefore it is high time for us
to look about us. As for my part, I have with all the seriousness that I could
for my soul, spoke to you, about the great and weighty affairs of your Souls
and Eternity. I again call Heaven and Earth to witness, that I have set Life
and Death before you; I have in the Name of my great Master been woing of you
to accept of his Son for your Lord and Husband; himself for your God, Father
and Friend. I have told you what the Lord does require of them that would be in
Covenant with him. I have given you a rude Description of him whom I would have
you acquainted with. I have told you of some of the glorious effects of
acquaintance with God. I have told you of the danger of being a stranger to
God. I have told you how thankfully some have closed with these offers, and how
well they like their choice. I have further showed you what a peaceable state
you shall be in, immediately upon your Spiritual Alliance with this Great and
Noble friend. I have told you also of some further benefit and good that will
come unto you upon your acquaintance with God. I have given you to understand
how desirous the Lord is notwithstanding all that is past, to forget and
forgive, and to receive you into favor, if you will in good earnest return to
him with speed. I have again and again propounded this match to you, and told
you as much as I could well do in so short a time, I have stayed a great while
for an answer, I have put the business forward all that possibly I could;
because I see how foolishly and madly you make light of those advantageous
offers, that are made to you, I have again and again pleaded with you, as if I
were ready to starve, and begging an alms of you; nay, if it had been for my
very life, I could not have spoke with more earnestness. I have expostulated
the Case with you, and asked you several weighty Questions, and you have not,
you cannot answer any one of them, but you must condemn your self, and by your
own confession, you have nothing in the world to say against the excellency of
this friend. And therefore you must either speedily come in, upon the
invitation, and close with those gracious overtures that are made to you, or
you must without any reason in the world (your self being Judge) cast your self
away. And in hopes that all that have heard me, will not be so mad as to make
light of these things, but be asking with some seriousness, that great
question? How shall I do to get acquainted with God? How shall I do to get a
Friend for my Soul? What shall I do to be saved? I have laid down some
Directions for those that are unfeignedly desirous to be reconciled to God, I
have told them that they must labor to be thoroughly acquainted with that
strangeness, and enmity that is in their hearts against God; and of the
unspeakable danger of their being strangers to God. I have further directed
them that would be acquainted with God to labor to get humble hearts. I have
advised that they visit him often, if they would be intimately acquainted with
him; and that not in a transitory way, but to make a Solemn set visit of it,
and to be sure that they do not forget to get Christ along with them. I
counseled them also to be much in those places where he is wont to walk; and
to get intimately acquainted with some of them that know him very well, and
will do their best to get them to be acquainted with him. I have told you, that
if you would be acquainted with God, you must kindly entertain, and make much
of any Messengers that come from him to you; and if men would make sure work, I
desired them as they loved their Souls that they would follow this great
Business with the greatest earnestness and seriousness in the world; and that,
what they do, they would do speedily. I informed you what arguments the
Scripture puts into our mouths, which we may urge, at the Throne of Grace. I
entreated you, for your Souls sake to take heed of those things which kept God
and man unacquainted; as namely, all sin in general, but more particularly,
Pride, Worldly-mindedness, Hypocrisy, delight in wicked company, Unbelief, and
Sensuality. Lastly, I direct all such as would be at peace with God, to give up
themselves to him resolvedly and freely, in a Solemn Covenant.

And have I been beating the Air all this while? What will you do after all
this? What shall become of all these Sermons? Dare any of you all still be
contented to be Unacquainted with God? Can you be very well satisfied, after
you have heard of such a Friend, to be a stranger to him? Can any of you look
upon your state as safe, while God is your enemy? O how shall I leave you, with
Hearts full of Enmity against your Maker! Alas, alas, poor Hearts! You look
very merrily as bad a condition as you are in, but did you but know how near
you are to everlasting Burnings, I believe it would put a damp upon your
Spirits, and spoil your Mirth. O how shall I leave that poor sinner, that
stands as a person altogether unconcerned! Whereas death stands ready for his
Commission, to fetch him away before God; and where are you then? O where are
you then, if you come before God as a Stranger? O what shall I do for thee?
What shall I say to thee, to prevail with thee! O what arguments will persuade
thee! O, how shall we part! Brethren, my hearts desire is that you may all be
saved. O that you may all know in this your day, the things of your peace! O
that I could mingle all my words with tears! O pity, pity, for the Lords
sake, pity your precious Souls! O come not here to ask Counsel of God, and
then go away, and take the Counsel of the Devil! And what will you yet make
light of all the Tenders of the Gospel? Is Peace, Pardon, Reconciliation, and
Acquaintance with God, still nothing with you? Will you for all this take up
with a lifeless Religion, and never mind a more Spiritual intimate converse
with God? As the Lord lives, thou speak that word against the life of thy
Soul. But if thou will go on, and despise God, who can help it? I have told
you, and told you again, what the end of these things will be. Well once more,
I ask thee in the Name of God, will thou have God for thy Friend or no? That
is, will thou love him above all the World? Will thou accept him for thy Lord
and Husband? Will thou be ruled absolutely by him? Will thou lay down thy
weapons, and turn on Gods side, and fight under his Banner? Will thou have
Holiness here, and Happiness hereafter? One would think, this is a question,
that one need not be long a resolving. Come, come away for the Lords sake; for
your precious Souls sake, as you would be owned at the day of judgment; as you
would rejoice when most of the world shall be filled with unspeakable horror,
and perplexity; as you would not hear that heart-rending word from the mouth of
the Judge, Depart, I know you not, come away, I beseech you! Come away! O ye my
dear Friends, the Cloud hangs over the world, and ere long it will fall with a
vengeance. O come out of Sodom, linger not for the Lords sake, lest the dint of
that storm fall upon you. Fire! fire! fire! Awake! awake! awake! The fire is
kindled. What meanest thou, O sinner! if thou sleep a little longer in that
Bed of security, thou art a dead man, thou will be awakened with horror, when
thou shall know thy danger, but not know how to avoid it: And do you still say?
Make have! O make have, your Glass is almost out, your time almost spent, and
death is hastening apace upon you; I speak it again, make haste, come away, I
cannot, I cannot hold my peace. How can I endure to see the ruin of thy Soul,
and say nothing! O follow those Directions which I have given thee out of the
Scripture! Seek the Lord while he may be found, and with all possible speed,
seriousness, and gratitude, accept of his kindness, while you may. Methinks
some of your hearts seem to be affected; methinks your countenances speaks you
to have some thoughts of returning; some of you look like persons almost
resolved to set upon this great work. O that it may not be almost, but
altogether! Speak in such Language as this to your own Souls. What meanest
thou, O my Soul, thus to stand Disputing? Is this a time for thee to stand
still, as if thou had nothing to do? Hark, how the King of Glory calls! Hear
how his Messengers invite you! Consider how long they have stood waiting for
thee! And shall they go away without thee? O foolish Heart and unwise; will thou answer all these Gracious Offers with a flat denial? Or that which is
little better, will thou put off all Gods Messengers with some sorry excuses?
Awake, O my Soul, and look about thee! How can thou refuse when Mercy calls?
How can thou deny when Kindness it self asks, entreats, beseeches thee?
Awake for shame, up and put on thy Wedding Garments! O that this mind might be
in you always! O that thou were up and ready! And then happy were the day
wherein thou were born; then happy were the day that ever you heard of a
Christ, of Acquaintance with God, and Reconciliation with your Maker. O then
how glorious should thou be for ever! I rejoice to see the day of thy
Marriage a coming; when thy Lord and Husband shall bring thee home in the
greatest State, and in infinite Glory to his own House, where thou shall sit
like a Queen for ever and ever. Behold his Harbingers are coming! Behold how
many Messengers the Lord has sent to prepare his way! Awake, O Zion, and put
on thy beautiful Garments! Rise up, O Royal Bride, and put on thy Princely
Robes! Cloth thee with the Sun, and put the Moon under thy feet. Go out and
meet the King thy Husband. Behold O Jacob, the Wagons of Joseph are coming!
Behold, O daughter of Zion, the Chariots, the Chariots of thy King and Husband
are a coming! They are a coming! O why does not thy Heart leap within thee! O
why do not thy spirits even faint for gladness! Why do thou not say, It is
enough, I will go out and meet my Lord before I die? When will the Sun be up!
When will the day break! When, O when will the shadows fly away! I will get me
up to the Mountains of Myrrh, to the Hills of Frankincense. I am traveling
for Zion, my face is toward Jerusalem; who will ascend the Holy Hill with me?
Who will bear me company to my Husband's House? Let us go up to the Lords
House; come away, the Sun is risen, the shadows are flying away, thousands are
gone already. Let Barzillai and Chimham, old and young too, go along with the
King of Jerusalem. Come from the Highways and Hedges, come with your Wedding
Garments, come quickly and he will make you welcome. The King has sent to
invite us to a Feast, a Feast of fat things, of Wines on the Lees well refined.
Come, for the Table is spread, all things are ready, and his Servants stay for
us. And will God entertain such Creatures as we are? And will the Lord open his
Doors to such loathsome Beggars? Will the Father receive such Prodigals! Return
then unto thy rest, O my Soul, for the Lord will deal bountifully with thee.
Who is that which I see coming in the Field? Who is this that comes from the
Wilderness? That comes to meet us? Hark! methinks I hear the Trumpet sounding:
Hark! what is the matter! How do the Mountains echo! How does the Air ring
again! What noise is that which I hear! What glorious Train is that which I
see! Whence do they come, and whither do they go? It is my Master's Son (dear
Soul) thy Lord and Husband with his Royal Attendants. Behold he comes! He comes
apace! Leaping upon the Hills, Skipping upon the Mountains. He is coming! he is
coming! he is even at the door! Ere long thou shall see the Mountains covered
with Chariots and Horses of Fire; the Earth will tremble and shake; the Heavens
and the Earth will be all on a Flaming Fire; the King of Glory will come,
riding upon the Wings of the wind, accompanied with Millions of his Saints and
Angels; He is coming, he is at the door. Go vail thy face; alight and meet thy
Husband. He will bring thee into his Fathers Palace, and thou shall be his
Wife, and he will love thee for ever: And thou shall remember thy Widdowhood no
more. Even so, come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

