THE Jesuits Intrigues: WITH THE PRIVATE INSTRUCTIONS OF THAT SOCIETY To their
EMISSARIES.

The First, Translated out of a Book privately printed at Paris. The Second,
lately found in Manuscript in a Jesuits Closet after his Death.
Both sent with a LETTER from a Gentleman at Paris, to his Friend in London.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, M DC LXX IX.

A LETTER sent from a Gentleman in Paris, to his Friend in London.
SIR,
I have taken this opportunity of my Friends going over, to send you the
enclosed Papers: which, if you think to find your account by it, you may
publish, only I would have you by no means to disclose my name, while I
continue abroad, for reasons you may easily guess.

THE first of these two little Tracts; I met with here at Paris, printed in
French. If it be not so quick and smart, as should Answer the reproof of so
great Offenders: at least I am sure the length of it cannot be tedious. It is
in a manner but a Table of the Jesuits Conduct in managing their Worldly
Interest: and so you ought rather to expect truth in it, than wit.

The Other is what I met with in Manuscript, and (I believe) never yet Printed.
The Copy I made use of, was written in French, and not very Correct: But
however there may be mistakes in some little words; I dare undertake in the
whole it is true; not to be denied, but by an impudence whose practice will
give it self the Lie at the same instant. It was found amongst the Papers of a
Jesuit, that Died not so near his Friends, as he might have wished. And
therefore he that found it, placed this Text under the Title of it: There is
nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; and hid, that shall not be known.

It may be some, who either have not so well Confidered the general
Transactions of the World, or are partially devoted to the Society, will judge
these accounts too extravagant for the Jesuits ever to undertake. But if they
please to go along with me a little further, I make no doubt but they will
change their minds.

Let us then but look round Christendom, and see in what posture these good
Fathers stand. The Emperor is by the confession of all men beset with them:
whose head they fill so full of Music, That by their good will they would
leave room for nothing else. The King of Spain is a Child, but his Mother (the
Queen Regent) has taken care that the Jesuits shall not lose their share in
him, having placed Father Nidard her Confessor the first in her Council, as
Chief Minister. How well he has answered that Trust, let the Revolt of Don
John, and the high discontent of all the Nobility witness: now in a time when
the lowness of Spains fortune lays them open for a prey to all their
Neighbors. The King of France his last Confessor was Father Anat, whose
peaceable and quiet behavior appears sufficiently out of the Writings of the
Jansenists. Flanders is wholly rid by the Jesuits. England gives as great a
Testimony of their busy spirit, as any other Country: where by their Rule of
not suffering any of another Order to succeed Confessor in the room of one of
them, they have almost thrust out all other, Regulars as well as Seculars. Of
which there is no small complaint made in these and other parts. Nay, the late
Pope himself had a Jesuit his Confessor, Cardinal Palavicino, without whom he
would resolve nothing of Religion or Conscience, which were managed
accordingly, as may be seen in several Accounts of his Worthy Deeds. It would
be too much to set down their present Condition in every little Court and
Commonwealth; since it is manifest by what has been said, that they insinuate
themselves into Princes and other Great Men, for no other good, but their own.

I had forgot the King of Poland, who was brought up a Novice among them.
However, to give light into their particular actions, I will only make bold to
hint at two or three passages. The first shall be that of their dealing with
the Dominicans in Spain, concerning the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin
Mary. The Dominicans as more addicted to truth, denied the thing: upon which
the Jesuits took occasion to show that hatred they had always bore them, under
pretense of their zeal for so considerable a Superstition. And therefore they
have recourse to the Pope, pressing him to decide the Controversy on their
behalf. He not willing to determine a point that had so little reason, and no
Antiquity for it; would not resolve; but only in some measure to gratify their
importunity, sends a kind of Declaration into Spain -- That though it was true,
The Immaculate Conception could not be made out, so as to enjoin the Believing
of it: yet he esteemed it as the more reverend Opinion, and could wish all
Christians rather to be of it. But though his Holiness would not speak out
himself, the Jesuits made him. For upon these very words they raise a
persecution against the Dominicans, telling the people, that though the Pope
had not in express terms Condemned the Dominicans, yet Implicitly he had, by
declaring his own sense so much for the other: Thus did they put the cheat upon
the peoples understandings. But that their Industrious influence may appear the
more; you shall see they will not forbear to pick pockets when time serves. For
in Sivil they set up a Bank, where any man might put in his money, to be
remanded again at pleasure. This they kept in great credit, and maintained by
their Trade in the West Indies. At last, when they perceived most of the stock
of City and Country was got into their hands, presently they returned all over
into the Indies, and broke. The people came upon them for their money, They as
Churchmen pretend exemption from the Civil Courts: and have so baffled the
deceived people, that I believe e're this they are in despair of recovering one
farthing.

And now I have taken notice of their traffic in India, let me refer you to
the Letter of John Palafox de Mendoza Bishop of Angelopolis in America, etc. to
Pope Innocent the X. dated the 8th. of January, 1649. And the Memorial
presented to the King of Spain, in Defense of Don Bernardino de Cardenas Bishop
of Paraguay in the West Indies, etc. against the Jesuits, both put out in
French. In both which, the insolence, ambition, and wickedness of the Jesuits
is so discovered, that were it not recorded upon such public Acts, the
proceedings would be Incredible. For it appears there, that to serve their own
ends, they made use of Pagans to shed Christian blood, endeavored to murder
their Bishop, and such other horrid attempts, as must, no doubt, render them
odious to all posterity. The Eighteenth Canon of the Council of Calcedon was so
little in their minds, that they did not so much as observe the common dictates
of Humanity. But when a Raviliac has been found amongst them so near hand; and
not only Libells scattered abroad to justify such proceedings, as Admonitio ad
Regem Ludovicum xiij, and Mysteria Politica; but Books publicly owned and
authorized by Themselves, written by Mariana, Aquaviva, and others, but chiefly
by Santarel, who was censured for it by all the Universities of France, with
the approbation of the Parliament of Paris, as may be seen at large in the Book
called, The pernicious Consequences of the Jesuits new Heresy. I say, when we
have such sufficient testimony so near home: we need not make any long voyage
for their discovery.

Now, that it may appear they have all qualities alike, do but consult the
Provincial Letters, and you will find the Morals of these men, as nortoriously
faulty, as the rest. For it is plain there, from the pens of their own approved
Authors, Tannerus, Emanuel Sa, Hurtado, Castropalao, Fagundes, etc. that
Murder, Sacrilege, Intemperance, Fraud, or any other sin, may by the small
change of a thought, or easy application of an intent, either be turned into a
virtue, or at least lose its vitiousness, and become an innocent action.

And why should we then wonder at any thing that is reported of these men? For
certainly, of late Times, the Devil has not found more effectual Instruments
for the peaceable damnation of Souls, than the Jesuits. The great Enemy that
so often foyls him, is Conscience: which these decoys of Satan do so sweeten
and blind with religious evasions, that they draw whole flocks after them into
the kingdom of darkness, with as much alacrity, as a Saint goes to Heaven.

But that I may not be thought to write an Invective; I do declare, I have no
pique against any of that Society: but rather an obligation to wish their
practices more open and generous, and more suitable to their profession; that
so many great Wits, as they have among them, might be Conversed with, without
hazard of a man's being brought into some inconvenience. Indeed the only reason
that made me think it requisite to lay them open in English at this time, is to
let all men see, what a pack of Knaves we should be pestered with, if ever
Popery crept in. But, God be thanked, we have a Prince knows them too well to
trust them: and a Government well enough fortified against their Invasions.
However, as a restless sort of people, that will compass Sea and Land to gain
Proselytes, and will leave no stone unturned to promote their Interest: all the
discouragement imaginable shall not hinder them from making their attempts. And
therefore, since they are not able to break in at the fore-door, they try to
steal in the back way, by the help of their Journey-men, the Phanaticks; by
whose means, having once wrought a Confusion, they hope the more successfully
to fish in troubled waters. And thus they make themselves as sure of the booty,
as the Ape did of the Chestnut, when he made use of the Cats foot to pull it out
of the fire.

For this is that they flatter themselves with. They look upon the Phanaticks
as a giddy-headed rabble, without any foundation or principles, to establish
any Religion upon: Fit for any impression, but the right. And so they brag here
abroad, that if they could but once see a Toleration, it should be the same
satisfaction to them, to find a Minister of State's or any Great Man's Coach at
a Conventicle door, as if it stood at the Queens Chapel. For they do not in
the least despair of success, if they could get the Reins of Government
slackned at this rate. Because, say they, there is none but the judiciously
virtuous part of the Nation can escape our hands: which will make so slender a
party, that it will not be very difficult to overcome them.

For first, the Malcontents will naturally fall into our Nets, or the
Phanaticks. Next, all Knaves, that either want preferment, or would have more,
take to the Side that is for Change, which we know by experience to be the
Phanaticks. And lastly, which make up the body of most Countries, those
effeminate spirits, whose reasons are drowned in their fancies, will, as the
Apostle testifies, by the spiritual debauchery of those Creepers into houses,
be drawn into any wickedness.

But no doubt these Cunning Deceivers reckon without their host. The Cheat is
too fresh in every ones memory to take again so soon. For to think the King
would give up that Sword of the Unclean Spirit, by which God's Anointed and his
People were destroyed, into the hands, not of another generation, but of those
very men, who by open violence did for several years declare their Contempt of
His Government, Hatred to His Person, and Rebellion against His Authority: were
a folly not to be exceeded, but by that of Trusting them. And now I have shot
the Bolt of

Yours, etc.
Paris, Feb. 13. S N. 1669.
THE JESUITS Intrigues.
THe Laws and Constitutions upon which the Order of the JESUITS is
established, make it plainly appear, that Father Ignatius had a very holy
design in it. And truly in its first Infancy it gave great hopes, that it would
prove a very fruitful Branch of Christianity: For as long as these good Fathers
continued in works of Charity, following the Rules of their Order: They really
did much good, as well by an excellent Education of Youth, as by converting
Souls, and maintaining the Faith. But as the Devil would have it, who is no
less industrious and cunning in perverting godly designs, than good men are to
advance them, He takes occasion from the considerableness of the Order, and the
mighty progress they had made in so short a time, to destroy the end, it was
first ordained for. So that by his subtlety, instead of their great Charity,
which at present is almost wholly frozen up, he has possessed them with the two
most pernicious affections of the World, Ambition and Covetousness. Which
brings so great a mischief upon Christendom, that a greater is hardly to be
imagined, as I shall make appear by the following Discourse. Only first, I
protest before God, that it is neither Interest nor Passion, which moves me to
Write; but only my zeal for the public good: For the advancement of which, I
hold my self obliged to employ the utmost of my power, in hopes that their
hypocrisy and practices being laid open to the Great Men of the World, they
will find some expedient to remedy the Abuse.

The first thing then to be known is, that the Jesuits Order being
particularly applied to the Education of Youth, of which there is no Kingdom
nor Town, but stands in great need; it was sought to, in the beginning far, and
near, and highly favored by many Princes: Insomuch that within a few years it
was got to as high a pitch, as others have attained to in many Ages. But this
Greatness, which very often is accompanied with change of Manners, stirred up
in the Successors of Father Ignatius so great a love toward their own Society;
that persuading themselves it was of more use to the Church of God, than all
the rest, and more proper for the Reformation of the World; they concluded
amongst themselves, that they were to apply all their skill and endeavors to
the aggrandizing of it, since in that they should increase the true Militia of
Jesus Christ, the good of the whole Church, and the ancient Patrimony of the
Lord, to use their own terms. And here it is, that I had need have Aristotle's
Subtilty to discover, and the Eloquence of Cicero to express the strange Method
(which many, perchance for its novelty think it incredible) by which these
Fathers go on, daily advancing their Society. But I will content my self to
observe only some particulars, leaving the rest to be made out, as shall seem
most probable to each man's fancy. So that, all I intend to do, is, to give some
certain heads, and directions that may serve, as I guess for good grounds to
any, that will make reflections, or discourse upon this Subject.

First, these Father Jesuits concluded they should never bring Their Society
to that considerable pitch of Greatness as They aimed at, barely by Teaching,
Preaching, Administering the Sacraments, or by their devout Offices of that
nature. For though from the very beginning they had gained upon the affections
of a great many, as I told you before: yet perceiving that after a little time
that kindness cooled, they much questioned, whether their Order had not come
short in the effectual Captivating of minds. And therefore they devised two
other means for attaining to their Greatness; First, to endeavor with Princes,
and all others to make the rest of the Orders cheap, by finding some great
Defects in them. So that by this wicked application having set up their own
Greatness, by the abasing of others, they have made themselves Masters of
diverse Monasteries and Abbeys, and other considerable Revenues, depriving the
other Orders of Them (which before were in possession) by slander and calumny:
The next way was, by insinuating themselves into affairs of State, engaging to
their interest the greatest part of the Princes of Christendom by so cunning
and artificial expedients, as are not easy to imagine. Their Father General,
to whom they all pay an absolute obedience, resides constantly in Rome. He has
made choice of certain Fathers, who, because they are always with him are
called Assistants; and there is at least one of every Nation, from whence they
take their distinction, one calling himself the French Assistant, the other,
the Spanish, the third, the Italian, the fourth, the English, the fifth, the
Austrian, and so of all the otherKingdomes and Provinces. The charge of each
Assistant, is to inform the General of all Transactions of State that pass,
either in the Kingdom or Province, of the which He is Assistant. This He does
by His Correspondents, who residing in the principal City of that Kingdom, or
Province, make a diligent enquiry of the estate, nature, inclination and
designs of the Prince: of which they advise the Assistants, giving them notice
especially of the discoveries they have made, or any thing that falls out new.
Thus when all their Pacquets are come to Rome, the Father General calls
together His Assistants, who lay open to Him the affairs of the whole World,
discovering to Him the interest and practices of all Christian Princes. After
which when they have consulted about all that is written, and examined and
compared the several accounts, They draw the conclusion, which is to assist one
Prince, and oppose another, according as it suits with Their interest and
profit. And as the stander by sees more, than the Gamester; so These Fathers
having before Them, the interest of all the Princes, do with much more ease
contribute to the affairs of Him, They know disposed to serve Them.

The next point best worth consideration is the great pity, that Regulars
should interest Themselves in affairs of State, when Their Order obliges Them
only to attend the saving Their own Souls and others. For the Jesuits, who do
concern Themselves more in the Civil Government, than the Seculars Themselves,
make it absolutely necessary that some course should be taken to prevent so
great a disorder, for fear of most dangerous Consequences.

First, the Jesuits Confess a great part of the Nobility of the Popish States,
for the more effectual carrying on of which, the poor are no longer admitted to
Confession, besides very often They are Confessors to the Princes Themselves.
By which means is it not hard for them to dive into all the designs, and sift
out all the resolutions, as well of Princes, as of Their Subjects, of which
immediately They give notice to the General or His Assistants at Rome. How
eafie is it then to judge, what prejudice this may do to Sovereigns, when it is
by a party that drive on nothing but their own advantage? For doubtless all the
World will grant, that nothing can be more essential to the preservation of a
State, than Secrecy, by the disclosing of which the other frequently is broken.
And this is certainly the reason that all wise Princes conceal Their minds so
carefully, learning by experience what advantage They get by knowing the
designs of others, which, for the better carrying on of Their affairs, They
spare no cost to inform Themselves of by Ambassadors, and Spies: though the
intelligence proves oftentimes not so faithful for want of employing skilful
Officers.

But I dare always undertake that the Father Jesuits, that is, the General and
His Assistants have the advantage of true information one way or other, of all
things that pass in the most private Counsels, what by Confessions, and
inquiries of Their Correspondents placed in all the principal Cities of
Christendom, and by the Mediation of other Their Accomplices, of which we shall
say more hereafter. Thus They know what strength, revenue, expense or designs
any Prince has, than He Himself. And all this at no more charge, than the
portage of Letters, which indeed are something chargeable too. For, as I have
been informed by the Post-Masters, each Courier costs Them Fifty or Threescore
Pounds, and sometimes more, to the Sum of an Hundred Pounds. By which you may
easily conceive, having so perfect notice of the interest of each State, They
are likewise able to lessen one Prince to another, weaken Their authority over
the People, raise against Them, what enemies They please, and make
insurrections at home so much the easier, because by the same means of
Confession, and Sifting, They get into the very Souls of Subjects, and so find
out, who are well, or ill-affected. For, by those accounts They have of all
State Affairs, They may easily set Princes at variance, and possess them with a
thousand Suspicions: and by understanding the Subjects minds so well, they may
with the same facility encourage Their contempt of government, to the breaking
out into all manner of sedition and confusion. From all this every man ought to
conclude, that interest of State forbids any Prince to choose for his Confessor
of that sort of men, who are so industrious in prying into affairs of State,
and make that benefit of what they are acquainted with, to use it for a means,
to ingratiate Themselves with other Princes. And much less reason have Princes
to suffer Their chief Ministers and Counselors, or the Officers of Their
Household to Confess to Them: Especially since we live in an Age replenished
with Persons, which, neither yielding to the Jesuits in learning, or piety,
may be as serviceable, without running such a hazard, being such as only
concern Themselves in the Direction of Souls and Discharging Their
Ecclesiastical Functions.

But for the better understanding of what we have said hitherto, and what
hereafter shall be said: it must be observed, that there are three sorts of
Jesuits. The first consists of certain Lay People of both Sexes; which having
associated Themselves with that Society, live under it in the performance of a
certain blind obedience, steering all Their actions by the Directions of
Jesuits, and are ever in a readiness to execute, what They command. These are
for the most part Gentlemen, and Ladies that pass the rest of Their days in
widowhood, as likewise wealthy Citizens, and rich Merchants, who like good
Fruit Trees bring plenty of good things to the Jesuits, that is, store of gold
and silver. Of this sort are those women, which are commonly called Bigotes,
who being persuaded by These Fathers to despise the World, are by Them in
requital made a harvest of, being wheedled out of rich movables, and other
considerable matters. The second kind takes in only men, of which some are
Priests, and others Lay, who though They live abroad in the World, and many
times by the Jesuits good word obtain Pensions, Canonries, Abbeys and other
Revenues, are yet under a Vow to take the habit of the Society upon the first
Order from the Father General, for which reason they are called Jesuits in
Vow. It is by these, the Father Jesuits carry on their business so smoothly,
for the establishing Their Monarchy, keeping Them in all places, and in all
Princes Courts, and in short, wherever any thing of moment passes throughout
Christendom, and this for such service, as shall be declared in the seventh
particular. The third sort is of those politic Jesuits, in whom all the
authority rests, who hold the reins of government over their Order, and who
being accosted by the Devil with the same temptation our Savior underwent in
the Desert, All these things will I give Thee, if Thou will fall down and
Worship Me, have taken Him at His Word, and thus in compliance with Satan do
with might and main prosecute the Universal Monarchy. Now as almost all the
important affairs of Christendom are passed at Rome, and that There it is, the
chief of These noble politicians reside, that is to say, Their General with a
great number of the Order: So is it upon the same place They have determined to
begin Their Dominion, as They may easily perceive, who will but take notice of
Their behavior There. Very hardly shall you transact any thing in that Court,
but the Jesuits who have notice of all that passes of importance, will
presently meet in Counsel to determine an issue, that may be favorable to
Their interest. There you shall find Them running to the Cardinals, the
Ambassadors, and the Prelates, where bringing about the discourse to the
affair Then in treaty, or to be treated of, They represent it, as They please,
always considering Their own advantage, and for that cause often so disguising
the matter, as to make White appear Black, and Black White. Thus the first
Relation, especially from men of a religious Order, making the greatest
impression upon the Spirit of Him, that hears, it falls out frequently, that
business of importance proposed by Ambassadors, and other Great men to the
Court of Rome, has not that success, as Princes could wish: and all this by
having spirits prepossessed by These Worthy Jesuits with partial accounts,
which forestalls the Credit, that ought to be given to others, who explain
Themselves with more truth and sincerity. Nor is this at Rome alone that They
impose these Cheats: but likewise in other Courts, either by Themselves, or the
Jesuits of the second rank. Whence we may conclude, that the greatest part of
the Affairs of Christendom pass through the Jesuits hands, and that those only
succeed which they think not fit to oppose. All this while I must confess, that
their address to engage themselves in Affairs, either for the opposing or
favoring of them, is so artificial, that it is impossible thoroughly to see into
it, so as to give a perfect description: However it shall be no hard matter for
any particular Prince to discover so far as his own Concern requires, if he
will but take the pains to peruse this short Account that I shall give; because
I know it will make him reflect immediately upon what is passed, by which
calling to mind the several circumstances of his former Treaties, by comparing
them with my observations, it is impossible but he must descry the subtle
dealing of the Society. Notwithstanding this sly and close management be the
chief Engine they work with, to accomplish their Monarchy, which is their
principal aim; yet they do not omit other means now and then (so has their
Passion blinded them) that lays open their Ambition to all the World. Was it
not a pleasant request they made, under pretense of a public good for the
Church, to Gregory the Thirteenth, That he would give Order to his Legates and
Nuncio's, each of them to take a Jesuit for his Confident, to advise in all
business?

The fourth thing that requires our confideration, is that by these devices,
and their understanding in Affairs of State; the Principal Jesuits are struck
into a great league of Friendship with many Princes, Temporal and Spiritual;
whom they make believe, that they have done them great service: And from this
one advantage have proceeded very great mischiefs. The first is, that by making
ill use of the Princes kindness, they take upon them to wrong a great many
private Families, which though Wealthy and Noble, have been brought to utter
ruin by the Jesuits engrossing of Widows Estates, and by indirect means,
inveigling many young Gentlemen into their Order, that have been sent to their
Colleges for Education. For how often do we find it, that when these young
Gentlemen grow sickly, or are found incapable of performing the Duty belonging
to their Order, they are dismissed without ever having restitution of their
Estates made to them, or theirs, the Jesuits having got possession before ever
they would let them Profess? This is far from that justice Ignatius has
enjoined them; and no way consonant to that first intention their Founders had,
who left them not according to their insatiate avarice, but enough to keep them
in a condition to serve the Church.

The second misfortune, which follows from the access these Jesuits have to
Princes, is, that the Fathers boast, and cunningly make the World believe,
their intimacy with Great Men to be more, than indeed it is. And by this they
awe the very Ministers of State, and cause them to seek their Favor, and
Petition them for whatsoever they would have pass. Nay, their vanity is
increased to that degree, as they are so impudent to boast themselves able to
make Cardinals, Nuntio's, Lieutenants, Governors and other Officers, so far
that some had the sace to say, Their General could do more, than the Pope
himself; and others, That it was better to be of that Order which could make
Cardinals, than be one themselves. I am not at all afraid, that what I have
said will make me pass for a Slanderer; because the Fathers speak it all so
openly themselves, that hardly any one, who has conversed with them, has not
heard them say the very same thing.

The fifth point is, after the foundation of Policy laid, that the first thing
they demand of those Princes, into whose good opinion they are got, is to
obtain leave to advance or suppress whom they please, always pretending
Religion, to make their request more acceptable. And when it so unfortunately
falls out, that they have their will, which is but too often; you must not
expect that they fill up Vacancies with men of desert, and such as are best
able to discharge the Duty of the Place; quite contrary, if any one recommend
such Persons to the Prince, they shall use all their interest to hinder it,
unless they prove to be some of their Intimates, such as are wholly devoted to
their service. But those they recommend and stand for, it is no matter how ill
affected they are to the Prince, or how great Knaves, capable of the Employment
or not, that does not at all concern them. By which ordinarily we find, that
such Officers, as they prefer, serve for nothing but to torment their Prince,
and cherish the People in Discontents, which in the end break out into Sedition.

The sixth observation cannot be made out better, than by the comparison of the
Captain of a Ship, who perceiving a favorable Gale for his Voyage, has no
sooner given notice by his Whistle, but all the Slaves are at their Oars, to
make for the Place appointed. For it is almost after the very same manner, when
the General has concluded with his Assistants, that such a person should be so
preferred; the first notice he gives of his purpose to those that reside upon
the place, has a general influence to set them all at work, tooth and nail, to
set up the Person so marked out. It follows then that he which has received so
signal an obligation, must be very ungrateful, if he does not requite it, when
it lies in his power, By which it comes to pass many times, that they esteem
themselves more beholding to the Jesuits, than the Prince who gives them the
Office, and so more devoted to their Interest, than to his Honor and
advantage. Thus are Princes fooled, who whilst they fancy they have not a
faithful Servants, have taken into their breast a Spy of the Jesuits, who
oftentimes by that means work the ruin of the Prince, that raised him. This and
all the rest I have mentioned are so great Truths, that I could easily give
many Examples of them by sad experience. But because I would not unnecessarily
contract an odium upon my self, I shall omit them, and content my self to draw
only this conclusion from what I have said in this last point, That this Device
of the Jesuits to place their own Creatures in great Charges, is perchance the
reason why they call their Order a Great Monarchy; forasmuch as by this way
they dispose of Princes and their Ministers. And therefore it ought not to seem
strange, that one of their chief Fathers, having a public Address to make to a
Great Man in the name of the Society, let fall this arrogant expression, You
know very well (Sir) thut our Society have always held a fair Correspondence
with your Highness; importing, no doubt, that they were Monarchs, as well as he.

In the seventh place, these Fathers endeavor, as much as in them lies, to
make the World believe, that all those that receive any favor from a Prince,
are to acknowledge it from their Intercession, or some of their Creatures. And
this gives them a greater power over the Subject, than his natural Prince;
which cannot certainly be without very great danger: It being against all
reason, that such froward and ambitious Youths, as the Jesuits are, should
have the Will of Ministers of State at their Dispose. For besides that they
have an opportunity by this means to work what Treason or Distubance they
please, they have an infallible expedient by these Ministers (their Creatures)
to place their Jesuits in Vow, of which we spoke before, about Princes, either
in the capacity of Counselors, Secretaries, or what else offers it self. And
no sooner these are in, but that they plye the Prince night and day to persuade
him to take a Jesuit for his Confessor, or Chaplain at least, and all to make
Spies for the Father General, to whom they give account of the most private
passages. Which is, no doubt, the cause that it so often comes to pass, that
what has been thought to have been carried most secretly, has become public
when least dreamt of; and that we find undertakings of the highest importance
frustrated, without being able to imagine who was the Traitor; and what a yet
worse, oftentimes they undergo the blame, who least deserved it

The eigth particular to be noted, is, that as it is natural for the Subject to
follow the inclination of his Prince; so all those who have given themselves up
to the Father General, when they observe his close and passionate application
to State Affairs, and that he makes it his own business, by this means to
aggrandise and enrich his Society, they, like Apes, immediately take after
their Leaders, and turn all Politicians to help in carrying on, as they
suppose, so glorious a project. To this end they set their Relations and
Friends at work to get into the hearts of Princes, and discover their most
secret thoughts, ever making report to the Assistants and General upon the
first notice. For being well assured, that it is the only way to procure their
Superiors good will, and by consequence Preferment (which is bestowed upon none
but such as are thought capable of exalting their Society to that pitch they
aim at) they make it their business to recommend themselves, by some politic
Achievement, that they may be looked upon as fit to manage greater Affairs.

My ninth observation therefore shall be, that as by virtue of the Alembeck,
Chemists know how to extract Ointments for the Cure of almost mortal Wounds,
and as the Be makes her honey up of the choice of diverse flowers; so the
Jesuits by strength of Reason, compose their own Interest out of the faithful
Intelligence they have of the Concerns of all Princes, and of all Occurrences
of State; by which they do not only refresh that inward thirst of becoming
Great, but make likewise a mighty advantage in understanding their own
emolument, in prosecution of which, they beat down all before them to
accomplish their ends. But, what is most remarkable, when, as we have said
before, they are got into the hearts of Princes, they are used to play them
off, by assuring them, what excellent expedients they have for putting such a
plot in practice, and to bring about such a design. But scarcely will they have
begun in their assistance according to engagement, but that upon confideration
of some inconvenience this addition of Greatness to a Prince, whom they have
hitherto fed with fair hopes, may bring to them, they create a thousand
delays, like Advocates in a Process at Law, and then upon a sudden, by some
excellent sleight of contrivance, turn all into confusion, and so break the
neck of that Plot themselves had laid. He that will but reflect upon the League
of France, which being carried on, and concluded by them, was likewise
detected, when they saw the King was like to get the better; and upon England,
which they so often promised to the Spaniards; will need no other proof to make
out the truth of what I have said.

May we not then very justly draw this conclusion from the whole, That the
Jesuits having no real or sincere kindness for any, nor will oblige the World
beyond their own Interest, neither Prince nor Prelate can make use of them
without injury to themselves. For at the same instant they pretend a like
respect to all, becoming Monsieurs with the French, Dons with the Spaniard, and
so with all other Countries, as occasion serves, and hopes of advantage. They
are very indifferent who it is they do harm or good to. And, no doubt, it is
that excessive Self-Interest, and the little regard they have to any man's
Concern else, which makes few enterprises succeed, in which they have a hand.
However I must allow, that they have an incomparable art in concealing this
indifference, some of them still pretending a great zeal for the Crown of
France, others for that of Spain, others for the Emperor, and for all the rest
of the Princes from whom they expect any favor. But if it so fall out, that
some one of these Princes takes a Jesuit into his Cabinet-Counsels, this
fellow shall no sooner know any thing, but that he will advise the Father
General of it, who presently sends back his result upon it, in order to which
he proceeds, without consideration either of his Princes Will or Service.

And though these I have already declared, are very great inconveniences; I
will show you yet greater. The first is, That the Jesuits being fully informed
of the several Interests and Counsels of Princes, they amongst them that feign
themselves to be of the French Faction, propound to the King, or his chief
Ministers, certain considerations of State, which may be of some weight, such
as have been sent from Rome in their politic Letters. Those which flatter the
Court of Spain or any other Government, where they have access make other
propositions in these places, quite contrary to the former, or at least such as
may keep Christian Princes at a distance to be in perpetual jealousies one of
another, which disturbs the common Peace more than can be imagined, and brings
a misfortune upon all Christendom. For, such a defiance hinders all possibility
of joining against the Common Enemy; and indeed makes all Treaties of Peace
between Princes signify very little. The second inconvenience is, That by
these subtle practices they have so opened the eyes of all people, that no body
minds any thing else but the Politics: So as nothing is done now a days, that
is not first weighed in this blance, nor any business that is not directed by
this Jesuitical Compass. But all this would be nothing to what mischief would
ensue, if they of the Reformed Churches should take up this example, and abuse
their Interest with Princes after this manner. For then in stead of Lutherans
(with whom some accommodation may, it is hoped, be found out one day) we should
have spring up a politic brood of irreconcilable Antichrists. And to make it
appear, that I have said nothing but the truth, when I have charged the
Jesuits with such abominable Artifices, and Collusions, above all when they
are upon insinuating themselves into the favor of Princes, I must not forget
what was done amongst them some years since upon the Concern of Great Britain.
One of their Fathers, an Assistant of that Kingdom, called Father Parsons,
having writ a Book against the Right of the King of Scots to the Crown of
England; Father Criton with others of the same Order defended the Kings Cause,
in a Book Intuled, The Discourse of the King of Scots against the Opinion of
Father Parsons, or to that purpose. And though you may suspect by this, that
they are divided among themselves; yet I do assure you, they do understand one
another perfectly well. For this Game was played by the directions of their
General, to the end, that if the Scotch were disappointed of the Succession,
then should be showed, to whoever came in, Father Parsons his Book; or if
otherwise, Scotland should carry it, then they should ingratiate themselves by
presenting Criton's Work: And so whatever came uppermost they were provided
with that should make their Society acceptable. By which you may judge how true
it is, that I told you, Princes are the main object of all the Jesuits Designs
and Actions, and therefore reason good, they should esteem their Order a Great
Monarchy. Nay, is not this an undeniable argument of my assertion, the small
care they take to please any Prince, when their Interest comes in competition?
We have have many experimental Examples that convince it beyond dispute, if it
were worth the trouble to set them down: I will only give you one, which shall
be as good as a thousand. Every one knows, that there is none in the World,
that the Jesuits are in so high a nature obliged to, and to whom they owe more
fidelity, than the Pope, not only for the particular Vow of Obedience they make
to his Person, but for many other reasons besides. And yet for all this Pius
Quintus of blessed memory, having a mind that these Fathers should officiate in
the Chore, and do all things after the manner of other Regulars; they would
never obey him, but pretended still some great prejudice it would bring upon
them: Only there were some amongst them that submitted to His Holiness, and did
as they were commanded. But how did the rest serve them? Were they not by way
of reproach called Aviatins, or Starters aside? And was ever any of them
afterward preferred in the least? Just so they set themselves against that
worthy Person Charles Boromeo Archbishop of Milan, when, as Legate a Latere, he
would have visited their Society amongst the other Regulars.

But (alas!) what is all this? They break even the holy Canons by trading,
expressly against their injunctions, in Pearls, Rubies and Diamonds, which are
brought them from the Indies. And it is generally believed, that the greatest
part of the Jewels which come from the Indies and are sold at Venice, pass
through their hands. Neither is this a bare rumor spread abroad by their
enemies; for I have it from those very men, whom they employ, as Brokers to put
them off. I could produce other Stories, that should make it as clear, how ill
they serve the Pope, and how dishonestly; but because I can say nothing in it,
without mentioning a Prince, who would not very well relish my discourse, I
will be silent. For I desire to serve all the World, and offend no man, not so
much as the Jesuits, which otherwise I honor, and against whom I do not in
the least pretend to write an invective; only a little to abate their pride,
and, if possible, make them behave themselves with more moderation, than
hitherto they have done.

For who is there almost that has not reason to complain of the Jesuits? And
yet, just as it falls out many times with men in desperate diseases, whilst
they make lamentable complaints to heaven, such as startle every body that hear
them, though each patient very well knows what kind of a Disease he is visited
with, yet not one in a thousand can tell from what inward cause it proceeds;
so, notwithstanding all the World cries out upon the Jesuits, some for being
oppressed by them, others for not being so honestly dealt with, as was to be
expected from men of their Robe; yet the inconvenience continues, few
perceiving what is the original of this Mischief. However if one would but look
a little into the business, it would appear plainly, that the immoderate and
boundless passion of making themselves Great, provokes them to neglect the
satisfaction of Princes, and to deceive them, to oppress the poor, embezel
Widows Estates, ruin great Families, raise suspicions and promote enmities
betwixt Christian Princes, to introduce themselves into their Affairs. But
would it not be a strange irregularity in nature, if one of the meanest parts
of the body, which was made only, as a servant to the more noble, should take
to itself the best blood, and the greatest share of the vital spirits? Could
one after such a disorder expect less, than a dissolution of the whole? The
abuse in Church and State is no less; when we see the Jesuits Order, which is
come in, one of the last, and erected for the Conversion of Infidels, and
drawing sinners to repentance, assume to itself the Concerns of Prince and
Prelate, drawing out the best, and very life itself of their Affairs for their
own use: Which most assuredly cannot be done without, both a public and
private disturbance, by keeping under those subjects who most deserve
advancement, and raising none, but the unworthy, with thousands of other
Devils, such monstrous proceedings must call up.

I could easily bring many reasons here from experience, besides those I have
given, to prove of what a vast extent the ambition of the Jesuits is, and that
there is no measure in their desires of growing Great. But because I hate to be
tedious, I will only lay before you the project of Father Parsons upon England,
as he himself has set it down, in his Book called The Reformation of England.
Where after he has fallen upon Cardinal Pole (a man of singular piety and
worth) and has observed certain faults and defects in the Council of Trent; he
concludes at last, that supposing England should fall back to the Church of
Rome, he would put it into the Condition of the Primitive Church. For this
purpose, all the Ecclesiastical Revenues must be brought into one common Stock,
the care and dispensation of which, he would have committed to seven discreet
persons, taken out of the Jesuits Society, to distribute, as they should think
fit. Moreover, he would have all other Orders forbid coming into this Kingdom
under severe penalties, only such as they shall permit, which according to his
judgment must be none but the begging Orders. But as it is the usual fate of
self-love to blind those it has mastered, and be they never so wise, make them
guilty of the greatest follies: I do not much wonder at what this Father adds,
England (says he) being once brought back to the Truth, the Pope must not, for
at least five years after, think of making any profit out of the
Church-Revenues, but remit the whole entirely to the seven, who shall dispose
of them, as they think best for the Churches advantage. In good earnest a man
must be very dull, that should not perceive their whole design to be to amuse,
or rather cheat the Pope by such a proposal, hoping at the five years end to
find out some other trick, which seldom fails them, to keep it five years
longer, and so by degrees shut His Holiness quite out. Does not this
demonstrate their greedy ambition to an undeniable degree? Can any man after
this, doubt of their aspiring thoughts of a Monarchy? Do not the arts they use,
but it past dispute? And do they not at the same time, make it manifest, that
so they have their Ends, they are indifferent, as to the rest, whether
advantaged or ruined by it? In the time of Gregory the Thirteenth, they made it
their request, to be invested with all the Churches of Rome, no doubt that they
might found their Empire in the Capital City of the World: But that which was
denied them for Rome, was upon their importunity, granted them for England,
where they made him confer the Dignity of Archpriest upon a Jesuit in Vow,
who instead of protecting the Ecclesiastics, plays the Devil against all
Priests, that have no dependence upon the Jesuits, so far as to hinder their
communication one with another, though but to discourse, which has made them
almost desperate. Therefore it is no marvel if at present most of all the
Priests in England are Jesuits in Vow; since, besides the reasons I have
already given, they admit none into the Colleges, but such as pass their word
to take the habit of the Society. So that if England should slide back again,
there is no question of it, but that it would give beginning to an established
Monarchy of the Jesuits; because the Bishoprics, Dignities, and generally,
all the other Benefices and Church-revenues would be bestowed upon Jesuits.

No wonder then, if after this we hear of so few Converts, especially in that
Nation we last spoke of. For first, the old Stock of Priests which formerly
made a great harvest, that the Jesuits falsely attributed to themselves, is
near worn out. And these Youths are more zealous in promoting their own
Interest, than in saving of Souls. And then besides the Protestants observing
the tyranny of the JESUITS over other Priests of their own Religion, and how
they juggle in all their dealings, have taken so great an aversion, that for
fear of coming under the same lash themselves, they think of nothing less, than
a change. I will say nothing here of their imaginary pretenses to a certain
State, nor the discourses they continually buz in a Princes ears of the great
share they boast to have in the hearts of his people, by which they make him
believe, they keep them in their Allegiance and Loyalty toward him. It shall
suffice for conclusion of my Discourse, only to propose four Considerations.

I. That Men so ambitious, and that drive on such Designs, must needs be lovers
of change and novelty. And therefore being able to create them, when they
please, by putting men in Arms, the Conduct of which, I have showed you, how
good they are at, it is in a manner impossible they should forbear; Hence you
may easily judge, That no Prince ought to have any kindness for them, who loves
Peace and the preservation of his State. For I have already made it appear,
they can do him no more service, than what may, as well be done by others: But
then they may engage him in a thousand troubles, and it may be, promise his
Dominions to another, if he entertains them in his Territories, and does not
show them respect enough, by governing himself after their Directions, which is
of equal danger.

II. If without any temporal Jurisdiction they make such a bussle in the world;
what would become of us, if unluckily any of them should happen to be Pope? No
doubt, he would fill the Consistory with Jesuits, and so entail the Papacy
upon themselves. Going on then, as they have done, and setting their Interest
for a Rule, and having a Pope with all his power to back them; were it not to
be feared that the Dominions of many Princes would be in jeopardy, especially
those that bordered upon St. Peter's Patrimony?

III. Such a Pope, chose out of their own Society, would certainly do his
utmost to invest them with some Town and temporal Jurisdiction, which would not
be done without injury to some Prince.

IV. If the Consistory were filled with Jesuits, the whole Patrimony and
Revenue of the Church would be in their hands; and as we see a man that has a
Dropsy, the more he drinks, the dryer he is; so doubtless, these Fathers with
such an addition of greatness, would be but the more covetous of Riches and
Honor, in prosecution of which, the whole world should be disquieted. Now, all
the world knows, nothing is so liable to change as States, especially where
there are those, that never want boldness to attempt. So that it is very likely
the Jesuits in the case we suppose them, would quickly alter the present state
of Affairs, to bring it to their fashion, and thus to confirm their absolute
Monarchy. For, though hitherto they have done their best to make themselves
acknowledged Monarchs, by drawing into their Company the Sons of Free Princes,
who were to give up their Rights to them; yet could they never compass it,
because still some other power perceiving their aim, has crossed their purpose.
But if a Jesuit once came to be Pope, then would be their time, after full
possession of the Church-revenues, by their crafty methods to attain to that so
long wished for Condition. However I hope, though such an accident might not
prove so fatal, yet the apprehensions of what may fall out, will be so well
considered in behalf of all Free Princes, that the Conclave will never run the
risk of so dangerous an importance.

From what I have said we may gather this general Consequence, that it is
necessary for the preservation of the public peace, and the security of
Government, that His Holiness and other Christian Princes give some check to
this Society, whose ambition is got up to that excessive pitch, as without some
speedy prevention will become remediless. When my advice shall be asked for the
effecting of this, I am confident they shall be so far from taking it amiss,
that they will give me thanks for it. All I would have, being only to make them
Monarchs of their Souls, which are the Elect of Jesus Christ, and leave off the
thoughts of this World, which is but Dirt: And I offer in Charity to contribute
all the help God has enabled me with the power of.

THE JESUITS PRIVATE INSTRUCTIONS.
CHAP. I. How they must behave themselves in any place upon their first
entrance into a New foundation.
TO make our Order acceptable and welcome to the Inhabitants, amongst whom we
are to settle, it is very requisite to make them understand the rule of our
Constitutions; that it is to no other end, but as much as in us lies, to
procure the Salvation of our Neighbor and our selves. For that reason we ought
with all submissive and humble deportment frequently to visit the Hospitals,
the Sick, and those that are in Prison, to Confess them; that by a Charity to
the Poor not known to other Orders, and being Newcomers, we may have the
reverence, and respect of the best, and most eminent persons in our
Neighborhood.

Care must always be had to remember that written Rule, to request, with all
modesty and show of piety, leave to perform our Functions, and to make sure of
the good will both of Clergy and Laity within the Parish, whose favor or power
may avail us any thing.

We must go far and near, and beg the little Collections for the Poor; that the
Inhabitants, taking notice of our necessities, may be the more liberal.

We must appear to have but one soul, and one design amongst us all; that by
the show of a submissive compleisance, every body may approve of it: And if any
be obstinate in this point, let him be thrust out of the company.

We must inform our selves of the value of all Estates personal and real, but
seek our acquaintance with them rather through liberality, than purchase. And
if we get any thing that is considerable, let the purchase be made under a
strange name by some of our friends, that our poverty may still seem the
greater.

Such revenues as we have near any Town, in which there are any Colleges of
ours, let our Provincial assign them to some other Colleges more remote, that
neither Prince nor people may discover any thing of our profits. We must never
settle in a Town that is not rich and wealthy. And this must be pretended in
imitation of our Savior, who went not up to Jerusalem, or any other place, but
to save Souls. And doubtless he understood Judea much the better by so often
frequenting it with his Disciples.

And this more is to be said for a populous place; If our Society design the
saving of Souls, They have the Proverb their own, Where the people is, there
must the prey be made.

As well for our advantage, as that we may be thought poor, we must search and
scrape up all that can be spared in Town or the Villages adjacent.

Our Preaching must be directed by the humor of the people we live amongst;
and it must be insinuated that we are come to catechize and teach their
Children. And this we must do gratis, without regard had to any quality; and
yet so, as in order to serve our selves, by not seeming burdensome to the
people, as all other Begging Orders are.

We must profess to be of the number of the other Begging Orders, till our
House has got a sufficient Income, to which we must have a particular aim.

CHAP. II. What must be done to get the ear and intimacy of Princes and Great
men.
THere is great care to be taken in this business. To bring over any Prince to
Us, we must be sure to take off that prejudice of believing, They have no need
of Us, and persuade Them, what interest We have, That no man dares lift up his
hand against Us.

Princes have always desired a Jesuit Confessor, when They have been engaged
in hateful practices, that They might not hear of reproof, but still have some
favorable interpretation put upon Them. This often falls out upon Matches
contracted with near Relations; which are very troublesome, by reason of the
common opinion, That such Marriages never thrive. And therefore when Princes
are set upon such things, We must encourage Them, and espouse Their Concerns,
putting Them in hopes, that We can have what we will of the Pope, and allege
some reasons, opinions, or examples, which may feed the humor, by showing how
Matches of higher consequence have been approved of for a public good, and
have many times been indulged to Princes for the greater glory of God.

Thus when a Prince attempts any thing; as for example: He has a mind to make
War; We must go along with Him; fix His mind and resolution upon it, without
enquiring into particulars, for fear, if things should happen otherwise than
well, the fault should he laid at our door. And this We may do by pretending
Our Rule, which forbids Us to take knowledge of affairs of that nature.

To confirm the good will of Princes, it is good to undertake some little
Embassy, always provided it bring us in some advantage: by which We may render
Our selves as necessary, as welcome, and let Them see how great Our power and
credit is, as well with the Pope, as all other Princes.

There is no better way in the world to win Princes, and Great Men at Court,
than by Presents, which though never so mean, are better than none at all. And
to give Them a full testimony of Our affections, manners and inclinations, We
must, than which nothing is more acceptable to Princes, discover to Them the
deportment and manners of those They have an aversion to. By this means we
shall creep into the hearts of Princes and Grandees. Now if They be not
married, when we receive Their Confession, We must propose to Them the Matching
into some noble Alliance, to some beautiful Lady, and a great Fortune, and
such, as if they are not related, at least are very intimate with some of Ours,
set out such Virgins with Commendations suitable to our End to please These
Great Ones. Thus We may by preferring a Wife make new friendships, as we find
by experience in the House of Austrich with the Kindomes of Poland, and France,
and the Dutchies.

When Women of condition come over to Us, We must possess Them with as great a
love to Our Society as is possible, and that as well by those that are Our
Friends of their Relation, as by Our selves, to the end they may become the
more liberal toward Us. Now the way to gain their affections, is by little
Services and trifling Presents, which will make them lay open their hearts to
Us.

To conduct the Consciences of Noble Persons, We must follow the opinions of
those Authors that write in a more gentle style against the rigorous Morals of
the Monks: Which will make Princes reject the latter, to embrace Our advice and
counsel: And thus They shall wholly depend upon Us.

Therefore to have the good Will of Princes, Prelates and other Great
Personages, it is requisite that They be acquainted with Our great Deserts, and
that We show Them, how considerable We are in all parts of the World, and that
We are able in a high measure to dispense with reserved cases, which other
Monks cannot do: as to absolve from Fasting, or Paying any just Debt, Untie the
impediments of Marriage, and a thousand other Obligations and Vows. We must
endeavor to breed dissension among Great Men, and raise seditions, or any
thing, a Prince would have Us to do to please Him. If a chief Minister of State
to any Monarch that is Our Friend, oppose Us, and that Prince cast His whole
favor upon Him, so as to add Titles to His Honor; We must present Our selves
before Him, and court Him in the highest degree, as well by Visits, as all
humble respect.

CHAP. III. How we are to deal with persons of Great rank, that are not rich,
but have great power in the Commonwealth, that we may make Our advantages by
Their Credit.
IF They be Secular Lords, We must under the protection of Their assistance and
kindness, carry any process against Our enemies, and make use of Their
partiality to hook in Houses, Villages, Gardens, Quarries of Stone for
Building, especially in the Towns where we have Colleges, always purchasing
under a strange name of some Confident of Ours.

We must be very careful to uphold the Bishops and Parishioners revenues for
Us; lest They should hinder the exercise of Our Function, where They have to
do. For, In Germany, Poland, and France, the Bishops have great power, and can
with a great deal of ease obtain from their Prince any Convenience for Us, as
Monasteries, new erected Parishes, the privileges of Serving at certain
Altars, places devoted to holy uses, and other things, which must be
facilitated by stopping the Seculars mouths with some small consideration.
Besides, We may transfer to Our own use, what foundations We please, where
Catholics and Heretics inhabit together.

These Bishops should be made understand, that besides the meritoriousness of
the act in such a case, they will reap a great benefit: Whereas the Secular
Priests and the Monks would pay them with nothing, but a Song.

They ought to have immortal praise for their zeal in so good a deed, that are
the Cause of Our getting into the foundations of some Seculars, and Canons,
which may be effected with ease by the assistance of These Bishops.

We must see, that when the Bishops and Princes are founding any Colleges, we
have a perpetual License conferred upon Us to assist the Vicar of the
Parish-Churches in the Cure of Souls; and that for some time the Superior be a
parishioner himself, so to have the Church wholly at Our dispose.

The Bishops must be persuaded to build us Colleges in those Universities that
are our Enemies, and where the Catholics and Heretics hinder Us from having
any foundation; and that as well There, as in any other great Town, We may have
liberty to Preach.

When there is any design of Canonizing one of Our Order; the business must be
followed by Letters of Grace from Great men to His Holiness. If occasion so
require, that the Princes must appear in person to solicit, We must look to it,
that no Regular go along with Them, or attend Them, with whom we hold not
Correspondence, for fear they steal away the Princes affection from Us, and
procure our Colleges, where they have any thing to do already, to be joined to
them to Our prejudice. Therefore when any person of quality comes within Our
Walls, We must treat Him with all modest respect, and show of piety.

CHAP. IV. The Duty of Chaplains and Confessors to Princes, and Great Lords.
THat Princes and other men of Degree may be fully satisfied that Our whole
design is the Great glory of God, which Our Society has chose for their
particular cognizance; We must pretend all the resolution and sincerity in the
World. And afterward try, how pliable They are to Our Instructions, not all at
once, but by degrees, screw Our selves into their politic Concerns of
Government and Revenue. To arrive thus far, We must often inculcate, that They
ought not confer Honors, Charges, Offices, or other preferments, but upon such
as are able, and of integrity, and that have merited by some notable Service.
Make them sensible, how great a sin it is to do the contrary, always
dissembling our intention to meddle in any thing of that nature, protesting
against it with all asseverations, making it only a Case of Conscience, in the
station We are to speak the truth.

If then the Prince be put to a stand what to do: He must be told, what
endowments and capacity They ought to have who are to fill up such or such
places, and how they ought to demean themselves. We must fusser none to come
in, that are not of our Intimates. Therefore let the Prince hear again and
again, that to employ men of integrity and good lives, will be highly for His
honor, absolutely necessary for the maintenance of true Religion, and the good
of His People. Which persons must never be nominated by any we are not sure of,
but by some of our fast friends. Thus we shall strike up a mutual obligation,
and be the more cheerfully served upon all occasions.

The Confessors and Chaplains must get out of our Friends, what Lands or Money
the eminent men have, whether virtuous, and bountiful, and be sure to keep a
Catalogue of their names, and then neatly recommend them to the Prince, that so
the way may be laid open for preferment, when any falls worthy of them. But
they must mark out those in the first place, that by Confession they discover
to be well inclined to Us.

Above all, they must be sure to handle Princes, and others, with all easiness
and satisfaction, and not to press them too much in their Confessions, or
Sermons. They that retain to Princes must have very little money, and be mean
in their furniture, contenting themselves with some poor little hole, as in
appearance most mortified persons, and avoid the suspicion of flattery. For by
such a discreet carriage they may prevail easily with the Prince to do nothing,
in Church or State without their advice.

All diligence must be used to get the names of all the Officers of State, to
change or continue, as shall be thought most expedient, but without giving
ground to suspect the removalls come from Us. And this must be brought about by
some of our friends, that are near the Prince, who may effect it without
mistrust.

CHAP. V. What must be done with those Orders that comply with ours, and by
that means often get, what should otherwise have fallen to our share.
We must digest this fort of people, as a Medicine for a Mad Dog. And
therefore to remedy the mischief, as much as in us lies, we must possess any
Prince, that will give us the hearing of the perfection of our Order above all
the rest, and that if the other seem to excel us in the strictness of
Discipline, yet ours in the whole is the most glorious star in the Church's
firmament, and that the rule of other Orders in wholly directed by ours.

We must lay open the defects of other Orders, and new how they that concur
with us in the same design, come fart short of us in the performance.

We ought to set our selves chiefly against those Orders, that ape us in the
education of youth, Principally, in those places, where it depends upon our
credit, and where good advantage may be made.

Such Orders must be represented to the Prince, as contentious, and apt to
cause tumults and seditions.

The Universities must be made believe, that those other Orders are like to
prove much more pernicious to them, than ours. And if such chance to have
Letters recommendatory from the Pope, or Cardinals: We must procure the Prince
to mediate on our behalf to His Holiness, that we may produce more authentic
authority for our selves.

We must get the good word of the Inhabitants of that Town where we have
Colleges, to confirm the excellency of our Institution, uprightness of our
conversation, and incomparable method in teaching Scholars.

Besides it must be suggested, that the opening diversity of Schools will be
liable to breed opposition and tumults, especially if under the tuition of
several Orders.

All possible industry must be used to make our studies flourish, and win
applause, giving proofs thereof to Prince and people.

CHAP. VI. How to procure the friendship of rich Widows.
FOr this purpose must be called out some of the Fathers of the lively est
fresh complexions, and of a middle age. These must frequent Their houses, and
if they find a kindness toward our Society, impart to Them its great worth. If
they come to our Churches, we must put a Confessor to them, that shall
persuade them to continue in their Widowhood, representing to them the great
pleasure, delight and advantage will accrue to them by remaining in that state:
and this they must be assured of, and promised an eternal reward, and that this
only thing will exempt them from Purgatory.

Set them up a little Chapel, and an Altar neatly furnished, the minding of
which may put the thoughts of a Husband out of their heads. For the better
effecting of which, frequent Masses must be said there, and Exhortations given.

To facilitate the business they must be induced to lessen their family, and to
take Stewards, and other Officers of our recommendation, and place some of our
Creatures about them in the House. So that by degrees, having got a perfect
knowledge of all the circumstances of their Concerns, and their devotion to our
Society, we may at last place what Officers we please about them. The first
thing that their Confessors are to do, is to get into their Counsels, and to
let them understand how necessary it is for the good of their souls to give
themselves wholly up into their hands. They must be advised to Receive often,
to assist at Divine Service, to repeat the Litanies over, to take a daily
examination of themselves, and their Confessors must assist them in choosing
out some Men and Women-Saints for their Tutelaries, especially recommending the
Founder of our Order. Let them be exhorted to make an entire Confession, that
knowing their faults, humors, and instructions, from beginning to end, it may
serve them as a direction to bring them about to our purpose.

Twice or thrice a week must be given them a Lecture in commendation of a
Widows life, and how many thousand vexations and charges a second Marriage
incurrs.

Being thus induced to continue in Their Widowhood, presently they must be put
upon entering into some religious Order; not in a Cloister, but after the manner
of Paulina. Thus when they are caught in the Vow of chastity, all danger of
their Marrying again is over. They must then be earnestly pressed not to admit
young people into their Court, such as are given to Courting of Ladies, Play,
Music or Poetry; That they avoid much company. But let all this be done with
such a moderation, as may prevent any complaint of our rigor toward them, for
fear of a just repriment.

All Presentations, Chaplains, and the like, in their gift, must be disposed of
by us. By this we shall insensibly get ground upon them, persuading them to
deeds of charity, and giving alms, without which they can never gain the
Kingdom of Heaven. Always provided, they never bestow any charity without the
advice and consent of their ghostly Father: because it is very material to be
assured upon whom, or how a charity is placed to make it acceptable to God. For
they must understand, that alms ill-bestowed will rather do hurt, than good.
And if they do not believe, how much it contributes to the expiation of their
sins; they must neither be allowed so much liberty nor liberality.

CHAP. VII. How to keep Widows to our selves, so far as concerns the disposing
of their Estates.
Widows must be frequently minded of continuing in their devotion, of
performing charitable offices, to let no week pass without doing some good work
of their own voluntary motion, to the honor of the holy Virgin, cutting off
all superfluous expenses, and distributing something extraordinary to the poor,
and the Churches of Jesus Christ.

Now, if besides this general good disposition, they give any testimony of a
particular bounty toward us, whether by any great sum of money, or otherwise:
we must make them entire partakers in the merits of our Company, and to set the
better gloss upon it, let it be confirmed by the Provincial, or if need be, by
our General.

If any of our Widows break their Vow of chastity, they shall be shrived by
their Confessors twice a year with a renewing of their Vow, that the freshness
of the memory of it may oblige them the more to us. And upon the day of their
reconciliation, they may have leave to recreate themselves with any civil
divertisement.

It must be proposed to them to live after our Rule, and if they think fit,
that all their Attendants and Domestics do the like.

They ought to be persuaded to come to Confession every month, as well upon the
Feasts dedicated to our Savior, as Those to the holy Virgin; The Apostles, the
Patron they have made choice of, and principally St. Ignatius, and St. Xavier.

Place Syndikes with them to have an eye upon both men and women in their
Court, and to discover their miscarriages, for our better information, but not
to take any notice of the Widows vow of Chastity.

The Domestics must be forbid to look scornfully, or talk of things behind
peoples backs, which grows ordinarily into contempt. And therefore offenders in
that kind are to be severely chastised, or else by the Widows leave turned out
of doors.

These Widows must be served by civil Maids of our recommendation, such as have
skill in working several ornaments for our Churches, which may be a means to
give their Ladies a pious divertisement.

We must place a Governess over these Maids of our own choosing, that may keep
them constantly at work, and have a strict eye over them.

Visit the Widows, as often as we may be welcome, entertaining them with
pleasing discourses, and godly stories, and keep up the cheerfulness of their
humor, and never be too severe with them in Confession, lest they take
distaste at us: unless there be no hopes left of making any advantage by them.

We must comfort them, and advise them to go often to Confession, that in
relyance upon this consolation, They may be wholly ours, body and goods.

If there be any hopes of frighting them into good nature, we may be a little
more rough with them: But a Confessor must do this with great caution, and not
before he has consulted with the Superiors.

It is of great importance for the gaining a Widow's friendship, to give Them a
particular privilege of coming into our Colleges upon some solemn performances,
as the acting a Tragedy, or such like: and not to let Them go abroad in extreme
cold weather: and to dispense with Their Fasting, or wearing Sackcloth, which
may be taken off by Alms. That thus They may be satisfied we are not less
sollicitous for the health of their bodies, than their souls.

We must hinder Them, as much as in us lies, from going to the Churches of
other Orders, upon their Festival days: and convince them, that all the
indulgencies of other Orders are comprised in Ours.

Let them be as sensual as they please, provided they are liberal, kind to our
Society, and handle the matter so, as not to give scandal.

When they are in consideration, how to dispose of their Estates: they must
have laid before them the perfection of the Saints, who have forfeited their
blood, parents and friends, and cheerfully relieved the poor Members of Christ.
Here it is, that we must represent that Crown they shall receive, if they give
themselves, and theirs, up to us.

To induce them the more willingly to this mind, we must let them see the 123
Articles in the 4th chap. of our Constitutions, That by this means they may be
informed of the drift of this perfection, and may be weaned from that fondness
after their Relations. So that their whole affections may be set upon the glory
of God, by the advice of their ghostly Father; who must therefore lay home to
them the great hazard of death worldly grief carries along with it, which does
constantly attend the too great tenderness for near kindred.

The escaping of this danger wholly proceeds from that sincere resignation of
themselves up into our hands: which nevertheless was wrought by our
importunity; A thing all other Orders are strangers to: Then tell them of
others, who for this only act of resignation have obtained the kingdom of
heaven: and that they may one day be canonized, if they will be diligent to
prosecute so glorious a design; promising them moreover under the Seal of
Confession, that they shall be sure of our interest with the Pope for the
effecting of it.

When therefore the Widows are ready to put their Estates into our hands, and
to give themselves up to the directions of their ghostly Father; to avoid
clamor and opposition, they must immediately confirm this Conveyance, if they
be willing, and that they are fully persuaded that such counsel comes from God,
the Protector of Widows, who has greater care of their souls, than bodies.

They must be likewise possessed that God takes great pleasure in good works
and alms bestowed upon religious Orders, and such poor people, as give
themselves up to devotion.

And this advice their Confessor must give them, letting them understand, that
a cheerful giver is a delight to God, when he acts within the bounds of
obedience, which is the sister of humility. But they must be sure, when they
determine any charity, to give an account to their Confessor, that he may add,
retrench or alter, as he shall think fit.

Above all, they must be forbid the visiting of other Orders, lest they entice
them away from us. For generally, this Sex is unconstant. They must therefore
be made see, that our Order is superior to all the rest, more necessary to the
Church, of greater reputation in the Cities, and has greater interest with
Princes. So that it will be impossible for them to make a better choice. For
the other Monks have none of these advantages: nor ever look after the
salvation of their Neighbors, being generally ignorant, dull, heavy, sottish
fellows, that mind nothing but their bellies, and voluptuous living.

When we have got good store of money and other things out of our Widows, for
fear they should take a freak to marry again, we must put discreet Confessors
to them, who will take care that they assign us pensions, and certain tributes,
or alms, to help pay the yearly debts contracted by our Colleges, and profested
Houses, particularly for those at Rome, and such Colleges where the poorer sort
of our Order study; as also for the re-establishing of Novitiates, who have
long since been dispersed.

Dispose them to lay out a good sum yearly for the buying of Chasubles,
Chalices, and other accommodations for Altars.

Before a Widow comes to die, if she has not left us to be Executors, for fear
of displeasing her friends, want of affection, or any other cause, let her be
acquainted with our poverty, the number of our new Colleges not as yet endowed,
the zeal and numerousness of our Order, the great want our Churches are in, and
advise her to finish those buildings of our Colleges which are left imperfect,
and to be at the charge her self, for the greater glory of God, of erecting
Temples, Refectories, and other foundations, of which we poor servants of the
Society of Jesus Christ stand in need. And let all this be done warily and with
dispatch.

After the same method must we treat Princes, and other Benefactours, that have
raised us any great structures, or founded any Place. First, letting them
understand, that their good works are consecrated to eternity, that they are
the true model of piety, that they are those, we make a particular remembrance
of, and that they shall have their reward in the next world.

But if they object to us, that Jesus Christ was laid in a manger at his Birth,
and that he had not where to lay his Head; and therefore that we who are in a
more particular manner his Companions, ought not to enjoy the perishable
vanities of this world: then must it be pressed home to them, that indeed at
the beginning, the Church was in that condition, but that now by divine
providence she is become a Monarch; she was then but a broken rejected stone,
but is now grown into a high rock.

CHAP. VIII. How to draw into our Society the Sons and Daughters of our Devotes.
THat the Mothers may the more willingly consent to this enterprise, we must
persuade them gently, that they must be a little harsh with Daughters that are
stubborn, whipping them with rods, if young; with mortification, and threats of
worse usage, if more gone in years.

They must be chastised, and denied what were otherwise befitting their
quality. But if they will comply with our Rules, they must be cherished with
all tenderness, and promised a greater portion, than if they should marry.

The Mother must lay before them the austerity of a Husband, and the
chargeableness of that condition: represent to them the hardships and vexations
of Marriage, the torments and anguishes they are to endure, and that nothing
but sorrow is to be got by it; whereas the entering into some religious Vow,
brings along with it all content. The same doctrine must be applied to Sons
that are inclinable to marry.

We must get familiar with their Sons, and invite them to those Colleges we
think fittest to place them in, carrying them into our Gardens to walk, and to
our Countrey-houses, where we go for diversion.

Show them the great content those retreats afford, and how great respect all
Princes pay us. In short, we must make it our business to draw in the youth, by
carrying them to our Refectories and Chambers, letting them see the
agreeableness of our conversation, and how easy our Rule is, which has the
promise of the glory of the blessed.

Our sharpness in disputations of Things appertaining to this world, or that to
come, the eloquent discourses that are made amongst us, from delightful
entertainments so heavenly pleasant, which seem to be bestowed upon us in the
name of the holy Virgin, by way of revelation, must not be omitted, as so many
inducements to bring them to our Order: convincing them how great a sin it is
to resist a call from heaven. Let them likewise be present at our Exercises, to
see what that will do.

The Preceptors that teach Widows Sons in the house must be of our preferring;
who must be perpetually inviting them over to us, and promise them, rather than
fail, that if they will enter into our Society, they shall be received gratis.

We must order it so, that their Mothers disappoint them of their necessaries
from time to time, to make them consider into what troubles, and difficulties
their affairs are fallen.

CHAP. IX. How to enerease the Revenues of our Colleges.
NOne of our Order shall be admitted to the last profession, so long as they
are in expectation of any inheritance to befall them: unless he has a Brother
amongst us younger, and more likely to live than himself, or for some other
beneficial reason. In the first place, above all things we must endeavor the
aggrandizing of our Order according to the will of our Superiors, who alone
must be acquainted with these things, and must do their utmost to advance the
Church of God to the highest sphere, for his greater glory. To which end, the
Confessors of Princes and rich Widows, must be sure to tell them, that since
they receive at our hands spiritual good, for the salvation of their souls; it
is but reasonable, they should make us partakers of their temporal good things.

We must refuse nothing that is offered us. And if they promise us any thing,
it may be committed to writing, if there be any danger of giving them distaste
by overhasty importunity.

We must prefer no Confessors to Princes, or others, but such as are able and
fit to prevail with them, and to reprove them now and then for not being kind
enough to the Society. And therefore if any of them act not their part, as they
should do, let them be called back immediately, and others sent in their room.
For we have found to our grief, that many times persons have died suddenly, and
by their Confessors neglect have left nothing of value to our Church. And the
reason was, for want of being dexterous enough to make them sooner ours,
whilst they lived: which might easily have been done, had we watched to have
taken them in the humor, and not waited any other opportunity.

We must visit the Nobility and rich Widows, and sift out with a Christian
address, whether they will leave any thing to our Churches, as well to get
remission of their own sins, as those of their Relations and Friends. After the
same manner must we handle Prelates, and others of their Diocese, which will
bring us in no small gain.

Our Confessors must be sure to enquire of those that come to Confession,
their names and sir-names, allies and friends, what they intend upon the hopes
of any Succession, how they resolve to bestow themselves, how many brothers,
sisters, or heirs they have, how old, what estate, of what vocation, or
breeding, and persuade them such an information imports much to the clearing
their conscience. Then if there be any hopes of advantage, let them be enjoined
for penance to Confess every week: that what was omitted in the first weeks
Confession, may be made out in the next. Thus when all is got out of a
Penitent, the Superior must have notice, and resolve how he shall be managed
for the future.

What has been spoken in the Concern of Widows, must as well be executed upon
rich and wealthy Merchants, that are married, and have no heirs, and upon rich
Virgins that have an esteem for Us. For if we once get into their estates, we
shall soon make them ours. But we must by no means be too forward in driving on
such a design, lest we spoil all.

To procure any man's good will, we must take our measure from his Conversation,
and study to humor him in his inclinations. And our Provincials must send
discreet persons to those places, where the people are rich, that a good
account may be given to the Superiors of a hopeful success.

As soon as our people find they are got into their favor, they must presently
cry up their great bounty and deserts: which the other poor begging Friars,
never think of doing.

Our Receivers must take an Inventory of all the Houses, Gardens, Quarreys,
Vineyards, Villages, and other Emoluments, in and about the Town they reside
in; and, if they can, learn how we are beloved among the Inhabitants.

Moreover, they must find out every man's Employment and Income, what Land he
has, and what encumbrances are upon his Estate. Which may be done easily by
Confessions, the discourse at several meetings, by way of entertainment at
Visits, and by the assistance of our fast Friends. So soon as ever a Confessor
has discovered a man to be very rich, and that there is hopes of working upon
him; he must immediately give notice.

They must likewise inform themselves exactly of such, as will part with any
thing considerable, in exchange for their sons, whom we have admitted into our
Society.

Enquire if any of those, that wish us well, have any inclination to be
Benefactors to our Colleges; or if they have made any purchase, upon condition
to return it to Us after their Decease: Or what better advantage, we are to
expect from them.

Every body must be acquainted with our great necessity, the Debts that swallow
us up, and the continual great Charge we are obliged to be at.

When our Friends bestow any thing upon us, we must get it to be upon this
condition, that after a little time, we may have power to incorporate it into
the rest of our Demains.

If any of our Women-friends, that are Widows, or married, chance only to have
Daughters, we must neatly persuade them to put them into a Nunnery with some
small Portion, that the rest of the Inheritance may be ours. So for Sons, when
they have any; we must do all we can, to get them into Our Society, by
terrifying them first, and bringing them under perfect obedience to their
Parents. Afterward we must make them despise all things here below, and show
them the greater Duty of following Jesus Christ, who calls them, than their
Parents, if they regard their souls. It will likewise be a sort of Sacrifice to
Our Order, to draw in one of the younger Children, unknown to his Friends; whom
we must take care presently to send to some Novitiate, a great way off, having
first given notice to the General.

If a Widower, and Widow marry, that have Children by their former Marriages,
and likewise by the latter. Those of the last Venture must first be sent into a
Cloister, and then the former will easily follow.

If a Widow has sons and daughters, that will not be induced to a Monastic
Life; the Superior must for the first default, blame the Confessor, and put
another in his room, that may be more likely to bring the business about. But
if that fail; then must the good woman be persuaded to make money of all that
she has in her power; and give it us, for the expiation of her own sins, and
her husbands.

When we meet with a Widow that has no Heirs, and is whooly devoted to us, and
gives her self up to prayers, and is in possession of Land, or any other
Estate: we must persuade her to assign it over to our Colleges, and content her
self with some small yearly allowance from Us, that she may have more leisure
to serve God, and be quit of the encumbrances of this World. Afterward take
off her pension, and maintain her in Common with our selves, that under
pretense of mortification and poverty, she may become as one of our Domestics.
For we must bring her thus to our bent, lest some wicked Relation of hers
should take her off from so good a Work. Therefore it will be very convenient
to send her to some remote place to spend the remainder of her days; telling
her, that such a course will bein the nature of an Hermitage, which is held the
most devout and commendable of all ways.

That our Friends may be the more easily induced to believe our poverty, our
Superior must borrow of the moneyed men, giving Bond before a Scrivene.
Perchance, when they lie a dying, they will send to the Scrivener, for the good
of their souls, to deliver us up the Bonds. And a piece of paper is easier
given up, than the counting over a heap of money.

For the same reason, we should take up all the money we could of our Friends,
though we put it out again: that so being sensible of our great indigency, this
may be a more ready way to provoke them in compassion at the hour of death, to
leave us the whole, or a good share, for the erecting some new College.

We must not fail to be in Fee with the Physicians, that they may recommend us
to their Patients upon all occasions.

Our Confessors must be sure not to nelgect visiting the sick, especially
those that are in despair, laying before them the pains of Purgatory, and Hell,
which are no ways to be avoided without Charity: They which have been formerely
covetous are used for the most part to be very liberal ot our Society: and, if
may be, put all their Estates presently into our hands; which our people must
press, as much as they can, for fear the opportunity should slip by.

If a Woman in Confession, blames the vicious and harsh humor of her Husband,
that hinders her from observing our Discipline, and that she be rich, and well
inclined toward us: She must be convinced, that she can do nothing more
pleasing to God, than to lay out a good Sum of Money unknown to her Husband, or
else spare it out of her own allowance, as being the only means to procure her
quiet for the future, and remission both of her, own sins, and her Husbands.
And we find many times by experience, that this course has abated much of the
Husband's rigor.

CHAP. X. Of the Rigor and Discipline within Our Society.
THe Superiors shall declare the rigor of this Discipline to be such, that,
excepting some reserved Cases, whosoever among us, of what age or condition
soever, shall have taken off any of ours, or our Friends, from doing us good,
or put them upon entering into any other Order, but Ours, or upon bestowing
their Patrimony on Us shall show a coolness and backwardness, and rather
persuade them to give it to some other Order; or if any that receive
Confessions, shall persuade their Penitents to bestow their Charity upon their
poor Kindred: such ought to be esteemed mortal Enemies to the Society. And
though they must not be dismissed immediately, yet let them be forbid hearing
any Confessions, and mortified by undergoing the most vile and abject Offices,
be put to teach the lower Forms in the School, hindered from taking any Degree,
and as well in private, as at Meals, let them be perpetually jobed, grumbled
at, debarred of all recreations, and solemn Meetings; whatever they value most
in their Chambers, let it be taken away; that being thus hard put to it, they
may first complain themselves; Which is the best way to get rid of such
incorrigible Fellows.

They which scruple the procuring any manner of advantage for the Society,
shall be turned out without any more to do. In short, the Superior must never
stick at dismissing any, that continue not in perfect obedience and submission.

CHAP. XI. How to order a Dismission.
TO the end, that they we turn out, become not irreconcilable to us: we must
handle them after this manner. Before they are dismissed, they shall give it
under their hands, and confirm it over the Sacrament, that they will never
speak, nor act any thing against our Society.

Hinder their access to Great Men, whether of the Spiritualty, or Tempralty:
for fear they should curry favor with them to our prejudice. Lay open their
Vices, and Miscarriages, and ill Conditions; with a testimony of our great
resentment, that they should so far forfeit themselves with us, past hopes of
reconciliation.

Write word to all our Colleges of their names, and sirnames, we have
dismissed, with a large account of their Mis-demeanours.

In whatever power or credit he may be, that is turned out; we must still be
beforehand with him, in our address to the sober, and powerful Men, letting
them understand, what heinous Offenses he has committed, that were the cause of
his Disgrace. Then lay before them the love, power, reputation and advantage,
our Society has brought to the Church of God, by the approbation of all men;
the great esteem is had of our Learning, for which Kings, and other Great
Princes, take us for their Confessors and Chaplains, and admit us into their
most secret Counsels. And besides, if we acknowledge our selves obliged in
Christian zeal, to have a particular love for our Neighbor; how can it be
imagined, that we should do the least wrong to any we have admitted Companions
under the same Rule with us.

We must have a great care, how we let any of those, we have dismissed, into a
Benefice, before having first cried Peccavi, given us a good sum of Money, and
assigned all they have, over to our Society: or at least given some particular
and sufficient testimony that they are ours, body, and soul.

CHAP. XII. What choice ought to be made of those Novices we take in amongst
us, and how to keep them.
WE must be very careful in choosing Youths well-disposed, of good parts, and
comely persons, well born, and rich. To entice them, they must be carried into
our Gardens, or into our best appartments, by the Prefect of the Classes, who
shall satisfy them, how acceptable an undertaking it is to God their coming
into our Society.

The Governors of our Colleges must be very gentle with them, to let them see
what an affection we have for them; which to manifest the more, when any others
chance to be in the same fault with them, we will pardon them merely for their
sakes, and then let them privately understand as much.

We must tell them with some seeming kind of passion, that Youth is always
ill-disposed: and if they render not up themselves upon such warning, they must
be threatened with eternal Damnation.

For the more easy winning upon them, we must present them with some small
trifles, little Images, Books, or the like; walk with them in the Gardens, and
there give them some of the best Fruit, sweeten them up with good words, place
them in the best seats upon any public Solemnity, and sometimes entertain them
in our Refectories, giving them a taste of our best and choicest Wines.

We must persuade them that God has designed them for us, and that we are most
assured of it, by the revelation of our Holy Fathers. But they must have a care
not to speak of it again to any body.

Then must we threaten them, that they are eternally Damned, if they despise
the Call of the Holy Ghost, who has inspired them to enter into our Order.

When they come to desire to be admitted, it must not be granted them
presently, but put off a little, to try the strength of their resolution.

They must be advised to conceal their intention, not to let their Relations
know any thing of it, nor so much as their Play-fellows at school. All this
while we must cherish their good purpose, of coming into our Society, with the
best words we can give them. So that by heightening their desire every day more
and more, they may covet their admission with more leisure and satisfaction.
But, if it so fall out, that any change their mind; and would go out again:
they must be remembered, why they sought this admission with so much zeal and
earnestness; and made know, that this inconstancy will turn to their Damnation.

Now, because it is very difficult to draw in, and afterward to keep the
Children of rich Magistrates and Lawyers, if we have them in their own
Country: therefore in such a case, we must send them privately to the
Novitiate in Rome, having first advertised the Provincial and General. And if
any Germanys come to us into France, with any such Design, as entering into Our.
SOCIETY, they ought to be admitted without any farther Dispute.

We must be sure to send such, as there is any danger of keeping, to some
Novitiate, where the Governor of the place is our Friend; lest the insolency
of the people should prevail against us.

Now to reconcile the Friends and Relations of these Young Men we have
admitted: we must extol the bravery of their resolution, particularly in that
they have put themselves into the number of the faithful Servants of Jesus
Christ, without any leave of Parents, and that the whole drift of our Order is
to live in all Holiness, and good Doctrine, to the admiration of all men. And
therefore Great Princes have been pleased to do us that honor, as to enter
into our Society, for a retirement there to end their days.

Lastly, we must tell them, how acceptable so great a Devotion is to God, when
so young a man puts himself into the List, to fight under the Banner of Jesus
Christ.

CHAP. XIII. Concerning our Women Devotes.
OUr Confessors must have a great care, to use our Nuns gently: because they
are our greatest Benefactrices for the endowing our Colleges, and many times
give us half their Estates, when they enter into a Monastery.

We must get out of our Devout Women to vow Chastity and Obedience in our
presence, that we may be sure of them.

Let them know, how well God is pleased with their vail and spiritual
subjection, which comprehend Chastity and Obedience, and their voluntary
poverty, which argues their service to God, to be from the whole heart and
will. Thus into whatever good way we put them, they will certainly recompense
us with all their Temporalties.

CHAP. XIV. Of reserved Cases and Dismissions from the Society.
BEsides the reserves in our Instructions, which our Superior, or an ordinary
Confessor, with leave, has power to dispense with: there is in the case of
Sodomy, Adultery, Fornication, a Rape, or any other uncleanness, or any thing
committed against the honor, or profit of the Society, a private order to let
such know, that their offense amounts to a Dismission, which can have no pardon
without first promising out of Confession to the Superior all the particulars
of their enormity.

No Confessor shall accuse a Penitent once Dismissed, and out of Confession.
But if any such acknowledge his fault freely, let him be turned out: and if he
will not own it. he must be kept up for some time.

When any of our Confessors take the Confession of an Extern, and that they
accuse themselves, for having been dishonest with one of our Society: let them
have no absolution, before they have first acknowledged their fault out of
Confession. Which if they do, let ours be well chastised, and give the others
absolution.

If a Woman that is a stranger to us, has committed simple Fornication, and
confesses that she has been naught with some of us: let her not have absolution
before she has sworn never to reveal what has been done, and that upon
receiving absolution, she shall declare with whom she committed this folly.

When two of our own people have committed Sodomy one with the other: he that
disowns it, shall be turned out, and he that first confesses it, shall be kept
in. But with such mortification, as shall make him afraid ever to do the like
again: and presently after, whether willing or no, let him be dismissed.

Such as are lewdly given amongst us, whether in word or deed, we must avoid;
and having first acquainted the General with our reasons, let us use them with
all severity, deny them whatsoever they desire, be it never so inconsiderable,
and appoint such over them as shall never let them lead a happy hour, put them
upon all the meanest Offices; till they begin to murmur, that we may have
occasion to set them Going. And be sure, we never suffer such to stay with us,
as rebel against their Superiors, or that can never agree with their
Companions.

But chiefly if any seem to be dissatisfied with their Superiors, for making
unjust acquisitions for our Society, cross our interest, diswade people from
being charitable to us, or do not set themselves against those, that bear us an
ill will: they must never be suffered, For, we must take this for a rule, that
if any scorn their obedience to their Superiors, and presume to be governed by
their own fancies: they will have as little regard for Christ's own commands.

It is sufficient cause of Dismission to commend, or have any esteem for a
State or University that is enemy to our Society.

At the Dismission of any one, he must be more severely, and sharply reproved,
and have it laid home to him, what a fault he has committed in forgetting his
Duty.

He that shall be appointed at dinner, shall lay open the crimes of such
heinous offenders, so as they themselves may be convinced of their error, and
sensible of our just resentment. But we must never think of keeping such
fellows. For they can only serve to bring a Scandal, and breed Dissension among
us.

CHAP. XV. Concerning those of the Society that are appointed for entertainment
and conference.
SUch as have the care not only of our spiritual affairs, but temporal also,
for the improvement of our Company, as the Confessors of great Princes and
rich Widows our Preachers and Directors of these private Instructions, must be
ranged with the first of our Society.

When the Confessor of a rich Widow is grown old, let him be changed for one
that may be more proper for the place. But in the mean time, let the good old
man that has done us so much Service, have whatever he shall demand, either for
meat, clothing, fire, or any thing else that his age may require. The
Superiors shall not vex him with penance, nor take much notice of his faults,
for the profits sake, and good harvest he has brought into the Society by his
industry, and well disposing of Souls. And as to their Servants and
Under-waiters, Bedels and others, they must not be roughly handled, lest their
decrepit age become more chargeable to us.

It would not be handsome for us to send away the old knaves that have taken so
much pains in our behalf, for faults, which the infirmity of old age makes them
liable to. Their Relations, that wish both them and us well, would never
forgive us.

All encouragement must be given to our young Jesuits that are noble and rich,
and bring us in, Benefactours and Founders: they must have all they can desire.

We must be kind to those that have not yet given their estates to us, and that
expect large inheritances; and not forget those that have been instrumental in
drawing in such youths, or have any way showed their affection to our Society.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Devotion of the Society.
WE must all of us take up this opinion, that the Rule of our Society is much
more excellent, than that of other Orders, and therefore particularly press
this to all our friends, that they follow the Doctrine of our Fathers, and that
our Society is that foretold by Vincentius Ferrerius, as has been proved out of
the Revelation by Abbat Joachin, our whole design being to pursue the
prescription of the Son of God, Jesus Christ Crucified, and that it is our
business to avoid giving any Scandal in the least, so that we are the paterns
of all government, and are they that make learning flourish, and give education
to most people of quality.

For it is our sense, that whosoever shall do or say the contrary must not stay
with us: Because a Kingdom divided against it self must needs fall. And
therefore we are the more zealous in keeping up these Principles by which we
expect to prosper.

Our people must be sure to take all occasions of declaring, that it is
impossible the Church should flourish under any Monarchy without the
concurrence of the Temporal power: that by this means we may win upon the Great
Ones, ever making appearance of living after the strictest rules of any upon
the place we are. This shall be sure, not only to make us welcome to Princes,
but procure usa reputation of Wisdom, which in time will bring us into their
most secret Counsels. Where though we serve the Society, all must be pretended
for the public good, which will advance our Credit.

Above all things we must still lay before us the glory of God, nd good of our
Society. Following the proverb, that bids us love our selves in the first
place, and afterward our neighbors.

Therefore no matter what mischief we create; since the advance of our Society
is above all other considerations. For we see by experience, what a help the
Dissension of Princes is to us, as likewise their ordinary follies and
weaknesses.

But we must be cautious not to be suspected as the fomenters of War, or to
meddle in State Affairs: though we avoid no means to serve our Society.

When we are got into good credit: We must teach, that learning is needless in
a Parish Priest, being only requisite for Regulars, that write controversies:
and that if they understand the Gospel, it is sufficient: Thus shall we at last
make them beholding to us for Doctrine.

So soon as our reputation is got to the height, and that we are well advanced
in Riches, Learning and the favor of Great Men: Then is our time to enter upon
Canonical Cures and Abbeys. Which other Orders are never able to attain to, for
want of parts, and discretion.

Thus we may be in hopes one day to govern the whole Church; which would be our
golden age, and is a blessing we may expect from God, as Protector of our
Society in a more peculiar manner.

For we have so ordered it; that for the time to come, if we look well about
us, nothing can fall out but peace and tranquillity: Since our Society has taken
Jesus Christ for its Shepherd, who will not fill to make it flourish in all
respects.

CHAP. XVII. Concerning the contempt of Riches.
THat we may not seem too greedy after gain, it will sometimes do well to omit
taking up the lesser alms, that are given to discharge our ordinary expenses:
though on the other side, we must not refuse the least thing that is proffered
us by our good friends. But when we are in pursuit of a great sum, we must now
and then let slip a less.

There shall be no Monuments or Epitaphs set up in our Churches, though it were
for any of our best friends; lest the number of them should make people
mistrust how rich we are. -- Nay we must not permit it so much as to a Wisdow,
that we have drained to the last Mite. Our Society being made up of choice
persons; if any of them grow Scrupulous, and effeminate in their devotion: let
them be dismissed. Also, he that conceals any thing from us, or that is dull,
or sickly, or becomes mad by over-studying himself, though he has given us all
he had: we must not give him a farthing back again. But to make his Dismission
the more Plausible, we must pretend to keep what he brought to us for defraying
the great charge we have been at with him.

Those that are rich we must avoid being rude with in the least: but send them
away quietly, as out of Compassion, and great kindness. For by this means, when
they die, they may leave us all they have. Therefore we ought to cherish their
devotion, and if they seem inclined to a Monastic life, advise them to make
choice of St. Francis.

As for such as are very rich and nobly born, we must not dismiss them for any
fault whatsoever: For it is an easy matter within our own Walls to conceal
their miscarriages. And therefore we must do it, for fear their wealthy
Relations should take it ill, if we handle them so rudely.

CHAP. XVIII. What the Superiors ought carefully to observe.
THe Superiors must keep these Instructions very private, and look upon them,
as the true directions they are to observe: Nor may they impart them but to
very few of us, and those such as have occasion to make use of them.

Now, forasmuch as the greater part of our Order, that have made the last vow,
is acquainted with these Private Instructions: Therefore the Society has
provided, that none that are capacitated to know these things, shall have it in
their power, to enter into any other Order but the Chartreux, whose austerity,
and perpetual silence will keep them safe enough.

We must be very careful they fall not into the hands of our enemies, who may
make an ill interpretation of them. But if it should happen, which God forbid;
we must absolutely renounce them, and deny that ever our Society so much as
dreamed of them. And therefore in their stead we must produce our general Rule,
that is in Print, and which is quite contrary to these Private Instructions.

Our Superiors must be very inquisitive to find out, whether any of our people
have given a Copy of them to an extern.

No Superior shall have them transcribed without leave from the General: And
if the Society find that any Superior has been backward in executing these
private Instructions; let him be sent straight to the Chartreux.

No man must know what revenue we have in the several Provinces: Nor what
advantages we make of the Church-revenue.

FINIS.

