Pacis Consultum: A DIRECTORY To the Public Peace: Briefly describing, The
Antiquity, Extent, Practice and Jurisdiction Of several
Countrey-Corporation-Courts; Especially, The Court Leet. An Exact and Perfect
Method to keep a Court of Survey for the setting forth and bounding of the
Manors, Lands, and Tenements; with the Articles to be therein given in charge:
a work most useful: of which Subject, never was any thing printed before. An
Abstract of the Penal Statutes, useful for all men to know. Also some difficult
Questions in Law, proposed unto, and resolved

By Judge Jenkings.

Printed at London, by J. C. for H. Fletcher, at the three gilt-cups, near the
west end of Paul's 1657.

To the READER.
Reader,
IF any actions of men may be though praise worthy; certainly it must be their
endeavors for the public good; and above all, the preservation of the common
Peace, and propriety of meum and tuum, one amongst another; for which end and
aim only, the Law was ordained; and to that very intent and purpose, was this
ensuing Treatise composed; not thereby to gain applause, but that others may by
it reap profit.

For if the Country-Courts were duly kept as they ought to be, both Court Leet
and Court Baron in every Manor, the common people need not so complain for the
want of due Administration of Justice, as they do; nor be forced to seek so
far, and trouble the Superior Courts with so many petty Actions, wherein the
damage can never countervail the charge.

And for the Court of Survey, as there is nothing more necessary, so would it
appear in the end, there can be nothing more profitable: if the Lords and
Tenants would agree together in their several Manors, and cause Surveys and
Terrars to be made of every one's Estate, with the Title; and this keep as a
Record amongst themselves; thousands of tedious Suits, touching Titles of Land,
to the undoing of many Families, might be avoided, and the right Heir and Owner
peaceably enjoy his own, if this course were taken but once in an age.

I the rather put down the Abstract of Penal Statutes, because of the daily
breach of them, to direct those that will, how to punish the Offenders: and the
voluminous bulk of the Statutes themselves come not to the view of every one.
Gratefully therefore take this small Branch, every one that wishes well to the
Peace of English Sion; for the Head and Members whereof, remains a daily Orator,

27 April, 1657. Ph. Ag.

Courteous Reader, These books following are printed for, and sold by Henry
Fletcher, at the three Gilt-Cups in St. Paul's Churchyard near the West End.
A Dispensatory, with the whole Body of Physic: wherein is discovered the
Natures, Properties, and Virtues of Vegetables, Minerals, and Animals; by the
learned Renodaeus, chief Physician to the King of France: Englished and revised
by Richard Tomlinson of London, Apothecary: in Fol.

A Martyrology, containing a Collection of all the Persecution that has
befallen the Church of England since the first Plantation of the Gospel to the
end of Queeh Mary's Reign; with the Lives of many Eminent Persons: by Samuel
Clearck. Fol.

An Explication of the 110 Psalm: wherein the several heads of Christian
Religion therein contained, are largely explained and applied: by Edward
Reynolds D. D: 40.

A plain and easy Caleulation of the Name, Mark and Number of the (...) of the
Beast, by Nathanie^ Ste^e^^ ^^^nister in Leistershire: a learned (...) in 40.

Paracti^^ his Chemical Trans^^^^ation of Metals and Minerals, with the
Experiments of Raymund Lully, containing the right Composition of both Elixirs:
in 80.

Enchiridion of the Art of Physics by John Sadler, D. in Physic: 80.

Time well improved, or Meditations on Heavens glory, Earths vanity, and Hells
horror, with Prayers for most ^^castent: and other verses used by the Bell man
of London; 120.

England's Balm, or P^^p^fals by way of Grievance and Remedy, to the Lord
Protector and Parliament, for a Regulation of the Law by William Sheppard,
Sergeant at Law: in 80.

Plays. The old Law; by Middleton in 40. Acteon and Diana, acted many times
lately at the Red-Bull, in 40. both new.

The Antiquity, Extent, and Power OF Court-Leets; And the form of keeping them.
IF Antiquity may offer it self in plea for Authority, then good cause has
this Court to challenge equality, if not pre-eminence above any in the
Commonwealth of England: for it was established long before the Conquest, and
in those days held Plea of all matters in difference either for meum and tuum,
the two greatest Adversaries in the world, or pro placitis Coronae, which
intends generally the keeping of common peace and welfare in a Nation, which is
the crown, and dignity thereof; and the breach thereof is aptly called Crimen
lesae Majestatis.

And so duly and impartially in those days were the Liberties and Laws of this
Court observed, that it is yet, and ever will be recorded amongst our Legenda
aurea; that in those days a child might travel safely in the Road with a bag of
gold, without danger; and then the Ways were more dangerous in regard of woods;
being more full of Woods, but I think not so well stored with Thieves as now;
so that we have destroyed the one, and yet in too much plenty reserved the
other.

But to avoid digressions, and prolixity toe, we shall proceed to the formality
of proceeding in a Court Leet as now it is: and by the way, observe, that all
manner of Crimes, from the highest Treason, to the lowest Trespass, are here
enquirable, though not punishable; of which in order you shall have a perfect
description.

A Court Leet is at most kept but twice a year, in some places but once, and in
some lazy Lordships not at al, but left as a thing obsolete and useless

The manner thereof is, first about fourteen days before the Court is to be
kept, for the Bailiff to give notice thereof by virtue of a Precept to be by
the Steward of the Court pro tempore existente to him directed; which usually
runs after this form.

The Summons for a Court Leet.
H^ss. A. B. Gent. Steward of the Manor, or Hundred, or Leet aforesaid To the
Bailiff thereof, greeting: I command you, that you summon and warn all the
tenants of the said Manor, as well residents as not residents, and all
customary tenants of the Manor aforesaid, that they be before me at H.
aforesaid on Thursday the 26 day of March next coming, to do their Suit unto
the View of Frankpledge, and all things thereunto belonging, etc. Dated, etc.

Then the Steward ought to enter on the Court-Roll the Style of the Court;
which is usually after this manner.

The Entry of a Court Leet, together with a Court Baron.
H^ss. The view of Frank-pledge, with the Court Baron of C. L. Esquire Lord of the
same, there held the 20 day of March, etc. By A. B. Steward there.

Then make three Proclamations when you call the Court; and then a Proclamation
for Essoi^s, and profers of Suit and P^ea: which if any be, enter them in the
Court-Roll, and afterward proceed to impanne^ and swear the Jury for the
Inquest. Swear first the Foreman by himself, and then the rest by two or three
at a time. The Oath is usually the same in substance, and not differing much in
form from the Oath of the Foreman to a grand Inquest in Assizes and Sessions,
and might be omitted: but lest the young Tyroes might want it. I will in insert
the method thereof, thus:

The form of the Oath to the Fore man of an Inquest at a Court Leet.
You shall diligently enquire, and truepresentment make of all such matters as
shall be given you in charge: the council for the Lord Protector
(Commonwealth, King, or other Title of the supreme Magistra^e as the Law
commands) your fellows and your own, you shall well and truly keep: you shall
not conceal any thing for favor, fear, promise, or affection, nor present any
thing for lucre, hatred or malice; but in all things you shall present the
truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, according to your evidence*
So help you God, and by the contents of this Book.

The Oath of the rest may follow, in this manner.

All such Oath as A. B. your Foreman has taken on his part, you and every of
you shall well and truly take, keep, and perform. So help you God.

This being done, and Proclamation made for every one to keep silence and give
attention, the Steward is to proceed to give the Charge, which is to consist of
these particulars.

The Charge of a Court Leet consists of two parts: one is, things there to be
enquired of, but not punish^ble there, and the other, such offenses as are
three presentable, and punishable by Fine, Amerciament, etc.

Know then, that, to avoid needless circumstances, we shall briefly tell you,
that a very proper comparison may be made between the disposure of a
Commonwealth and a natural Body, as between the Macrocosmus and the
Microcosmus. The Commonwealth is a Politic Body, consisting of a head and
members, the one subservient to the other in his proper office, as the members
of the natural body are; which maintains a mutual harmony, and a flourishing
condition in the whole. But as the natural body is subject to infirmities so
also is the Politic and must be purged, the one by the Physician, the other by
the Magistrate.

As in the natural body some diseases are mortal, striking at the head thereof;
some cannot be cured but by Blood-letting; others so malignantly Gangreous, as
the whole member must be cut off to preserve the sound part: so in the body
Politic there are some mortal diseases, striking at the head, as Treasons and
Petty-treasons, as shall now be declared; some deadly, wounding the members, as
Murders, Manslaughters, etc. some gangrenging, as Robberies, F^lonios,
Bu^glaries, and the like, as follow.

Orderly then; to escape confusion, we shall declare what offenses are here at
this Court Leet enquirable and presentable, and not here punishable, but are by
the Steward to be certified to the next Assize or Sessions of the County; and
then what offenses are here to be presented, punished and determined.

The first of all presentable here, are High-treasons and Petty-treasons, which
are diseases striking at the head, and thereby, if effected, to destroy the
whole body.

Presentment therefore is here to be made of all High and Petty Treasons; which,
together with some other crimes incurable but by taking off the peccant member,
are to be set down in writing intended; one part whereof is to remain with the
Steward and the other with the Jury, and is to be delivered to the Justices of
Assize at the next general goal delivery holden for the County. Stamford; Pl.
Coron. lib. 2. cap. 24, and Lambert Justice of Peace, lib. 4. cap. 6.

The Jury therefore is to enquire of all High-treasons; that is, if any do
compass, imagine, intend, or go about to procure the death of the Lord
Protector, and do declare the same by word, writing, or any open act; or shall
go about to make war against the said Lord Protector and this Commonwealth; or
shall adhere to, or hold intelligence with any of the Enemies of this
Commonwealth: This is High Treason.

If any person shall counterfeit, clip, file, wash, or otherwise counterfeit or
falsify any of the Coin or Money of this Commonwealth, or the Coin of any
other Nation which is current in this Commonwealth; this is High Treason, and
enquirable here.

If any shall counterfeit the Privy Seal, Signet, or Sign Manual of the Lord
Protector, the great Seal of England, or any of the mean Seals of the Common
Pleas, Upper Bench, or Exchequer: These are High-treasons, and to be enquired
of here as Felonies.

Petty-treasons are, if any man kill his Master or Mistress, or a woman her
husband* this is to be enquired of here as Felony.

In the next place follows an unnatural wicked Crime to be enquired of, and
that is Murder. If any one shall out of malice prepensed or forethought, kill
another; this is wilful Murder.

Manslaughter is also a species of Murder, and here to be enquired of: which
is if two persons fall out suddenly, without any prepensed malice, and fight,
and the one kill the other; the Defendant in this case shall have the book for
his life, but loses his goods as in the case of Murder: so shall also the
Defendant lose his goods, which kills another se defendendo, or in his own
defense: and the same Law is, if it be per infortunium by misfortune: and this
is here to be enquired of, as Bloodshed.

Rape is also here to be enquired of; that is, if any man lie with, or carnally
know any woman forcibly against her will, if she exceed the age of ten years,
although she consent afterward; this is Felony by the Statute, 22 Edw. 4. And
if there be any ayders or assisters therein, they are also adjudged Ravishers,
as well as he that committed the act.

Carnally to know any woman child under the age of ten years, though she do
consent, it is Felony.

But in Rape there must be Rem in re, penetration, as well as emissio seminis;
otherwise it is no Felony. A Jury ought to be very Careful herein, and not
find a bill upon any Sluts oath.

Adultery is also to be enpuired of as Felony. If any man carnally know
another wife, and it be proved either by confession or two witnesses, it is
Felony: but the confession of one party is no evidence against the other, nor a
husband against his wife, nor a wife against her husband.

The horrendum peccatum non nominandum of man with man, or with beast, is also
Felony.

Defacing of a man's Physiognomy, as cutting off his nose, putting out of eyes,
or cutting out of a man's tongue, is Felony.

Robbery is also here to be enquired of; that is, if any one take any thing
from the person of another violently, though it be but the value of a penny; it
is Felony.

If one be pursued by another, and the person in his flight throw his purse or
any other goods into a bush or other place, and the other comes and takes it,
this is Felony as well as if he took it from his body, because he parts with his
goods for fear of his life.

Burning of a house, or barn adjoining to a house, is also Felony, and here to
be enquired of. Burglaries are also here enquirable; that is, if any person do
break any house, Church, wall or gate, in the nighttime feloniously, though he
carry nothing out of the house, yet this is Felony, because every man's house is
his Castle wherein he ought to repose himself for his safety, and out of which
he is not bound to flee.

If any one shall discharge a Pistol or any Gun in at a window, this is
Burglary.

Also, robbing of Churches or Chapels, and taking any of the ornaments or
other goods out of the same, this is Felony.

Taking of Doves out of a Dove-house in the nightime feloniously, is Felony,
and here to be enquired of.

Also, taking of young Pigeons of Gosshawks in their n^sts; or taking of fish
feloniously out of ponds or trunks, is felony; but if out of a River, it is but
Trspass.

Felonious taking of tame Dear, Swans marked, is also Felony.

Also, if any one receive a Felon, knowing of the Felony he has done* or if
any rescue any one that is taken for Felony, it is Felony, and here to be
enquited of.

Accessaries are also here to be enquired of, which are of two sorts, both in
Felony and Murder: that is, an Accessory before, and an Accessory after the
fact. An Accessory before is; if any one shall procure, command abet, or
consent to another to do a Felony, hough he be not presen: when he does it, yet
he is accessory before the fact.

Accessory after the fact, is, when one consents to it afterward, either by
receiving of the Felon or his goods, knowing them to be stolen.

Escapes are also here to be enquired of; which are of two sorts, voluntary and
negligent. Escape voluntary is, where one takes another for Felony, and
afterward permits him to go at large whether he will: this is Felony.

A negligent Escape is, when one is arrested for Felony, and afterward
escapas, through the negligence, though against the will of his Jailer or
Keeper: and if he be not freshly pursued and taken, before they lose the sight
of him, the Jailer shall therefore suffer a Fine.

Petty Larceny is also here to be enquired of; which is the felonious taking of
any thing under the value of 20 d as Hens, Geese Piggs; or pilfering things of
small value out of wincows: these things are here to be enquired of For these
offenses, The house of Correction were mere proper for the offender, then the
Goal and punishment used: and so likewise more satisfactorily might all
Felonies be expiated by the Felons labor till restoration be made, then by
death; For tex talion is, it the most just law in the world; blood requires
blood and nothing else; it is more precious then to be spilt as to often it is.

But while it is as it is, you are to enquire what Goods or Chattels, Lands and
Tenements any Felon has at the time of the Felony committed: for the persons
so offending forfeit their goods to the Lord of the Leer, and their lands are
to escheat to the Lord of whom it is holden.

And thus match concerning such matters and offenses as are to be enquired of
and presented a a Court Leet, and to be certified to the Justices of Assize. In
the next place follows such things as are here to be presented and punished.

This being a Court of Record, here may be brought Informations upon all penal
Statutes, or an action of Debt, at the election of the Plaintiff or Informer.

Offenses of this nature in this Nation, do at this time too much abound; parley
by the Ignorance of such as would prosecure them, but know not the Law, nor the
encouragement; and chiefly by the countenance of those that should take
cognizance of them and punish them but they are more apt to incline to take the
Delinquents part then the Prosecutors. Know therefore, that amongst these
Caterpilers of the Commonwealth, the Gamester is the principal Verb: by which
wicked practice, how many Families and persons are utterly ruined! And yet none
so much favored and defended these.

But to prevent this destructive evil, the Law has provided, that if any man
shall keep, either in his house, yard, or backside any playing, or sufferany to
play at Tables, Cards or Dice, Coits, Clash, Loggets or Nine-pins, Shove-groat,
otherwise called Slide-thrist, or shall keep any Bowling-green or alley, and
shall suffer any person to play thereat, or at any other unlawful game, either
now invented, or to be invented; every such person and persons shall forfeit 40
s a day for every day wherein he kept such gameing as aforesaid: And all
persons that shall play at any such games, forfeit every one the sum of 6 s. 8
d. for every day that they shall play at any such games as aforesaid: one moyty
of all such Forfeitures shall go to the use of the Lord Protector, the other
moiety to any person that will sue for the same (non constat, what he is worth
per annum, as some pretend) in any Court or Course of Record, either by action
of Debt, Bill of Indictment, Plaint, Suit, or Information; wherein no wager of
Law, Essoyn or other protection is to be allowed the Defendant. Therefore in
this Court, an Information, action of debt, or Plant, lies against
gaming-houses, and players thereat, if any such there be within the Jurisdiction
of the Leet (as there are few places free from them) And the Jury is also to
inquire of these offenses, and present them.

In the next place, (and indeed, be ought to be a the upper end of the board)
for he is the ringleader of all wickedness) comes Mr. Alehouse keeper, or Mr.
Victualer, as he calls himself: This is one that is seldom guilty of one fault
alone; yet he is so elevated with the vapors of his Ale, that he will bid
defiance to the law, and them that prosecute it: and many times the Constable,
or him that is sworn to present his Abuses, dares not, because out of the
flushes of his easy gains, he lends him money.

But the Jury, at every Leet and other Inquest is sworn to enquire and present,
if any one sell Beer or Ale without license. It will not serve their turns, to
pretend they are free Cooks, or free Inholders: for the statute excuses none.
The punishment for an unlicensed Alehouse-keeper is at the discretion of the
Judge or Justice, either by the thee Statute of 5 Ed. 6. wherein the penalty is
20 s. to the use of the poor (deducting a third part to the Informer, if it be
by information) of the parish where the offense is committed; or in default of
payment thereof, the Ale Merchant is to be publicly whipped. Another penalty by
the Statute of 3 Car. is three days Imprisonment without Bayl: and for
Mainprize, and afterward until he shall put in sufficient security not to
Victual any more without License.

Also, if any Alehouse-keeper, litensed or unlicensed shall sell Beer or Ale in
unsealed Measures, a^ Cans, stone-Juggs, black Pots or the like, or in any
other unsealed Measures, or shall sell less then a full Ale-quart of the best
Ale or Beer for a penny, or take above a penny for a full sealed quarr; he
forfeits for every such offense 20 s. one third part thereof to the prosecutor,
and two parts to the poor of the Parish.

Honest then might well employ themselves to punish these Offenders: and doing
it impartially, without respect of persons, may do much good to the
Commonwealth, preventing these fellows from growing from bad to worse, by
putting their ill-gotten, gains to Usury; maugre their calling of them
Promoting knaves. And I doubt not but I shall have such prayers as the
Chaplains of their Calling nse, for my pains.

If any Al-house keeper shall suffer any persons to sit tippling in his house
above the space of an hour* he forfeits Ten shillings, and the Tiplers Ten
groats a piece:

If any Alehouse-keeper suffer any one to be drunk in his house, the Drunkard
forfeits 5 s. the Alehouse-keeper 10 s.

Every Alehouse-keeper is to keep at least one lodging-bed in his house, for
the entertainment of Arangers: that is the intent of Alehouses.

Neither is the Alehouse-keeper to take any goods to pawn, of strangers or
wayfaring men; nor to entertain any suspicious persons, but to give notice
thereof to the Constable or next Justice of peace.

Fore-stallers, Regrators, and Ingrossors, are here also to be presented or
informed against.

If any one shall buy corn upon the ground, or other dead victuals, with an
intent to sell it again out of any Fair or Market, he forfeits the value of the
goods so bought, and two months imprisonment of his body, without Bayl or
Mainprize.

There is also an Act of Parhament lately made concerning Corn and Meal, That
if any person shall sell or put to sale any Meal or Flour, in his house or
shop, or otherwise then in the open and public Market; be forfeits the treble
value of the Meal or Flour so sold: one half of which forfeitures go to the
poor of the Parish where the offense is committed; the other half to any one
that will sue for the same in any Court of Record by Information, Indictment,
or Action of Debt. etc. And moreover; the Meal-man is to suffer imprisonment of
his body the space of one month, without Bayl or Mainprize.

If any one shall sell wine without License, he forfeits five pounds a day for
every such offense; one half to the Protector, the other half to the Prosetutor.

If any one shall use any Art, Mystery, or Manual Occupation, having not been
brought up Apprentice thereunto by the space of seven years, he forfeits forty
shillings a month for every month he shall so use it; one half of the
Forfeiture to the Protector, the other to the Prosecutor.

If any person, of the age of sixteen years or more, shall wilfully absent
himself from his Parish Church, and shall not repair thereunto or some other
lawful Parish Church or Chapel, during the space of a month, he forfeits for
every month he shall so refuse going to Church, and not having a lawful excuse
to the contrary, the sum of 20 l. the Forfeiture to be divided in three equal
parts; one third part thereof to go to the Lord Protector, the other third part
to the Poor of the Parish where the offense is committed, and the other third
part to the Informer; to be recovered in any Court of Record, by any person
that will sue for the same, by Action of debt, Indictment, Bill, Plaint, or
Information. I see noreason why Anabaptists; and those called Quakers and
Rantors to, should be exempted from the penalty of this Statute, any more then
Papists. But further to proceed to our Charge.

The Jury is to enquire also, if all Constables, Headburroughs, Deoimers or
Tythingmen, and all other Suitors that owe any Suit unto this Court, be present
here or not, to do their Suit and Service; and to present the names of all that
are absent, or make default.

They are also to enquire if any Customs or Services due unto this Court be
concealed or holden back, how or by whom the same are so detained; and in what
Bailiffs time the same was; and present the same.

Enquiry is also to be made, if any Purprestures be made upon the land, wood,
or water, with blocks, staves, ditches, hedges, or by or with any other thing,
manner or way done to the common annoyance of the people; and present it.

Also, if any Walls, Houses, Pale^, or Hedges, be made or erected within the
Jurisdiction of this Court, to the annoyance of the people: this is to be here
presented.

If any High ways, Waters, Ditches or Paths be turned aside out of their
andient courses; this is to be enquired of, and presented.

The Jury is also to enquire if any encroachments be made on the High ways, or
upon any of the Lords soil or common, or one neighbor upon another; and
present the same.

If any Laystalls be made or any carrion be cast in Highways; this is
enquirable.

Common disturbers of the peace, or such as make Frays in disturbance of the
people or breach of the peace; this is to be presented.

If there be any common Barretors within the jurisdiction of this Leet, common
Scolds, or makers of debate, to the annoyance and disturbance of their
neighbors; this is enquirable.

Enquiry is also to be made of all Pound, breakers, such as break the common
Pound, to take any Distress out of the same; their names are to be presented.

Also, the Jury is to enquire, if any persons shall make any Outcries against
the Law, (where no cause is) to the disturbance of the people; and present
their names.

Also if any Rescous be made within the jurisdiction of this Court, upon the
Sheriff, or any of his Bailiffs, or any other Officers, in the execution of
their Office; this is to be enquired of and presented.

Enquire also if any Eves-droppers, that is. such as stand under walls,
windows, at dors or other places, to hear the discourse of others, and to carry
tales thereof to others, thereby to make debate or strife amongst their
neighbors; present their names* All such offenders are to put in good s^ourity
for their good behavior; the offense highly deserving it.

Breakers of hedges, and such as walk by night and sleep by day, are here to be
enquired of.

All such as keep houses of Bawdry, or ill orders in their houses, to the
breach o the peace, or disturbance of their neighbors, their names are to be
presented.

All common hannters of Taverns or Ale houses, having not visible estates
sufficient to live upon, they are here to be enquired of, and presented, that
they may give an account by what means they live. And under this Article, being
well and duly examined to the purpose, you will find many Thieves and
Gamesters; from which number, my host himself is seldom to be excluded.

Also, if any go in any message for Thieves, knowing them to be Thieves, they
are to be enquired of.

If any person have watered any Hemp or Flax in any river, running water,
stream or brook, or common Pond. where cattle use to drink, they are to be
enquired of: they forfeit for every such offense 20 s. the one moyty to the
party grieved, or any man that will sue for the same in the Court Leet, by
Action of debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information.

But note, that if such an offense be presented by the Jury in a Court Leet,
the penalty cannot be levied, but the offender is there to be amerced, and the
Amerciament estreated, and so levied: but it may be punished in the Leet, upon
the Action or Information of any person against the offender.

If any persons have or use any false, counterfeit, or unsealed Weights, Scales
or Measures; or if any use double or two sorts of Weights or Measures, that is,
one to sell by, and another greater Weight to buy by, which is a deceit to the
people; this is to be enquired of^^n.

The Assize of Bread is also to be enquired of; and it wants diligent enquiry
whether Bakers do make their bread of a due size according to the Statute, and
the rate and price of corn; and present the defaulters.

Also, if Butchers, Fishmongers, or any other Victuallers, sell any corrupt, or
offer to put to sale any corrupt or unwholesome flesh or fish, it is to be
enquired of. Also, that all persons that sell Victuals, sell the same at
reasonable prices, according to the price of the Market adjoining: and they
that sell otherwise, and are thereof convicted, shall pay double what they
receive, to the party that is damnified: this is therefore to be enquired of.

Euquity is also to be made of Hostiers, that they sell not Hay or Oats but at
reasonable prices; and that they do not take for the bushel of Oats but an
half-penyover the common price in the Market; and that they take nothing for
the Litter.

An Inne-keeper may bake his bread for horses, in his house, in any
thorowfare-Town, which is no City where any common Bakers dwell. Provided that
he make the same according to the prices of grain: otherwise it is presentable
and punishable in Leet.

If any Millers take excessive Toll, they are to be enquired of. A Miller ought
to take but the twentieth, or the four and twentieth grain, according to the
custom, or the strength of the water.

Also, if any Miller change the corn or grain he has ground, it is here
enquirable and punishable.

If any Artificers use any deceit in their work to the deceiving of the people,
it is here to be enquired of, and their names p^esented.

Also, if any Constable, Ale-taster, Bailiffs, or any other Officers within his
jurisdiction of this Court, have not well and truly done their Officers, or
neglected the same, it is to be enquired of and presented.

Whether the Constables and Tythingmen have done their endeavors to see the
peace kept, and duly to keep watch and ward as the Law requires; it is to be be
enquired of here and presented.

The Jury is also to enquire of Treasuretrove; that is if any Money, or Plate,
or other treasure be found, that was hid in the ground, and no man knows the
owner, that is, who hid the same; this is the King's, unless the Lord have it
by a special Grant or Prescription.

Enquiry is also to be made of Estrays; that is, if any Horse, Piggs, Hoggs or
other ^attel, or Swans have come into this Lordship, and have been there a year
and a day, and not claimed; then the same is the Lord's by Prescription: but
the same ought first to be impounded in a lawful Pound, and proclaimed in three
Markets next adjoining: and if one claim them, then they shall be seized, and
ought to be put into some several land, which is open and public, and not into
any covert, or wood, where the owner cannot find them: for if they be in
covert the property is not changed, though they be there a year and a day

Waifs are also to be enquired after; that is to say, Whether any Thief upon
Hue and Cry, pursuit or otherwise, does waif his goods, that is, throw away or
forsake his goods or any part thereof in his flight, such goods are called
Waifs, and the Lord of the Leet is seized thereof: therefore it ought to be
enquired of, and presented here at this Court. Also, if any Officer seize upon
any Thieves goods, though there be no pursuit; in this case, the Lord of the
Leet shall have these goods.

If any (...) for Felony or Murder; that is, if any be indicted for Felony or
Murder; though he be acquitted, yet if it be found that he fled for the fact,
he forfeits his goods and chattels to the King, or to the Lord by Charter: and
this is enquirable.

If any horse or mare that is scabbed, mangie, or has any infectious disease,
be put into any Common or waft grounds; the owner thereof shall forfeit to the
Lord of the Leet 10 s. this therefore is to be enquired of.

If any person be outlawed in Debt, Trespass, or other personal Action, his
goods are forfeited, and the King shall have them, unless they be granted unto
the Lord by Ch^rter* this is also here enquirable.

The Jury are also to enquire whether the common Fine is duly gathered by the
Bailiff or Headborough, and paid according to the custom of the Court, and
common

They are also to enquire whether there be within the Leet a Pilloty, and
^umbrel, and Stocks, to punish offenders according to Law. In every town where
there is a Leet, there ought to be Stocks; and in default thereof, the Town
shall forfeit, 5 l.

If any Baker, Butcher, Brewer, Alehousekeeper, or the like, dot ache excessive
gain for their Victuals, or do promise, covenant or conspire together, not to
sell Victuals but at a certain price, this is to be here enquired of and
presented.

Likewise, enquiry is to be made if any Artificers, Workmen^ or Laborers have
promised, covenanted, or conspired together that they will not make or do their
works but at a certain price, and not to finish what another has begun, or
that will do but certain work in a day; they are to be presented, and punished
according to the Statnte of 24 H. 8, cap. 12.

Also, enquiry is to be made if any Tanner have put to sale any Hide of Ox,
Bul^or Cow, that is gashed or out: he shall forfeit for every Hide so sold, 12.
d. Also, no Curryer ought to curry any Leather in a Shoo^makers house, nor to
curry any Leather that is evil tanned.

Enquiry is to be made in all Leets in Country-towns and Villages, if there be
any Crow-nets to destroy Crows and Rooks, if they do not destroy the Crows
nests then they begin to breed: in default hereof, the Town is to be amerced.

You are also to enquire in the Leet, if any person has by any means taken or
killed the young Spawn or Fry of any Fish, in any stream, river, brook,
floud-gate, or in the Tail of any Mill; or whether any person has taken in any
of the said places any Salmons or Trouts out of season, or any Pikes not being
in length ten Inches, or any Barbel not being in length twelve inches, or any
Salmons not sixteen inches, or Trouts not eight inches: all such offenders are
here to be enquired of, presented and punished.

The Jury shall also enquire, if any person shall either by day or by night
break down the head or dam of any Pond, Pool or Moat, wherein the Lord has
fish, with an intent to steal or destroy the said Fish; he shall pay to the
Lord treble damages, and be imprisoned three months, and be bound to the good
behavior for seven years.

Hunters and stealers of Deer are here to be ^nquired of and presented.

No stone horse, being of the age of two years, shall be put into any common,
Forest, or Chase to pasture, except he be fourteen handfulls high, in pain to
forfeit the said horse. Also, the said Commons ought to be driven at
Micha^lmas, or within fifteen days after, upon pain of 40 s. and if upon the
sam driving there be found any Mare Foal, or Gelding, not likely to be able to
bear foals, or do other profitable service, the same shall be slain and buried.
32 H. 8. cap 13.

You shall also enquire whether Hue and Cry, and fresh Suit be duly made and
pursued, after Robbers and Felons, according to the Statute of West^^. 13 Ed.
1. cap. 2. For if any man be robbed in the daytime, and the Thief escape, and
is not taken within forty days after the Robbery, for lack of Hue and Cry, the
Borough or Hundred shall answer to the party for his damages. Also, if any
person be killed in the daytime in a Town, and the Murderer or Manslayer
escape, the Township shall be fined for his escape 18 Edw. 2.

If any persons, to the number of twelve or above, shall make any unlawful
assembly, to break any Banks, Enclosures, Parks, Barns, Houses, and such like,
and Proclamations be made by the Sheriff or Justice of Peace that they depart,
and yet if they remain together an hour after such Proclamation is made, every
such attempt is Felony.

Also, every Copyholder, being a Yeoman, Husbandman or Labourer, of the age of
18 years, and under 60, not sick, not having a reasonable excuse, and being
required by the Justice, Sheriff etc. to apprehend such riotous persons as
aforesaid, and refuse, shall forefeit his estate during life, and his Lord may
enter. Also, the Farmer being a Yeoman, and refusing, forfeits to his Landlord,
and he may enter.

Also, it is Felony, if any person, without compulsion, bring, send or diliver
any Money, Ammunition or Victuals to any person assembled in such manner. Also,
the Justice of Peace, or other Officer, may raise a power to suppress them. And
if any Officer kill any such Riotous or rebellious persons, he shall go free.

And if any person know of any such pretended rebellion, and do not openly
declare the same within twenty, hours next after such knowledge, he shall be
imprisoned three months without Bayl or Mainprize: and also, he that hinders
Proclamation that it cannot be made, commits Felony.

If any shall trace in the Snow, kill or destroy any Hare or Leveret with dogs
or otherwise, he shall forfeit 6 s. 8 d. 13 H. 8. cap. 11.

If any Jury sworn and charged to enquire concerning these offenses, do
wilfully conceal the same, then the Steward has authority to impannel and
charge another Jury to enquire of such concealment. And if such concealment be
found and presented by the said Jury, then every one of the first Jury shall
forfeit for every concealment of every offense 20 s. one moiety thereof to the
Lord of the Leet, the other moiety to any one that will sue for the same by
Action of debt, Bill, Plaint, Suit, or Information: wherein no wager of Law,
Essoyn, or Protection is to be allowed. Provided the Suit be commenced within
six months; otherwise the offender to be discharged thereof. 33 H. 6.16.

Stewards in Leets have power to enquire concerning the erecting of Cottages,
and maintaining of Inmates, and to punish by Distress al offenses committed
against the Sta^^te touching Inmates and Cottages. 31 Eliz cap. 7.

Stewards in Leets have also power to enquire, hear and determine all offenses
touching the making of Malt. 2 Ed. 6.16. Ed. 2.35. Eliz. 7.

Stewards in Count-Leets shall enquire of, hear and determine al offenses
committed within their Liberties against the Stature for the preservation of
Phesants and Partridges. 23: Eliz. 6.23. Eliz 10.

Nevertheless, with a salvo jure to all Corporations and Bodies Politic, of
all their rights and privileges, to enquire and punish any of the said
offenses 1 Eliz. 17.35 Eliz. 7.

Articles to be given in charge to Constables and Headboroughs, at Leets and
Sessions both of Cities, Towns, and Country Corporations; most necessary for
the preservation of Peace, to which our present scope intends only: and this
Direction well followed, will perfectly conduce thereunto, if such a
preservative for the health of men can be attained unto under Heaven.

Therefore I say, These ensuing Article ought specially to be enquired of,
returned and presented by all Constables, Headboroughs, Tythingmen, Decimers
and all sworn officers, who are enjoined by Oath to preserve the Peace in their
own persons, and in all others as much as in them lies; then to discharge their
own duties, let them, diligently observe and prosecute what follows, viz.

Inprimis, They are to enquire and return al such persons as shall continue
tippling or drinking in any Innes or Alehouses, at any time above the space of
an hour, and more especially upon the Sabbath Days: and such persons as they
shall find drunk, and also such In keepers and Alehouse-keepers as shall
entertain them.

2. They are also to return the Names, Sirnames, Additions of Names and
Qualities of all Popish Recusants; (as well houskeepers, as Lodgers) dwelling or
residing in any of their Parishes, Precincts, or Liberties.

3. The Names of such persons as shall profanely swear or curse, with the
number of their Oaths or Cursings immediately after the committing of such
offense.

4. Item, Such as use victualling or selling Beer or Ale without License.

5. Such persons as suffer any unlawful Games in their houses, backsides, or
Gardens: and also the Names of any that shall play at any of the said Games.
This is a gangrene and spreading leprosy in this Commonwealth, a Vice abhorent
to Christianity; yet (the mores the pity) most favored by them that should
seek to suppress it, I mean, in plain English, the Professors of the Law:
insomuch, that an honest cause shall never have any countenance or defense like
one of these: and no persons are so much vilified; nay, a Felon shall have more
favor then a lawful Prosecutor, I mean an Informer against these Caterpillars:
Sed tu domine usque quo? But nolens, volens, (yet I hope to see the contrary),
Mr. Alehouse-keeper will be the best man; yet I hope to see the tide run the
contrary way, if men could but once learn wit enough to know, That charity
begins at home; The Alehousekeeper knows it very well: he will be sure to look
how the reckoning goes: and wise men will keep reckoning at home, and not let
him keep it for them; knowing that two pence a day is above fifty shillings per
annum, and out of two pence the Tapmerchant gets a penny. Then judge what he
gets by all the Flies he catches in his Web. Certainly, did people once
consider this, the Ale wife would have few Companions better then her self, yet
now she thinks the best scarce good enough for her, though the Causers of it
have little thanks for their pains: when she has gotten their money, it is
seldom but they have a scoff or jeer into the bargain, because they should not
complain of an unkind Hostess: And the worst mischief of all, is, That men very
often ensnare themselves to their, utter undoing by the Alehouse-keepers and
his Compurgators Evesdropping of their discourse. And certainly none but fools
will go to game for what is already their own, nor no Christian endeavor to
come by, or enjoy by playing for what is another. And because the Fort and
Fountain of Gamesters is the Alehouse, I made this Digression soberly to advise
three sorts of men^

The one is in general all honest people to wish them (if they be not worse
then Infidels) to avoid the Alehouse; for under that notion I conclude the
gaming house too, knowing them to be inseparable companions. And therefore I
say again, It were well if it were ordained, That every Alehouskeeper should
have at his door the sign of the Beggar; for from that spring, the
Alehousekeeper original comes when he first enters into his order; and before
he leaves, he makes all Beggars that frequent his company: therefore such a
sign might give warning to others to let him alone, and keep his beggarly
condition to himself, which might enforce him to work for his living as honest
men do, and not grow so fat by the sweat of other men's brows.

The second sort of people I would speak to, in my intended hopeful Instrument
of Reformation, is the Professors and Practisers of the Law; these should seek
to punish vice rather then promote it; Ergo, I would desire them to honor their
profession so far as not so earnesty defend as they too much do, the Destroyers
of the public Good; that is, the gamesters and Alehousekeepers and all
breakers of penal Statutes. Well, Semel dictum sapienti sat ost, I Will say no
more, for Iexpect little thanks for this: R. T. Rhadamanthus.

The third sort I would advise is, such men as take upon them, or will
undertake the prosecution of all penal Laws and Statutes against the contemners
and breakers thereof; which persons are usually called Promoters and Informers
etc. Be sure, let me advise you to shoot home where you begin let no fair
tongues ensnare you; promises nor hopes of reward entice you, ^obe caught in
their nets; when, for the lucre of a small Fee (which they al generally seek to
ensnare you with) you release them, and un^oe your selves. But, I say, draw
your Arrow to the head, and he will fly to the mark: if you prosecute the Law
to the utmost without favor or affection, you do that the Law intends you for,
and shall being profit and tranquillity to the Commonwealth in general, and to
your selves as good members thereof in particular, maugre all opponents; doubt
not but our Lawmakers and Keepers, whom God has now raised to protect us, will
defend you in the execution of Justice: and the better to direct you, I will
immediately lay down, and declare to you the heads of the penal statutes, as
soon as I have done with my ensuing Articles.

6. Constables and Headboroughs are also to present such persons as do refuse
or neglect to do their duty of watching or warding.

7. Item, Such persons as divide their Houses into several Tenements; and such
as do entertain Inmates, who may be an annoyance to their Neighbors, or likely
to bring charges upon the Parish.

8. Item, The Defaults of petty Constables Headboroughs, and Tythingmen (these
are the same in Nature, though different in Name) for not causing Rogues,
Vagabonds, and Beggars to be duly apprehended, punished and passed, according
to the Statute.

9. Item, All masterless men and women living at their own hands, such as are
idle and will not labor, and can give no good account how they get their
living: all suspicious persons, Whores, Night-walkers, and mothers of Bastards,
which may be chargeabe to the Parish.

10. Item. The Names of such Persons as refuse to take to Apprentice, poor
Parish children, to Husbandry, and other Callings according to Law.

11. Item, All such as neglect to make due rates and collections for the relief
of the poor in every parish, and that cannot give a just account of the
employment of the rent and stock of the poor.

12. Item, The Defects of the Highways and Bridges, with the names of such as
should repair them, and have neglected or refused to do their duty herein.

13. Item. Such Scavengers as neglect to do their office, in causing the
Streets to be kept clean within their Liberties; and the names of such persons
as commit common annoyances, by laying of dung, soil or ashes in the Street.

14. Item, The names of such persons as neglect or refuse to pave the Streets
before their houses, where the said Streets have usually been paid.

15. Such persons as keep any Hogs in the Streets or elsewhere to the annoyan^e
of the people. These three last are only preper for Towns and Cities.

16. All such Bakers as put light bread to sale, and the weight thereof; and
such Brewers as sell Beer or Ale to unlicensed Alehouse-keepers, and such as
ingross any Corn, Grain, or any dead Victuals.

A Compendium of all such penal Statutes as concern forestalling, engrossing,
regrating, Millers. Bakers, Brewers, Clothwo^kers, Alehousekeepers, Gamers,
Wine without License, Recusants, mealmen, Usury and Extortion, should here
imediately follow; but in regard we find them too prolixo^s to be annexed to
the Court Leet, in regard it makes too long a passaege to the Court Baron; and
we not being willing to omit any part thereof, conducible to the comm^n good,
seeing we intend this Treatise chiefly for the instruction of the ignorant in
this most needful knowledge, as well for the plain Countryman, as for the
benefit of the studious Tyro in the Law Practice; We shall reserve the addition
of the penal Statutes, as an Appendix in the close of the Book, and proceed to
the Court Baron.

Now because the Court Baron is always an adjacent Neighbor, if not a Companion
with the Court Leet, I shall successively give you the form and watters of
charge to be enquired and punished there.

The Court Baron holds Plea of all personal actions and trespasses made within
the Manor, where the Tenants are and ought to have Justice at home, and not to
be at the charge of a Suit at Westminster, for every petty action: where
sometimes the damage is not three pence, 20 l. is spent in deciding the
Controversy.

This Court ought to be kept every three weeks; and to that intent, the Lord
receives Rents and Services of his Tenants to do them Justice: and some hold
their Lands only, by this service of doing Suit of Court, and these Suitors
are the Judges of the Court, though I believe few Lord know a reason why they
receive their Quit-Rents; and few Tenants wherefore they pay it: by which
means, the due keeping of these Courts, is in many, nay, most places neglected,
to the great injury of the people; But a remedy they may have against the Lord
for the non-usage, or abuse thereof, which shall here following be declared:
but to proceed. First, enter the Style of the Court, which is after this
manner, Holsh^t, ss. The Court Baron of J. W. held there on Friday the 24 of
March in the year of our Lord, 1656.

When the Style of the Court is entered, call the Suitors and Tenants, entering
their appearances and defaults; then make Proclamation, That if any one will be
essoyned or enter any plaint they may come in and be heard.

After the Essoyns* and Plaints and Pleas be entered, then impanel the Jury, and
swear them.

The Oath is after the same manner as the Leet, on^y leaving our these words,
The Council for the Protector, etc.

Then after silence made, proceed to give in charge these Articles ensuing:

First, the Jury is to enquire of the Suitors which owe any Suit to this Court,
whether they do attend the Court or no, and present the Defaulters.

Secondly, Enquire whether any Tenant be dead since the last Court, or before,
whose death is not yet presented; and present the same: and what Lands and
Tenements he held of his Manor at the time of his death, and by what service;
and who is next Heir to the said Inheritance.

If it be Socage-Tenure, the Lord shall have his Fealty and one years Rent for
a relief over and above his yearly Rent: (I do not mean the Rent to the value
or profits of the Land; though many Lords of Copyholders, have much mistaken
themselves of late, in this case, or else the Tenants do too much mistake
themselves, to the Tenants undoing, when the fine has been stretched by the
cloak bag-strings of the Lords conscience:) and for his relief, the Lord may
distrain immediately after the death of his Tenant.

You shall enquire whether any Freeholder has aliened, or sold away his
Freehold, or any parcel thereof, and present it: for he which bought the Land,
before he enter, ought to give notice thereof to the Lord; and if he bought but
a parcel, the Rent ought to be apportioned accordingly between both parties,
according to the value of the Lands sold.

Fourthly, Enquire whether any one man has two several parcels of Land holden
by several Titles, and dies seized of the same: the Lord shall have two
Herriots by his death.

You shall also enquire whether any Copy holder dies, seized of any Lands, so
holden, and present it. Also, whether any Copyholder has made any Lease of
his Copyhold, or otherwise aliened or sold the same, without surrender, and
present it; for its a forfeiture of his Copyhold.

Enquire also whether any Copyholder has made any surrender of his Copyhold,
or any part thereof, since the last Courtday, or before, and present it; and
into whose hands it was made, and to whose use: for at every death, or other
alienation, the Lord is to have a Fine (were it not for this, few Lords would
keep any Court at all, though they ought to do it, to do justice to their
Tenants;) and the party into whose hands the surrender is made, ought at the
next Court to present the same, and to certify the surrender into Court to the
use of the alien, according to the trust reposed in him, on pain of forfeiture
of his Copyhold: and the party that receives the surrender is not invested in
any right in the estate by the surrender, unless he be admitted Tenant in Court.

Enquire also, if any Tenant of this Manor, have given any of their Lands into
Mortmayn, and present it: if any man give or sell any Lands to any house of
Religion, or to any other which be corporate by the Kings Grant; or if any one
make any Feofment upon trust to the use of any Religious house, or to the use
of any Fraternity or Corporation: this is Mortmain.

You shall also enquire whether any Tenant, for term of life or years, or any
Copyholder of this Lordship, has made any waste, or suffered any waste to be
done upon their Lands and Ienements, and present it.

Waste is when any Tenant for term of life or years, or any Copyholder pulls
down any house, or cutteth down timber trees or suffers any of his
Copy-hold-Tenements to decay or fall, or if any of the Tenants plowup any meadow
ground or if they suffer any wall or pale which was covered, to be uncovered,
by reason whereof, the same wall or pale does fall: or if any Tenant dig coals,
chalk, sand, or make any Mine in his Ground, it is commitment of waste.

But if a Tenant fell Timber to repair Houses in decay upon his Copyhold, and
therewith does repair them, or therewith build a new house, or any new
building; this is not waste. But if he cut down and fell any such Timber, this
is waste. Also Copy holders may cut down Wood to burn upon their Tenements, or
to make Reparations without waste.

Enquite also, whether any Tenant died, seized of any Lands holden of this
Manor, having no Heir at the time of his death, his Lands shall escheat to the
Lord.

None shall inherit Lands in Fee-simple, unless he be Heir, of the whole blood;
and understand, that a Bastard can never be Heir unto any man; neither can he
ever have Heir, but his children of his own body lawfully begotten: therefore,
if any Bastard die without issue, or any other Tenant die, seized without
Heirs, present it.

Also, if any Tenant seized of any Lands or Tenements, was ejected therefrom by
one that had no rightful Title thereunto, and after dies without Heir. the Lord
shall have his escheat, as well if the Tenant had died seized: ergo, enquire
thereof, and present it.

Enquire also, if any Tenant of this Manor has been attained for any Treason,
Felony, or Murder, for which he had judgment, although he were afterward
delivered, or were burned in the hand: the Lord has his Lands by escheat: or
if any one has abjured the Land or be outlawed for any Treason, Felony, or
Murder, present it: for the Lord shall have his Land by escheat.

You are also to enquire, if there be any rents, customs, or Services withdrawn
from the Lordship which are due, and of right ought to be done thereunto; and
what Rights, Customs, and Services they are, by whom withdrawn, and where the
Land lies out of which they be due, and who holds the same, and present it.

Enquire also, whether any Waif or Stray was or is within this Lordship; and
whether the Lord be answered of the same; and if not, present by whom they are
detained; and if any Herriot be conveyed away or concealed, present it, and by
whom.

And here it will not be any digression
to tell you what a Waif and Stray is.
A Waif is if a Thing being pursued, or otherwise to ease himself of his
burden, does leave and forsake his goods, which he has stolen, or any part of
them; such Goods are called Waifs: and the chief Lord shall have the Goods so
waived, unless the Owner of them, do make fresh suit after the Thief, and
attach him for stealing the said Goods; in such cass he shall have his Goods
again, though they be waived; but then he must sue an appeal, or else procure
the Thief to be convicted at his Suit, 21 H. cap. 12.

An Estray is, if any Beast be found in the Lordship, and no man know the Owner
thereof, they shall be seized to the use of the King, unless the Lord have them
by Grant or Prescription, if the Owner do not claim the same within a year and
a day after the Lord has caused Proclamation to be made in the next Markets,
and in the Church, according to the Statute.

Also enquire, whether any person has made any Rescous against the Lord or his
Officers within the Manor, and present it: That if the Lord come to distrain
for his Rent, and the Tenant resist him, that he cannot distrain, this is a
rescue; or, if Beasts distrained run into the house of the Owner, and the
Distrainer prays them to be delivered to him, and the possessors will not
deliver them, it is a Rescue.

You are likewise to enquire of, and present all pound-breaches; whether any
person has broken the Lord's Pound, that is, to have taken away any distress
put therein: if the Lord do distrain for Rent or service behind, he may
impound the distress either in a common Pound or in his ow^ Ground, if he will,
or in his Neighbors Ground, by the License of his Neighbor: and any place in
which the Lord does impound, is the Lord's Pound: but if any other person do
impound any Cattle in his own Pound or his Neighbors, he ought to give notice
thereof to the other party, that is, to the Owner of them, that he may give
them meat if he will; and then if the Beast die for want of food, he that was
distrained shall be at the loss, and he that did distrain, may distrain again
for the same Rent or Duty,

Enquire also, if any Inhabitant have overcharged the Common, or Highways, or
common Fields, by putting therein more Cattle then they ought to keep, or
before the days agreed upon, and present it; for the Lord may distrain the
Surplussage, Damage Feisant.

There may also be made certain Orders by the Inhabitants, one among another,
which none may break under such penalties as they agree upon between themselves.

Also you shall enquire, whether any persons have dug any Holes or Pits in
the Highways, or whether any use commonly to break Hedges, or suffer any
Hoggs to go unringed or unyoked, to the annoyance, of their Neighbors, and
present the same.

Enquire likewise whether any person has stopped any Watercourse, Way, Ditch,
Path or Style, or turned any of them out of their way, and present it; have a
care in this case you presentno man maliciously; a foot or two to step about
its, not so great damage to any as to cause a suite more then the value of the
land, as some have done, and after repented too late.

Also, whether any Tenant has made any incroachment upon any of the Lord's
Land, Meadow, Pasture, Wood, Heath, or other vacant Ground, without the Lord's
leave; or has set his Hedge or Pale, beyond his due bounds, and present the
same.

Also enquire, whether any person has plowed up, or removed any Meerbanks,
Banks, or removed any Bounds or Limits between one piece of Land and another,
and present it.

Also, you shall enquire whether any person does detain or keep away, or detain
any of the Lords Court-Rollsor Evidences and present the same.

Also if any person have Hunted, Hawked, Fished or Fowled in the Lor^'s Warren,
and present it.

Also, you shall enquire, if any persons have taken any Eggs of the Lord's
Swans out of their Nests, and present their names.

Enquire also if any trespass be done in any of the Lord's Liberties, either in
his Corn Grass, Meadows, Pasture, Woods, Waters, Ponds, or Hedges; or take, or
destroy any Aerie of Haws, and present the same.

Enquire also, if any Land be enclosed that ought to lie open, without the
license of the Lord and other Freeholders, and present the same, that the
Tenants of the Manor may not lose their Common thereof.

Enquire also, whether any Tenant for life or term of years, has let any
greater or longer estate in his Lands or Tenements then he has therein; it is
a forse^ture of their Estates.

Enquire lastly, if all the Defaults and Plaints presented at the last Court,
be sufficiently and duly amended: and whether all the Orders and Rules made
heretofore concerning this Manor, be observed and kept, and present it; and if
you know any thing more fitting to be, or that ought to be presented for the
Lords profit, or your own common good, diligently enquire thereof, as you are
in con^cience bound, according to the Oaths you have taken, and are obliged to
both by God and man: studying as much as in you lits, the general good and
welfare on^ of another: and to that end, of all matters given you in charge,
and here to be enquired of, make a true presentment, distinctly and plainly
without malice, in speaking more then is true, or favor in concealing any one
that is culpable, against the truth.

The form and manner of proceeding in personal Actions both in the Court Leet,
Court Baron, (and also the hundred Courts, which is also a Court held generally
every three weeks, to hold plea in personal Actions, where the debt or damages
exceed not 40 s. by the Sheriff in many places, or by his Steward, if the King
be Lord thereof; or if it be a particular Lord, by his Steward for the whole
Hundred:) I say, the Process of these Courts, is, Summons, Attachment and
Distress, to be directed by Precept from the Steward of the Court to the
Bailiff of the same, where it lies in the choice of the Plaintiff either to
summon the Defendant, or attach his Goods; which he must put in Bayl unto, to
appear at the next Court to answer the Defendant, which is usual in trespass:
but in debt, only a Summons without bayl; a laudable way of granting out
Process in all Courts of Judicature, coming nearest the purity of the original
and ancient practice of the Laws of this Nation.

And if the Original in the Court of common Pleas were only used, and the
Capiat taken away, or rather indeed a Sub-poena only in all Cou^ts, and an
Attachment to follow in case of Contempt, how much vexatious charge and trouble
would the people of the Nation be freed from, and their Estates and persons
saved from the devouring clutches of those ravenous Wolves, the Catch-poles and
Sergeants, to which honest men are often enforced subjects; when perhaps, nay,
most often, less charge would end the difference then these men expose both
parties unto: and for which, both Plaintiff and Defendant sit down losers.

But because it is our earnest desire to pursue peace as much as is possible
with all men we, shall here lay down a method of keeping a Court of Survey;
which if all Lords and Tenants would, as if they will, with a little charge
they may, join together, and perfectly observe, the Right and Propriety of
every man might be known and registered amongst them, and thereby many tedious,
consuming, troublesome Title-Sutes at Law, avoided; for by this means, every
one might know his own; and he that will not therewith be content, deserves
nothing.

The manner, form, and method of keeping a Court of Survey for the surveying,
setting forth, Butting, describing and bounding of any Manor or Town; with the
several Tenures belonging to the same. With the form of making a Terrar or
Field-book, and the Articles to be given in charge to the Jury, in a Court of
Survey.

Articles to be enquired of and given in charge in a Court of Survey holden for
the Manor of A. in the Parish of H. in the County of N: the 8 day of May, 1656.

IN primis. Who have, or are suspected to have, or keep back any of the Lord's
Evdences, Court-Rolls, Rentals, Books of Survey, Te^rars or Writings what is
soever, concerning the said Manor, and who have been Stewards of the said
Manor within the time of your remembrance.

Note, if there be a Survey holden for two Manors or more, at one time; then
say, instead of Manor, Manors. And the said Manors, or either of them.

2. Item That you inform what Limits and Bounds belong to the said Manors; and
what Lords are bounding or bordering thereupon, or whether they do ch^lenge
intrude or encroach upon the Lands of the Lords of the said Manors.

3. Item, That you set forth the Freehold Lands and ^enements, within the said
Manors from the Copyhold, customary and demeasne Lands of the said Manors,
and either of them, or any other Manor, and who are the Freehold Tenants or
Occupiers thereof, and what are their names and what Free^hold Rent do they
severally pay to the Lord of the said Manors for the same.

4. Item, What alienations, transmutations or alterations have been made of any
Freehold Lands within or belonging to the said Manors or either of them, and
what is due to the Lord upon any such alienation, transmutation or alteration.

5. Item, What Houses or Tenements of Freehold are now standing, or have been
decayed within the said Manors: by whom and when were they so decayed; what
Laws do or heretofore did belong to every such House or Tenement; and what
Lands have been sold from the said Houses or Tenements, and to whom.

6. Item, What Tenements or Cottages are lately built within the said Manors,
that are holden at will, or sufferance, or by Copy of Court-Roll of the said
Manors, or either of them, or any other Manors, and who be the owners or
occupiers thereof, and what Rents and Services do they yield and pay for the
same, and what Laws do belong to every such Tenement and Cottage, and how long
since have any such Tenements or Cortages been built, and what Commonage do
they challenge for the same, and by what right, and what is the name of such
Common or Commons they challenge Commonage in.

7. Item, How many Copyhold or Customary Tenants, are within or belonging to
the said Manors, and either of them and what be their several names, and what
Messuages, Land^, Tenements, or Hered itaments, has every such Copyholder or
Customary Tenant; what are their several quantities and yearly values, where do
they lie, and how they are abuttalled, and by what Rents and Services does
every such Copyholder hold the same.

8. Item, Whether any of the Copyholders within the said Manors have
exchanged, bargained or sold any of their Copyhold Lands or Tenements to any
Freeholder, and what are such Lands and Tenements so bargained, exchanged and
sold, yearly worth, and where do they lie.

9. Item, Whether any Copyhold or Cnstomary Tenant of the said Manors or
either of them, has let or set for any time or term of years, his Copyhold,
or Customary Lands or Tenemen^s, or any part thereof, without the Lords
license, and whether any enjoy any Copyhold, or Customary Lands, not having a
Copy or Grant thereof immediately from the Lord of the said Manors, and what
be their names, and the yearly value thereof.

10. Item, What Lands, Tenements, Rents, Services or Hereditaments, within, or
belonging to the said Manors, are withholden, concealed, or subtracted from
the Lord of ^he said Manors, by whom, and when, etc.

11. Item, What Heath-Grounds, Sheep courses or Sheep-walks are within or
belonging to the said Manors, how are they situated, set forth, or bounded;
and how many Acres, do every such Heath Sheep course or Sheep-walk contain, by
measure or estimation; and how many Sheep will the same yearly maintain and
keep, and what other Privileges or Customary Feed do belong to the said
Sheeps-course or Sheeps-walk; and where do the same lie; and at what time or
times in the year is the said Privilege and Feed to be taken, and what is the
yearly value of the said Sheep-walk or Sheeps-course.

12. Item, Whether any can or do justly claim or hold any Land that lies within
the said Heath-Grounds, Sheepcourse or Sheeps walks and by what right do they
hold or claim the same, and how much Land have every such Land-holder, and
whether have they not other Lands of the Lord of the said Manors in Leiu or
exchange thereof, and where do the said exchanged Lands severally lie: and how
are they abuttalled and bounded, and what be the several Names of the Occupiers
of such Lands, and their several quantities.

1. Item, What Commons, commonable Grounds, waste and vacant Grounds are within
and belonging to the same Manors, and what be their several names: how are
they situated, metred, let forth or bounded; and how many Acres do every such
Common, commonable Grounds, waste and vacant Grounds contain by estimation, and
who can and do justly claim or pretend to have any Common of Feed in the said
commonable Grounds, waste and vacant Grounds, and what be their several names.

14. Item, What Enclosures and Encroachments have been made at any time
heretofore, and now being in, upon, or out of the said Commons, commonable
Grounds, waste and vacant Grounds, by whom, where, and when were they made, and
what quantity, and by what warrant or right they did, or do hold the same.

15. Item, What plantings or Trees is now, and have been hertofore set or
growing upon any of the Commons belonging to the said Manors or either of
them, by whom they have been so set or planted, and what be their names that
challenge the same as helonging to their Houses or Tenements, and what be the
names of such Houses or Tenements, and how far off are the said Plantings or
Trees planted or growing from the said Houses or Tenements, and what number of
Plantings or trees do they severally challenge to belong to their said Houses
or Tenements, and by what right; and who ha^h lopred, felled, sold or converted
to their own use any such Plantings or Trees, and for how much do they or any
of them hold the same.

16. Item, What dem^asne Lands are belonging to the said Manors, and either of
them, and where do they severally lie, and how are they abuttalled, and what be
their several quantities and qualities and their yearly value; and what be the
names of them that have them in Farm, exchange or Occupation; and for what Rent
and term, or for what cause do they severally hold the same.

17. Item, What Liberties, Freedoms Frankchises, and other preheminences and
royalties do belong or appertain to the said Manors, what are the same, and
what profit may be yearly, or otherwise made or raised by the Lord thereby.

18. Lastly, to enquire and certify who shall neglect or refuse to bring in and
show forth their Deeds or their Evidences of all their Freehold Lands and
Tenements within the said Manor, together with all their Copies or Court Rolls
of all such Lands as they severally hold by Copy of Court-Roll of the Manors
aforesaid, for the better setting forth and distinguishing of the said Lands
accordingly, whereby the Survey of the said Manors may be made the more
perfect.

The manner of making the Terrar or Field-Book, may be thus:

A general Survey and Field book taken at H. in the County of S. holden for the
Manors of G. and H. by R. T Steward and Survayor of the same. the 10 day of M
1656. wherein all the Messuages, Lands, and Tenements in the said Manors, are
set forth, butted and bounded. The Tenure how all such Lands are holden, and
who be the right Owners thereof.

Then begin at what part of the Town you please, so go through, setting down
every parcel of Land, Message or Tenement distinctly, abutting and bounding
it: and at last, set down the Tenure and Title of the Owner or Inheritor,
according to his evidence for the same: as thus; if you begin at the Manor
house, then begin your Survey Book.

A. B. Esquire Lord of the Manor of H. etc. holds one Message or Manor house;
being the site of the Manner aforesaid, in his Demeasne as of Fee, together
with Barns, Stables, Dove house, Orchards, Garden, etc. abutting and bounding
the same exactly.

Then proceed to the next land as you go, whether East or West: if, East, then
thus.

A. S. holds next, and more East, twenty Acres of Arable Land, abutting, etc.
as it lies, etc. by Copy of Court Roll: ut patet per Cop. suam de Rotulis
Curiae,

If it be Free hold of Inheritance, then say;

A. S. holds of the same Manor, one Free-Tenement, etc. abutting it exactly
and putting down his Title and Tenure; according to his Evidence.

If the Lords of Manors, and Tenants in their several Parishes and Townships
would but join together, with a little charge, they might have Books of Survey
made of their several Manors, wherein each man's Propriety might be recorded
and known: and this being done, but once in an age, or by every succeeding
Lord, his Tenants and himself might live in amity and tranquillity; and many
chargeable and vexatious Lawsuits, to the undoing of thousands, avoided: and
people might quietly follow their Vocations at home, and not the promotion o^
others, by the ruin of themselves: But probably the Obstructors of Peace will
give me small thanks for this. Oh Mounfeur Self Ends and Avidus! when will thou
depart from us? R. T. Pacis dulcis Amator.

Acording to promise, I shall proceed to declare the manner of proceeding in
some inferior Courts of Record of this Commonwealth; but declaring them fitter
Ob^ects of Reformation then Practice; hey were indeed originally instituted for
the more speedy administration of Justice, between party and party, in their
Corporations: but are now, by the corruption of time, become Instruments of
vexation and injury: and because they are seated in the Metropolis, I shall
first begin with the Sheriffs Court of London.

There is holden at the Guild hall for the City of London, two Court-days for
one Compter, holden before one of the Sheriffs; and two Court-days for the
other Compter, before the other Sheriff in every week: holding Plea in all
personal Actions ad infinitum. Their Practice in both Courts, differs neither
in manner, nor form nor substance; but the beginning of their proceeding, I
mean, the levying of their Plaints is the most unjust and illegal, both in the
eye of the Law, and of all rational people of any Court in the World.

For indeed the blame of all Courts, is, that they do not issue out Summons,
and take sufficient Pledges to prosecute upon the Return of the Summons, as the
Law originally intends, before the awarding of any Capias, for arresting the
Body of the Defendant: but return an Original of course (as they call it)
sometimes, and sometimes not at all; putting John Do and Richard Roe, for
pledges to prosecute; whereas indeed, there ought to be a due Summons first
returned, and Pledges, that is sufficient Sureties, That if the Plantiff do not
prosecute, or be overthrown in his Action, the Defendant shall be satisfied his
costs and damages for his unjust trouble, charge and vexation.

But the Practice of these Sheriffs Courts is so far from this, that they make
out no Process nor Precept at all for to warrant their Arrest. But they have a
Book in their Office at the Compter-gates, wherein they enter the Actions, that
is, the Plantiffs and Defendants Names, and the Debt or Damage; and that is
all: And this is most often done after the party is arrested and in Prison: for
if two of their Varlets meet a man in the street, minding to make a prey of
him; for which they continually lurk, they immediately seize on him, if they
know but any person he has any dealing with, be the Case right or wrong, they
presently drag him to the Compter, or their petty Goals at next door, and then
run and enter against him what Actions they please, in the Name of any Man. And
at the next Court-day, the Defendant perhaps, after two or three days
imprisonment, may obtain a Non-Sute; and shall have adjudged him 7 s. 2 d. for
his Charges, which is not the tithe thereof: and that he may look for, if he
can tell of who: or any man whatsoever, that has any envy in his breast, which
there are few that want, may come and enter an Action against any man he is
minded to do a mischief unto, and keep him in Prison (at 8 d. per week charges
to the Knave) as long as he lives. And their way of taking of Pledges of
prosecuting, is thus: To demand of the Plantiff, or he that enters the Plaint,
where he lives: if he say in Fleet Street, then then they enter Pledges to
prosecute, John Fleet, Richard Street; if in Common-Garden, then Pledges, etc.
John Common, Richard Garden: according to the place the party names, though no
such man be.

And it is a great oppression to Countrypeople, who are thus snapt up by
irregular Proceedings. This is not to expedite Justice, but to disgrace the
Law, and wrong the Commonalty. By this means, I have known many utterly undone;
and some have lain in Prison five weeks upon this account, and never knew,
heard of, nor could never find out his Adversaries.

And then, after this he has nonsuited their Actions, entered over and over
again, they take a President from a worse then this, that I must take so much
leave, as plainly to speak of; that is, the Court of Upper-Bench, from whence
issues a Writ, called a Latitat; or in the County of Middlesex, A Bill of
Middlesex: and upon the supposition of one of these returned, though never any
such thing be, they reward a Latitat into all Counties, to take the Defendant,
without naming the cause, only Trespass, be it what it will be; upon which, if
he cannot put in bayl, he shall lie in Prison three Terms; which sometimes with
the Vacations to boo^, is above three quarters of a year: and then if the
Plantiff declare not, he may obtain his Liberty by a Supersedeas, if he has
money to purchase it: but not a farthing costs, or any remedy against the party
that injured him; by this wicked practice, many a poor Soul miserably ends
his days in Newgate.

And if a man be arrested by a Latitat or Bill of Middlesex, and the P^aintiff
never declare after he has put in Bayl, he shall not have any costs, but only
a Nonfuite or a Discontinuance as they call ^t, unless the Defendant appear in
person, and that is hardly worth his while. This I make bold here to mention,
because it is a G^ievance cries loud for Redress, and so does the City-Court
too: for can it seem reasonable that any man should be arrested and imprisoned
he knows not why nor wherefore? and most times irregularly; the Sergeants
having the advantage to do it without Warrant, or any Precept or Process to be
shown; oftentimes, nay, most commonly imprison the Defendant without any Action
entered against him. This Practice was abhorred by the Heathens: and then is it
not a shame it should be tolerated by Christians?

But after the Arrest, the Defendant appearing by Attorney, the Plantiffs
Attorney declares if cause be; and then they fairly proceed to Trial, according
to the substance of the Proceeding of the Upper-Bench, though different in
form: and to the Defendant, if he be a Freeman in case of debt, is allowed
four Defaults, by which time he may make his peace if he be wise.

And by the way give me leave to tell you, that I have read, and I am sure it is
reasonable, That it is not lawful for a Citizen, or one living in a Corporation
to arrest any st^anger that inhabits in another Country, into one of these
Courts; but by Process from above: for these Courts had their Authority granted
them originally from the King for their ease, and the more easy dispatch of
Justice between one another in their several Franchises: for as the Forraigner
has no benefit by their Franchise; so ought he not to be impleaded in their
Courts. Besides, a great disadvantagedies upon the stranger being far from
home, and distant from Friends, is too often enforced to purchase his Liberty
by an unjust Composition.

There is also a Court holden before the Major and Alderman in the Guild Hall
of the said City, unto which the Sheriffs Court is subject by removal, and both
of them to a Habeas Corpur out of the Upper Bench or Common Pleas, if the
Action be not under five pounds; and if it be, then the Defendant may cause
another Action to be entered against him, at the Suit of any person he will
name, which is above 5 l and remove both together.

There is also another Court of Equity, held between one Freeman and another in
the said City, wherein they regularly proceed by Summons in all Debts not
exceeding 40 s. and pity it is that the Authority of that Court extends no
higher.

Thus by the head, you may guess at the whole Body; I mean, the Proceedings of
all Corporations: for setting the first Arrest or Process aside, when they come
to declare, they do generally in their Declarations imitate the Bills and
Declarations of the Upper Bench.

I would be larger, but I proceed to other things here more aimed at: only by
the way let me desire the Stewards and Judges of all such Courts, to be careful
in amending what Er^ors they find have through the rust of Antiquity, crept in
among them: endeavoring as much as they can the ease of the Subject, and equal
Right to all.

Certain Questions and Cases in LAW, Resolved.
1. JOHN Do surrendered to his Wife certain Copyhold Land of Inheritance to
her, and to the Heirs of their two Bodides, to be begotten; and for default of
such issue to the right heirs of the said John Do; but in the said surrender,
does not express that he gives it to her for her Jointure, althugh it was his
intent she should have ne other Dowwhether is this a Jointure or not.

2. The said John Do died without Will, his Wife administered, and there was
certain Timber felled for the repair of a Copyhold belonging to the Heir,
which the Praisers refuse to put into the Inventory, for the reason aforesaid.
This Widow marries again, and her Husband takes away the Timber so felled from
off the Lands belonaing to the said Heir: whether is this Felony or not?

3. Her said Husband is the Lord of the Manor, and does detain and keep
certain Writings from the Heir of the said Deceased, refusing to keep any Court
where the Heir should be admitted Tenant to certain Copyhold Land lying within
his Manor; but does destrain for Quit-Rent upon the Land belonging to the Heir,
refusing to deliver the Heir his Writings, or show any Title he has to the
Quit-Rent.

4. Whether the aforenamed Surrender being accepted and taken, does not bar
the woman to have any Dowry either in Fee or Copyhold Lands, after her
deceased Husband, although the Custom Book of that place where the Copy hold
lies, renders the Widow of the Deceased the third part of tho Lands, that her
Husband died seized of?

5. What sorts of Wood is accounted Timber by the Law; and whether the Woman by
virtue of the aforenamed Surrender, can cut and sell any manner of Woods
growing upon the said surrendered Lands, to make a waste and spoil: or whether
the Land restrains her but to cut for necessary uses?

6. Whether the Widow of the Deceased in her Widdowhood letting a Leese Parole
for five years of her surrendered Land, contrary to the Custom, ought not to
make good the said Lease Parole to the Tenant, because he shall be much
damnified if he enjoy not the same?

7. If a man taken with an Execution for Debt by the Sheriffs Bailiffs, and the
said Bailiffs suffer him to make an escape, and the Creditor renews not the
Execution in two or three years after, whether may he afterward bring his
Action against the Sheriff or the Debtor?

8. We desire to know what penalty is to be laid upon the Lord of the Manner
which ought to keep a Court Leet once a year, and does not, and to whom the
penalty belongs.

9. How Lords of Manors do hold their Lordships and Manors, and whether they
pay any Rent therefore or no?

10. If Lord of a Manor commit Felony, who is to have the forfeiture of his
Royalty.

The Resolution of the foregoing Questions.
To the first: A Jointure of a Copyhold does not bar Dower; for that at the
common Law it it did not; and by the Statute of Uses the Jointure must be of
Lands at the common Law; and whereof Uses might be raised, which holds in
neither in Copy-holds.

2. It is not Felony, but the Lord of the Manor may have an Action of Trespass
again the said Husband; or the Heir may have an Action upon the case against
him.

3. The Heir may sue him at common Law for detaining of his Writings: and
touching the distress for Quit-Rents, let the Tenant bring a Replevin, and the
Lord upon his Avowry must show his Title.

4. The Statute of Joyntures does not extend to Copy-holds for the Reasons
given to the first Question; and therefore that Statute is no bar.

5. Elm, Oak and Ash are accounted Timber in Law: and Beech in Countries barren
of Wood: the Law restrains any Copyholder to fell Wood or Trees but for
necessary uses, unless the custom warrant it otherwise.

6. The Lease Parole for five years not warranted by the Custom is a forfeiture
of the Widows estate, if the Lord take advantage thereof; if the Lord so do,
the Lessee has no remedy.

7. Against the Debtor he can have no Action of Debt; for his Action was
determined by he Execution: but within two or three years he may bring an
Action of Debt against the Sheriff.

8. A Quo Warranto lies for nonuser or abuser of a Franchise. The penalty is
the Seizer of the Leer.

9. All Lordships and Manors were holden before these times meditate or
immeditate from the King by accustomed or reserved services.

10. If he hold of the King, the King if of a measne Lord, that Lord.

Cases resolved touching Wills.
What persons are by the Law to make a Will or Testament, and who not.
A Person our-lawed for Felony cannot make a Will; but if a man be outlawed
only in Personal Actions, he may make a Testament of his Lands, but not of his
Goods. The same Law is of a man attained of a Praemunire, but not of a man
excommunicated.

An Infant making a Will of his Land within age, and dies after he comes at
full age, not revoking this Will, it is not a good Will.

A woman seized of Land and marries, and afterward makes a Will of it: this
is not good.

A Lunatic being of sound memory, makes his Will and becomes Lunatic; and
afterward comes to his understanding and dies: this is not a good Will.

A man speechless, or one born deaf and dumb, may make a Will by signs.

A man being of a sound memory, makes his Will, and afterward becomes mad, and
so dies: this is not a good Will:

A man who has a Wife not divorced takes another Wife who is an Inheritrix;
she cannot make a Will.

What is a good Will, and what not; and what shall be a Revocation, and what
not.
A Will without naming any Executor is good for Lands, but not for Goods

A Will wanting date is good, if made after the 20 day of July 1540.

A Will without sealing or subscribing if it be made in writing in the life
time of the Testator, although it be never proved before the Ordinary.

A Will Nuncupative is not good for Land.

Two men severally seized of Land, make a joint Testament of their Lands: this
is good.

A man is making his Will, and has devised parcel of his Land; and before the
finishing thereof, he dies: the Will is good, for so much as is devised.

If a man appoint by his Will, that his Land shall be fold to pay his debts,
and shows not by whom; the Will is good, and shall be performed by the
Executors or administrators.

If a man makes a Will of land that is not his own, and after purchase the same
land and die: this is not a good Will.

Also if a man makes a Will of his land, and after alien this land, and
afterward repurchaseth it again, this not a good Will.

A Woman makes a Will of her Land, and after takes a husband, who has issue;
the husband and the Wife both die: this is not a good Will.

A man makes a Will, and afterward makes a new Will; and after in his bed
dying, says that his first Will shall be his last Will, this is good.

A man makes his Will in writing, and after gives diverse Legacies to several
persons then after by word revoketh all but one: this is a good Revocation of
all but that one.

If any man gives land by Will to one person in Fee, and afterward gives the
same land to another person by another Will but for term of life: this is a
Revocation of the first Will.

What things are deviseable or may be devised.
If any man be seized of lands deviseable, and thereupon builds; the house or
building may be devised. So likewise may a Rent charge created de novo.

A man seized in right of his wife, and grants parcel of his land to one, and
after devises the residue to another: this is good.

If a Farmer of land not deviseable, erect and fix a Furnace in the midst of
the house in the land, he may devise this Furnace.

A Tenant in Fee-simple or Fee-tail, may devise the Corn, although the land be
not deviseable: but trees he cannot.

A man seized of a Mill, may devise the runner-stone- but not the under-stone*

If a man have an annuity to him and his heirs, he cannot devise this annuity:
but if it be an annuity for term of years, he may.

If a husband die, having before devised Corn upon his wives land, it is good,
whether it were sown before the Marriage or after.

What words shall make Fee-simple lands, and what not.
Land given to a man to hold to him and his heirs, with Warranty of the land to
him and his heirs, this is a good Feesimple.

Land devised to a man by Will, by these words, To do with it at his pleasure;
this is a good Fee simple.

Lands given to a man, to hold to him in Fee-simple, and livery made to him and
his heirs according to the form and effect of the deed; it makes Feesimple.

Land given to one for term of life, and livery and seisin made to him and his
heirs, according to the form and effect of the Deed; this is not Fee-simple.

A man seized in Fee-simple, grants totum statum suum, his whole estate; Ha^
bend' to the grantee and his heirs, and makes livery according to the Deed:
this is Fee-simple.

A man leavyeth a Fine sur Connuzance de droit come ceo etc. The Conusee, that
is, he to whom the Fine is granted, has Fee-simple.

Two Coparceners in Fee simple make partition; and for equality of partition, a
Rent is assigned out of one part to the other, without any other words: the
Assign has the Fee-simple in the Rent.

Land is given by Deed, the Habendum sibi and haeredibus suis, vel de corpore
su^, to him and his heirs, or heirs of his body; this is not Fee-simple: But if
the Habendum were sibi and haeredibus suis, vel smis assignatis, to him and his
heirs or assigns.

A man makes a Lease of two acres of Land for life the remainder of one of them
(without showing which) to a single woman in Fee: she takes a husband, and
after the Lessee is impleaded in a Praecipe quod reddat of one of the acres,
and prays aid of the husband and wife, as of them in remainder: they join in
aid gratis, and cannot bar the demandant, whereby he recovereth. The husband
dies, the Lessee dies; the Wife has the fee-simple in the other acre.

Tenant in tail enfeoffeth his brother, Recovery is had against him by
erroneous Judgment: the Tenant in tail has issue, and dies; the issue within
age; the brother dies without issue: the issue in tail being his heir within
age, reserveth the Judgment by error, and enters; he has fee simple.

A Lease is made to the husband and wife by Deed, pro termino vitae suae.
Habendum eis pro termino vitae, to have to them for term of life of the wife:
she dies, the husband continues in possession, he has fee-simple.

A Lease is made to a woman for term of years, upon condition, that if she have
issue within the term, that she shall have fee; the Lessor and Lessee
inter-marry, and have issue within the term, and the husband dies; the term
expireth, and the wife continues in, seized of the fee simple.

Husband and wife Joynt-tenants in tail, make a Lease for life; the husband
dies, the fee-simple descends to his son out-living the wife.

Who have a sole estate in fee-simple, that they may devise it, and who not.
A man seized of Land in Fee, has issue a daughter beyond the Seas; and after,
he has another daughter within the Realm, and dies; the daughters enter
together, the younger daughter has a sole estate in fee-simple.

A man is dissolved by two, and he releases all his right to one of them in
tail; he is so seized in Fee simple.

One Joynt-tenant releaseth to his companion upon condition: the Releasee
dies, his heir enters, the condition is broken, and the Releasor enters,
clayming the moyty; the heir shall not be said to be sole seized.

Two Coparceners in Fee are impleaded; the one of them disclaimeth; the other
is not sole seized. The Law is otherwise between Joynttenants.

A man seizd in fee, has issue two daughters bastards, and one daughter
legitimate: the Bastards, enter; the daughter legitimate releaseth to one of
them, she is not sole seized.

Land is given to a man, to have to him together with A. the daughter of the
donor in frank marriage; after they are divorced, causa praecontractus, at the
suite of the husband; the donor dies, the daughter is his heir; she is sole
seized.

A woman inheritrix has issue, a daughter, her husband dies; she takes a
second husband, and has issue another daughter: the husband and wife exchange
the Land of the wife for other Land in Fee; and after of the wife and husband
die, the daughters enter into the Land taken in exchange: the younger shall be
said to be sole seized.

A feme sole makes a Feoffment upon condition to be performed on the part of
the Feoffee at a certain day, before the day they intermary, the day incurreth,
the money not paid: the husband is sole seized.

A Feoffment is made to two, and to their proper use; and livery, and seisin is
made to one of them accordingly, he is not sole seized: otherwise, if no use
had been expressed. A Feoffment is made by deed to two, with a Letter of
Attorney to one of them, to deliver seizen, and he makes livery to the other
accordingly: he is not sole seized in Fee-simple.

Two joynt-Tenants, one within age, are diseised by the Father of the Infant;
and the Father dies seized; the Infant enters, and the other occupies in
Common with him, the Infant is sole seized.

Two joynt-Tenants in Fee: the one bargains and fells by Indenture all his
part, and before the Inrolement, the other dies, and the Indenture is enrolled
within the six months, the other moiety shall descend.

What persons are Coparceners or Tenants in common in Fee-simple: and who may
devise their parts, and who not.
A man has two daughters, and makes a lease to them for term of their lives;
the father dies; the daughters are seized in Fee in Coparcenary.

Land is given to a husband and wife and to a third person, and to the heirs of
the husband; and the third person releaseth to the husband and wife, and to the
heirs of the wife: the husband and wife are not joynt^ Tenants nor Tenants in
common of the Fee-simple: but the husband himself is sole seized in Fee.

A man has issue, two daughters; and the elder of them holds certain land of
the father by 4 d. rent, the father dies, the younger sister shall be presently
seized with out any partition of 2 d.

Two joyn-Tenants by deed, make such partition, that is, that the one of them
shall have the one moiety to him and his heirs, and the other shall have the
other moiety to him and his heirs, without any meets or bounds, they are not
Tenants in common.

A man makes a Feofment of two acres of Land habendum; the one acre to one of
them and his heirs, and the other acre to the other and his heirs: they are
joynt-tenants.

Three Coparceners are agreed to make a partition, so that the one has a
several part alloted to her in severalty; and that the others shall hold in
Coparcerany: and for equality of partition, a rent is granted and allotted out
of the several part to the others in Fee: they are coparcerners of the Rent.

A man makes a lease for life, and has issue two daughters, and dies; the
Lessee make waste: the one of the daughters has issue, and dies: the issue
and the other bring a Writ of waste, and recover, and enter; they are
Coparceners as well of the Freehold as of the Fee.

Land is given to two to have to them, that is to say, to the one of them in
tail, and to the other in Fee: he who has a Fee, devises the whole, and
dies: this not good for any part.

What devises of reversions or remainders of Rent be good, and what not.
A man lets a lease for term of life and after diseised his Lessee, and makes a
Lease for term of life to another: for term of life of the first Lessee, the
remainder over in Fee, the first Lessee enters, yet he in the remainder may
devise his remainder.

A man makes a lease for years upon condition that the lessor disturb not the
Lessee within the term of the Lease, that the Lessee shall have Fee, and makes
Livery accordingly: the Lessor disturbeth the Lessee for Rent, where none is in
arear, and after he devises his reversion: this is not good.

A man makes a Lease of two acres of Land, reserving rent, and has issue two
daughters, and dies, the daughters make partition of the reversion; so that
the reversion with the appurtenances of one acre is allotted to one, and the
other to the other: they severally devise the rent: this is not good.

Land is given to two habend to the one for life, and after his decease to the
other in Fee; he who has the Fee devises his reversion: this is good.

The husband endows his wife at the Curch-door, and after is attainted of
Felony, and dies; the wife enters: the Lord of whom the Land is holden,
devises the reversion, this is not good.

A lease is made for life: the remainder in Fee to the Wife of the deviser, she
surviveth, and devises this remainder: this is good.

An Infant makes a Lease for life, the Lessee grants his estate over with
Warrants the Infant at his full age bri^geth a dum fuit infra aetatem, against
the Grantee, who avoucheth his Grantor, who enters into the warranty, upon
whose possession the demandant releaseth in fee al his right, and is barred in
the action by this release, and after devises his reversion: this is a good
device.

A man gran's his reversion in Fee, and before attornment he grants the same
reversion to the Grantee for term of life only and the Tenant attorneth
generally, the Grantee devises this reversion: this is a good device.

A husband makes a Lease for life to the daughter and heir apparent of his
wife, being covert rendering rent; the wife mother dies, the husband devises
the rent: this is void.

A man makes a lease for life, reserving rent to him and his heirs, the Leassor
devises his rent; this is good: but if he reserve the Rent to him and to his
Assigns, it is not good.

What gift, or estate, or conveyance shall be said to be made by covin or
fraud, and what not.

A m^n holds Land in Soccage of a common Lord; and he conveys this by fraud
to defrand the Lord of his relief or herriot, the Lord shall not take advantage
of this covin.

The Tenant makes an estate in Fee upon condition, and takes back an estate to
him for lise, the remainder to his eldest son in tail, and for default of such
issue, the remainder to the heirs of the Body of the father begotten, the
remainder over in Fee to the Lord of whom the Land is holden, yet this is covin
at the pleasure of the Lord.

A man bona fide enfeoffeth two of his servants to their own use, for good
service done and to be done; and they by covin convey diverse faandulent estates
to their masters, which remains over, etc. and the master knowing of their
intent rejoyneth at it, yet this shall not be fraud.

The Tenant intending fraud, enfeoffeth diverse persons, and puts the Lord in
trust as Attorney, to make Livery and Seizin, and so he does, yet the Lord
shall avoid this covin.

The Tenant makes a Lease for years to the Lord, and after by a Fine conveyeth
fraudulent Estates, etc. and after, the Lord within the term, makes his
Executor, and dies, and the Execu^or enters into the term, and after the
lessor dies, his Heir within age, and the term continues, the Heir of the
Lord shall not avoid this covin.

What shall be said a purchase of Lands by the husband for the Jointure of the
wife, and what not.
Land is given to three men, and a feme sole: one of them marries with the
feme; she being excommunicated, one of the others releaseth to the husbandand
wife, and to the Heirs of the husband: the husband dies, the wife assents. This
is a good Purchase, and yet the wife is not a Tenant for life.

I. S. being contracted; marri^h another wife, and after marries her with whom
he was contracted: he and his wife exchange land, which he had in the right of
his wife: the husband dies; she agrees to the exchange; this is not a
jointure.

A windmil is leased to a woman for years, who takes a husband, he grants
the term upon condition, and for the condition broken enters: the lessor
releaseth them, and haeredibus suis omnibus masculis: and if they die without
such an Heir, that this shall remain to the Heirs of the husband: this is good,
etc. 27. H. 8. cap. 10.

A Reversion upon an estate for years is devised to the husband and wife in
free marriage by the father of the husband, the remainder to J. S. in fee
Tenant for years surrendeth to the husband, who dies; the wife enters: this a
good estate to the wife; etc.

An upper chamber is granted without deed to A. for life, the remainder for
life; the remainder to A in Fee: A. grants his estate to him in remainder and
his wife, and to the^r Heirs; and if they die without Heirs males of their
bodies begotten, that then this shall revert: the husband dies, the wife
enters. This is an estate to the wife, etc.

Land is devised to J. S. for life, the remainder to a husband in
frank-marriage for, etc. I. S. and the deviser die; the husband enters and
dies, the wife euters: this is not an estate made, etc.

Five acres of Land, adjoining to the Sea are devised to husband and wife, and
haeredibus suis masculis, for, etc. five other acres adjoining thereunto, the
Sea for saketh, into which the husband and wife enter: this is not any estate
made in the five acres newly gained.

J. S. by indenture bargains and sells a Dove house to husband and wife, and to
their heirs so long as they have issue of their bodies, whereas he has no
Dovehouse: J. S. builded one; the husband enters and Dies, the wife enters:
this is no tail in Jointure, etc.

The father gives Land to the son and his wife, and liberis suis, with
warranty to the son and his Wife, and to the heirs of their bodies for ten
years; they are impleaded within the ten years, and lose and have in value: the
years expire, the husband dies, the wife enters: this is not an estate in tail
for jointure, but for life.

Land is given to A and B and to the heirs of B. B. leaseth this to a feme sole
for life, the lessor grants to the said feme, and J. D. common for ten year out
of the said Land, during their lives for the Jointure of lessee, and after
marries her: A. and D. die: this is an estate conveyed for life as an
hereditament.

To grant an annuity of 10 l. jointly and severally, to J. S. in Fee, who
grants it to husband and wife, to the husband for the life of J. D. to the
wife until one of the sons of J. S. accomplish the age of twenty one years, the
husband dies, the wife accepts this annuity this is an estate made for the
wife for a jointure, etc.

A Lease for life is made to the husband, the remainder to his wife and J. D.
successive for their lives; the husband ^elleth trees and dies, the wife
enters, the Vendee cuts, the lessor recovers in a Writ of wast, and has
execution: this is an eviction by lawful action: and yet the wife shall not
have a Writ of Dower.

A Lordship by fealty and rent, is give^ to Baron and fem: in tall before
marrige, for, etc. the remainder in see a Tenancy escheateth the husband,
leaseth the S^ignory to A. who recovereth in a Cessavit, and dies, his heir
entert, the husband dies* this is an eviction by lawful action, and the wife
shall recover but an estate for life to the value of the Tenancy.

Tenant in tail of a rent, purchases the Land, out of which, etc. in tall, and
gives into Baron and feme for their lives, for, etc. fifty years expire,
Tenant in tail, and the husband die, the wife enters, theissue brings a
Formedon of the rent and recovereth, and is put in execution: this is an
eviction, and the wife shall have it to the value of the rent.

Land is granted to a feme covert for life, for, etc. he in reversion grants it
by Fine: the Conusee brings a scire facias, the husband claims Fee, and it is
found against him, whereby judgment is given, the husband dies, the wife
enters, the recoverer enters: this is not an eviction.

Tenant after possibility of issue extinct, the remainder for life is discised,
and released to the diseisor, who dies: his heir gives the Land to husband and
wife in tail, Tenant for life brings a consimili casu, and recovers; the wife
enters; this is not an eviction.

An Infant gives a Park to a feme covert for life without impeachment of waste,
the remainders of them to two men, and the heirs of their bodies: the game is
destroyed, the husband dies, the wife enters, they bring a Wrie of waste, the
wife pleads Null wa^e, etc. whereby they recover: this is a lawful eviction,
but she shall not have a Writ of error.

Land of the value of 20 l. per annum, is granted to a feme for life, rendering
10 l. per annum; she marries: he who has right recovereth the Land by covin
of the husband, and has Execution; the husband being Tenant in Tail, dies,
having Land to the value of 10 l. per annum, the wife shall have it discharged
of the rent, less for life reversing rent, the lessor diseiseth him and makes
a feosment, the feoffee dies, his heir gives the land to the lessor and his
wife in tail for her jointure. Tenant for life brings a writ of entry in the
post, and recovereth, and has execution, the husband dies, the wife shall have
dower, and shall recover for life the rent not recovered in value.

Grandfather, father and son, the father diseiseth the grandfather, and takes
a wife; the father surrendreth certain Copyhold land to the use of himself and
his wife, and the heirs of the husband: the father dies, the son enters, the
grandfather dies, the wife shall have this jointure or dowr, but not of this
land.

Land is given to husband and wife in tail, with warranty, they lose and
recover in value against him who has nothing: the husband and J. S. being
joynt-Tenants, agree by deed, that after five years ended, they shall hold in
severalty; the husband dies within the five years, the wife has dower
assigned, she shall have both.

Lord and Tenant: the Tenant is attainted of Felony, and commiteth Treason, for
which he is attainted the Lord enters, and gives the land to the Tenant and his
wife for years, upon condition, that if the Lord do not pay 20 l. to the
husband and wife at a certain day, that they shall have it in tail, for the
wives jointure: and the husband, dies before the day, the money is not paid:
this is a jointure, and the wife shall not have dower.

A. enfeoffeth J. R. and B. makes livery to J. S. who takes a wife; land is
given to them in special tail for the jointure of the wise, they levy a fine.
J. S. dies, a praecipe is brought against B. he disclaims; the heir of J. S.
enters, the wife shall not have jointure nor dower of the land, but of other
land she shall have dower.

A rentcharge issuing out of Lands in several Counties, and in the hands of
several persons, is granted to husband for life, the remainder to his wife for
her life for her jointure; the husband dies, the Tenant attorns to the wife,
she shall not have this jointure not dower.

Land is given to J. S. for life, the lessor diseiseth him, and gives the land
before Coverture to the wife for life for a jointure, a stranger confirms her
estate with warranty; I. S. brings a Praecipe and recovereth, the wife has
in value, the husband and he in reversion make a feofment before the Statute,
the husband dies: this is not an eviction by discontinuance of the jointure,
and yet she shall recover dower.

What is a ioynture assured before marriage, and what a jointure after marriage.
A Lordship by fealty and Rent before marriage is granted to Baron and feme for
a jointure, they marry; a Tenancy escheateth, the husband enters and dies; this
is a jointure in the Tenancy assured before marriage.

J. S. contracts with A. and before marriage, concludes with B. that he will
recover the Manor of D. and that this shall be to them in tail for a Jointure.
B. brings a writ of entry, which is returned, they marry. B. recovers and
enters: this is a jointure after marriage.

I. S. leaseth to two for years rendering rent, and grants the reversion to
husband and wife for their lives for a jointure, one attorneth before marriage,
and the other after marriage: this is a good jointure before marriage.

I. S. enfeoffeth I. D. to the use of himself until he marry, and after that he
marries, then to the use of her that shall be his wife for her for a jointure:
this is a jointure after marriage.

I. S. grants land to a feme for ten years, and if he after marry her, then she
shall have it for her life for a jointure, they marry; this is a jointure
before marriage.

I. S. in consideration of a marriage to be had betwixt him and A. S.
covenanteth that he shall be seized to the use of him and the said A. for their
lives; they intermarry, the deed is enrolled, this is a jointure before
marriage.

After affiance between I. S. and A. S. they conclude that a fine shall be
leavied of the Manor of D, for her jointure, the concord is acknowledged
before the chief Justice; they marry, and after a writ of Covenant is brought,
and a fine leavied: this is a jointure after marriage.

I. S. and A. marry before years of consent, land is given to them for their
lives, at the years of consent they agree: this is a jointure after marriage.

I. S. makes a deed of feoffment to A. with a letter of Attorney, which
^eofment A. does express to be to the use of himself, and her who shall be his
wife for their lives, for a jointure; they marry, the Attorney makes livery:
this is a jointure after marriage.

I. S. diseiseth one to the use of A. and B. whom he intends shall marry for a
jointure. A. and B. enter, and after the diseise releaseth to the wife for her
jointure: this is a jointure after marriage.

Land is given to A, B. and her who shall be his wife, for a jointure; they
marry, the wife enters; this is a jointure in the moiety, which she shall have
by survivor, and before marriage.

A devises, that his Executor shall give the Manor of D. to J. S. and A. D.
who shall be his wife, for their lives; they intermarry, the Executor grants
the Manor accordingly; This is a jointure before marriage.

Some Cases resolved touching forceable Entries, by the Statute of 8 H. 6. c. 9.
The turbulency of some troublesome Spirits, oftentimes cause great mischief in
this case, who have the Law in their own hands, and altogether be their own
carvers in laying hold on violently whatsoever they imagine their own, not
regarding the mark or touchstone whereby it should be proved: from whence arise
tumults, affrays, riots, assaults, mayhems, man slaughters and murder it self:
for preventien of which evil, the Statute of 8 H. 6. has provided remedies,
and given power to the Justices of Peace to suppress such mi demeanors; and
because the Country people are much infested with this malign disease, for
whose instruction this Treatise is chiefly intended, I shall here give them
some 'Directions in this Case.

What is a forceable entry, and what is a forceable detaining, and what not.
If two persons or more being armed, or having weapons in their hands, enter
the house of another to have possession thereof, and thereupon the party in the
house parts a far off without any further violence offered him, this is a
forceable entry.

If two men or more armed etc enter the house of another, the door being open,
not declaring their intent, and remain in quiet notwithstanding, the Tenants
without using violence: this is not a forceable entry.

But if two or more enter the house of another in peaceable manner, and after
with fore and violence against the will of the party in possession put him out
of possession: this is a forceable entry.

If a single person break the house or window of another and enter in, against
his will, and thereupon he threatens the party in possession, insomuch that for
fear he forsakes the house: this is a forceable entry.

If a forceable entry be made into the house of another to fight with the party
there dwelling; and he for fear departs out of the house, and his enemies also;
this is not a forceable entry:

If a man make a lease for life, and after grant the reversion to the same
lessee upon condition, which is broken on the part of the lessee, and thereupon
the lessor enters with force to gain the possession of the land: this is a
forceable entry.

But if the lessor enter with force to se^ if waste be made by the lessee; this
is not a forceable entry.

A Lord distrain for rent with force, though none be arear: this is not a
forceable entry.

If any be fighting in a house, and the door shut, and others enter, and break
it to see the peace kept: this not a forceable entry.

If two persons are fighting in the street, and one wound the other, so that he
is in danger of death, and flee into a house, and shut the doors after him, and
others there present pursue him, and break the house to take him: t^is is not a
forceable entry.

But if no such danger of his life be, then they cannot break the house to take
him, although it be done upon fresh suite; but if the door be open, they may
enter and take him.

If the Justices of peace upon complaint made come to the place where the force
was, and find the door shut, and within the house there is but one sole person,
who will not open the door, and suffer the Justices to come in: this is a
detaining with force.

If the Justices come to the place where the force was, and find some persons
in arms, or their weapons lying by them in the house; this is a detainder with
force.

If a man has two houses near adjoining, the one by a good title, the other by
a defeazible title; he keeps a force in the first house to beat them who would
enter into the house by a defeazible title; this is a detaining of force within.

If a man claim common in any Land, and the Land is detained with force, when
he would use his common, or distrain for his Rent: this is a detaining with
force.

If a man hear that certain fellows will come to his house to kill, beat or rob
him: whereupon he assembles a force to assist him in his defense, this is no
detaining with force.

If a man has rent issuing out of the land of another, which land is detained
with force, when he would distrain for his rent arear, he who is so disturbed
of this rent, is no party grieved to complain by the Statute before recited.

If after the death of the father, a stranger enters by abatement into the
land, and holds with force, the son is not a party grieved.

If a man be seized of land, upon which a forceable entry is made, and die
before any complaint is made thereof, his heir is not a party grieved to make
complaint.

If a man make a lease for five years upon condition that if within the first
two years, the lessee pay to him 10 l. that then he shall have fee, and livery
is made accordingly there, if any such forceable entry be committed within five
years, although that the condition be not performed, yet the lessee is a p^rty
grieved by this Statute.

A man possessed of a term makes the heirs of J. S. his Executors, and dies;
the said J. S. being also then dead, leaving issue a daughter, his wife
pregnant with another daughter; the first enters into the land after which the
other is born, and then such a force is committed; both the daughters are
parties grieved.

Who are bound to ge with the Justices at their command to remove a force; what
is their penalty in case they refuse to go; and of what force is the Justices
record.
A man attainted of Felony upon request made is bound to go with the Justices
to remove a force.

Dukes, Earls, Lords, Barons, and every Apprentice and Servant is bo^^^ by the
Statute to go with the Justices to remove a force.

An Alien born, and not made a Denizen, or a man who is not of sound memory, an
Infant within the age of fourteen years, or any woman sole or covert, are not
compellable to go with the Justices to remove a force.

A man going under bayl for debt or trespass, is not bound to go.

If hue and cry be made at one end of the Town, and the Justices require them
at the other end of the Town, they are bound to go with the Justice to remove a
^o^ce.

But if they have taken a Fellon, or ^are in pursuit of a Fellon at the time of
request, they are not bound to go:

If the Sheriff, Constable or other Officer without any Warrant, Process or
Precept, require any person to go with the Justices to remove a force: they are
not bound to go by this Statute; neither can an Officer arrest or imprison them
by this Statute for their refusal.

But the Justices themselves may require them being in their presence by word
only, and upon their refusal, imprison and fine them.

If a forceable entry, and detainer with force be made upon the possession of a
Justice of peace, he himself upon the view of it cannot remove the force.

But if upon a force committed, they also assault the Justice himself, then he
may commit them to prison.

If one part of a house be in one County, and another part in another County;
and when the Justices come to remove the force before they can arrest them,
they go into another part of the house which is in another County; there they
cannot remove the force by this Statute.

If a man enter the house of another by force, and expels the owner thereof, to
one part or end of the said house, and detain the house with force; the
Justices may remove this force, and commit the offender to prison.

If the Justices be present upon other business, where a forceable entry is
made, when they are informed thereof, before any detainder, they cannot arrest
them, and commit them to prison by this Statute.

If the Justices come to remove a force; and upon an arrest made, the offenders
escape into another County, the Justices cannot arreast them nor commit them to
prison by this Statute, although it be upon fresh suite.

If the Justices come to remove a force, and the offenders, before any arrest,
make an escape for that time, but in the morning they are brought back again
before the same Justices to the same place, by virtue of their Precept, yet
they cannot commit them by virtue of this Statute.

If the Justice come to remove a force, and before that they can arrest the
offenders they escape from thence; upon that, the Justices may well record this
detainer with force by this Statute.

If the Sheriff is made Justice of peace, and after in the same year that he is
Sheriff he comes to the place where the force was, he cannot make a Record of
this by the Statute.

If the Justices upon their coming to remove the force, make a Record thereof,
and commit the offenders to prison* and although it appears by the same
Record, That it was not a force upon the matter, yet no remedy for the party so
convicted.

If the Justices make a Record, That they did see, where indeed there is no
such matter, yet the parties cannot traverse it.

If the Justices come to remove a force, and a Rescue is made to the Officers
and others there present to remove them, they may Record that as well as the
force.

But if the Justices upon view of a force, record a Murder, Maim, or Man
slaughter, this is no Record by this Statute.

If the Justices upon a force committed and complaint thereof made, make
enquiry thereof, without going to the place it self where the force was: this
is also a good enquiry by this Statute.

But if the Justices upon view of the force, make a Record thereof, and their
Record contains that the force was made with twenty persons, and the inquiry
found it but ten persons: this enquiry is not good by this Statute.

If several enquiries be made by several Justices, upon a forceable entry,
every one of them is a good enquiry.

If the Justices in their inquiry of force, present an Inquest by persons not
sworn to do it; the inquiry makes mention that they were sworn, yet this is a
good enquiry.

But if the enquiry be made under the number of twelve: this is not a good
enquiry.

If any of the jurors, before whom any such Inquest is taken, be attained of a
false Oath, or in decies tantum, or are Ambo-dexters: this is not a good
enquiry.

But if there be twelve persons in the jury over and above the persons
attainted, the inquest is good.

If it be found by inquest that A. B. was seized, until J. D. diseised him with
force by this inquiry, A. B. shall have restitution.

If it be found that the father made a lease for years, and died, the years
expired; and before any entry made by the son, a force is committed; the son
shall not have restitution by this Statute.

A man seized of Land has issue a daughter, and dies, his wife great with
child of a son, the daughter is ousted by force, and after the Son is born, and
all this matter is found by inquest; yet the Son shall not have restitution but
the daughter shall have it:

If it be found by several Inquests, that a man is ousted with force by several
persons at sundry times of one and the same thing; each Inquest is good, and he
may have restitution upon which of them he will; but when he has restitution
upon the one, then he shall not have restitution upon the other.

If it be found by several inquiries (that is to say) by one inquest, That J.
S. is ousted by force; and by another Inquest, That J. D: is ousted with force,
and all of one and the same Land* there ^ach of them may have restitution by
these enquiries.

If it be found that two joynt-Tenants were ousted by force, the one may have
restitution upon this enquiry without his companion.

If it be found that A. B. was seized for the Term of D. and he is ousted with
force by E. and that D. is now dead, yet A. B. shall have restitution by this
enquiry.

If it be found that the Father was seized until ousted with force, and died
before any restitution or entry, the son shall not have any restitution.

Likewise if a man be possessed of a lease for years, and is ousted thereof
with force, and dies before restitution, his Executors shall not have
restitution by this enquiry.

A lessee for life, the remainder over in fee, the lessee is ousted with force,
and all this matter found by inquisition of the force but he in the remainder
shall not have restitution by this enquiry.

The husband and wife before issue had, are ousted with force, and then have
issue, the wife dies, the husband by inquiry shall have restitution.

If a Less for life be ousted with force, and the lessor enters for
condition broken, and this is found by Inquest, yet the lessee shall have
restitution by this enquiry.

The Justices of Peace before inquiry be taken, may put the party in possession
again without any Writ; but noe other Justices can do it without Writ.

The Justices of the same County, the record being before them, may award
exemption by Writ, although they be not the same Justices before whom the
inquest was taken; but not without the same Record.

If the Justices who took the inquest be dead before restitution be made, yet
the Justices having the record may award execution of the same: the Judges of
the Upper-Bench having the Record removed before them, may award Execution by
this Statute by Writ; but not otherwife.

If a Tenant of Land pays any rent to a stranger by compulsion of distress
taken with force: this is a disseisin with force.

But if a man be disseissed of any rent by the Tenant of the Land, or by
Rescous with force^: this is not a desseisin with force.

If the Lord improves the waste with force, not leaving sufficient Common for
the Commoners: this is a disseisin with force within the compass of the Statute.

If a lessee for years with the remainder over for life be ousted with force:
this is not a dissesin with force by the Statute.

If the disseisor, after he has continued in quiet possession for three years,
detaineth with force; this is not any detaining with force by the Statute.

If two joint* Tenants are disseised with force, they both together are the
parties grieved by this Statute, and not apart; but if one of them releaseth to
the other, or dies, then the other by himself is a party grieved.

If the husband and wife seized of Lands in right of the wife, are disseised
with force and the husband dies, the wife shall be a party grieved by this
Statute.

If a man be seized in right of his wife, and disseissed with force, and after
they have issue, the wife dies, the husband is aparty grieved by this Statute.

If a man makes a lease for life to his eldest son, and is disseissed with
force, and dies, the Son is the party grieved.

Land descends to two daughters, one enters, and a stranger ousted her by
force, she may have an assize by this Statute: the party grieved may have an
assize of novel disseisin, or an action of trespass upon the Statute, reciting
the Statute, and shall recover treble damages.

Also in a Writ of Attainder brought against the Jurors, if they find for the
Defendant by false Oath, the party shall recover treble damages.

And these offenses, I hope all Friends to peace and truth will avoid, and
hereby find directions to punish the nocent.

An Abstract of several penal Statutes made and enacted for the good of the
Subjects, but are every day shamefully broken: therefore I have, according to
promise inserted the several penalties by them enjoined according to the nature
of the offense, to terrify Offenders for fear of the punishment, (though they
have so many partakers, that it will not restrain them) and to excite others
effectually to prosecute them for the love of Virtue.
WE will not here actum agere, not use so much Tautology, as to insert what we
have already spoken of; but only put you in mind, That we have before in the
Charge of the Court Leet, sufficiently dissected the Alehouses, perhaps more
then my Hosts will thank me for; and given a hint at the Gaming-Houses too,
because the Alehouses and they are inseparable Inmates; yet nevertheless, they
are not so fully laid down as I find the Statute mentions: wherefore therewith
I Will first begin.

Of Gaming-houses, and Players at Games.
No person whatsoever shall keep, hold, suffer or maintain in his House, Yard,
Orchard or Backside, any place of unlawful Games; nor shall not permit nor
suffer any persons to play at his House, Yard Backside or Orchard, at Tables,
Cards, Dice Coits, Loggats, Clash, Bowls, Slidethrist or Shovegroat, (called
now Shuffleboard and Boards end) or at any other unlawful Game, invented or to
be invented, on pain to forfeit for every day he shall use or suffer the same,
40 s. and all such persons as shall use or haunt any such place of unlawful
Ga^es, or pl^y thereat, forfeits 6 s. 8 d. for every such Offense.

No Artificer or his Journey-man, no Husbandman, Apprentice, Labourer, Servant
at Husbandry; Marrriner, Fisherman, Water-man or Serving-man, shall play at
any such unlawful Game or Games out of Christ-mas; nor then, out of their
Master's House, or presence; on pain of 20 s. for every default 20 s. All which
forseitures are to be divided between the King and any person that will sue for
the same in any Court of Record; laying his Action in the same County where the
Offense is committed, and prosecuting the same within a year, 33 H. 8, 9.

If Informers would look diligently after these offenses, they would do good
service to the Commonwealth, and save many Families, Wives and Children from
Destruction, and Gameste^s from the Gallows, where they usually throw their
last Cast.

All Licenses to keep Houses or places of unlawful Games, shall be void, Stat.
2, 3. p. m. 9.

Perjury.
Whosoever suborns a Witness to give false Testimony in any Court of Record,
forfeits 40 l. and upon conviction, if he has not wherewith to satisfy the
penalty, he shall suffer six mon^hs imprisonment, stand in the Pillory an hour,
and be disabled for a Witness for ever after, unless the judgment given
against him be reversed by attaint or error.

And he that does wilfully forswear himself, that is, commit wilsull perjury,
shall forfeit 20 b. six months imprisonment, and be dis^abled for a Witness,
unless the judgment be reversed; and if he cannot pay the Fine, he is to stand
in the Pillory, and have both his ears nailed, Stat. 5. El. 9.

By forswearing, I mean giving false evidence upon Oath before a judge of
Record; and this is Perjury: for if a man bring an Action on the Case for
scandalous words against another, for saying of the Plaintiff he forswore
himself; it will not bear an Action, unless he say he forswore himself in a
Court, which is a Court of Record being called there for a Witness.

And here by the way I must needs memtion a Case which is odious.

T. S. of W. subborns H. S. his Son to give false evidence in the Court of
Record holden for the Honor and Castle of Windsor, in a Cause there depending
between F. W. etc. he had done the same before at Abingdon, and has since
therewith W. F. against the same F* W. upon an Indictment: H. S. commits wilful
Perjury at Windsor, is found thereof guilty by Indictment at W. (where there
was no Sessions kept a long time before) nor (because of their kind usage to
the Country, since) at the Seissions: the business was so handled by Tom
Sneaks, and his Friends, that it was alleged that Windsor. Court was not a
Court of Record, and unless the Prosecutor presently prove it, (which they knew
upon an instant he could not) the Defendant should be acquitted; and so he was
thereupon. Rare Justice! But in the Court of W. it is no wonder.

I could name two or three more admirable Presidents between these parties: and
some acted in the Town-Court of Okingham, inter Sims and Magic; but I Will
reserve them till another time for another intended Subject.

The Forfeitures in Case of Perjury are to be recovered in any Court of Record
by Action of Debt or Information, one half to the King, the other to the
Prosecutor; and may be laid in any County, though the Offense was not committed
there.

This Act ought to be proclaimed at every Assize; and great pity it is in my
opinion, that there is no greater punishment ordained for Perjury.

It is in all respects equivalent to murder; and why should not the committers
thereof, receive the same punishment as murderers convicted do? or at least
should do.

He that will forswear himself, as too many now a days make no bones of it,
oftentimes does, and upon any spleen, malice, or revenge, will take away the
estate and life of any one.

Did not T. S. at Oke-ingham swear against F. W. at Abingdon, that he had
stolen six cocks of Hay from him worth six shillings, and brough his Son and
another to do the same? when there was not a Hay-cock in the Ground: but the
said F. W. was deputed lawfully to gather Tithes which the other very well knew,
and did take but two or three little Grass cocks valued at three pence, which
was his right: yet the other endeavored to hang him for it, if his Perjury had
not appeared too manifestly, as well as it has done since; as I shall shortly
in another intended Subject fully demonstrate and anatomize the practice in the
Court of Oke-ing ham besides. But I Will forbear them now, because the scope of
this is something else, to which I Will proceed.

Forestallers, Regradors and Ingrossers,
If any Person shall buy or contract for any Merchandise, Victuals, or any
other thing whatsoever, in the way, by Land or Water, before it be brought unto
any City, Fair or Market where it ought to be sold; or shall cause the same to
be so brought; or shall dissuade the people from bringing any such commodity to
any such place; or, being brought, shall persuade them to inhance the price
thereof, shall be adjudged a forestaller, Stat. 5. Ed. 6.14.

A Regrador is he that buys any Grain, Wine, Fish, Butter, Cheese, Candles,
Tallow, Sheep, Lambs, Calves, Swine, Pigs, Geese, Capons, Hens, Chickens,
Pigeons, Conies or other dead Victual whatsoever, brought to a Fair or Market
to be sold there, and to sell the same again in the same Fair or Market, or in
some other Fair or Market within four miles.

An Ingrosser is he that gets into his hands by buying, contract or promise,
(other then by device or Grant) any Corn growing in the Fields, or other Grain,
Butter, Cheese, Fish, or other dead Victuals whatsoever with intent to sell it
again. The Offend or in any of these Cases, shall forfeit for the first
offense, the value of the goods so bought, and two months imprisonment without
Bayl: for the second offense, the double value, and six months imprisonment
without Bayl: and for the third shall forfeit all his goods, be set on the
Pillory, and be imprisoned at the Kings pleasure.

He that buyeth Grain in any Market for change of Seed, shall bring as much
hither the same day and sell it, according to the present price of Grain, on
pain to forfeit double the value of the Grain so bought.

He that buys any Cattle, and sells the same alive within five weeks, shall
forfeit the double value thereof, during which time he ought to keep them upon
Pasture, either had by grant or prescripition. These Offenses shall be divided
between the King and the prosecutor.

Wine without License.
No person whatsoever not lawfully authorized by License, shall sell or utter
any Wine by retail to be spent in his or their mansion house, or in any other
place, in their tenure by any color, craft, or engine, on pain of 10 l. to be
divided between the King and the Prosecutor: which suit shall be comenced
within a year after the offense committed, Stat 7. E. 6.5*

Understand, no color, craft nor engine shall evade the penalty of this
Statute: it is not the pretense of the keeping a free Vintner, as they call it,
nor taking their Wine of a Vintner, or other such pretenses may serve their
turn.

Of importing Silk or Ribbands, etc.
None shall bring or cause to be brought into England any Silk wrought (by it
self or other stuff) out of England in Riband, Laces, Girdles, Corses, Cawls,
Tissues, or points, on pain to forfeit the lameor the value thereof: to be
divided between the King and any one that shall seize or sue for the same,
Stat. 19. H. 7.21.

A general complaint is now made by most, nay all Tradesmen that work in Silk
of the great damage to the English Manufacture in Silk, by reason of the
Ribands and wrought Silk brough into this Nation by the French and Dutch and
those Foreign Nations, to the great hindrance and decay of our English Trade:
for prevention of which, I have the rather quoted this Statute to discover a
remedy for my grieved Countrymen in this behalf, by which they may wright
themselves if they look after it.

Wood.
There are such wastes and devastations of Wood and Timber, and the growth
thereof, in this Nation, as predicates a sad event and inevitable calamity
ensuing, if it be not timely prevented, (though I am half afraid, it is too
late already, but hope better) and do hereby invite all lovers of their
countries good, effectually to put in practice all such Laws and Statutes as
are ordained for the preservation of Wood and Timber; as here they follow:

Statute 35 H. 8 17. There shall be left unfelled in every acre of Copice or
Under wood, which shall be felled at twenty four years growths or under, twelve
Standils of Oak: or if there be not so many Oaks the number shall be made up of
Elm, Ash, Asp, or Beech; which Standils shall no^ be felled, until they bear
ten inches squar^ within three foot of the ground, on pain that the owner of the
Wood shall forfeit for every Standil nor so left, 3 s. 4 d, and for every
Standil left, and afterward cut down before he come to that bigness as
aforesaid 3 s. 4 d. the forfeitures to be divided between the King and the
Prosecutor.

None shall convertinto tillage or pasture any Underwood or Cop^ce, containing
two acres or above, and being two furlongs distant from the house of the Owner
thereof, or from the house whereunto such wood does belong on pain to forfeit
40 s. for every acre so converted: it were well if this were carefully looked
after.

But the owner of any such Copice or Under wood may fell Standils for his own
use for building or repairing, etc. notwithstanding this Act.

The Lord of the Soil shall not fell or cut down any Wood or Copice, wherein
others have Common (except it be to his own use) before he and the Commoners
shall agree in the setting out a fourth part thereof, to be employed to the use
of the Lord; and in case they cannot agree thereupon, two Justices of Peace
appointed by the Sessions shall have power to call before them twelve of the
Commoners and Inhabitants, and with the consent of the Lord and them, shall set
our a fourth part thereof to be enclosed by the Lord within one month after;
and then to be felled at his pleasure, being subject to the same Laws and
penalties upon breach thereof, as other Copices before mentioned are: and if
any Beast be suffered to come into such fourth part within seven years after it
is felled the Owner of such Cattle shall forfeit for every such Beast 4 d. and
if the Owner of any such Copice or Wood, cut down any Trees or Underwoods
there, contrary to the form aforesaid, he shall forfeit for every tree so cut
down 6 s. 8 d. All these forfeitures are to be equally divided between the King
and any one that will sue for the same in any Court of Record, etc.

Vpholsters.
None shall make to sell, or offer to be sold, any Feather-Bed, Bolster, or
Pillow, except the same be stuffed with dry-pulled Feathers, or clean Down
only, without mingling of scalded Feathers, fenne-Down, Thistle-Down, Sand,
Lyme, Gravel, or other unlawful corrupt stuff: on pain to forfeit the same so
offered to be sold, or the value thereof.

Likewise, none shall make to sell or offer to be sold any Quilt, Mattress, or
Cushions stuffed with any mingled stuff, other then Feathers, Wool, or Flocks
alone; on pain to forfeit the same so put to sale, or the value. All which
forfeitures are equally to be divided between he King and any person that will
sue for the same.

Brokers, Usurers and Extortioners:
Three Birds of a Feather, not a pin to choose: these are destructive Locusts,
that live by the sweat of other men's brows: the most wicked of all people;
abhorrent, and against the Laws of God and Nature: for usurae legitimae sunt
illicitae: nay, nulla usura legitima est: those usuries which our Politic Laws
allow, though they may be said to be lawful usuries, and the most legitimate
quoad nostram legem, yet they are illegitimate, and all unlawful secundum legem
Dei.

Those most wretched people the Jews, having received from God a most express
Command, not to oppress their brethren with Usury, they practice no vice more,
and have spread their grangrene throughout almost all Nations, whither Gods
judgments have scattered them; but especially, to the great shame of
Christians, have in this respect found most imitation in England. And
notwithstanding the prudency and vigilant care of our Supreme Governors to cut
off the Hydrean heads of these Serpents, they carry their poison so subtly as
to destroy whole families under the pretended coverture of innocence in the eye
of the Law: but yet certainly, their skins may be pulled off, and their
wickedness appear, if duly looked after. I shall therefore first begin with the
Brokers, who lend money upon pledge or pawn, as they call it: that is, seldom
exceeding the quarter, or a little more, of the value of the thing so laid in
pledge, shall be the sum of money so lent: and under this notion, the Brokers
shops are the harbors and receptacles of thieves* for they receive like hell,
all that comes, not caring whether the bringers be the right Owners or not, so
there appear a visage of gain: and though the right Owner find his own Goods
in their possession, yet they under pretense of the alteration of property,
will not deliver them. But let them know, that the sale of Goods wrongfully
gotten, to any Broker in London, Westminster, Southwark, or within two miles of
London, shall not alter the property the^eof.

And if any Broker, having received any such Goods, shall not upon the request
of the true Owner, truly discover them, how and when he came by them, and to
whom they are conveyed, he shall forfeit the double value thereof to the Owner
of the said Goods, Stat. 1 Jac. 21.

But th^s is not all; for by an Act of the Jate Sessions of Parliament holden
at Westminster, in the County of Midd. Anno 1651* it is enacted and ordained,
That no person or persons, shall directly or indirectly, or by any craft or
color whatsoever take above 6 l. for the loan or interest of 100 l. for a
year, or over* and above that rate for a greater or a lesser sum, shall forfeit
the treble value of the money or goods so lent, to be divided between the
Protector and any party that will sue for the same in any Court of Record, by
Indictment, Action of Deb^, Bill Plant or Information. And if any Scrivener or
Broker, shall take any more then 5 s. for the procuring of 100 l. for a year,
or according to that rate for a greater or lesser sum, shall forfeit 20 l. and
the P^llory.

Nevertheles so cunningly do these brokers and Usurers carry their designs,
that viis and modis they take at first penny after the rate of 30 l. per annum,
per cent, and as they handle the business, they make it amount to above 60 l.
per annum, per cent. besides the trade of those that let money at 2 s. in the
pound, deducted for twenty weeks, and have their money also paid weekly.

Well therefore were it to be wished, and is much to be desired, that these
offenses were duly prosecuted, and this enormous vice corrrected, so much
conducing to the good of the Commonwealth, and well-being of all people in
general who must earn their bread before they eat it.

Several other kinds of Extortion there are, especially in Bailiffs,
under-Sheriffs, Goalers, Sergeants, and suchlike, which I shall omit here, and
leave them till another opportunity, because their corruption will fill up
whole volumes: unless I be prevented by their being reduced by the diligent
hand of Justice, as I hope shortly they will

FINIS.

