HOSANNAH to the Son of DAVID: OR A TESTIMONY to the LORD'S CHRIST. Offering it
self, indifferently, to all persons; though more especially intended for the
People, who pass under the Name of QUAKERS.

Wherein not so much the detecting of their persons, as the reclaiming the
tenderhearted among them from the Error of their way, is modestly endeavored,
by a sober and moderate Discourse, Touching the Light and Law in every man;
referring to what is held forth by them in their several Books and Papers,
herein Examined and Discussed.

By a LOVER of TRUTH and PEACE.

Am I become your enemy because I tell you the truth.
The Leaders of this people cause them to err, and they that are led of them
are swallowed up.
And they went in their simplicity -- of some have compassion, making a
difference --
If God peradventure may give them repentance to the acknowledging the truth,
and that they may recover themselves out of the snare --
What know thou, o man, whether --
Out of the mouths of Babes thou have ordained strength.
LONDON, Printed by William Godbid, 1657.

To the Impartial and Vnprejudic'd Reader.
IT is recorded in the Holy Scriptures, That many waters cannot Quench Love,
neither can the Floods drown it, for love is strong as death: which truth is
experimented in him that bears this witness, by whom it has been said (as in
another Case) I will keep my mouth with a (muzzle, or) bridle, I was dumb with
silence, I held my peace; I have said, Let days speak and let multitude of
years show wisdom, as for me I am of few days, and therefore feared to appear
in this matter, saying within my self, I cannot speak, for I am a Child:
Nevertheless while I was musing the fire burned, and my heart was hot within me
boiling or bubling up, and at length brake forth into this ensuing Tract,
touching Zions King, wherein my stammering tongue was unmuzzled, and I was made
to say, Thou art fairer than the Children of men, Grace is poured into thy
lips; Thy Throne (O God) is for ever and ever, the Scepter of thy kingdom is a
right Scepter, and to share with the Children who cried Hosannah to the Son of
David. Though there may be (as there has been, Mat. 21.15.) some that may be
displeased thereat: yet a love to Sions King and to the Children of that
kingdom (however distinguished in form or appearance) has drawn it forth.

The subject discovers its nature by its name or Title; if discouragements of
any sort could have stifled it, thou had not been troubled with the reading
thereof, it has been as fire raked up in the Embers of a private breast two
years and upwards; while it at length is come forth as an untimely birth, or as
that, which is born out of due time, laboring under the burden of being both
Unnecessary and Unseasonable.
The one because it has been done already, by other and better hands, the
other because the persons, with whom it chiefly treats, are now come to a
settlement in their persuasions, and it is now unseasonable to treat them who
are already resolved.

Touching the first of these I have to say; though some others have been in
this work, as the Harvestman reaping the ears with his arm, coming forth in the
strength of their might with the arm of a man, to help the Lord against the
mighty.

Yet gleaning grapes may be left, as the shaking of an olive tree, two or three
berries in the top of the uppermost bough, four or five in the outmost fruitful
branches, the gleanings of Ephraim may well be admitted to follow the vintage
of Abiezer: the Babes and Sucklings bear a part in the Chorus; and out of their
mouths has God ordained strength, were it not evident and clear, that the
foolish things of this world, the weak things, the base and despised things,
were the things chosen of God, to make forth his appearance in and by, and
wherein he often times glorifies himself, it might, and doubtless would have
caused these papers to have disappeared, which now are prostrate at his foot,
to speak life or death unto at his pleasure.

As touching the seasonableness of the discourse, this also is submitted to
him: it is most certain that in some respects, it does seem to be brought forth
unseasonably.

Yet in season and out of season have their respective blessing from him in
whose hands are all issues, and that, which in man's account may seem most
unseasonable, may not so be accounted of by him, who judges of things as they
are indeed, not as in appearance only, and this may be (yea I verily believe it
is) the fittest season in sundry respects.

However or whatever the issue be, it is enough that it is witnessed to be the
effect of an heart affected with the honor and glory of God, and a sincere
desire of the good and welfare of my Countrymen, however named or
distinguished, for many of whom in tender bowels I am distressed, though
unknown to them by name: if God peradventure may give them to see, that which
he would have them see.

I have great reason to believe, that there are many persons dear and precious
to the Lord, whose spirits are fallen asleep on the Dalilah's lap of this
worlds entising pleasures and preferments, whom the most high and blessed
father of spirits will awaken in his holy season, and will show them that they
are fallen from their first love, and that it is not with them as yesterday and
heretofore: but that while their tables are full even to excess, that yet
leaness is entered into their soul, and this will be demonstrable enough unto
them, when they compare the present with the bypast times, which when they
shall see, Oh! what a smiting will it procure, as when a dart strikes thorough
the liver, and the soul is made to mourn in secret, and to bleed inwardly, for
its backsliding and departure from the living Lord: who knows what a whisper
from the Lord may do, whilst this poor despicable piece is in thy hand, and is
anointed by the Lord to be thy remembrancer. Nor have I this persuasion (only)
touching some of those now last named: but for those also (or some among them)
who have quit their former profession, which they have made before many
witnesses, and are moved away from the hope of the Gospel, to the embracing of
some other thing in stead thereof, my purpose is not to argue the thing here,
but do earnestly entreat of you to peruse the discourse thoroughout; let not
the adversary, the Accuser, dissuade you therefrom under any pretense
whatsoever, but patiently and soberly read, and consider, as you would, that
either I or any other should do touching any thing of like nature, that has or
may proceed from any of you, neither say it is too tedious, nor that it is Babel,
nor give it any other term of reproach, till you have weighed with due
consideration the things proposed, and then I am very well assured 'twill stand
in the judgment: how hot or fiery soever it may prove.

If any person enquire touching the Author, and take offense because he is not
named: let such know, that for that very reason, viz. to avoid offense, is the
name withheld, considering how common an error it is for persons to judge of
books by the Author, rather than of the Author by the book: and to like, or
dislike the book (without due consideration of the matter thereof) as they
approve, or disapprove of the person, who publishes it: partly to avoid this
(too Common) error in many, and partly to give content to my own genius, who am
a lover of retirement and privacy: these are two principal reasons, why it is as
it is, as to this enquiry: what entertainment it shall find at the hands of any
person, as I know not, so neither am I careful, my heart suggests unto me, that
both to the wise and unwise I am exposable, my stammering may offend the one,
and my speech may displease the other, nevertheless I am made free to be found
a sacrifice to the Censure, both of the one and the other, if I may therein but
find acceptance with him, whom I serve in my spirit in this undertaking; making
this request unto thee for thine own Soul's good, that thou would give time
to the exercise of thy mind, and understanding before thou passest sentence: be
not too sudden either in receiving or rejecting the matter laid before thee,
not too rash in Censuring, or too fierce in opposing but be clothed in thy
right mind.

Put on (as the Elect of God) bowels of mercy, kindness, gentleness, remembering
that the wisdom, that is from above, as it is pure, so it is peaceable, full of
mercy, and good fruits: if thou art made free to appear thus accomplished, to
help the stammering and lisping, to speak more plainly: thy work will be
rewarded by him, whose it is; and be very acceptable to me, whose soul is made
willing to be one with and in the truth, as it is in Jesus.

HOSANNAH to the Son of DAVID: OR A Testimony to the LORD'S CHRIST.
AS God at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke in time past unto the
Fathers, by the Prophets; and in these last days has spoken to us by his Son,
making forth the discoveries of himself, in order to our Salvation: So has
Satan, that old Serpent the Devil, at sundry times, and in diverse manner of
ways, been exercised toward the Sons and Daughters of the living God; and in
these last days he has eminently put forth himself, not only nibling at the
heel, but striking at the head of the heirs of Salvation.

Sometimes he acted under the form of a Serpent, as to Eve, Genesis 3.1, 4.
Sometimes as a lying, slanderous, and false Accuser, Job 1.9, 11. Sometimes as
a subtle Disputer, Luke 4.3, 9, 10. If thou be the Son of God, etc. enforcing
the Argument with a misquoted and misapplyed sentence of Scripture, It is
written, etc. Sometimes as a cunning and subtle Inquisitor, Matthew. 22.17.
Master, Is it lawful? etc.

Sometimes he will be a false Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15. Sometimes a false
Christ, Matthew. 24.24. Sometimes a false Prophet, 1 John 4.1. 1 King. 22.21, 22.
Sometimes a false Brother, Gal. 2.4. Sometimes a false Teacher, 2 Pet. 2.1. And
all this not in a single, but in a multiplied capacity: many false Christ's,
false Prophets, false Apostles, false Teachers; all centring in him, and he in
them, either as a Serpent, with secrecy and subtilty, or as a roaring Lion and
Dragon, with open violence and hostility; either by his wises, Ephesians. 6.11. and
devices, 2 Cor. 2.11. beguiling, as he beguiled Eve, Genesis 3.13. and 2 Cor.
11.3. or else by his force and violence seeking to devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. or as a
great red Dragon, casting some into prison to try them, Rev. 2.10. being wroth
with the Woman, and making war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the
commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus.

And this bloody enterprise he carries on, not only by such Instruments as are
his own, who are led captive by him at his will, and in whom he rules, as the
Prince of the power of the Air, and in the hearts of the children of
disobedience; but by exciting and stirring up the spirits of the children of
peace to divisions, emulations, and eminent persecutions one against another;
Ephraim to envy Judah, and Judah to vex Ephraim, neither of them remembering
that they both are the offspring of him to whom the promise was made, and of
them who were heirs together with him of the same promise.

All the envy and enmity centring in him who has been the Liar and Murderer
from the beginning, whatever and whoever have been the Instruments made use of
by him, winged with fraud, or armed with violence; He, I say, being the All in
All of whatever is acted in any Instrument against the Son of God, and against
the Sons of God, influencing all his Angels in all their variety of Appearances.

Against him in a way of Eminency should every arrow be directed, not so much
eyeing Instruments, as he by whom they are influenced, and by whom they are
acted: that like as He (1 King. 22.31.) said in another case, Fight neither
with small nor great, save only with the King of Israel. Or as they in the
Prophecy ( Ier. 51.3.) were directed touching Babylon, Against him that bends
let the Archer bend his bow, against him that lifts up himself in his
Brigandine; which is also the main scope of this ensuing Tract.

This lying Murderer, as he has been busied from the Beginning to beguile and
to destroy, if it were possible, the very Elect; so even at this present time
also has he laid his bait, his snare, his Engine, exercising the part of a
crafty Fowler, on purpose to deceive, as much as in him lies, the remnant of
the seed, by sending abroad certain Instruments under great disguise of purity
and piety, clothing them with the titles of Apostles and Messengers sent abroad
to preach the everlasting Gospel, whose distinction among men is, that they go
under the name of Quakers.

The consideratien of whom, together with their Principles, (though in all
faithfulness and tenderness I testify my soul is drawn forth, not so much
against the persons of any, as against him that acts them) is the subject
matter of that which follows, as was hinted before.

I find it commended in the Church of Ephesus, that her Angel had tried them
which said they were Apostles, and were not. And the Apostle John advised, I
Joh. 4.1. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they
be of God: for many false Prophets are gone out into the world. Which advice he
gives unto his beloved: Little children, let no man deceive you.

Such considerations as these have (in the power of God) wrought up unto great
searchings of heart, and strong inquiries after the pleasure of God, and the
knowledge of his truth; which according to the small measure thereof received,
has had its improvement in the comparing of such things as came to my hands
from time to time, endeavoring if by any means I might attain to the knowledge
of the principle.

But as the Persons were diverse, and their Books and Papers very many; so I
found it very hard and difficult to gather up what was scattered here and
there, to make out any entire Piece, though some competent progress was made in
that endeavor, with a mind very much freed from prejudice; and among other
things, I met with these passages:

Christ has enlightened every one that comes into the world, thou that love
that light which Christ has enlightened thee withal, thou brings thy works to
the light, that thy deeds may be proved, etc.

The Light will not let thee take Gods name in vain, it will draw thee out of
the worships of the World, and keep thee in the fear of God.

The first step of peace, is to stand still in the Light, which discovers
things contrary to it, for power and strength to stand against that nature
which the light discovers, here grace grows, here is God alone glorified.

The light, which has enlightened every one, that comes into the world; there is
every one of your Condemnation, that hates it, and every one of your teachers
that loves it: waiting in it, will guide you to God, it will show you the way
(which is Christ) to the Father. (Fox, way to the Kingdom, p. 1. etc.)

Thou that art guided by the Lamb, the light in thy Conscience, Despise not the
day of small things, but mind the counsel of the Lord Jesus: the little light
which shines in thy dark heart is the powerful word of Faith, which was in
the Beginning, by which all things were created; this light is the word of
Faith the Apostles exhorted to take heed unto, Romans 10.6, 7, 8. the unction of
the holy one given of the Father, whereby we need not to teach one another, but
as the anointing teaches us, which is truth and no lie, which is the sure word
of prophecy, whereunto ye do well to take heed, 2 Pet. 1.19. ( Deusb. Man's
Return. p. 12. 27, 28.)

It opens all the Scriptures, and leads man out of the fall up to God; this is
the true light, and leads to life eternal. ( Farnw. Rant. Discov. p. 13.)

The light is but one in him that loves it, and in him that hates it. The light
which Christ Jesus has enlightened every one withal, is made manifest, and
convinces of all ungodliness and worldly lusts.

That which may be known of God, is revealed in man. ( Fr. Houg. Common Salv.
p. 5. 7, 8.

Oh thou blind Pharisee! a Child of God needs no repentance. ( p. 11.)

The Scripture is not the Saints rule. ( Fiery Darts, p. 19.)

Come down all ye high-minded Pharisees, and lay away all your Profession;
throw down all your old building, and lay a new foundation.

Hearken to that in your Consciences, which checks you when you do amiss, and
troubles you in Conscience, when you have been drunk, or have done some evil
act.

Be willing to be guided by that, and that will lead you to repentance? It will
be a Teacher to thee, teaching and directing thee in righteousness, purity,
holiness, etc. Parnell, trial of faith, p. 5. 6. 7.

Loving the light, it will guide you to God from all men, that you need never
look at man more. ( Farnw. Discov. p. 12.)

Being obedient to the light within, it will lead you to purity, to holiness,
to uprightness; that light obeying it is your salvation, disobeying that light
is your Condemnation. ( Brief Discov. p. 4.)

To the al-seeing Eye, that light in your Consciences, I direct you. The wise
man's eye is in his head, which eye is the light in your Consciences, being
guided by it, it will lead you to Christ, who is your Head. ( Letters, p. 3. 5.)

Hearken to the light in your Consciences, that is your Teacher, if you do not
obey, it will be your eternal Condemnation: Hearken to it, and your soul shall
live. A true Discovery, I.C. p. 17. 18.

By all which, as also by much more, which is to be found in many of their
Books, under variety of Expressions, it is to be observed:

That a great part; nay, the main Foundation of this their great building, is
the Light, wherewith every one that comes into the world is enlightened; and
this is held forth under these two branches; viz. 1. What it is in every one?
2. What it does in every one?


It is, That in the Conscience, which checks you, when you have been drunk, or
have done some evil act.

It is, The powerful Word of Faith, by which all things were created, and which
Paul exhorts to take heed unto, Romans 10.6, 7.8.

It is, the sure Word of prophecy, whereunto you do well to take heed, 2 Pet.
1.19.

It does convince a person of all ungodliness.

It directs in righteousness, purity, and holiness.

It will guide you to God from all men, that you need never look at man more.

If you do not obey it, it will be your eternal Condemnation, hearken to it,
and your soul shall live.

That light obeying it is your Salvation, disobeying it is your Condemnation:
It opens all Scriptures, and leads man out of the fall up to God.

These things among many other, are naturally included in the Sentences before
repeated, which being examined and compared with what the Scriptures testify
touching them, it will evidently appear, that although the Enemy has made to
himself a strong hold, yet the Father of lights has discovered him, and his
Covering is found too short and too narrow to hide him; and Wisdom's children
will acknowledge it, when the veil is plucked off, and the disguise discovered
and detected.

It may not be unmeet for the more clear and fair discussion, as also for the
better satisfaction of some, to lay down something positively touching this
matter, according to the two branches aforementioned, rather than to treat them
oppositely by way of Controversy, at least in this place; reserving the
examination of them, and their proofs (if any there be) till afterward: if God
peradventure may please to give unto any Repentance to the acknowledging of the
Truth, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. and that they may be recovered, etc.

THE Spirit of the Lord does testify by the Apostle, 1 John 1.5. that God is
light. Who being altogether in himself the fountain-light, covering himself
therewith, as with a garment; and dwelling in the light which no man can
approach unto. So none may be said to be light, but God, that is to say,
Originally so.

But in subordination to him, there are many derivative lights, lighted up by
him, being his Offspring; and so is he the Father of lights.

1. The Lord Jesus Christ, considered as he is the anointed Savior, the Son in
subordination to the Father, as he sustains the office of a Mediator, the Man
Christ Jesus, as such, he is a derivative light. But so as that he is the
Sun-light, far above all other lights, which it ever pleased the Father of
lights to light up: he in whose face the glory of the Lord shines forth. As the
Sun (but in much more eminency and transparency) is the Compendium of all
light; so is the Lord Jesus Christ the great and glorious Sun of
righteousness, in whom dwells the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, of light
and life.

2. There are the Angels, those ministering spirits, those flames of fire, those
star-like sparkles of light: These are lighted up by the Father of lights, who
also is called the Father of Spirits, Heb. 12.9.

3. There is also another sort of light, which is likewise lighted up by the
same Father of Lights and Spirits, and that is the Candlelight of Man's spirit,
so called by the Lord himself, Prove. 20.27. The spirit of a Man is the Candle
of the Lord. It is a light indeed, yet but a Candle; and though the Candle of
the Lord [yet inferior to other lights, lower than the Angels.] It has its
subordination, its limitation, its bounds are set how far it shall be
exercised; and that will appear in the second Branch, when we come to show,
what it does, or can do.

Q. 1. But first let us consider? What the light in every man is?

Answ. The Light in every man is the Spirit of every man, which is in him, and
without which he could not be a man; which Spirit of a man is by the Scripture
testified to be the Candle of the Lord: Every man's spirit is derived unto him
from the Father of Spirits, and is a Candle of the Lords lighting up, as he is
the Father of Lights.

This Spirit of a Man is understood to be the Reason of a man, or the
Understanding of a man, that whereby he is adapted to know his Creator, and the
end of his Creation; viz. who made him, and why he was made; also how he should
answer the end of him that made him, according to that of David, Psalm. 95.6. O
come, let us kneel before the Lord, our Maker, for he is our God. And Psalm.
100.3. Know ye the Lord, he is God, it is he that made us, and not we our
selves. And the end of Gods making us is expressed in the 2 verse. Serve the Lord,
etc.

We should therefore serve God, who has made us, because he therefore made us,
that we might serve him: And this lies not only in Reason, but in Nature also,
so that the very nature of the thing requires this of all mankind, as appears,
Jer. 2.10, 11. by an argument drawn from the Nations, and their false gods.
Gods making man, and man's serving God, are terms reciprocal, they look each
other in the face, as the winged Cherubims did, which Moses was commanded to
make, Exodus 25.20. and answers each to other, as face does to face in a
glass, Jam. 1.23.

Hence it follows, that as God did make man, that he might serve him, and set
up a light in him to see by, both whom he is to serve, and how he is to serve
him; together with the Reason thereof, because God had made him: there must
needs be together with the light set up a Law implanted in him, which Law is
called Light, Prove. 6.23. whereby the will and mind of his Creator was impressed
upon him, and made known unto him, and he by his candlelight sufficiently
qualified, to see it, and to understand it, together with the Reason and
Reasonableness thereof; which became an aggravation of his Transgression, Romans
1.19, 20, 21, 25, 26. God made Man upright, but they sought out many inventions.

Q. 2. Let us consider, What does this Light or Candle of the Lord in every Man?

Answ. Solomon by guidance and inspiration of the Spirit of the Lord, says, It
searches all the inward parts of the belly, Prove. 20.27. though when it was
first lighted up, and set a burning, it was ascendant, and moved upward with
its torching aspiring flame; while man remained upright (as God at first made
him) his light ascended: He could look his God in the face, he could come
before his presence with gladness, and singing, and serve him that had made him.

But when the thief had got into his Candle, though it put it not quite out,
for then he must have been extinct also himself as Man, for no Candle of the
Lord, (i. e.) no Spirit of a Man, no such thing as a Man at all: they stand and
fall together, as dry bones without skin and flesh, and these without spirit
makes no Man; I say then, when the thief had got the candle, and dimmed the
light, and lowred the aspiring ascendant quality, and now it burns downward,
and discovers the things beneath, searching all the inward parts of the belly,
now the fire burns inward; this Candle of the Lord is exercised in discovering
the iniquity and transgression; driving man through fear from the presence of
God; the Candle showed Adam his Transgression, which made him through fear hide
himself, Genesis 3.10. As it was then; so is it now.

And this is the proper effect of the Candle of the Lord, (the Spirit of every
man) that it searches all the inward parts of the belly; or as the Apostle
says, It intermedleth with the things of a man, 1 Cor. 2.11. For what man
knows the things of a man, save the Spirit of a man, that is in him? But the
deep things of God none knows (or searches out) but the Spirit of God.

This effect or operation of the Spirit of a man, whereby it looks upon and
searches out the things of a man, diving into the inward parts of the belly, is
such an act of understanding, as is both direct and reflex. It looks at the
thing done, or to be done; and knows when it is done, and that it is done; and
this is science or knowledge performed by a direct act of the understanding.
But when the understanding considers what it has done, or is about to do, and
reflects upon some certain rule or law, according to which, his action is done,
or not done; this reflex act of the soul is called conscience, (i. e.)
knowledge together with something else; and it is much more than bare science,
and to the making up of this, there must of necessity be the presence of a law,
with which a person must know-together-with-it; and this knowledge-together
with another is conscience.

For the light simply considered makes not any thing that is done, to be good or
evil; but by a reflection upon the law, and comparing its regularity or
irregularity therewith, its conformity or nonconformity thereunto, thence
springs the sentence of the goodness or evilnesse of the action; the light
manifests the deed done, the Law discovers the quality of the action, according
to that of the Apostle, Romans 3.20. By the Law is the knowledge of sin; Now
according to the conformity or nonconformity, that a man's actions bear to the
Law, suitable thereto will be the sentence it will give, and answerable to the
sentence the Law pronounces, will be the Excusation, or Accusation of the
person, according to Romans 2.15. Which show the work of the Law written in their
hearts, their consciences also bearing witness, and their thoughts mean while
excusing or accusing one another.

As the Lamp, Torch, or Candle, which the Lord lighted up in Man, though it is
become exceeding dim in comparison of what it was before the thief took it, yet
is not annihilated nor cease to be, for then man could not exist, he should
also cease to be: So likewise the Law of God, which at first was plainly to be
read, being written in man's heart, is now not so obliterated, or obscured, but
that there is yet left sufficient to render God righteous in his proceedings
against the sons of men, who hold that measure of the knowledge of God (which
is left in them) in unrighteousness, or who like not to retain God in their
knowledge, so far as he is manifest in them, or shown unto them, viz. in his
eternal power and Godhead, which they not abiding in the acknowledgement of
will render God righteous in his proceeding against them, and leave them
inexcusable before him.

Should there not be so much of the Law, as to discover the actions which are
done in the flesh to be good or evil, and set the conscience upon the work of
accusing or excusing, where else should the Lord have a witness for himself in
Men, and how else should God be just in judging the world; stopping every
mouth, and declaring his proceedings righteous, in rendering to every man
according to his deeds, which time is called the day of the Revelation of the
righteous judgment of God, Romans 2.5, 6.

Seeing then it is the property of light to make manifest, or discover, and this
at most is but science, the exercise whereof is either direct or reflex,
respecting the time past, present, or to come, wherein it has a most ample
latitude to expatiate it self according to the variety of objects, whether
within it or without it, even to wonder and admiration, yea, and so far as to
me appears, beyond my expression.

Nevertheless it looks upon its Objects as it finds them, though it makes
manifest every thing within its sphere as to matter of fact, yet it gives being
to nothing; its all eye (as I may so say) it sees all that is done, but does
nothing; it neither likes nor dislikes, approves nor disapproves, but as its in
conjunction with a law, and has reflection upon it; and thence proceeds the
names of good and evil, of lawful and unlawful, thence also the arguing, and
redarguing, the accusing and excusing, and now science is become conscience.

By all which it does appear, that the candle of the Lord, or the spirit of a
man, is a great light, though but a candle, yet its of the Lords lighting up,
and though it fall (beyond all utterance or conceiving) short off the virtue,
which once it had, having this blot upon its glory, that whereas when it first
came forth of the hands of him that formed it, who is the Father of spirits,
Heb. 12.9. it was then conversant with him primarily, and immediately, yet
since it has been dimmed, and well nigh extinguished (as it was in the
transgression) its now exercised mostly, and principally about the things of
the belly the things of a man, the things of it self: it has therein a great
ability in point of manifesting and discovery not only as they are obvious and
apparent, but as they are occult and hidden, searching out the secret things of
the belly: Nor is its ability only (though most here) but it is able to feel
and seek after God his Creator, Acts 17.27, 28. and in a great capacity of
knowing much of him (as such) at least his eternal power and Godhead, Romans
1.19, 20.

Yet its excellency is heightened, and much advantaged by its concomitant the
Law of its Creator, which as a glass reflects and returns face for face, and
discovers not only the face, but the spots also that is in it: Hence there is
a necessity of considering somewhat further touching the Nature of the Law in
conjunction with the light in every man, by which will appear, what the light
in every man can do, and consequently what it cannot do.

Forasmuch as together with this Light or Candle of the Lord, there is a law
impressed on mansheart, upon which this light reflects; which does as truly
discover the quality of his actions, as the light discovers the actions
themselves. And as Adam gave names to the creatures, and as he named them, so
were they called; even so does the law in man's heart give names to all his
actions, according to the proper nature of their agreement, or disagreement
with the mind and will of God; and this respects as well the secret thoughts,
and intents of the heart, Heb. 4.12. as the outward actions, and in this
respect the Law is called light, in like form of speaking as this is used,
Matthew. 24.27, 28. the Cup for the wine in the Cup.

This law considered as it is in God is but one, as in the fountain of wisdom
and justice: as the light in him is but one, though diversely communicated and
distributed, yet he only is the father of lights: So in him the law is but
one, though differently exhibited and made known according to the variety of
the subjects, who are to be governed by it (among whom man is chief.)

As man is considered the subject of it, so it is distinguished according to
Scripture phrase into the Law of works, Law of faith,
Romans 3.27. both these are distinguished again into the Law written and
unwritten: the subjects of the law under the first consideration (i. e.) of
works, though they have the law written on their hearts, and do by nature
things contained in the Law, yet many of them not having the positive or
written law, as others had; these are said to be without law: as they indeed
were in comparison of those to whom the outward positive written Law was added,
Gal. 3.19.

Nevertheless they were not positively without Law, (for then they could not
have been guilty in any respect, for its evident, that where there is no law,
there is no transgression, Romans 4.15.) but comparatively they were without a
positive declared written Law, according to that divine testimony, Psalm.
147.19, 20. He shows his word unto Jacob: his statutes and his judgments
unto Israel. He has not dealt so with any nation: and as for his judgments,
they have not known them.

These having the law written upon their hearts, and by the Candle of the Lord
so far legible as to evince God his eternal power and Godhead, leaving them
therein without excuse, Romans 1.19, 20. Manifesting that this God, whose eternal
power, and Godhead revealed in them, or showed unto them, was to be loved with
all the heart, and all the mind, and withal the soul (employed in that word
(as before has been declared) Psalm. 95.6. Psalm. 100.2, 3. Making and serving
being correlatives; his making and our serving being necessary dependents, as
the Apostle argues the same case in the point of redemption, saying, Ye are
bought with a price, etc. therefore glorify God with your bodies, and spirits,
for they are his, 1 Cor. 6.20. (but of this anon in its place;) this I take to
be the sum of the first Table of the Law, and is written on the heart of the
natural man.

The other Branch or Table of the Law comprehended in these words, Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self, or whatsoever ye would that men should do unto
you, do ye likewise unto them; This also is written on the table of the heart
of every man, notwithstanding it be not written in Characters, i. e. letters
and syllables, and become a positive law to them, yet its there, and men doing
(as the Apostle phraseth it) by nature the things contained in the law (though
they be in comparison of others without law) are a law to themselves, and
hereby they show the work of the law written in their hearts, Romans 2.14, 15.
which is a clear demonstration of the truth hereof.

It is witnessed by our blessed Lord Jesus, Mat. 22.37, 38, 39, 40. that to
love the Lord with all the heart, with all the soul, and with all the mind, and
to love ones neighbor as ones self, on those two commandments hang all the Law
and the Prophets; and it is evident that this in its measure is effected by
them, who are said, by nature to do the things contained in the law; whence
else springs all those stumblings upon a Deity, and groping and feeling after a
worship, and religion suitable to what is apprehended of God; and herein,
though the candle burn so dim, that the poor soul feels after this, as they
for the door of Lots house; yet in the other part or table of the law they have
much more cleerness of discovery of the things of a man, (accounted the moral
virtues) they declare with a broad daylight (as it were) that these are
written there.

The whole amounting to this, that those who live without the law, i. e. the
law as it was committed to writing, and delivered by the hand of Moses,
according to the appointment of God: yet in these God has not left himself
without witness, but has written on their hearts the same law for substance,
which he afterward enlarged by the hand and administration of Moses, and added
this to the former, because of transgression (either to reduce the
transgressor, or to aggravate the transgression) that sin might be made
exceeding sinful.

And therefore God may justly proceed in judgment against the transgressions
which are committed against him, and his law, as the Apostle argues, he having
left all men without excuse, by giving them a light or candle in their heart,
by which they might see to read the things contained therein.

But if those, who have only the law of nature, and do not by nature the
things contained in the law, be punishable, and Gods proceedings therein
justifiable (as indeed it is) as has been often minded before: of how much
sorer punishment think we shall they be thought worthy, who transgress under
this additional declaration of the Will and Law of God committed to writing,
with those large annotations, and marginal notes (as it were;) this must needs
be a great aggravation, this new edition of the law must needs bring a further
addition of guilt to the transgressors thereof.

Man or the children of men thus differenced and thus enlightened by the candle
of the Lord in them, are the subjects of the law, in the first sense, as it is
called the law of works, Romans 3.27. or the old covenant: In which consideration
God has concluded all under sin, Romans 3.9. and stopped every mouth, and
rendered all the world guilty before him by the sentence of the law, considered
as before, Romans 3.19. forasmuch as the tenor of the law being this, viz. Do and
live, and Cursed be every one, that continues not in all things which are
written in the law to do them, finds no man able to perform it in all things,
for that all have sinned and come short of the glory of God, Romans 3.23. the
Spirit of God testifying, that the law, though in it self, holy, righteous and
good, yet was weak through the flesh, Romans 7.12. Romans 8.23. So that what could
not by it be effected was accomplished by the law of the spirit of life in
Christ Jesus, Romans 8.2. opposed to the law of sin and death, as the law of
faith is to the law of works, Romans 3.27.

Touching which Law (as being the next branch in the distinction) and the light
accompanying it, it will be necessary to speak.

The law of faith (which is the second branch in the distinction) is a law
founded in God, as in the fountain: and as the former, that is, the law of
works, or of the first covenant, proceeded from the Wisdom and Justice of God,
as being a just and equal thing, that he should be served by those whom he
made to serve him; so this law of faith ownes it self to the mercifulness, and
goodness of the same God toward such as had forfeited all into the hand of
justice, for it had been a righteous thing with God, to have taken vengeance
upon the forfeiture.

The foundation of which law of Faith, or second Covenant was laid in that word
of Grace, or rather on Christ in the promise, that is, the seed of the woman
shall break the head of the Serpent, Genesis 3.15. and is of as large extent, as
the former of works; if we consider 1. The Object thereof. 2. The Subject of it.


The Object is the Lord Jesus, who is propounded in the promise, as the
repairer of the breach, and the restorer of the paths to dwell in, according to
that testimony, Psalm. 75.3. The earth and all the inhabitants of the earth are
dissolved: I bear up the pillars of it. And thus by him all things consist.
Col. 1.17. holding forth a ground of return to God, from whom man by the
transgression was turned aside, and through fear had hid himself, Genesis 3.10.

The Subject was the first man, and in him all mankind who were not only
privileged by this promise by being put into a possibility and capacity of
being renewed again by repentance (which condition the first covenant had in
it, for that left no room for repentance) but they were also hereby obliged to
believe in him, who was promised to break the Serpents head to destroy the
destroyer, and to lead captivity captive.

How far the Law of faith may be said to be written on every man's heart (as
the former law of works) is not given unto me to understand; only this glimpse
I have of it, that it appears to have had an influence on the heart of man
(from the proposing of the promise aforesaid) by those sacrifices, which were
offered up to God before the publication of the positive law: wherein as well
Cain as Abel offered sacrifice Genesis 4.4. I therefore call their offerings
sacrifice, because they are so called Heb. 11.4. (...) 1 Cor. 10.18.

Abels sacrifice was mingled with faith, offered up upon the true Altar,
witnessed unto by Gods acceptance, and by faith he obtained a good report
among the Elders, Heb. 11.4. with whom he had received the same spirit of
faith. But with Cain and his sacrifice it was not so, nor accepted as such:
nevertheless it appears to me from hence, that there was the power of a Law of
faith, as of works upon them both and they equally obliged thereby; only the
one offered a sacrifice as an obedience of faith, the other in form without
faith, and as it were by the works of the Law, Romans 9.32. Nevertheless in
obedience to the same law of faith, for as much as he offered sacrifice also
(though not in faith) the one had faith in his heart, and Christ in his eye as
a redeemer and restorer, the other was wanting at least in faith, which should
have seasoned his sacrifice.

They both had equal obligation from one and the same law of faith, which
looked at Christ as its object, as the law of sacrifice did imply, whether
propitiatory, Heb. 9.22. or gratulatory, Levit. 7.12, 15. Psalm. 107.22. Both
yielded obedience to the law of faith, in what was outward in the Act: only
Abel had an eye open to him that was invisible, as the object of his faith
carrying him above the Act.

So that the law of faith doubtless respected all the race and generation of
mankind by way of obligation from the giving of the promise; but the children
of the promise are counted for the seed: like as it is said, All are not
Israel, who are of Israel, Romans 9.6. though all the family of Abraham were
greatly privileged, Romans 3.2. and 9.4. and obliged: So likewise all the race of
mankind are greatly privileged by virtue of the promise or promised seed in
whom all the nations are blessed, yet not all Nations but the children of the
promise are counted for the seed, according to the tenor of that word, 1 Timothy
4.10. Who is Savior of all men, especially of them which believe.

A common Salvation is extended to all Men by Jesus Christ, Jude 3. and all men
are bound to believe and repent, that they may be saved, Act. 17.30. John 3.16.
But the special Salvation is to them only, who have obtained like precious
faith, 2 Pet. 1.1. (i.e.) the faith of Gods elect, Tit. 1.1. the faith of the
operation of God, Col. 2.12. these are they which are reckoned or counted for
the seed, Gal. 3.7, 9, 29. these are they to whom the righteousness of God,
which is by faith of Jesus Christ is manifested unto all, and upon all them
that believe, Rom, 3.21, 22.

As the law in the first consideration, i. e. of works was Gods firstborn, and
man was fitted for the work thereof, while his bow abode in strength: God
having made him upright, Eccles. 7.29. So the Law in the second consideration,
i. e. of faith (whose foundation was laid in that blessed word of promise, Genesis
3.15.) lay in the same womb and bosom of eternity, for they were twins; And
though that stepped out first, declaring the Majesty of him whose Image it bore,
yet this caught its Brother by the heel, declaring the infiniteness of the
Mercy and compassion of him, whose Law it was, proclaiming the Lord, the Lord,
gracious, long-suffering, etc. No sooner is the Transgression detected, but the
Redeemer is promised; Oh the height, and depth of the riches of mercy, who
kissed Justice, and overcame it, Psalm. 85. Mercy and Truth met together,
Righteousness and Peace kissed each other; nor does this latter destroy the
former, nay it establishes it, Romans 3.30, 31.

Like as when the Law of the first Covenant was engraven on tables of stone, it
did not at all diminish or lesson the glory of that which was written upon the
heart, nay it did augment the luster thereof, and made it more legible: so
neither does the Law of faith destroy the Law of works, nor make it void; nay
it does establish it, for as much as it no way dispenses with its subjects
service, nor acquits them of their duty, save only of the manner and end of the
service: As it was performed in the oldness of the letter, now it must be
performed in the newness of the Spirit, Romans 7.6. but it must be obedience
still; Loving the Lord our God, with all the heart, with all the mind, with
all the soul, with all the strength, and our neighbor as our selves: this is
not diminished or made void by the Law of faith, it only requires Newness of
Spirit in lieu of Oldness of letter.

These two considerations of the Law went hand in hand together all along
thorough the old administration.

From righteous Abel to the end of the Catalogue of all the cloud of witnesses,
who were subjected to the first dispensation, dying in faith, saluting though
not possessing the promises, they seeing him, who was invisible, their faith
did not at all lesson their obedience: nay it winged their obedience; It was
the salt, that salted every sacrifice, Mark 9.49. For without faith its
impossible to please God, Heb. 11.4, 6.

This Law of faith however it ran along as the blood in the veins, and was
that, which led to God through every service, and in every sacrifice, was
nevertheless veiled under great obscurity, and under much darkness; The Spirit
thereof did testify of the suffering of Christ, and of the glory, which was to
be revealed; but it testified of them, as of things a great way off, the
promises whereof they saluted, but possessed not; the way into the most holy
not being open, or made manifest, while the first Tabernacle was yet standing,
Heb. 9.8.

This double kind of sacrificing ran all along thorough out the whole
dispensation in as many as retained the Law of sacrifice, and cast not off
utterly the Knowledge of God, which the most part did as the Apostles argument,
Romans 1.21, 26, 28. makes it evident. For as much as all along there was a
Remnant having an eye upon the promise, obtained a good report, and the Savor
of them in Divine Testimony remains to this day as a Cloud of witnesses.

This Law of faith as it sprung not with mankind in Nature; but was added by
occasion of the Transgression (for it succeeded that as a plaster does the
wound,) it was not written in the heart of the natural man as a thing just and
equal: For God to remake, and to redeem fallen man, into whose heart it could not
rationally have entered, that there should ever have been a way found out in
justice, or equity, or with a due saving of the truth of him, that made the
Covenant, that man should be put into a capacity, or come under a possibility
of being preserved (having transgressed) and yet God be righteous, seeing there
was no term or condition in the Covenant, which God made with him looking that
way (for transgressing and dying were the terms reciprocal) but it was of
mere grace, that the promise was made, and was indeed the opening of a door of
hope in a possibility of returning for man, which was run away from God.

This laying the foundation of a better hope by which man might be recovered
and encouraged to draw near to God, was as far above the reach of the natural
man to know or expect as the heavens are above the earth, yea as the thoughts
of God are above the thoughts of man: this Law then is not natural but
supernatural; not springing up together with man, as that of works; but is
added through grace, Psalm. 75.3. ( Ex abundanti) and such as this Law is, such
is the light, which accompanies it, and the enlargement of the one 2is the
enlargement of the other also, as will evidently appear by what follows.

I say, this Law of faith or word of promise being extended to all mankind,
holding forth a possibility of man's return to God upon terms of faith and
repentance, employed in the first promise, and testified in the sacrifice of
Abel, the long suffering and patience of God contributing much this way, his
goodness and forbearance laying great obligation upon persons, these visible
things of God holding forth the invisible or secret purposes and Counsels of
his heart toward returning sinners, and calling and crying out to man upon
that account to return to him by repentance, from whom by transgression, he was
departed: by which footsteps of God man might trace a possibility of Redemption
through believing in the promised seed, as by the former, viz. The visible
things of the Creation, he might discern, the Eternal power and Godhead of him
by whom he was made and created: So that in this also, as in the former, God
has not left himself without witness even to the natural man; but has given
him occasion, and opportunity to feel after God, as thus considered.

The print and impressions of mercy being stamped upon every out-coming of the
Lord, which upon the terms of the first Covenant was not discernable, speaking
nothing but wrath and terror and trembling, according to that of the Apostle,
Romans 4.15. The Law works wrath, etc. And that justly upon every
transgressour, yea for every transgression; for it is written, Cursed be every
one, that continues not in all things written in the Law do them, Gal. 3.10.
and Deuteronomy. 27.26. So that God has left man in great measure without excuse even
in this respect also, holding forth such discoveries, as whereby he might
discern a possibility of the recovery of his forfeited estate, evidenced and
manifested in the patience, bounty, long-suffering, goodness, and mercifulness
of God toward him a sinner, to whom it was at first said, In the day thou
eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye, or dying, thou shall dye, instead of
which severity, Behold goodness, and forbearance interposing and leading to
repentance, Romans 2.4. And this in relation to man as a man: while he is endued
with no other light, than that which is common to him as such, that is, the
spirit of a man, which is the Candle of the Lord, by which he may not only see
the things of God as his Creator, that is, his eternal power and Godhead, and
what has dependence thereupon in relation to the first Covenant, or Law of
works.

But a crevice is opened into the discovery of the Redemption promised as the
subject of the second Covenant upon the terms thereof in relation thereunto as
to a law of faith evidenced by the promise to as many as the sound thereof ever
came. Yea all mankind in the forbearance, goodness, and long-suffering of God,
though unto them, but as unto natural men: and this discovery shining forth
through natural appearances, Act. 14.17. Romans 2.4. Yet sufficient to leave
himself a witness in man from these discoveries, evidencing a reprieve from
immediate destruction, which the transgressour has merited: and opening a door
of hope for pardon, and remission through the riches of the goodness and
forbearance of God; sufficient to engage the heart of a natural man to seek the
Lord, and to feel after him, if possible he might find him in this capacity as
a Redeemer, even as in the former capacity, he might discover God as his
Creator and Maker.

And though Man's greater impotency will be found in this, than in the former,
yet is it his duty no less here than there: and he no less excusable for not
being found exercised in the endeavor after it. God having left himself a
witness in one case, as well as in the other, though not so the one as the
other.

For in the former not only from without by things seen were the invisible
things of God discovered, but also by his Law written in the heart of the
natural Man was this discovery made of God as his Creator, and his subjection
to him as such under the terms of that Covenant, viz. Do and live.

But touching this latter Covenant or Law of faith, the discovery thereof
arises from what is without. It had never been known nor ever thought of; nor
ever would it or could it rationally have come into the heart of Man, to have
conceived such a thing, but from the declaration of God in his promise (which
faith made application of in the first believers) and from the series of his
patience and forbearance continued to the race of mankind darkely speaking
forth the same thing with a silent, yet constant voice, Psalm. 19.1. Romans 10.18.
sufficient to leave man without excuse, and convincing of a possibility of
being renewed again through the riches of that goodness, which hereby called
and led unto repentance, Romans 2.4.

Nevertheless there was to be another Edition of this Law also, as there was of
the former (of which there has been mention made before) That although God
left not himself without witness in those first Believers, Abel, Enoch, Noah,
Abraham, Isaak, Jacob, Moses, David, Daniel, and the rest, of whom to tell time
would fail, who were all enlightened with a light suitable and proportionable to
their object: there was communicated to them a Spirit of faith, whereby they
were enabled to behold him, who was the object of their faith: So Abraham saw
the day of Christ with joy; John 8.56. and Moses saw him, which was invisible,
Heb. 11.27. Faith saw Christ through sacrifices, saw remission of sins in
shedding of blood, without which there is no remission, Heb. 9.22. Yet
notwithstanding God having provided some better thing for those which were to
come after, that they without us should not be made perfect, has in these last
days spoken to us by his Son revealing the purpose and Counsel of his heart by
him; bringing Immortality and life to light by the Gospel, which before was hid
from ages and generations, Ephesians. 3.5. and not so made manifest.

But in the fullness of time, the fountains of the great deep were broken up,
and the windows of heaven were open; and the treasure of wisdom and Counsel,
which had (comparatively) been hidden from ages and generations (not positively
so) for every Age had its proper measure in proportion to the dispensation
under which it was, yet in comparison of what was further made out by the
appearing of the grace of God giving testimony of his great love to the world
in sending his own Son, Romans 8.3. To dye for sinners, Romans 5.8. Yea while they
were yet sinners, and at enmity with him, then to reconcile them to God, Romans
5.10.

Then I say and at this time for the Word to be made flesh, and Tabernacle
among the sons of men, and cause his glory to be beheld as the only begotten of
the Father full of grace and truth, without controversy this was the great
Mystery of Godliness, God manifested in the flesh, etc. He had been hid in God
long before, but now was made manifest, bringing immortality and life to light
by the Gospel, preparing a way into the Holiest of all, which way was not yet
open, but shut up under veiles and shadowy darkness whilst the first Tabernacle
was yet standing; and this God has done upon terms not of the first covenant,
that is to say, of works, called the old Covenant: but upon the terms of the
second Covenant, or Law of faith, bringing in everlasting Righteousness upon
the account of that better hope by which we draw nigh to God, Heb. 7.19.

Thus as that first Covenant or law of works, which was witnessed sufficiently
in man's heart, so far as to justify God, and render man inexcusable for
transgressing it, yet through the bountiful goodness of God was afterward
engraven on Tables of stone, and so became a written and legible Law, the
keeping of the Oracles whereof was committed eminently to Abraham's posterity;
yet so as that the sound thereof went forth among the Gentiles far and near,
who also might be admitted upon the terms thereof into the family of the then
Israel of God, and many taking hold of that Covenant of God were admitted, to
whom there was but one Law, as well to the stranger, as to him, who was born in
the house, Exodus 12.48.49.

In like manner this new Covenant which God made with miserable, fallen,
affrighted runaway, hidden, Adam touching the seed of the woman, which should
break the head of the serpent as in the promise, Genesis 3.15. this in process of
time comes to be drawn from under the veil, and so immortality and life comes
to light through the gospel. Which notwithstanding it were so sufficiently
manifested from the time it was first promised, as that the heirs of Salvation
did see through these veils, and beheld him that was invisible: and all others
might have seen, and many did see, that which left them without excuse; for
with whom was he angry but with those, who had not faith, Heb. 3.11, 18, 19. as
with those to whom the Gospel was preached, but did not profit them, not being
mixed with faith, Heb. 4.2.

Yet out of the super-abundant goodness and riches of grace, Ephesians. 2.7.
commending his love to poor sinners, God makes this new impression thereof in
such large and capital letters, as that it may be read and seen of all men, to
whom the tidings thereof comes, making publication of this joyful message by
the Acclamation of that heavenly Host, who praising God said,

Glory to God in the Highest, on earth peace, good will toward men, Luke
2.13.14. bringing good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people, the
sum of which was, There is born this day in the City of David a Savior, which
is Christ the Lord, Luke 2.10.11. or, the Lords Christ, v. 26. a light to
lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of his people Israel, v. 32.

Which voice of this heavenly Host was not like that on mount Sinai, wherein
the mount was altogether on a smoke like the smoke of a furnace, where the
whole Mount quaked greatly, and the people, which were in the Camp trembled,
Exo. 19.16, 18. but contrariwise it was here: Peace on Earth, good will toward
Men, and glad-tidings of great joy to all people.

These were the blessed openings of the Fathers bosom, bringing life unto
light; Revealing the Counsels of his heart, which had been kept secret from the
beginning of the world, but was now made manifest for the obedience of faith
among all nations, according to the tennor of that Scripture, John 3.16, 17.
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes on him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Now is the first promise unbowel'd, and declaration is now made, who is the
seed of the woman, and what is the Law of faith, and also who are the proper
subjects thereof. Every one to whom the sound thereof comes is under the
obligation thereof: but they only, which do believe in Christ, shall not
perish, but have everlasting life, and these also are reckoned for the seed.

This then is the tennor and tendency of the Law of faith; That whosoever
believes on Jesus Christ, shall not perish, but have everlasting life: and
this, not occultly but openly declared.

Together with this new Edition of the Law of faith, the Subjects thereof are
likewise declared to be such, as are to be renewed, to be new made, to be born
again, and to have a light implanted in them suitable to this Law, as they had
a light implanted in them suitable to that of works.

That like as the former light sprang up with them in the natural birth: Man
had his candle from the beginning of his Creation to see his Creator, and a Law
sprang up with him to serve his Maker, that is, to love him with all his heart,
with all his soul, etc. So now in this new Creation is he in like manner to be
endued with a light suitable to his birth, he must be born of the Spirit, or
from above, and therewith to be enlightened to have this Law written in and on
his heart; this is a branch of the new Covenant, I will write my laws in their
hearts, etc.

This is that which was pointed at all along thoroughout the old dispensation
in all the types and sacrifices, they looked unto Jesus the Mediator of this
new Covenant, whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his
blood to declare his Righteousness for the remission of sins that are past,
through the forbearance of God, That he might be just and the justifier of him,
that believes in Jesus, Romans 3.25, 26. and by this law of faith to exclude
boasting.

The Law of works speaking on this wise, do and live (or the man that does
these things shall live in them) sets man upon doing for life, or that he may
live: and while man is doing he is apt to be boasting (as he) Luke 18.11. I am
not as other men are, etc.

The Law of faith speaks on this manner, Awake thou that sleep, stand up
from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light, Ephesians. 5.14. You has he
quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.1, 6. He is made to
live, that he may do, and he is made to know, that he is not sufficient as of
himself to do any thing, John 15.5. but all his sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor.
3.5. who works in him both to will and to do of his own good pleasure, Phi.
2.13. here is no room for boasting nor any color for any such thing, it is
utterly taken away by the law of faith, Romans 3.27. which empties the Creature
of all self-sufficiency, and leaves it at the foot of him, that quickened it,
that gave it life, to enable it to perform every action of life: not as if the
Law of faith were destitute of works, or the subjects thereof totally exempted
therefrom. Nay! but notwithstanding the saved ones are to ascribe the honor of
their Salvation to the free and rich grace of God as being mere gift in
opposition to works, to cut off all occasion of boasting; Nevertheless its
testified, that such are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good
works, which God has before ordained, that they should walk in them, Ephesians. 2.7,
8, 9, 10.

So then the bringing of Immortality and life to light through the Gospel opens
the Mystery thereof, and discovers in plain Characters, that which had lain hid
in former ages, the sum of all which is this, viz. That it is not in him that
wills, nor in him which runs, but in God that shows mercy Romans 9.15, 16.
according to that in Heb. 8.12. for I will be merciful, etc.

This is the wellhead, spring, or fountain of the Law of faith, from whence
flows all those blessed streams of good will toward man: this laid the
foundation of man's recovery and restoration, and this lays the top stone
thereof, whereunto all the saved of the Lord must cry, grace, grace: for his
mercy endures for ever.

This is the Beginning or first letter of his Name as it was described to
Moses, Exodus 34.6, 7. Merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and keeping mercy
for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgressions and sins.

The Elect-tryed-pretious-corner-stone of this Building is the Lord Jesus, laid
for a Foundation, a living stone, and such as he is, such are they, which are
built upon him, lively or living stones built up a Spiritual house, an holy
Priesthood, to offer up Spiritual Sacrifice, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ,
1 Pet. 2.4, 5, 6, 7. and other foundation can no man lay, than that is laid,
which is Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 3.11.

It is this, which gives boldness in the day of Judgment, because as he is, so
are they, that are his, in this world, 1 John 4.17. and this is the honor of
all his Saints or Sanctified ones, it is the lot of all the General Assembly of
the first Borne, whose names are written in Heaven, Heb. 12. not only of the
Saints, which were in Corinth, no nor thoroughout all Achaia, Ephesus, and all
Asia, but all that in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord
both theirs and ours.

Of this living Stone the Lord Jesus, and of these lively stones, viz. they
which believe on him, does the new building, or spiritual house consist; he is
not ashamed to call them Brethren: forasmuch as he which sanctifies and they
which are sanctified are all of one, Heb. 2.11. Nay not only Brethren, but
they are so of him, as Children of the Father, He the everlasting Father, Isa.
9.6. and they the Children of that father, Heb. 2.13. Behold I and the Children
that thou have given me; He the Root, and they the Offspring, he the head,
they the Members: they are so of him, that they have no subsistence without
him, which, as it is true of all mankind in general, yea and of all things,
that have being, that he bears up the pillars thereof, even he, who is the
Brightness of his Fathers glory, and the express Character of his Hypostasis or
substance; he bears up or upholdeth all things with the word of his power, Heb.
1.4. who is before all things, and by him all things consist, Col. 1.17. I say,
though all things own themselves to him for that Existence, which they have, as
upheld by him, and consisting in him, he being the Savior of all men, and of
all things, according to that in Psalm 36.6. Thou savest Man, and Beast.] I
rather use the word Savest or wilt Save than Preservest (though the latter be
used by the Translators) because I find themselves have so rendered the same
word elsewhere, viz. Esa. 45.17. Israel shall be saved with an everlasting
Salvation, as also in the 118. Psa. 25. verse, Save now, where the words (...)
are rendered by the Septuagint, (...), which Prophecy has an especial reference
and relation to Christ, as may appear by the particular application thereof to
him by the Children crying in the Temple, and saying (...), Hosanna, Matthew.
21.15, 16. and Christ's defense thereof against those that were displeased
thereat, avouching in their defense that Prophecy of David, Psalm. 8.2. Out of
the mouth of Babes, etc. And to this agrees that of the Apostle mentioned
formerly, viz. The Savior of all men, etc. Yet it is most eminently, and in a
most especial manner true of those, who believe, 1 Timothy 4.10. Even those of his
own house, (stock and kindred) those which are of the household of faith.

That of the Author to the Hebrews is very emphatical, where speaking of Christ
it is said, He took on him the seed of Abraham: It is not said, the seed of
Adam. For though that be true that Christ is the second Adam, and took on him
the nature of Man, as such; yet it is not terminated there, but his alliance,
stock, and kindred by way of eminency were Abram's seed, rather than Adam's
seed: these were his Brethren, and his Children. Heb. 2.11, 13, 16, 17.
Therefore to the end the promise might be sure to all the seed, even to all who
are of the faith of Abraham. Romans 4.16. He took on Abraham's seed, which was
more than if he had taken on Adam's seed.

Not as though the Word of God had taken none effect: For, as all were not
Israel which were of Israel, neither because they were the seed of Abraham
according to the flesh, were they all children, but the children of the promise
were counted for the seed. Though the whole race and lineage of Abraham's family
arrived at great dignity, and were wonderfully differenced from the rest of the
Nations, by external Covenant, Oracles, and Ordinances: Yet the seed was hid
among them; the children of promise were scarce discernable, yet they were
those which were reckoned upon, to whom the promise of the everlasting rest was
made, for they which believed entered into rest.

It follows then, that although God has made of one blood all Nations to dwell
on the face of the Earth, etc. and bounded their habitations, Act. 17.26. Yet
he has distinguished the Race and Generations of mankind into two seeds, first
expressed in Genesis 3.15. in these words, Thy seed, and her seed. Afterward more
amplified, and that distinction evidenced not to be different qualities or
qualifications in one and the same person, (as some understand) but in distinct
persons differently qualified; as appears in the persons of Cain and Abel,
Ishmael and Isaac, Esau and Jacob, and so all along: Wherein, though all
mankind are of the Race of Adam, yet there are but some which are of Abraham,
and of those, all are not the seed which the Lord has blessed; for though all
which proceeded from his loins were his children according to the flesh, yet
the children of the promise are counted for the seed: and these also are so the
children of Abraham, (children of Promise, children of Faith, children that
cannot lie) as that they were first the children of Adam, as Abraham himself
also was, according to that divine testimony, 1 Cor. 15.46, 47, 48, 49. That
was not first which is spiritual, but that natural, and afterward that
spiritual. The first man is of the earth, earthy: the second man is the Lord
from heaven. As is the earthy, such are they that are earthy; and, as is the
heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly. The former are the children of
the first Adam by natural generation, the latter are the children of the
second Adam by spiritual regeneration, of whom it is thus witnessed, Joh.
1.12, 13. That to as many as receive him, (i. e. the Lord Jesus) to them he
gave the privilege (or prerogative) to be made the Sons of God, even to as many
as believe in his name: who are born not of bloods, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.

So that it appears, As the first stone of the building, viz. that living,
elect, precious cornerstone, the Lord Jesus himself, was not borne of the
will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, Luke 1.34, 35. So
likewise the living stones of the same spiritual building are borne after the
same manner (for nature and kind) not of the will of man, nor of the will of
the flesh, but from above, according to what is testified in John 3.3. by the
true and faithful witness himself; Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a
man be borne again (or from above, verse. 5. or of the spirit, verse. 6.) he
cannot see the Kingdom of God.

Which being regenerate, or born from above, reverts into the former, Joh.
1.12, 13, viz. a receiving of, and believing on Jesus Christ; both which put
together, produce that new birth which is from above, viz. when it shall please
God the Father by his holy Spirit to make discovery of his love in Christ,
through or by means of a promise to sinners, and shall take off the fears and
doubts of a Soul, causing it to lie down at the foot of that grace, thus
brooding over it, and willingly accepting thereof upon the terms on which it is
tendered. Surely, this amounts unto a begetting again unto a lively hope, 1 Pet.
1.3. and is a testimony of the great good will of God, by which he begets by
the word of truth a kind of first fruits to himself, Jam. 1.18. especially
when this discovery of Gods love shining into the Soul through the face of
Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. shall be mixed with faith in them that hear and receive the
glad tidings of it, Heb. 4.2. and Gal. 3.14.

The Spirit of God, thus revealing Christ to the heart of a Sinner (and Gods
great love in him) and preparing the heart to receive him mingling faith with
the promise, and giving strength to receive the seed of the Word of promise, in
fullness of time, or according to the time of life (spiritually so considered)
brings forth that birth which is after God, according to that which is spoken,
1 Pet. 1.23. Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible,
by the Word of God, which lives and abides for ever.

This new birth presupposes a new Life, which holds similitude and proportion
with the first Creation; when God first made man, he breathed into him the
breath of lives, and he became a living soul, setting up in him a light, viz.
the spirit of a man, viz. the Candle of the Lord, suitable and proportionable
to his capacity as he then stood, directing him in all things necessary to be
known, or done, in respect of God or himself, according to the law written in
his heart: So likewise in this new birth, or new creation, the person receives
a new life. Ephesians. 2.5. Even when we were dead in sins he has quickened us,
etc. Evidencing, that as he which has the Son has life, 1 John 5.12. So this
life puts forth it self in such discoveries, as wherein the newborn Babe in
Christ, having received through believing a witness in himself, 1 John 5.10.
and has set to his seal, that God is true, John 3.33. crying to God, Abba
Father, by the Spirit of Adoption received, Romans 8.15. even the spirit of the
Son sent forth into his heart, Gal. 4.6. and desiring (as newborn Babes) the
sincere milk of the Word, the unmixed milk of that same Word by the
incorruptible seed, whereof the new Birth was begotten and born. 1 Pet. 1.23.
That it may grow up in him in all things, and this upon the account of having
tasted, that the Lord is gracious. 1 Pet. 2.2. By which spiritual growth it
appears to others as to himself also, that he is alive in Christ, as in his
head and root by faith. And that Christ lives in him also by faith, Ephesians.
3.17. and Gal. 2.20. Not only as an Object to be believed on without him, as
having done all for him, Romans 4.25. and 8.3. 1 Cor. 1.30. 2 Cor. 5.21. but as
inhabiting in him, according to that Testimony, Gal. 1.16. It pleased God to
reveal his Son in me; which is more amplified and explained, Gal. 2.20. I live,
yet not I, but Christ lives in me; and the life I live in the flesh, I live by
the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.

This inhabiting or in-dwelling of Christ in the heart is proper only to
believers, to newborn Babes in Christ, unto whom he has become a quickening
Spirit, Ephesians. 2.1, 5. and 1 Cor. 15.45. in such he dwells, as in his
Tabernacle, while they are Tabernacling in their house of clay. And as its
proper to them only which believe, so it is effected and performed in them by
the same Instruments, by which its life and being was at first conveyed, viz.
by the Spirit on Christ's part, John 14.17. Romans 8.11. and by that fruit of the
Spirit, viz. faith, on man's part, Ephesians. 3.17. That Christ may dwell in your
hearts by faith; so may those Scriptures be understood, Col. 1.27. Christ in
you the hope of glory; and that 2 Cor. 13.5. Know you not that Christ is in
you, etc. He is in the hearts of believers by his Spirit, and dwells there by
faith, guiding and leading them, directing and assisting them, teaching and
enabling them to perfect holiness in the fear of God; not only becoming a
Principle of life or quickening, giving existence or being to the newborn, but
causing them to grow up in him, and to perform the actions of spiritual life,
or of a living new-man.

Secondly, as in the first Man there was not only life, but light set up in
him, so the newborn babe in Christ (the new Man) is also endowed with light
suitable to his life; That quickening Spirit, which gave him life, gave him also
light, Ephesians. 5.14. Awake thou that sleep; and arise from the dead, and
Christ shall give thee light; as is the Man, so is his life, and his light: His
birth is from above, so is his life and his light, Ephesians. 1.17, 18. That the God
of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory, may give unto you the spirit of
wisdom and revelation, in the knowledge of him: The eyes of your understanding
being enlightened: that ye may know what is the hope of his calling, and what
the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints: that he may answer
the ends of God in his new Creation. As formerly the spirit of a man, the
Candle of the Lord in man, Prove. 20.27. acted its part under the first
Covenant: so the quickening Spirit of Christ, or rather the Lord Jesus Christ,
that quickening Spirit, 1 Cor. 15.45 and 2 Cor. 3.17. is the Sun of
righteousness arising with healing in his wings, Mal. 4.2. upon them which sat
in darkness, Isa. 60.1, 2. and in the region of the shadow of death, Luke 1.78,
79. and Mat. 4.16. (notwithstanding all their Torch or Candlelight) Christ is
their spiritual Light.

This living light, or Light of life is it, which beams into the souls of the
newborn babes, those little ones, which believe in Christ, giving them the
light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor.
4.6. according to that testimony of the holy Spirit, Psalm 36.9. With thee is
the fountain of life, in thy light, shall we see light, as far surpassing the
Candlelight of man's spirit, as the administration of the law of faith does
that of works: This spiritual light as far excelling the former, as the
administration of the Covenant to which it relates, does excel that which was
in-glorious in comparison thereof, 2 Cor. 3.10.

As man was not at first made for himself, but to serve his Maker, and had for
that purpose the law of his Creator written on his heart, by which to this day
he is accused or excused: So neither is the new man, or renewed man endued with
the principle of life and light, according to the image of him that created
him, for no other purpose, but to exist barely, and to be no other way
serviceable to him, that has quickened and illuminated him.

But there is a law, proper to this state of new life, called by the Apostle,
Romans 8.2. The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, to which law
subjection is to be yielded by all that are born of the Spirit, or from above.
Which law (as the former, viz. of works) is written in the hearts of these,
Heb. 8.10. as that former on the hearts of those, with this difference, viz.
that was written on the heart in Creation, this in regeneration; that in the
first birth, this in the new birth. On which law of the Spirit of life, the
renewed principle of light, which is in the renewed man acts, (as the candle in
the man did or does in the former capacity) reflecting on it, and receiving
conviction, and direction from that; and as far as the new Covenant is above
the old, so far is this law of faith above that law of works, Prove. 6.22, 23.
And this law of faith, Romans 3.27. or law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus,
Romans 8.2. or this better Covenant, Heb. 8.6. does excel, and far surpass the
first Covenant, as being founded upon better promises, than that was, which are
expressed most fully in Jeremy 31.33, 34. and 32.40. Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27. and
applied, Heb. 8.10, 11, 12. Wherein God undertakes by Covenant, and promises,
to pardon iniquity, transgression, and sins, and to remember them no more; also
to cleanse from all pollution, and all filthiness, that is, to take away both
the guilt and filth of sin; to take away the old, and give a new heart; to take
away the heart of stone, and give an heart of flesh, to put his laws in their
inward parts, and write it in their hearts, to put his spirit within them, and
cause them to walk in his statutes, and to keep his judgments, and do them,
God will not turn from them, and they shall not depart from him; these are
better promises than those upon which the first Covenant was established, Heb.
8.6.

For there was equity and justice in that Covenant, whose tenor was, Do, and
live: And cursed be every one, which does not continue in every thing, that is
written in the Law to do it. Who can say, God is unrighteous, in taking
vengeance upon those, who abide not in all things, fulfilling that Covenant,
considering the capacity wherein man stood, when this Covenant was made with
him at first, when God made him upright.

But now a Person being left to wrestle it out, and to toil in the remaining
strength of his own spirit, to fulfill it, how impossible is it for him to
attain to the fulfilling thereof? not so much in respect of the faultiness, or
weakness of the law, or first Covenant, though it pleased the Lord to impute a
faultiness thereunto, Heb. 8.7. And the Apostle says, that it was weak, Romans
8.3. And if there had been a law given, which could have given life, verily
righteousness had been or come by the law, Gal. 3.21. Neither does this lay an
imputation upon the law, which the same Apostle testifies, is holy, just, and
good, Romans 7.12. For surely if there be any such person, which abides in all
things, that are written in the law to do them, such an one shall find the
Lord just in his Covenant, fulfilling to a title, what on his part is promised
therein. The weakness therefore imputed to the law, is not so much in respect
of the law, as in respect of the subjects thereof, who through the weakness of
the flesh cannot fulfill it; according to Romans 8.3. For what the law could not
do in that it was weak through the flesh, etc.

The law is holy, just, and good, but it can do no more then point out the
duty, and discover the transgression, and pronounce sentence against the
transgressor, and this it does not in weakness, but in power, and is therein
quick and powerful, and mighty, etc. There Is no fleshly weakness in the pure
and holy law of God, it would and could convey life, if man could fulfill it to
a title, if not, then it must kill: this is it whereunto it has received its
anointing, and beyond which it must not pass, and therefore the weakness is
man's, and lies properly at his door.

Yet forasmuch as it conveys not strength, where it requires duty; nor is
founded upon any such promises, as may be ground of hope, in case of failing,
or nonperformance of every title, therefore it is found fault with, and
counted weak in that respect: and through the appearance of a greater grace,
way is made for the bringing in a better hope, a better Covenant, stablished
upon better promises, as before.

This new and better Covenant is Jesus Christ, (in whom all the promises
center, as being the Yea; and the Amen thereof, 2 Cor. 1.20.) and so he is
called, Isa. 42.6. and 49.8. I will give thee for a Covenant of the people to
establish the Earth, agreeing with that in Psalm 75.3. The earth and all the
inhabitants thereof are dissolved, I bear up the Pillars thereof.

This Covenant consisting of these better promises, is not yea and nay, but in
him they are yea, 2 Cor. 1.19. ratified and confirmed by blood, yea by his own
blood, in opposition to the blood of Bulls and Goats, by which the first was
confirmed, Heb. 9.18, 19. but this by the eternal Spirit, Heb. 9.14. in order
to eternal salvation, was confirmed by the blood of the everlasting Covenant,
Heb. 13.20. By all which, (as by very much more which might be instanced in)
infinitely transcends the former.

Especially if it be considered, that he, who confirms the Covenant by his own
blood (rendering it thereby eternal and everlasting) becomes also the Mediator
of this Covenant, even of this better Covenant, Heb. 8.6. Not only confirming,
ratifying, making, and well-ordering it in all things, and sure, (as touching
the promises themselves, which are in him Yea and Amen, as he was the Sacrifice
and Propitiation) but by becoming the Mediator thereof, to apply it to all the
seed, Romans 4.16. working in them the conditions, and qualifications, which are
requisite for the enjoying the good things, which are contained therein, 2 Samuel
23.5.

If Repentance be a condition of this Covenant, and required of the subjects
thereof, (as indeed it is) it shall be given them by the hand of this
Mediator, Acts 5.31. Him has God exalted to be a Prince, and a Savior, to
give Repentance to Israel, and remission of sins.

If Faith be required, (as certainly it is) the same hand conveyes it, who is
the Author and the Finisher thereof, Heb. 12.2. Phil. 1.29.

If any other branch of obedience be requisite, it is also undertaken for in
this Covenant, where it is said, I will write my Laws in their hearts: and lest
when they are written there, they should not be heeded nor followed, it is
further undertaken, for that the spirit shall cause the subjects of this
Covenant, not only to remember the things, which are required, but shall cause
them to walk therein, Ezekiel. 36.27. and Jer. 32.40. By leading them, by exciting
them, by quickening, strengthening, confirming, establishing, guiding,
directing, and assisting them, keeping the feet of his Saints, 1 Samuel 2.9. from
stumbling, sliding, and falling, in order to all which, they are taught to pray
daily against being led into temptation, and then are promised also to be
delivered out of it, by him, who himself also was tempted, that he might
succor them, which are tempted.

And to the intent, that they may not be misguided by their own spirit, or any
false spirit (the Lord Jesus foreseeing there would be many false Christ's,
false Apostles, false Prophets, false Spirits,) he committed his mind to
writing, to the intent also, that in other ages, Esaias. 8.19, 20. thence forth
they might try the spirits, the Christ's, the Prophets, the Apostles, (which
pretend to come in his Name) 1 John 4.1. Rev. 2.2. Joh. 20.31. 2 John 10. As
also therein much amplifying and enlarging their direction in point of
obedience, expressing and declaring more particularly that law of the new
Covenant, which is written in their heart more generally, explaining and
expounding his mind and will not only touching the matter, but manner of their
Obedience: hereby ordering and guiding the steps of his Servants, that their
footsteps slide not, Psalm. 119.9, 105. Psalm. 17.4, 5.

This bespeaks the Condition of the New Covenant, and consequently the law of
faith, to be infinitely transcending the old-Covenant or law of works; and by
how much this is more excellent than the former, by so much also must of
necessity the light be by which it is discerned, as that intiles it self to
Jesus, who is the Covenant, and Mediator of the Covenant: so must the light
also be referred to him, who is therefore (so frequently in the Scripture)
called the Light, Esa. 42.6. A Light of the Gentiles, as well as, the Covenant,
of the People. Act. 13.47. I have set thee, to be a Light to the Gentiles, that
thou should be for Salvation unto the ends of the earth.

Christ is this Light, in whose face the glory of God is to be seen according
to that in the 2 Cor. 4.6. God shining into the heart the Light of the
Knowledge of his glory in the face of Jesus Christ, who as Mediator (or one
standing between, 1 Timothy 2.5. For there is one God and one Mediator between God
and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, and Gal. 3.19, 20.) declares and makes forth
that bosome-love of the Father, which was from everlasting, which no man could
ever see by the light of his Candle, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10, 11, 14.

The light of the Father is not to be discerned by any other Medium, but as
revealed by Christ. In thy light shall we see light, Psalm 36.9. 2 Cor. 4.6.
John 1.18. John 14.6, 7, 9. Nor can any person behold the light of the Father
in Christ, but by the Spirit of Christ, John 14.26. and 16.13, 14, 15. and 1
Cor. 2.10. Nor can any person behold the light of the Father through Christ in
the Spirit, otherwise than by faith, Heb. 11.1, 6. John 17.7, 8. John 8.56.
Ephesians. 3.12. Romans 5.2. (so Abraham saw, as Moses also did, him who is invisible,
Heb. 11.27.) The Spirit emptying the creature of all other mediums, and
producing this fruit of its own, that is, faith, Gal. 5.22. by which it can
look on Jesus, and by him on the Father, as they of old from the foot of the
mercy-seat might behold him, who was above the mercy-seat, sitting between the
wings of the cherubims, Exodus 25. from the 17. to the 22. so that the light by
which the regenerate or renewed man, or the man in Christ, comes to see the
wonderful things of this law of faith, or new Covenant, and the mind of God
therein, is Christ Jesus himself, who is both the Covenant, and the light
thereof, who by the Spirit of Wisdom, and Revelation in the knowledge of him,
opens the eyes of the understanding, Ephesians. 1.17. and through the washing of
Regeneration, and renewing of the holy Spirit, Tit. 3.5. abundantly and richly
saves them, making them to become one Spirit with himself, 1 Cor. 6.17. In whom
they in their degree and measure behold with open face as in a glass the Glory
of the Lord, and are changed into the same image from glory to glory, as by the
Spirit of the Lord, or by the Lord the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.17, 18. I say in
measure, according to the proportion he bears in the stature of Christ, Ephesians.
4.13.

Thus the Regenerate man does come to see by the light of the Spirit of the
Lord, (by which he is illuminated) that glory of the Lord shining forth of
darkness through the face of Christ Jesus, which all the candles, nor torches
of man's spirit in the world could never have discovered, nor given him the true
and distinct knowledge of, whatever hints he otherwise might have had, touching
a possibility of Remission and Salvation, probably, and conjecturally, from the
series of Gods Goodness, Patience, and forbearance, or from the general sound
of the Gospel, and the glad tidings held forth therein, (which infinitely
transcends the former) yet this also, whilst it is taken in by the light of a
man's spirit, (though that be the candle of the Lord, as has often been minded)
it cannot amount to a discovery or right and true discerning of the things of
the Spirit of God as contained in and under the new Covenant, or law of faith,
but the Testimony of that Scripture stands as a wall of brass between his
candle and it, which says, The Natural man receives not the things of the
Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned, or judged of, 1 Cor. 2.14.

The reason is; because although the candlelight of man's spirit was suited and
fitly qualified by the Lord to lead him thorough the first Dispensation, that
is, of works: as that which had received its anointing thereunto, and adapted
to the administration that then was, (for he was made upright) yet when that
administration was to cease, and to be done away, 2 Cor. 3.7, 11. and another
to be brought in the place and stead thereof, wherein all things were to become
new, a new creation, and new creatures, 2 Cor. 5.17. governed by a new Covenant
or law, Heb. 8.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13. and Heb. 10.24. It was necessary that the
subjects hereof should be endued with new principles, and particularly with a
new heart, and a new spirit, also with another eye and light, than which did
accompany the former administration: for in that former there was light enough
in man's own spirit to see to work by, as a man may do in the night by a candle;
but in this there must be to walk by, broad daylight, Sun-light, that they
which are made light in the Lord, may walk in the light of the Lord, Ephesians.
5.8. Isa. 2.5. and that those which are born of the spirit, and made alive
thereby, may also walk in the spirit, by which they were quickened and made to
live, Gal. 5.16, 18, 25.

For which purpose the Covenant now spoken of undertakes not only to
new creature the man in Christ, 2 Cor. 5.17. giving him a new heart, and a new
spirit, that is, renewing him in the spirit of his mind, Ephesians. 4.23. but also
God superadds of his abundant grace in the same Covenant, his own Spirit, which
shall cause the renewed spirit to be improved aright, which may appear, as to
the praise and glory of God that gives it, so to the infinite and unutterable
consolation of the sons and daughters of God, to whom it is given, (as appears
in those precious promises and breasts of consolations) whereby the new
Covenant is unbosomed particularly, Ezekiel 36. 26, 27. where besides that the
new heart and the new spirit are promised in the twenty six verse, its added,
And I will put my spirit within you.

Q. But what to do?

A. It shall cause you to walk in my ways; it shall be both light to show you
how to walk, and life to enable you, it shall cause you to walk, etc.

Neither of which could be effected by the candlelight, so often mentioned
before; therefore was it of absolute necessity in this case, that as there was
to be another Law, or Covenant, diverse from the former, called a new Covenant
in comparison of the old: So there must of necessity be another light to
accompany it, diverse from the former, that is, as then man's spirit, so now the
Spirit of the Lord, not only to enlighten, but to enliven, as to direct and
guide, so likewise to enable to perform, that is, to work in us to will and to
do of his own good pleasure, Phil. 2.23.

Object. Although it may not be denied, but that the Covenant, and terms
thereof are much different from what they were under the Legal administration,
and that the Mediator of the new Covenant does far excel him, that executed
that Ministry under the old, and that the light and glory of the latter does
far surpass that of the former: Yet this does not put out the Candle of the
Lord in any man, nor render it unnecessary, or useless, but rather improves it
by clearing up its object from the obscurity that it lay under, by reason of
the veils and shadows, which are now done away in Christ, whereby the Candle of
the Lord burns much brighter, and is enabled to all intents and purposes to
make discovery of whatsoever is revealed in the Gospel, whatsoever is pretended
unto as a means of discovery other than this, viz. the spirit of a man, that
is, the reason and understanding of a man, is unnecessary, uncertain, and
dangerous.

Answ. Though this Objection has a great appearance of seeming strength, and
bids defiance to all that has been spoken hitherto, touching the light of the
Spirit of God in the new creature, calling it unnecessary, uncertain, and
dangerous: Yet a few smooth stones taken out of the Brook of the holy Scripture
directed by the Lord of the Battle, though slung out by a weak, despised, and
contemptible, Instrument, may stagger and disarm this Objection, how
disdainfully and Goliah-like soever it utters its self; threatening to give the
flesh of all that has been said touching this matter, to the fowls of the air,
and beasts of the field.

It has been often said touching the Candle of the Lord in man, that it is a
great and a goodly Light: and to what has been spoken, this may further be
added, that it may be said of it, as was said of that Champion, 1 Samuel 17.4,
etc. It has an helmet of brass on its head, and is armed with a coat of male,
weighing five thousand shekels of brass, besides its staff, its spear, and
shield. Incomparable in all these, and can speak words like it self, so saying,
it can comprehend all mysteries, especially now having the addition of
Gospel-discovery, yet notwithstanding all this may be said of it, and possible
much more.

Yet the testimony of God speaks on this wise, That touching him there is no
searching of his understanding, Isa. 40.28. That his understanding is infinite,
Psalm 147.

Object. Though a man cannot by searching find out God unto perfection; yet he
may attain to a competent proportion of the knowledge of him, especially in
Gospel-discoveries.

Answ. 1. Vain or empty man would be wise, though man be born a wild asses
colt, Job 11.7. What is more incongruous and inconsistent, than for a natural
Organ to comprehend a supernatural Object. The spirit of man may know the
things of a man, but the things of God knows no man but the Spirit of God, 1
Cor. 2.11. The reason is, because the things of a man are connatural to the
spirit of a man, and are objects adequated to his Organ, but the things of God
are not so, Ergo.

Object. This Scripture speaks only of the deep things of God, that the Spirit
searches them, verse 9, 10. Such as eye never saw, nor ear heard, nor ever
entered into the heart of man, etc.

Answ. Nay; for though the Apostle does cite a passage out of the Prophet Esaias,
where those words are used, Esaias 64.4. Yet he does not limit the search of the
Spirit unto those things only, forasmuch as it is added, The Spirit searches
all things, yea the deep things of God, not only other things, but those also,
that is, the deep things of God, which may relate to the seventh verse, the
wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom, which God ordained before
the world unto our glory, which none of the Princes of this world knew, etc.
the hidden mystery, the wisdom of God, which none but the Spirit of God could
search out, according to this Scripture. It was beyond the reach of the spirit
of man, yet this hidden wisdom of God, does the Spirit of God search out.

Answ. 2, The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for
they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. Hence its evident, that there is an
impotency, and defect in the reason and understanding of the natural man: he
cannot receive them, because he cannot discern them, (neither can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned) both his eye and his hand are (as it
were) Planet-struck, his understanding and his will are both defective.

Object. This is still spoken of the deep things of God, (as before) which eye
has not seen, etc. and consequently are not discernable.

Answ. Not so, for it is evident, they are discernable by others, though not by
the natural man, as appears, verse 10, 12, 15. they are spiritually to be
discerned, or judged of.

2. They are so far discernable by the natural man, as that they are rejected
by him, therefore they are things to be seen, yea even by him, while he is
such, only his eye is not adapted to the object; he looks upon the things of
the Spirit of God, without the eye of faith enlightened by the Spirit, as its
medium, by which these things are only dscernable; and hence his wrong
judgment does proceed, that is, he counts them foolishness, ver. 14. for they
are foolishness to him, that is, to the natural man. They are not so secret and
unseen, but that he can see so much of them, as to pass sentence upon them, and
count them foolishness.

Object. This is true of the natural man, that is, the carnal or sinful man,
whose eyes are closed up by infidelity, according to that of Mat. 13.15. This
Peoples heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their
eyes they have closed, etc. But to such as improve the light of their
understanding and reason, it is not so; as Solomon witnesses, Prove. 14.6. A
scorner seeks wisdom, and finds it not: but knowledge is ease to him that
understands.

Answ. It is not to be denied, but that God in justice may, and often does give
such up to blindness of mind, and hardness of heart, who close their own eyes,
and refuse to entertain the light, and make scorn of it, Prove. 1.24, 33. Yet
that this should be the proper signification of that word, that is, the natural
man, is not so evident; nay, the contrary appears.

Forasmuch if this place, viz. 1 Cor. 2.14. be compared with another of the
same Apostle, viz. 1 Cor. 15.44, 45, 46. where the same phrase is used, it will
appear that (...), that is, the natural man, is not to be taken for the carnal
or sinful man, (in the sense intended in the objection) but for a man (in puris
naturalibus) merely natural; for of him as such an one does the Apostle speak
in the Scripture last mentioned. Where the first man Adam is spoken of as of a
natural man, yea as being made such, and in his Creation, he was not made a
sinful man, though he was then made a natural man.

Object. Nor does it avail ought to say, this place speaks of his Body, where
it is said, It is sown a natural body, and there is a natural body, etc. A. If
that which follows be considered, v. 45. As it is written, the first man Adam
was made a living soul, the last Adam was made a quickening (or live-making)
spirit. Whence it appears evidently, that not the natural body (taking the Body
per se, or divisim) is there intended, but the natural man: else how could that
be which is there said, (so it is written, the first man Adam, etc.) I say, how
could this be a pertinent quotation and proof to the former, if it were not the
same in sense with the former? And how could it be of force by way of
Antithesis, or Opposition to the second Adam? If it took not in the whole first
man, and that as he was at first, that is, at his being made so, that is,
without sin; for so was he made, Eccles. 7.29. upright, without crookedness,
without inventions, they came in afterward. Whence it follows, that the
Pseuchical man, that is, the natural man, yea in his purest naturals, (as only
such, and while he is only so) cannot receive, nor discern the things of the
Spirit of God, until he is Pneumatized, or made a Pneumatical man, that is,
born of the Spirit, or from above, according to the tenor of those Scriptures,
John 1.13. and 3.3, 6. and 1 Cor. 2.14.

Object. But the Apostles James and Jude, do render this word (...), sensual,
not natural; whence it may be concluded, that by the natural man is not to be
understood man as impotent, and under an incapacity, or defect, and privately
so, but rather positively making himself so, and therefore rendered here,
earthly, sensual, and devilish, James 3.15. and Jude 19. sensual, having not
the spirit.

Answ. This does not in the least invalidate that which has been spoken,
touching the Pseuchical or natural man; forasmuch as the Scripture Phrase is
not another, but the same in all four places, that is, 1 Cor. 2.14. 1 Cor.
15.44, 46. James 3.15. and Jude 19. only the Translators have varyed the
English word in the two latter: That which in the former is rendered natural, is
in the two latter translated sensual, for reason best known to themselves;
(hinted at by a Learned man, in his Exposition on the Epistle of James) but
both are the same in the Original, and both are opposed to that which is
spiritual, as in the last of the places aforementioned, that is, Jude 19.
appears, sensual not having the spirit. So that all being put together, they
make up but one and the same thing, viz. The sensual man. Let him be the
Positive Pseuchik, he that does not embrace the Wisdom from above, James 3.15.
but brings in another wisdom, which is from beneath, or those mockers of the
last time, Jude 18, 19. both these being (...), sensuals, not having the
Spirit, that is, opposing the Spirit: Or, those privative Pseuchik's mentioned,
1 Cor. 2.14. which perceive not, or receive not the things of the Spirit of
God, but count them foolishness, nor can know them, because they are
spiritually discerned: Both these kinds of persons, (if there be any diversity
of kind among them) and all those testimonies of Scripture put together,
center in this truth; That man, that is, mere man, furnished with all that the
first man (after his transgression) was capable of, with all his light of
knowledge and reason heightened and improved to the uttermost in that capacity;
He is not able to discern the things of the Spirit of God, till he be born
again, and receive another eye, wherewith to see, that is, faith, and another
light, that is, the Spirit, by which to discern the spiritual-things of God, or
the things of the Spirit of God; So true is that testimony, Surely man at his
best estate is altogether vanity, Psalm. 39.5. not only in respect of outward
things, but even in his wisdom, his very thoughts are vanity, Psalm 44.11. yea
the wisest of them are so, 1 Cor. 3.20. The Lord knows the thoughts of the
wise, that they are vain: therefore let no man glory in man; but as it is
written, Jer. 9.23. 1 Cor. 1.27, 28, 29, 30.31. He that gloryeth let him glory
in the Lord, and be content to be a fool, that he may be wise, 1 Cor. 3.18. For
it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and bring to nothing the
understanding of the prudent, 1 Cor. 1.19. and that God effects, by bringing
in that which the wise ones of the world count foolishness, viz. Christ
crucified, who though he be to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Gentiles
foolishness, yet to them that are called, both of the one, and of the other,
that is, both Jew, and Greek, he is the power of God, and the wisdom of God, 1
Cor. 1.18, 31. because the foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the
weakness of God is stronger than men. And the way of Gods communication hereof
to his called ones, is no less wonderful in it self, though as foolish to the
wisdom of them, which would be wise according to the flesh; whose glorying God
himself cuts off, 1 Cor. 1.29. and adds; But of him are ye (that is, called
ones) in Christ Jesus, who of God is made to us (not in us) Wisdom, and
Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption; that according as it is
written, He that gloryeth, let him glory in the Lord: How foolish a thing
soever this seems to be in its application, yet this is true in him, and
founded upon him as the Covenant, and is one of the deep things of the Spirit
of God, which no natural man can receive, till washing of Regeneration, and the
renewing of the holy Spirit, flowing forth out of this blessed Fountain of
mercy and grace, (as in opposition to works of Righteousness) which is the
womb of salvation to the saved ones, Tit. 3.4, 5, 6, 7.

Obj. This is (notwithstanding all that has been said) a most uncertain means
of discovery, as is clearly to be evinced by all the pretenders thereto, who,
though they be very many, and diverse, yet they all discover the great
uncertainty hereof, by sad and woeful experience: Instances whereof may be
given in great abundance.

Answ. Though this be too true in some, yea in very many, yet it does not make
the Faith of God of none effect, as if the things were not, because so many are
mistaken about it. For the Scriptures give plentiful testimony to the thing,
and many have experienced the same, viz. That as the Father had his peculiar
time of operation by way of eminency, (though by the Word and Spirit) as is
testified, John 5.17. The Father works hitherto, etc. So the Son had his
peculiar time of working, to bring life and immortality to light, 2 Timothy 1.9,
10. Reconciling the world to God, (though God was in Christ effecting this
work) 2 Cor. 5.19. (and through the eternal Spirit the atonement was made, Heb.
9.14.) So likewise to the Spirit there is assigned a time of operation, to
apply whatsoever has been spoken or done by the Father, and Christ, in order
to the atoning and reconciling, to the perfecting and completing the eternal
Inheritance, preparing, or making meet the heirs of salvation for it, and it
for them, in all things necessary thereunto, according to the tenor of the new
Covenant, Ezekiel. 36.27. and the Mediation and ministration thereof; opening the
dark eye of the understanding, Ephesians. 1.18. to see the wonderful things which
were hid from ages and generations with Christ in God, Ephesians. 3.9, 11. and now by
him manifested and revealed, 2 Timothy 1.9, 10. enclining the will to receive
them, Phil. 2.13. removing away whatsoever sets and hinders, and making the
subject and object meet in the center, and become a perfect vision; and this
not with uncertainty, but with greatest assurance and certainty, as does
evidently and eminently appear to such as to whom it was a seal, Ephesians. 4.30. an
earnest also, Ephesians. 1.13, 14. and the first fruits, Romans 8.23. and likewise a
witness, Romans 8.16. 1 John 4.13. and 1 Cor. 2.12. All which are terms of
indubitableness, therefore there is such a thing, such an administration to be
witnessed unto in some, whatever mistakes may otherwise be about it in the
misapplication thereof by many.

Obj. Though this were the dispensation in the times of the Apostles, and of
the primitive Saints and Churches, that they were endued with the Spirit, and
born witness unto thereby, and sealed therewith, and that it was to them an
earnest and first fruits, and so was in them an evidence and certainty. Yet it
is not safe to conclude from thence, that because they once had it, therefore
persons now have it; except they which do now pretend to it, can make it
evident, and give demonstration thereof, as the Apostles and primitive
Christians could (as is to be demonstrated by many instances in the Scripture)
by signs and wonders, and mighty deeds.

Answ. The Dispensation of the Spirit may be considered in a twofold respect,
viz.

In relation to its Inward Operation, or Outward Manifestation.
Sometimes it is expressed under the similitude of wind or air (invisible and
unseen) and so it is in the work of Regeneration and Renovation, John 3.3. Tit.
3.5. And this was personally effected, and personally evidenced, Romans 8.16.
Rev. 2.17. Sometimes under the similitude of Cloven tongues and fire, and
visible demonstrations, ratifying and confirming the word of Faith, according
to Mar. 16.20. By tongues, prophecies, miracles; or by signs, wonders, and
mighty deeds, and these were Apostolical, 2 Cor. 12.12. God bearing witness to
the ministration of those first Messengers with signs, and wonders, and diverse
miracles, and gifts of the Holy Spirit, according to his own will, Heb. 2.4.
thereby confirming their word, Mar. 16.20. convincing the opposers, and
stopping the mouths of the gainsayers, Act. 4.16.

This variety of the Spirits operation, as thus distinguished into the Internal
and External dispensation thereof, as it may be clearly evidenced from the
Scriptures, so may it be of great use to strengthen the weak hands, and confirm
the feeble knees of such as are made weak, and turned out of the way upon the
account of this objection, or the like.

The Scriptures do witness, that many have been born of the Spirit, i. e. have
been true believers, have had their eyes and hearts opened, and have been
turned to the Lord; and yet many of these, though they bear witness of the
internal and invisible operation of the Spirit, as being born from above, Joh.
3.3. yet have been destitute of the demonstration of the Spirit, in respect of
its outward and visible manifestation in Signs and Miracles, etc.

Those twelve Disciples at Ephesus, mentioned Act. 19. were Believers, and were
so called, verse. 2. where the Apostle propounds this Question, Have ye received
the holy Spirit since ye believed? Whereby it is evident that he spoke of the
outward manifestation of the Spirit, which they had not so much as heard of,
and which they afterward did receive, verse. 6. when upon the laying on of his
hands they received the holy Spirit, and spoke with tongues, and prophesied;
whence it appears evidently that they were Believers, i. e. were born of the
Spirit; for faith is a fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. whereof Christ ( i. e.
the Spirit) is both the Author and Finisher, Heb. 12.2. not only in himself,
as the object; but in the Believer, as the subject, giving them to believe on
him, Phil. 1.29.

And if the faith of these twelve Disciples be questioned, what kind of faith
it was, it will be resolved by the Apostle in his Letter of Confirmation
directed to them, Ephesians. 1.13. where he says, In whom ye also trusted, after
ye heard the word of truth, the Gospel of your salvation; in whom also after
that ye believed you were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise. Whence it
appears plainly that those Ephesians, Act. 19. were real and true Believers,
and did partake of the inward operation of the holy Spirit, viz. faith, though
they had not as yet heard of the outward manifestation thereof in visible gifts.

A like instance there is of those Grecians of Antioch, who upon the
Evangelizing of the scattered Disciples, a great number believing turned to the
Lord, Act. 11.21. who yet had no visible demonstration of the Spirit, but an
invisible operation only: So it was with them of Samaria, who believed upon
the Evangelizing of Philip, while as yet they were destitute of the visible
manifestation of the Spirit, Act. 8.12. compared with verse. 15, 16.

At Iconium multitudes both of Jews and Greeks believed, Act. 14.1. at the
speaking and preaching of Paul and Barnabas. At Berea also, upon the hearing of
Paul and Silas, together with searching the Scriptures daily, many believed,
Act. 17.10, 11, 12. At Corinth likewise upon Paul's preaching many of the
Corinthians hearing, believed, etc. At Philippi the Lord opened the heart of
Lydia, attending to the things spoken by Paul, Act. 16.14.

These with many more examples there are, testifying to, and bearing witness of
this truth, that many persons have believed, been converted, and turned to the
Lord, ( i. e. have been born of God, Joh. 1.12, 13. 1 John 5.1. regenerated, or
born again, or from above, or of the Spirit, Joh. 3.3, 5, 6, 8.) who
nevertheless have evidenced no other power or presence of the holy Spirit, than
what was invisible in and upon their own hearts, but gave no outward visible
manifestation thereof by Signs and Miracles, at least not until afterward.

Whence it follows, that notwithstanding the dispensations in the times of the
Apostles, and primitive Saints and Churches, were very eminent for visible and
outward manifestations of the Spirit, in wonders, signs, and miracles, with
gifts of tongues and prophecies; yet this was not universal in operation, for
many were turned to the Lord, Act. 11.21. and unto them it was given to
believe, Phil. 1.29. and taken into a state of sonship, Joh. 1.12, 13. were
also regenerated and born from above, or of the Spirit, Joh. 3.3, 8. Some of
them not knowing, Act. 19.2. Others of them not yet receiving or witnessing any
outward appearance or manifestation of the Spirit, but only that inward
operation of the Spirit opening and enclining their hearts to embrace the word
of faith, and to receive the Lord Jesus as tendered therein, according to Romans
10.8, 9, 10, 11. And as some who had the inward operation, had not the outward
manifestation; so some to whom the outward or visible power of the Spirit was
communicated, were not entrusted with the inward and sanctifying operations
thereof, as appears, Mat. 7.22, 23. where it is witnessed that Christ shall say
to the workers of miracles, Depart, etc. I know you not; and to Judas Iscariot
was given power (among the rest) to cast out devils, and work miracles, Matthew.
10.4, 8. to show the Spirit is not limited; but, as the wind blowing where it
lists, distributing to several persons severally, even as he pleases, 1 Cor.
12.11. in diversity of gifts, administrations and operations: For as to one is
given by the Spirit the word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge by
the same Spirit, to another the gifts of healing, to another working of
miracles, etc. So it is said, to another faith, by the same Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.9.

Which operation of the Spirit is diverse, from the former gifts enumerated
both before it, and after it: for although there is required to the working of
Miracles a faith suitable thereunto, as appears by our Saviors testimony,
Matt. 17.20. Luke 17.6. Matt. 21.21. and by the Apostles, 1 Cor. 14.2. Yet this
Faith is a distinct gift diverse from that whose manifestation was external in
healing, miracles, and tongues, etc. and the one might then be where the other
was not, as has been proved already.

In like manner also such is the Dispensation of the holy Spirit at this day,
as the wind blows where it lists, forming the new birth, which is after and
according to God by faith in Christ Jesus, becoming a Spirit of regeneration
and illumination, Ephesians. 1.17, 18. and Tit. 3.5. opening the blind eyes, not only
to see Christ as he is held forth in the word, but to be believed on, accepted,
and received as the Author of eternal salvation to them that obey him, Heb.
5.9. but also by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Spirit,
purging the conscience from dead works, Heb. 9.14. giving boldness and access
to the throne of grace, through the faith of him, who is thus become a
quickening spirit and principle of life, a new and living way to all that
receive him, and manifest that faith by obedience true and unfeigned, Heb.
10.19, 20, 21, 22.

This may be thus evidenced by divine testimony, viz.

1. That as the wind blows where it lists, so is the birth of the Spirit in
those which are regenerate, is proved, John 3.3, 6, 8.

2. That they which believe in the Lord Jesus are thus dignified and privileged
with the estate of sonship, as being born of God, and from above, is witnessed,
Joh. 1.12, 13. and Gal. 3.26.

3. That this is effected by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the
holy Spirit, that being justified by his grace, we might be made heirs
according to the hope of eternal life, is likewise born witness unto by the
Apostle, Titus 3.4, 5, 6, 7.

4. That this was not the work of the spirit in any one particular age only,
viz. in the Apostles days, or primitive times (as they are called and
distinguished by some) but as it is said of Christ he is the same yesterday, to
day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8. so is it said, He is the Author and finisher of
faith, not only of theirs, Heb. 12.2. (though the word Ours being inserted in
the English reading may seem to carry it that way) but he was the Author and
finisher of theirs also, who are catalogued, and Chronicled in the 11. of Heb.
who began as low, as Abel, and so upwards, and not of theirs only, who thus
believed, receiving the word of promise, or rather Christ in the promise, from
the first giving forth thereof in Genesis 3.15. mixing the Gospel with faith, Heb.
4.2. nor of those who (in the times of more clear manifestation thereof) did
know and believe, Joh. 17.6, 7, 8.

But of their faith also, who from thence forth should believe on Christ
through their word, Joh. 17.20. and therefore in the place mentioned, Heb.
12.2. Christ is not said to be the Author, and finisher, (that is, the beginner
and ender) of our faith, nor of your faith, nor of their faith, but of faith,
in relation to all times and persons according to the tenor and testimony of
that word of truth, Act. 13.38, 39. By him all that believe are justified from
all things, etc. (not only the Jew, but the Gentile also) even all that are a
far off, as many as the Lord our God shall call, hence the Apostles testify,
that they had received the same spirit of faith, with those who had gone
before, 2 Cor. 4.13.

And as the faith of all true believers from Righteous Abel thoroughout the
whole cloud of witnesses, and thence forward, owns it self to Christ, as the
Author and the Finisher thereof; as was said before.

So likewise it is as necessarily applied to the spirit, whose gift it is, and
by whom it is wrought, 1 Cor. 12.11. among which operations of the spirit Faith
is one, reckoned among, yet diverse from that of miracles.

And it is called the fruit of the spirit among many other inward
qualifications of the renewed and regenerate Man, Gal. 5.22.

5. To this agree those other testimonies of the holy Scripture, wherein the
holy spirit is promised not for this or that particular age, much less this or
that particular person or persons only, but to all the seed, not reckoned
according to the flesh, but according to the faith of believing Abraham, Romans
9.8. and 2.28, 29. Gal. 3.7, 8, 9, 14. Gal. 4.27, 28.

But to speak more particularly.

The Scriptures bear witness to Christ Jesus, that he is the true seed
promised, in whom all the Nations of the earth should be blessed, according to
that, so often mentioned place, Genesis 3.15. as also, Genesis 22.28. expounded by
the Apostle (in Gal. 3.8.) of Christ himself, as the seed promised, a Covenant
to the people: So is he also the seed to whom the promise is made, as appears
by the same Testimony, Gal. 3.16. Not to seeds as of many, but as of one, and
to thy seed, which is Christ, who was the seed, which was to come, to whom the
promise was made, verse. 19. thus is Christ originally both Root and Offspring.

It is with Christ that the Covenant is made originally, Isa. 53.10, 11. and in
him with those that are his: to whom he is given for a Covenant, as appears,
Esaias 42.1, 6, 7. Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine Elect in whom my soul
delights, I have put my spirit upon him, and he shall bring forth judgment to
the Gentiles. I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thy
hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a Covenant to the peoples, for a
light of the Gentiles to open the blind eyes, etc.

In this Covenant it is promised, that he should have the spirit put upon him,
Isa. 42.1. which also was fulfilled in Luke 4.18. And as the spirit was by
Covenant to be put upon him, so was it also to be put upon them, which were
his, as does appear in the fifty ninth of Esaias 21. As for me, this is my
Covenant with them, says Jehovah, my spirit, which is upon thee, and my words,
which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of
the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says Jehovah,
from hence forth and for ever.

Where it is Evident, that the gift of the spirit is a Covenant-promise, as to
Christ in whom all the promises are Yea and Amen, so to them which are Christ's,
to him and to his seed, and seeds seed, according to Joh. 17.20. Not only they,
which did believe, but those, who through their word should believe, were the
subjects of Christ's prayer in the Application, and Mediation of the Covenant.

This is promised also in Ezekiel. 36.27. And I will put my spirit within you, and
cause you to walk in my Statutes, etc. which promise is not limited to Israel,
or to Abraham's seed according to the letter or Circumcision, but to Abraham's
seed according to faith. If ye be Christ's, then are you Abraham's seed, and
heirs according to promise, Gal. 3.8, 9, 29. and as is before proved.

The same is likewise confirmed, Joh. 14.16. And I will pray the Father, and he
shall give you another Comforter, even the spirit of Truth, (but lest it should
be said; as in the Objection, this promise was made to that Age of the Apostles
only; it is added) that he may abide with you for ever?

Obj. But were the Apostles at that time without that spirit altogether?

Answ. It is answered in the 17. verse, But ye know him, for he dwells with
you, and shall be in you: the spirit shall be the same, but the measures
enlarged; the same spirit of faith, but not the same measure.

Object. What shall the spirit do, when it is given in that larger measure.

Answ. It is resolved partly in the 26. verse, He shall teach you all things,
and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you. And
partly Joh. 16.13. He will guide you into all truth, and he will show you all
things to come.

Obj. This is that dispensation of the spirit, which is mentioned in Joh. 7.38,
39. and for which the Apostles were commanded to wait at Jerusalem, Luke
24.49. and which the Apostles did receive, Act. 2.4. according to the prophecy,
Joel 2.28.

A. It is not to be denied (as before) that one branch of the dispensation of
the spirit is to open it self in such discoveries as those; but the whole
thereof, and the all of that dispensation is not limited or confined to the
external and outward, and miraculous manifestation thereof only as in the
Apostles days; At which time not to every person individually was it so
communicated (as has been proved before) unto which you are referred, and
they, which did receive the dispensation of the spirit at large both in its
inward operation, and outward manifestation, yet did receive but the first
fruits thereof, Romans 8.23.

From the whole of what has been spoken in answer to this main objection, this
briefly is the sum;

1. That notwithstanding the dispensation of the spirit (in the times called
primitive, viz. in the days of the Apostles and primitive Christians) was with
great evidence, and outward manifestation, accompanied with signs, and wonders,
and mighty deeds, yet it was so but in some persons, not in all believers, as
by the instances before cited may appear, for there were some believers, that
did not know of such a thing, as the spirit, Act. 19.2.

2. That as some Believers were ignorant of outward manifestation thereof: so
there were others, who having the outward were destitute of the inward. Mat.
7.22, 23. and 10.4, 8.

3. The gift of the spirit is a Covenant gift, first promised to Christ, and in
him to them that are his, that is, Christ's, to him and to his seed throughout
their generations (seeds seed.) Isa. 59.21.

4. It was promised by Christ to his Apostles to be in them for ever, Joh.
14.16, 17. not so to remain in their individual persons for ever, but in their
successors, and not in them only, as such, that is, Apostles, but also in all
such as should thenceforth believe thorough their word, Joh. 17.20.

5. It was prophesied to be poured upon all flesh, Joel. 2.28. and applied to
all that were a far off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call, Act.
2.39.

6. The Apostle declares of himself, and the believing Romans, who although
they had received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby they cried Abba Father, and
he (at least) had also received the outward visible manifestation of the
Spirit, yet says of himself, and them; They had received the first fruits of
the spirit, intimating that there was yet a further manifestation thereof
reserved to them, which were to come after, according to the tenor of that
Scripture, Heb. 11.40. That they without us might not be made perfect. Hence
therefore it may be argued; that though it has pleased the Lord for the misuse
or abuse of his holy spirit, or for other most holy ends known unto himself, to
withdraw from the children of men for a season the manifestation thereof in
that which is outward in gifts of tongues, prophecies and healings, etc.
Suffering Arts (so called by Man) to prevail instead thereof: till the faith of
his people prevail through cries and tears to bring back the Anointed and with
him the Anointing.

For the prophesy of Joel is as yet but in part fulfilled, and the direction of
our Lord remains firm to this day, Luke 11. from the 5. verse to the 14.
touching the incessant importunate prayer for the holy spirit, concluding thus,
verse. 14. If ye then which are evil know how to give good things to your
children, how much more shall the Heavenly Father give the holy spirit to them,
which ask him. And surely were but the Lords people awakened to consider the
necessity of the return of that spirit, which has been for so long a time
withdrawn, and to be importunate with the Lord, and give him no rest, but with
all humble and holy boldness continue in prayer, and not faint, according to
that in Luke 18.1. who knows how soon the most high might turn the Captivity
of his people as the Rivers of the South, as to this particular, and meet his
mourning, praying Servants, where David met the men of Judah, (who came to
conduct him over Jordan) even at Gilgal, viz. the place of the rolling away of
reproach, Ioshuah 5.9. and make it a time (as that was a place) of rolling away
of reproach from his people forever.

Nevertheless though in respect of its visible manifestation, there be a great
hiding and withdrawing, yet according as was promised, Joh. 14.18. Our Lord
has not left his children Comfortless, nor Orphans. But has left them a
Comforter, as promised: Continuing to them the invisible Operations of his holy
spirit, enabling them thereby to cry Abba Father, who in that respect is called
the spirit of Adoption, Romans 8.15. and Gal. 4.6. Because ye are Sons God has
sent forth the spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying Abba Father: becoming
in them a sanctifying spirit, 1 Cor. 6.11. a spirit of sanctification, 2 These.
2.13. 1 Pet. 1.2. witnessing to their spirits their estate of Sonship, Romans
8.16. Causing them to Read that new-Name written on the white stone, which no
Man knows but he which has it. So that all though they cannot assure another
by infallible evidence, so as to leave them without doubt touching their
estate: yet to themselves the spirit of God, by which they are regenerated,
does evidence its own operation, according to that testimony, 1 John 5.10. He
that believes has the witness in himself: and by filling them with fruits of
righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the praise and glory of God;
leading them in paths of righteousness, keeping their feet that they stumble
not upon the dark mountains, sanctifying them throughout, as well in body as in
soul, and spirit, enabling them to mortify the deeds of the flesh, and to
cleanse themselves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit: mourning, longing,
pressing after this, and resisting and opposing, judging and condemning,
whatsoever is contrary thereunto.

This is a measure of evidence even to the stander by, (at least so far as is
necessary) and will amount to the fulfilling of that rule, viz. Let your light
so shine before men, that they seeing your good works, may glorify your
father, which is in Heaven. And this may be, and in many persons is witnessed;
though other external discoveries by Miracles be not produced.

Having in the foregoing part of this discourse treated of that light which the
most high, and holy God, the eternal fountain and Father of lights has formed
in every man, (viz.) the spirit of a man, Zech. 12.1. Or candle of the Lord,
Prove. 20.27. And therein holding forth, in some small measure, that which is
witnessed in the holy Scriptures of truth, touching the nature and property
thereof, under these two general heads, viz. 1. What it is, 2. What it does in
every man.

The impartial and serious consideration whereof afford's matter of conviction
to the opposite principle, and might be of use to such a purpose, though there
were not a word further added thereabout.

Nevertheless, in order to the satisfaction of some that are tender, who may
not be free to trace the discourse throughout, or may not so clearly discern
the scope thereof by what has hitherto been spoken, I shall endeavor to treat
them (I mean the people that pass under the name of Quakers) upon their own
ground, discoursing with them upon such principles as are laid down in the
Papers and Books of the men of their confederacy, persons of no small esteem
among them, certain hints whereof have been given at the beginning, and others
may occasionally be added.

In prosecution whereof, and to the intent it may be performed with the more
clearness to the meanest capacity, I shall proceed in the Method above mentioned
enquiring what is by them held forth touching the nature of the light wherewith
every man and woman that comes into the world is enlightened (viz.) 1. What it
is, 2. What it does in ever man, and I shall also examine the Testimony by them
produced for proof thereof.

Touching the former of these two particulars ( viz. what that light is) it is
affirmed;

That the little light which shines in the dark heart is,

1. The powerful word of faith, which was in the beginning, by which all things
were created.

2. That it is the word of Faith the Apostle exhorted to take heed unto, Romans
10.6, 7, 8.

3. That it is the unction of the holy one given of the Father, whereby we need
not to teach one another, but as the anointing teaches us.

4. That it is the sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well to take heed, 2
Pet. 1.19. [ Dewsborr, Man's return, Page 27, 28.]

Christ has enlightened every one that comes into the World. [Fox way to the
Kingdom Page 1.]

Waiting in the light which Christ has enlightened you withal,

5. That Is Scripture within you, page 8.]

These five Heads or Propositions thus laid down, relate to the first Article,
and are to be considered how far they hold proportion with the writings of
Truth, and are born witness unto thereby; to the umpirage whereof, I find, the
Authors of these assertions do refer themselves.

The Scriptures we own, etc. (Howgills fiery darts, Page 19.)

We direct to search the Scripture, whether our doctrine be not true. (Page 22.)

I challenge all the City of London to prove, that we speak or declare any
thing, but what the Scriptures bear witness to the same. [Page 28.]

Let him that can try us by the Scripture.

Here therefore we join issue, and answerable to the evidence, which the Lord
shall give by his Spirit in the holy Scriptures, so let it be. According to the
tenor of that divine Testimony, Esai. 8.20. To the Law, and to the Testimony;
if they speak not according to this word, it is because they have no (morning)
light in them.

First, To the first of those five Prepositions, I Reply.

1. Reply. 1. That although it be said, that the little light which shines in
the dark heart is the powerful word of faith, which was in the beginning by
which all things were created.

Yet this is but said without any Scripture produced giving witness thereto;
and therefore may not be admitted to the credit of a divine Truth, having no
other evidence than an humane Testimony; briefly, It is not proved, therefore
not believed.

1. Obj. Did not God create all things by the word of his power, or powerful
word?

Answ. I read in the holy Scriptures of truth that God created the Heavens and
the Earth, and all the hosts of them, Genesis 1.1. and 2.1. and that he did this
by his word, Psalm. 118.5. He commanded and they were created; but I no where
read, that they were created by the powerful word of faith, as is affirmed in
the proposition beforenamed.

2. Object. Is not Christ the word and did not he create all things?

Answ. 1. Christ is called the word of God, Rev. 19.13. but not the word of
faith.

2. Christ is called the word God, Joh. 1.1. by whom all things were made,
verse. 3. and without whom was nothing made that was made (i. e.) created, Col.
1.16.

But he is not called the powerful word of faith, much less may it be said,
that the little light, which shines in the dark heart, is the powerful word of
faith; or it, by which all things were made or created; nor may be so called by
warrant from the Scripture without some clearer proof.

3. Object. Is not Christ the light, which lightneth every one that comes into
the world? Joh. 1.9. And is it not he by whom al things were created and made?
A measure of whose light shines in the dark heart of every one.

A. Besides that there is a departing from the Terms in the Proposition; (as
may by the impartial and unprejudiced Reader be observed) For if the little
light which shines in the dark heart be that by which God created all things, and
that that light is the word of God, or the word God, Joh. 1.1.3. or Christ the
light, as is intimated in the Object. and 'twas by him and not without him that
al things were made.

Then this Objection should be thus put (in plainness and truth) Is not Christ
the light in every man that comes into the world? etc.

And to this agree those so often quoted sentences of Scripture, Christ in you
the hope of Glory, Know you not that Christ is in you, The Kingdom of Heaven
is within you. Which Scriptures are applied (by those Objectors) to every man
by a distinction and a meaning (viz) the light of Christ, and a measure of
Christ, and the little light which shines in the dark heart, and sundry other
meanings of this kind,

I shall endeavor to make it appear, that this Objection is not founded upon
the Scripture, which is brought to prove it, by reciting the passage in its own
words, John 1.9. That was the true light which lightneth every man that comes
into the world, or, every man coming into the world. Now let him that reads
judge, whether the terms of the Proposition ( viz. That the little light which
shines in the dark heart is the powerful word of faith) or if the Terms in the
Objection (viz.) That Christ is the light which lights every man, that comes
into the world, may be read in this recited place: and if they cannot be found
in the words of the Scripture, then the challenge of him which wrote the Book
Entitled Common Salvation, mentioned before, is returned as an evidence
against themselves, and their assertion remains still unproved by the
Scriptures.

4. Object. Although that those words (viz.) The little light which shines in
the dark heart, is the powerful word of Faith which was in the beginning, by
which all things were created. Nor that Christ is the light which lightneth
every one that comes into the world.

Although these very words be not expressed in John 1.9. nor Christ so much as
once named in all the nine first verses, yet of whom can it be meant other than
of Christ? as may be gathered from those verses considered and compared
together?

Answ. I might in answer to this Objection (alluding to that of the Apostle,
Acts 17.28.) allege a passage out of your own Books, (viz.) Fran. Howgill,
Common-Salvation, Page 3. Thou that tells of opening Chapters and verses by
meanings, thou never heard a word of Christ. I only observe this to show you,
what hard measure you mete out to others when your selves are constrained to do
the same things as will hereafter be further made to appear.

5. Object. Does not Christ himself say in John 8.12. I am the light of the
world, and in John 12.35, 36. where it is plainly expressed, That Christ is the
light, without any meaning?

Answ. Although in the 8. of John 12. verse. Christ is called the light of the
World, being the same, who in the 12. of John v. 36. is to be believed on; yet
neither in the 8. nor 12. nor first of Joh. by any of them, or all of them put
together, is it proved that the little light which shines in the dark heart is
the powerful word of faith, which was in the beginning, by which all things
were created, which cannot be affirmed of any other but of him, I say of him,
by whom all things were made, that were made, of whom it is said, he was in the
world, and the world was made by him and the world knew him not, and how or
where he should be called the little light, that shines in the dark heart, or
powerful word of faith, or the light, which lightens every man, that comes
into the world, I do not, nor cannot read, let the impartial, and sober minded
consider, whether any thing, but a meaning can make it out, and whether such
meaning be according to truth.

6. Object. Thou art stumbling at the light which should guide thee, and
therein manifests thy confusion and ignorance; while thou art talking about the
light, thou comprehends it not, through the darkness that is in thee. Show if
thou can, what is said touching the light of Christ, wherewith he enlightens
every man that comes into the world, either in the 1.8. or 12. of Joh. or any
other Scripture, that thy knowledge in the Mystery thereof may be manifested, if
there be any such thing in thee, or else for ever cease speaking any further
thereof.

A. Not to meddle with that branch of the Objection at all, which censures, and
judges, and speaks of darkness, confusion and ignorance, for bringing the
things asserted to trial, by the words of the holy Scriptures, and for
discovering the unproveableness thereof, by the Scriptures produced by them to
prove the same, lest the anger and frowardness in the Objector might produce a
like spirit in the Answerer: but rather inclining to the latter part thereof,
(viz.) to show what is said in the first of John, touching the light, wherewith
every man coming into the world is enlightened; according to that measure
wherewith I shall be assisted; though with never so much weakness and
stammeringness of speech, in holy fear and trembling before him, whom I serve
with my Spirit, even in this Service, though but a babe therein; I shall
propound to consideration a few things.

1. I do find that in the first of John there is mention made of the word,
which was in the beginning with God, of whom it is said, and that word was God,
Joh. 1.1. All things were made by him (verse. 2.) i. e. The word God. In him was
life, and that life was the light of men, verse. 4.

John was sent from God to bear witness of that light ( verse. 7.) i. e. The
word God, verse. 1. That was the true light, which lightneth every man Coming
into the world, verse. 9. even he by whom the world was made, verse. 10. He was
in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not.

This word God, he in whom was life, and the life was the light of men. He (i.
e.) God, the word, the maker of the world, verse. 10. He was that true light,
which lightneth every man that comes into the world.

According to that Divine testimony, 1 John 1.5. This then is the message that
we have heard of him, and declare unto you, That God is Light, and in him is no
darkness at all. So, that he who is the true original fountain of light, In
whom is life, and that life is the light of men, v. 3. and who enlightneth
every man, v. 9. (with life and light) that comes into the world, Is the word
God, Joh. 1.1. as appears, by what is witnessed in the forenamed Scriptures,
even God the Creator of the ends of the Earth, Esa. 40.28. The maker and former
of all things.

The word God, thus considered, the original and fountain of all light and
life, he of whom its said, as in Acts 17.28, 29. In him we live and move, and
have our being. For we are also his Offspring, even all the generations of
mankind, who are, or ever were subjects of life, and light, as he is the Author
and fountain of both, Psalm. 36.9. To all and every one, that comes into the
World: I say as thus considered, So the word God, or God the word, is the light
and life of men, and as so considered, he does enlighten, as really as inliven,
every man that comes into the world.

Setting up in every man a Spirit by which he does exist or live as a man,
differencing him from other creatures, by that Spirit of a man, by which he
lives a rational life, calling it, the candle of the Lord, searching all the
inward parts of the belly, Prove. 20.27. (i. e.) the things of a man, 1 Cor.
2.11. As appears more at large in the former part, where the nature and
property of this light, the spirit of a man, or candle of the Lord is
propounded and discussed.

I do likewise find in the same first of John 14. verse. that That word was
made flesh, and tabernacled among them, and they beheld his glory, the glory,
as of the only begotten of the Father; according to that Testimony, Phil. 2.6,
7, 8. who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God,
but made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant, and
was made in the likeness of men, and being found in fashion as a man, agreeable
to that, Psalm. 40.7. and Heb. 10.5, 7. A body have thou prepared me, then said
I, lo I come, (In the volume of the book it is written of me) to do thy will O
God, by which will we are sanctified, etc.

In like manner, and according to the tenor of these Scriptures, the word
before spoken of, John 1.1. was made flesh, John 1.14. and thenceforth was
called Christ the Lord, Luke 2.11. or the Lords Christ, Luke 2.26. As is
witnessed in the Song of Simeon, to whom it was revealed by the holy Spirit,
that he should not see death until he had seen the Lords Christ, who taking up
the holy Child Jesus (or the word made flesh) into his arms, he blessed God,
and said, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy
word, for mine eyes have seen thy Salvation, which thou have prepared before
all people, a Light to lighten the Gentiles, and the Glory of thy people
Israel, Luke 2.26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32.

Thus the word God, who was the enlivener, and enlightener of the world, the
maker and sustainer thereof, gave being both of light and life to the natural
man, and so enlightened every man that comes into the world, setting up a light
in him, a candle light, (i. e.) the spirit of a man, common to all men as men.

But the word made flesh becoming the Messiah, which is by interpretation the
Christ, Joh. 1.41. opened the Mystery of Godliness, manifesting God in the
flesh, according to that in 1 Timothy 3.16. Without controversy great is the
mystery of Godliness, God manifested in the flesh, etc. To which agrees that, 1 John 1.2. For the life was manifested, and we have seen it and bear witness,
and show unto you, that eternal life which was with the Father, and was
manifested unto us. The word I say, thus in fullness of time, becoming flesh,
became therewith the Lords Christ, or the Lords anointed, or the holy child
Jesus, Act. 4.26, 27. The anointed Savior, and hereby brought life and
immortality to light through the Godspel, 2 Timothy 1.9, 10. manifested by his
appearing, Tit. 2.11. and 3.4. according to purpose, Ephesians. 1.9. and promise,
Tit. 1.2. from the foundation of the world, and accordingly believed on and
expected by all the cloud of vvitnesses from Abel forward, to this day, from the
time the promise was given, Gen: 3.15.

In this sense and as thus considered Christ is said to be come a light into
the World, John 12.46. I am come a light into the world, to what end? Is it to
enlighten every man, that comes into the world? Nay, but that whosoever
believes on him should not abide in darkness, agreeing with that in John the
third, and 19. Light is come into the world, and this light is the Son of God,
whom the Father has sent, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish
but have everlasting life; and thus is he the light of the world, John 8.12.

As one whom the Father has sent, John 7.29. and sealed, John 6.17. and
anointed, Luke 4.18. to be the Covenant to the people, and light to the
Gentiles according to the prophecy going before of him, Isa. 42.1, 6, 7. and
61.1, 2, 3. Whereby he brought in another life, and another light into the
world, diverse from that which was given to the world, or set up in every man,
that comes into the world, according to the Terms of the Covenant, whereof
himself is Mediator, Heb. 8.6. and being made perfect he became the Author of
eternal Salvation, unto all them that obey him, Heb. 5.9.

Remembering only this that as there is a life common to al men, that come into
the world, who nevertheless cannot therewith inherit the Kingdom of God, till
renewed, so there is a light common to all men and women that come into the
world, which cannot discern the things of the Spirit of God (til renewed) as
their life is, for the life and the light have one Original.

7. Obj. Art thou so foolishly blind, as not to see thy own Babel, and
confusion in what thou have said? Is not Christ, and the word one? How then
do thou in thy beastly Nature, (the head of the Serpent reigning in thee,) by
dividing, and distinguishing confound the truth?

Answ. O that there were given to these people an ear to hear, and an heart to
consider the things that differ. Let him that reads understand, though I be
nothing, yea worse then so, I pass not for man's day; my judgment is with the
Lord in this matter.

Only it will not be amiss, to give a brief account, why I have thus
distinguished, or rather taken notice of the distinction, whch the Scripture
gives of God the word; by whom all things were made, who though he were the
fountain of life and light to all living, though he were clothed with light as
with a garment, yet the light wherein he dwelt was unapproachable, 1 Timothy 6.16.
whom the Apostle testifies, no man has seen, nor can see, yea, though he were
in the world, and the world was made by him, yet the world knew him not, but to
the world he was invisible, though he made it, and gave it subsistence, and
being, as is witnessed, Acts 17.28. In him we live and moove and have our
being, even our creaturely being, as such; yet was he invisible to us, while
such notwithstanding, and though some of the invisible things of God, might be
discerned by the visible things of the creation, (viz.) his eternal power and
Godhead yet he, the Creator and maker thereof, could not be discovered by that
little light in man, which was common to every man, until the word was
promised to be made flesh, Genesis 3.15. in the seed of the woman, who was break
to the Serpents head.

And this is borne witness unto by our Lord Jesus Christ himself, John 1.18.
No man has seen God at any time. As they who came to see whether Christ were
risen, John 20.3. They saw the napkin which had been about his head, and the
linen clothes wrapped together, sufficient to demonstrate, at least that he,
whom they sought was not there (if not also to testify that he was risen) but
him that had layn there, and was risen, this, those things cold not discover,
this was reserved to his own appearance, verse. 15, 16.19, 20.

So though upon the account of the common enlightening which every man and woman
which comes into the world, receives from God the former and maker of them,
which light they receive together, with the principle of their natural life,
which light and life as they are both one in the Author and fountain thereof,
John 1.4. So are they both one in the subject thereof. As James Naylor himself
acknowledges in his Answer to certain Queries in a book called Strength in
Weakness, mentioned before Page 24. line the first.

Yet this little light in man is so far from being the powerful word of faith,
which was in the beginning, and by which all things were created, I say, it is
so far from being it, That it cannot discover who, or what it is, that is spoken
of the napkin and the graves clothes. It may see, some of the visible things
of God, and there by somewhat of that which is invisible, but him that is
invisible they can never see, till he manifest himself, for no man ever saw him
or shall see him, since the transgression but as the word made flesh, Jo: 1.14.
manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. as revealed in the Son, John 1.18. and
by him manifested unto his Witnesses, 1 John 1.2. according to that blessed
testimony among others, 2 Cor. 4.6. God who commanded light to shine out of
darkness, has shined in our hearts, the light of the knowledge of the glory
of God in the face of Jesus Christ, which no man can see, but as he receives
another life, John 3.3. and light, for the life and the light are one.

For this very reason: Because I have observed the enemy to hide himself in
this bush, and here to lay his Ambuscado's to take persons at unawares, and to
cast his net over them, blundering and confounding by terms the Truth it
self, under shadowy expressions not obvious to the first view of every reader:
Because Christ is called the light of the world, therefore where light is
spoken of, there Christ is applied to be he, or if under these expressions,
The light is but one in all, Are there more lights then one? Show any other
light, etc.

Not heeding that, which is testified of the Word, that while he was hid in
God, (though he bore up the Pillars of all the Creation, as being made by him,
and existing in him, though he was light and life to all beings, according to
their capacities, besparkling all with rays or Candles, as their maker and
Creator) yet until a body was prepared him, and he made flesh, thereby
becoming the seed of the Woman, and fulfilling therein that promise, which had
been a word of faith to the Believers, throughout all ages, who all dyed in
faith, having not received the promise, but saluted it, as that which they saw,
and kissed it, and rejoiced in it, as Abraham did, who saw him, the Word, that
was to be made flesh, and was glad. I say, till the word was thus imbodyed in
flesh, or considered as such, and so to be seen and believed on, there was no
such thing as Christ, a Light to the Gentiles, other then in promise. I say,
Christ, as the Lords Christ, or Christ the Lord, according to those testimonies
before mentioned in Luke 2.11.28.32. for as he was Manifested in the flesh, he
was thus styled.

Of whom it is thus said, He which has the Son has life, and he which has
not the Son of God has not life (which is true of Light, for the life and
light are one, Ephesians. 5.14. and promiscuously put one for another) which light
and life is no other way attained but by a persons being borne again, John
3.3. by receiving, i.e. by believing on the Lord Jesus Christ. For to as many
as believed on him, to them he gave power, privilege, or prerogative, to be
made the Sons of God, even to as many as believe in his name, which were borne
not of Blood, nor of the Flesh, nor of the will of Man, but of God, John 1.12,
13.

The Children of the first Birth with their life and light cannot enter into
the kingdom of God, nay they cannot see the kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 2.14. John
3.3.5, 6. Except they be borne again, i. e. from above of the Spirit. But the
newborn, they which believing receive Christ, or receive Christ by believing,
those are they whose hearts God purifyes by faith, Act. 15.9. renewing them in
the Spirit of their mind, Ephesians. 4.23. by the washing of Regeneration, and
Renewing of the holy Spirit, Tit. 3.5, 6, 7. which he shedds on them abundantly
through Jesus Christ our Savior, justifying them by his grace, that they may
be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life. With this new-life comes
in the true light of the renewed Man, who till then is dead, as in opposition
to life, and dark, as in opposition to light, notwithstanding he be both alive
and enlightened by the fountain of life as a branch of the natural Creation.
[1 John 2.8. Ephesians. 2.5. and 5.8. John 1.3, 4.]

Hitherto touching the first Assertion or Proposition, and the proof thereof.

Secondly, It is further affirmed touching the little Light, which shines in
the dark heart, viz.

That it is the word of Faith, the Apostle exhorted to take heed unto, Romans 10,
6, 7, 8.

2d Reply. I cannot with more clearenesse proceed in the Examination of what is
here alleged from Romans 10. Then set down the words of the Scripture it self,
which is cited for proof thereof, that the Reader may have the clearer view
thereof. The words are these, viz. But the Righteousness which is of faith
speaks on this wise, Say not in thine heart, Who shall ascend into Heaven,
that is, to bring Christ down from above, or who shall descend into the deep,
that is, to bring up Christ again from the dead: but what says it, the word
is nigh thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that is the word of faith, which
we preach.

Having presented the Reader with the sight of the Scripture produced for
Evidence, I need say no more then this, It does not prove the thing for which
it is brought. Let him that reads consider, whether there be one word therein,
which mentions the little light, which shines in the dark heart, or calls that
little light the word of Faith, or exhorts to take heed thereunto as being it.

Now if the Scripture quoted for proof proves not the thing, as it plainly
appears, it does not. Where is he that made the Challenge to all the City of
London, to prove that any thing is (by these men) spoken or declared, but what
the Scriptures bear witness unto the same? or if it be said, that the Apostle
means the little light, which shines in the dark heart, when he speaks of
the word of faith, which is nigh, both in the mouth and heart.

I must say to this, as before in the former Case, Meanings are by some
approved, while as yet they are under Judgment and condemnation by others, as
I have already instanced in the Answer to the 4th Objection.

Inasmuch therefore as this appears (as the former to be asserted) without
proof, for that this Scripture does not at all mention, the little Light,
which is said to shine in the dark heart, nor calls it the word of faith, nor
exhorts to take heed unto it as such, nor uses no such phrase, as by reading
the words will appear. Further answer is not requisite to be given to it, then
to say, It is an ungrounded and an unproved opinion.

Object. But what may the Apostle intend by the word of faith, which he says
is in the heart, and in the mouth, and infers to be a saying of Moses, Deuteronomy:
30.14. where the like words are used, if it be not the light which shines in
the dark heart, what other thing can it be?

Answ. It is evident that the Apostle treating about the Righteousness of the
Law, and the Righteousness of faith, asserts in the 4th verse of the 10th of
Romans That Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness to every one that
believes, alleging that Moses describes the Righteousness, which is of the
Law, that the man which does those things shall live by them. Do and live. And
this was according to the Tenor of the Law written on the heart of man from
the Creation. It was no new thing that he Commanded them, but the same
repeated; which was engraven on their hearts before, viz. That they should love
the Lord, and serve him; which was the end of their Creation: Of which much
has been spoken in the former part.

Alluding to this passage of Moses, the Apostle uses the like form of speech,
that as the Children of the first Covenant, had the Law of that Covenant
written not only on tables of stone, but also on the fleshly tables of their
hearts, as appears, Romans 2.15.

So the Children of the new Covenant might have the Law of the new Covenant,
speaking to them in the like sort; the heirs of righteousness or the children
of faith might hear the righteousness of faith speaking to them on this wise;
viz. Say not in thine heart, who shall ascend into heaven to bring down Christ
from above, or who shall descend into the deep, to bring up Christ again from
the dead: But what says it? The word is nigh thee, in thy mouth, and in thy
heart.

Quest. Nigh thee, nigh who?

Ans. Even nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart.

Quest. Whose mouth, and whose heart?

Ans. Not every man's mouth, and every man's heart, but in thy mouth, and in thy
heart, who art a Believer.

Quest. What Word is that?

Ans. The Word of Promise, the Word of Faith, which we preach.

Quest. What Word is that, which you preach?

Ans. That which says, If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus,
and shall believe in thine heart, that God raised him from the dead, thou shall
be saved. This is the Word of faith, which is in thy mouth, and in thy heart:
and on this wise the Righteousness of faith speaks; For with the heart man
believes to Righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto
salvation; for the Scripture says, Whosoever believes on him, shall not be
ashamed.

Thus the word of Faith, or Law of Righteousness is near unto the Children of
faith, the heirs of salvation, even in their mouths, and in their hearts. The
Law of the new Covenant is a word nigh unto the Children of that Covenant, even
to as many as believe, and are of the faith of Abraham, the faith, which is of
the Operation of God. And these not as in the school of Moses, hearing the
voice, (which has thundrings and earthquakes) saying do and live, or the man
that does them shall live in them, and Cursed be every one, that abides not in
every thing, that is written in the Law to do them: But the word of Faith
speaks on this wise, This is the work of God, that ye believe on him, whom he
has sent.

As those who are married to another Husband, that they may bring forth fruit
to God, even fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the
glory and praise of God; serving him without fear in righteousness and
holiness all the days of their lives: who having restored their souls,
leads them in paths of righteousness for his names sake; being to them in
stead of Broad Rivers and Streams, writing his Law in their hearts, putting
his holy fear therein, having Circumcised their hearts, Calling them to his
foot, and keeping them there, leading them (though blind) in ways they knew
not, who orders their goings that their footsteps slide not. So that his Word
is nigh them, (I say nigh unto those, who are borne from above, and are the
Children of the new Covenant,) viz. in their heart, and in their mouth, even
the word of faith of which the Scripture speaks. But not so to every man: nor
is the little Light, which shines in every dark heart, this word of faith: nor
is this word of faith or Law of the new Covenant nigh to any person, viz. in
the mouth, and in the heart, but only to those that believe, as the scope of
this Scripture discovers; and then, and not till then is it a Scripture
fulfilled on such, and not on others, who, till they receive Life and Light
through believing on the Lord Jesus, are really destitute of both, 1 John 5.12.
He which has the Son has life, and he which has not the Son of God has
not life, which is true of light also, for it has been acknowledged already,
that the light and life are one.

I shall now proceed to the third Assertion, touching the light in every man,
viz. That it is the unction of the holy one, etc.

Thirdly, I find it affirmed touching the little light in every man, which
shines in the dark heart, That it is the unction of the holy one given of the
Father, whereby we need not to teach one another, but as the anointing teaches
us, which is truth and no lie.

Reply. Here being no Scripture cited for the proof of this Assertion, but
certain words of the Scripture made use of. It does appear to me to have
Reference to that passage of the Apostle, 1 John 2.27. I know not what other
place properly to refer them unto for proof. I shall therefore recite these
words, and compare them with what is here affirmed touching the light in every
man, or the little light which shines in the dark heart, viz. verse 20. But ye
have an unction of the holy one, and ye know all things. Verse. 27. But the
anointing which ye have received of him abides in you: and ye need not that
any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you of all things, and is
truth, and is no lie.

If this be the Scripture passage intended for proof, and beside this I know
none other.

Then I affirm (as of the former) that it speaks not at all to the thing,
which is under consideration; for how does it appear, that the little light,
which shines in the dark heart of every man is the Unction of the holy one,
given of the Father, whereby we need not teach one another, etc. I say how does
it appear that this is spoken of that little light, as being that Unction,
when there is not so much as one word mentioning that little light, at all, in
this entire passage of Scripture, nor any other that I do know of? If there be
any, I wish it were produced: nor can it satisfy to say its meant so, for
meanings have received their sentence already in the former branch. Nay, the
contrary is evident, that the Apostle is so far from speaking of the Light in
every man, and calling it the Unction of the holy one given of the Father, etc.
That he speaks of that holy Anointing, which they to whom he there writes,
viz. the little children, the young men, and the fathers, were made partakers
of, viz whose sins were forgiven for his names sake, and who had known the
Father, and overcome the wicked one, 1 John 2.12, 13. Such as in whom the
darkness was past, and the true light now shined, verse. 8. These were they who
had received the Unction from the holy one, and did know all things, the
anointing which they having received abides in them, according to that which
was promised, John 14.16. Even the Spirit of truth, who was to abide for ever
with them to whom he should be given, verse. 27. who being come should teach
them all things, verse. 26.

To the persons, who through believing were borne again, not of blood, nor of
the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, who (as little
children) had obtained Remission of sins for his names sake (as young men)
had overcome the wicked one, (as fathers) had known him from the beginning: I
say, to such as these are, and of such as these are, this Scripture gives
Testimony, that they had received the Unction of the holy one, i. e. the Spirit
of truth, which should lead them into all truth, and teach them all things, and
abide with them for ever, according to the promise of Christ, John 14.16, 17,
26. John 16.13, 14, 15.

Which Unction of the holy one ( i. e. the Spirit of truth) is not a light in
every one, shining in the dark heart, and teaching them all things; but is so
in such only as do believe, for to as many as received him to them he gave the
privilege of Sonneship. And because they were Sons, he sent forth the Spirit
of his Son into their hearts crying Abba Father, Gal. 4.6. Which is not the
state or case of every one, as is evident; for all men have not the faith, 2
These. 3.2. Without which men cannot be the Children of God, Gal. 3.7, 26, 28.
nor receive the Unction of the holy one, so as not to need any one to teach
them, but as the anointing teaches them.

Object. The words by thee first repeated (as taken out of the book called
Man's return) mention not these words (viz. Every one) but only the little
light which shines in the dark heart. Where the words Every one, do not
follow, notwithstanding thou do often mention them, as if they were there
expressed.

Answ. 1. To speak roundly and plainly to the Principle. That which is said of
the little light, which shines in the dark heart, as being the powerful word
of faith, or as being the Unction of the holy one, etc. is true of it, as it is
in every one, or is not true of it, at all in any one, according to this
Principle, which says, The Light is but one in all.

2 That Christ is the light which has enlightened every one that comes into the
world. Thou that hate this light, thou have it, to this the current of these
writings give testimony, and in particular this very Author of man's return
has these words (viz.) [Fox way to the Kingdom, Pages 1.6.]

All you enslaved Captives of Babylon hearken diligently to Jesus Christ the
light which lets you see the evil of your hearts to be guided by it, etc.
[Mans Return, Page 26.]

Every one mind your conditions, see what guides your minds, for the Kingdom
of Christ is within you, and that is the light which lets you see the evil of
your hearts, [ Page 27.]

O thou enslaved soul under the power of Babylon, in thee, come forth mind
the light in thee, which is the sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well to
take heed, 2 Pet. 1.19.

By which several passages it is evident, that the light which enlightneth
every one is the little light which shines in the dark heart of every one, and
is so intended even by this Author, as by others, and accordingly so applied
and spoken to.

Object. Does not the Scripture say, 1 Cor. 12.7. The manifestation of the
Spirit is given to every man to profit withal. How then do thou restrain it
to some men, as thou have done?

Answ. It is evident that all have not the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8.9. If any
man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, and Jude does testify of
some persons, that they are sensual, having not the Spirit, verse, 19.

Therefore the Apostle speaking of the manifestation of the Spirit which was
given forth in the Church of Corinth, in the diversity of its gifts, the
differences of administration, and the diversity of operations: To one was
given a word of Wisdom, to another a word of Knowledge, to another faith, to
another the gifts of healing, to another the working of miracles, to another
Prophecy, to another discerning of Spirits, to another kinds of tongues, to
another interpretations of tongues. Now all these were diverse manifestations of
the Spirit, in that Church of Corinth diversely distributed, and divided to
every man severally, verse. 11. Now all these works that one and the self
same spirit divideing to everyman severally as he will; as appears verse. 28,
29, 30. Now God has set some in the Church, etc. Are all Apostles? are all
Prophets? are all Teachers? are all Workers of miracles? have all Gifts of
healing? do all speak with tongues? do all interpret?

By which it does appear, that the manifestation of the Spirit, as it was
different, so it was differently distributed, and is restrained to some
Persons, v. 30. have all? do all? are all? etc. And the word (every man) in
the 7. verse, is explained by the same words (every Man) in the 11. verse. And
the end of this distribution of the Spirit, or manifestation of the Spirit is
given to no man for himself, but it is to every man to profit withal, to
edify and build up, and do service in the body, as an hand, foot or eye, or
some other member of the body, according to the similitude of a body used in
that Scripture, not that the Spirit or the manifestation of the Spirit is given
to every man (i. e.) to every individual Person; Forasmuch as some men are
sensual having not the Spirit; therefore not the manifestation thereof, for
there can be no manifestation where the thing it self is not.

But the Spirit himself, dividing to every man severally, as he please, gives
forth his manifestation to every man for the profit and benefit of others; for
to that end were those manifestations set in the Church, and given to several
Persons of the Church, for the use and benefit of the whole: and so is this
Scripture to be understood (i. e) the manifestation of the Spirit to whatsoever
it be, and to whomsover it is given, it is given them for edification and
profit of others.

The Spirit it self may be given to a Person for himself to bear witness
with him, to be his evidence or Testimony in things partaining to himself,
Romans 8.16.26. and in 1 Cor. 2.12. Now we have received the Spirit which is of
God, that we might know the things which are freely given to us of God.

But when God is pleased to give to any Person the manifestation of his Spirit
in a word of Wisdom, a word of Knowledge, in gifts of healing, or works of
miracles, tongues, or Prophesies; these and such as these are given for to
profit others withal, rather then the Persons themselves to whom they are
distributed; and so it is witnessed in the place before named; which discovers
the end of the Spirits manifestation, (viz.) to profit withal.

The Fourth branch of what is asserted touching the little light which shines
in the dark heart is next to be considered.

Fourthly, I find that it is affirmed touching the little light which shines
in the dark heart.

That it is the sure word of Prophecy whereunto ye do well to take heed, 2
Pet. 1.19.

Reply, To make trial of the truth of what is affirmed, it is necessary to
examine the Scripture to see whether it intermeddle in this matter which it is
brought to bear witness unto (viz.) the little light which shines in the dark
heart of every man; whether that be the sure word of Prophecy here mentioned,
the Scripture words are these;

We have also a sure word of Prophecy whereunto, ye do well, that ye take
heed as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the
day starr arise in your hearts.

Knowing this, First, that no Prophecy of the Scripture is of any private
Interpretation.

For the Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man but holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the holy Spirit.

In this portion of Scripture it may apparrantly be discerned that the Apostle
does not say of the little light, which shines in the dark heart that it is the
sure word of Prophecy.

For there is no such word in this Text as the little light shineing in the
dark heart; and therefore so to affirm and to bring this Scripture for
proof, is to wrong the Scripture, except it can be made forth that it ought to
be so understood and that that is the true and proper meaning thereof, which
nevertheless would fall under reproof as centring in a meaning, a thing by
them so branded with reproach, of which mention has been made before.

But as its not expressed in the words of the Apostle, so it will be found, not
to be meant or intended as spoken of the little light shining in man's dark
heart, a being the sure word of Prophecy in this place mentioned, for it is
evident the Apostle speaks of the word of Prophecy contained in the
Scriptures, as himself explaines himself as may appear by considering the
words and the scope thereof.

For the Apostle Peter knowing that he must shortly put of his Tabernacle (as
our Lord Jesus Christ had showed him) verse. 14. endeavors the establishment of
the scattered Saints in the doctrine of the power and comeing of our Lord Jesus
Christ 15.16. and this he does by two Arguments.

One drawn from the testimony of himself and others who were eye witnesses of
his Majesty when he received from God the Father, honor and glory, when there
came a voice to him, from the excellent glory, which voice they heard when they
were with him on the holy Mount, Matthew. 17. the 8. first verses, to which John
might refer. John 1.14.

The other argument to establish and confirm them in the present truth (i. e.)
the power and comeing of our Lord Jesus was drawn from the Testimony of the
Prophets, in the holy Scriptures, and therefore adds, verse. 19.20, 21.

19. We have also a more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto you do well that ye
take heed as unto a light that shines in a dark place until the day dawne,
and the day-starr arise in your hearts;

20. Knowing this first, that no Prophecy of the Scripture is of any private
interpretation.

21. For the Prophecy came not, in old time, by the will of man; So that it is
evident that the more sure word of Prophecy, which he exhorts them to take
heed unto, is the prophecy of the Scripture, or Scriptures of the Prophets;
which agree with and confirm this thing which he was an eye and ear witness of,
and had declared unto them (viz.) the power and comeing of our Lord Jesus, to
which agrees that which is testified. In 1 Pet. 10, 11, 12. and more
particularly that of Paul, who confirmed his doctrine.

By the like Testimony, Acts 26.22.23. witnessing both to small and great,
saying none other things then those which the Prophets and Moses did say,
should come.

From whence it plainly appears, that as the Apostle would confirm them in the
truth, of what he had testified touching the power and comeing of our Lord
Jesus, by telling them what he and others had both heard and seen when they
were with him on the holy mount; where they were eyewitnesses of his Majesty,
and heard the voice which gave testimony from heaven touching him.

Yet for further confirmation of them in this truth he referrs them to the
concurrent testimony of the Prophets, and to that more sure word of Prophecy
contained in the holy Scriptures, with this connection, (Also) we have also a
more sure word of Prophecy; besides my Testimony, ye have the testimony of the
Prophets, in the words of their prophecy; which he modestly proposes; as of
more weight to them then his report might be unto them, from what he had either
heard or seen; And therefore adds not only, we have a sure word of Prophecy,
but a more sure word of Prophecy and strengthens that saying by what follows
(viz.)

Knowing that no Prophecy of the Scripture is of any private interpretation,
for the Prophecy came not in old time, by the will of man but holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the holy Spirit which Testimony being founded upon
the Scriptures, he might, in relation to their belief thereof, call it a more
sure word, as to them.

And if it be but remembered, that he being an Apostle of the circumcision, Gal.
2.7, 8, (as James also was) among whom the Prophesies of the Scriptures were of
great esteem; as appears by our Lord himself, who so reports of them; and
sends them thither for Testimony of him. John 5.39. To which Paul also
appeals, Acts 26.22. As Peter in like manner does after the effusion of the
holy Spirit. In the 2. of the Acts 30. Acts 3.20. to 25. Acts 10.43.

Considering him I say as an Apostle of the circumcision and these scattered
strangers to whom he writes, to be such who are called by James the twelve
Tribes scattered abroad; among whom the writings of the Prophets had been so
greatly esteemed it was more to the believing Jews who were in the dispertion
to find it written in the Scriptures of the Prophets, beside what Peter the
Apostle both heard and saw, then if they had only received it upon his Evidence
and Testimony Therefore it is an additionall and concurrent Testimony. Also a
more sure word of the Prophets (As if he had said) ye have not only my word,
though I have told you both what we have heard, and were eye witnesses of: But
we have Also the Testimony of the Prophets, whose word of Prophecy is by
inspiration of God; for holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy
Spirit; thus ye have for witness both theirs and ours.

I might Further add:

That the word of Prophecy whereunto the Apostle says, that they do well to
take heed as unto a light shining, or as unto the shining of a light in a dark
or squalid or filthy place, (...), is a metaphorical speech.

As if he should say, you shall do well to attend to the more sure word of
Prophecy as you would do to the light of a Lamp, or Torch in a dark and
filthy place, so do to the word of Prophecy till the day dawne and the * day
starr arise in your hearts; till the day break and the shadows fly away: but
if this may not be admitted to be the scope of the Apostle, but that still it
is insisted upon, that the little light which shines in the dark heart of every
man is the more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto they do well to take heed. I
would yet say a few words more in this case occasioned from those two terms in
the Text (i. e.) (More) and (Until) [* (...).]

More is a word of comparison, and must refer to some positive term to which
it has relation (i. e.)

More sure then what? What answers to this Question? It must be sought in
something going before it, some other word of Testimony, there is besides this,
in comparison of which, this is a more sure word; not the only word, where any
person or thing is more excellent then another, there is of necessity some
other besides it self which has its excellency also in the degree.

If therefore the light shineing in the dark heart of every man, be a more sure
word of Prophecy or witness: then there is some other word of witness beside
this little light which must supply the place to this comparison; and so this
light is not the only word or witness, but a more sure word in comparison of
some other word beside it, touching the other expression (i. e.) Until I have
to say.

2 The little light of which so often mention has been made, called the
powerful word of faith which was in the beginning by which all things were
made, called also the unction of the holy one the manifestation of the spirit
given to every one, the Kingdom of Christ in every one, the Grace of God which
has appeared to all; the eye of the Lord which runs too and froe, in the
earth; with many more such like Epethites which are ascribed to it.

I say, if the little light which shines in the dark heart of every man, be
all this, or any of this, which has been spoken of it what is it less then
the day starr it self or what can be more ascribed to him who is the bright
morning starr, himself then is ascribed to it; which nevertheless this
Scripture intimates, must have the precedence and this must give way to that
which is to come when the day dawnes, and the day starr it self appears, or
arises in the heart.

For this is to be given heed unto, or attended unto; Until he come whose
right it is, Until the day dawne, and the day starr arise. [Vntill.]

Which form of speech (viz.) Until, denotes in Scripture Phrase a cessation
of the former at the ariseing and appearance of the latter. Do this till I
come, Mich 5 3. Micah 7.3.10. Matthew. 2.13. Flee into Egypt and be thou there,
until I bring thee word, which was done, verse. 19, 20, 21.

When that which is perfect is come, that which is in part shall be done away,
whether Prophesies, they shall cease, etc. 1 Cor. 13.8.10.12.

Let this little light be what it will be it is some such thing as is of use,
Until the day starr arise; it has its anointing with limitation, it is but
Until: then let this be considered and applied by any Person in sobriety and
tenderness, and let them say whether it does not necessarily carry the truth
and scope of this place, to the Prophesies of the Scriptures, which went before
of Christ; of whom it is said (by the mouth of his Apostle Peter, Acts 10.43.)
To him give all the Prophets witness, and particularly it is affirmed,
touching the Lord Jesus his power and comeing, Acts 3.20, 21. And he shall send
Jesus Christ which before was preach unto you, Whom the heaven must receive,
Until the times of restitution of all things, which God has spoken by the
mouth of all his holy Prophets, since the world began; for Moses truly said,
verse. 22. Yea, and all the Prophets from Samuel and those that follow after, as
many as have spoken, have likewise foretold of those days. These words of the
holy Prophets have been that which the holy Fathers, the Believers in all ages,
have given attendance to (or given heed unto) as unto a light shineing in a
dark place, until the day dawne, and the day starr did arise according as is
witnessed in the degree thereof (so far as to the accomplishing of that part
of the performance of the words of the Prophets) John 1.41. where Andrew says
to Simon, we have found the Messiah, which is by interpretation Christ, and
Phillip to Nathaniall verse. 45. we have found him of whom Moses in the Law, and
the Prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth: visiting his people with salvation,
as he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets which have been since the world
began, Luke 1.71.

Becomeing a day spring, or Sun riseing upon them, verse. 78. after their long
night, or shadowy dispensation, which nevertheless was bespangled with variety
of Prophesies all tending to this day, starr or Sunriseing, to which they did
well to take heed, as unto a light shineing in a dark place, Until he come, of
whom the Prophets testified; which Prophesies touching his comeing had their
fulfilling in that his appearance, and veiled themselves as having finished
the work of their Testimony, when it was said of him; Behold the Lamb of God, I
am come a light into the world; we have found him of whom Moses and the
Prophets spoke. The Lord is risen and has appeared to Simon, with other
Testimonies of like nature.

In like manner the present and succeeding witnesses of God throughout their
Generation shall do well to take heed or give attendance unto the Testimony of
the Prophesies of the Scripture, which bear witness unto the Kingdom power
and futher appearance and comeing of our Lord Jesus, throughout the present and
future dispensation, wherein knowledge is but in part, and vision is much
obscured; according to that in 1 Cor. 13.12. The light which shines through the
Prophesies of the Scripture, having their tendency to that day dawning and
morning appearance which they who (though believers in their several eyes yet,
without us could not be made perfect; knowing that when that which is perfect
is come, that which is in part shall be done away; the shadows shall fly away
when the day appears, and the light which shines in the prophesies of the
Scripture, shall veil and disappeare as the thing prophesied of in them is
fullfilled, but not till then: like as the star which appeared to guide the
wise men unto Christ, Math. 2.1. It went before them till it came and stood
over where the young child was: which when they saw, they rejoiced with
exceeding great Joy, verse. 9, 10. but after it had led them to him, there is not
any mention of its further appearance.

So, when the Prophesies of the Scripture, touching the kingdom, power, and
coming of our Lord Jesus, whether within or without, either within the heart or
without in the world: when the day dawns, and the day star arises: when its
really day: when whatsoever has been prophesied of is really accomplished in
that appearance of his who is the yea and Amen of the concurrent testimony of
all the Prophets, and to whom they all give witness, Acts 10.43. Then shall
that be fullfilled which is spoken of that City, Rev. 21.23. That it had no
need of the Sun nor of the Moon to shine in it, for the Glory of God did
lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof, Chap. 22.5. There shall be no
night there, no candle nor light of the Sun; for the Lord God gives them
light, and they shall reign for ever and ever: These sayings are faithful and
true and testified unto by him who is the root and offspring of David, and
the Bright and morning star: As then and not till then may it be truly and
in strictness said; That which is perfect is come; when there shall be no
night nor need of candle, but God shall be all in all: so till then and as long
as knowledge is but in part and vision is but in part, that men see darkly as
in or through a Glass (or riddle) so long as there needs any Sunne-light,
Moone-light, or Candlelight; and that the body is not completed (i. e.)
arrived at the state of a perfect man, so long as any member of the body or
joint in the body is unsupplyed or uncompacted and unjoyned together.

The measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ is not arived at, nor
the Prophesies fullfilled, which say, There shall then be no need either of
candle or Sun; for there shall be no night there.

Therefore, while persons find themselves falling short in measure, either in
things to be known and believed, or done and practiced, let such acknowledge;
That the bright morning star is not yet risen, its at best but rising, the
shadows are not yet gone, they cannot yet say, there is no need of a Candle, or
that there is no night there; what else means that bleating noise, which
speaks out the word measure, knowing in measure, and perfect in measure? who
knows not that real and absolute perfection, admits of no measures or degrees;
it knows no such thing as either diminution or increase, no such thing as less
or more, and that will appear when once that which is perfect is Come, and
that which is imperfect is done away; then shall we know as we are known, and
be with him where he is; our bodies of vileness being changed, and made like
unto his glorious body: Till which time we shall do well to attend to the
more sure word of prophecy (contained in the holy Scripture) as unto a light
shining in a dark place.

Object. Thou that gives meanings and adds thy own words to the Scripture,
thou art a perverter of the Scripture; for whereas thou tells of the day
dawning, and the day star arising in the heart; and says then it is really
day, and that there is no night, when it is plain that the Scripture declares
of the dawning of the day, and speaks of it as of a time before day-breake,
or while it was yet dark, Math: 28.1. Compared with John 20.1. So that the day
dawn is a time wherein there is but a measure of the day appearing.

Ans. As for endeavoring to find out and hold forth the scope and sense of
the Scripture, by you called [giving of meanings]

1. It has been practiced by your selves, as the reader may perceive by what
has gone before, and that which has been observed hereupon, so that the blame
lies equally on your selves as on me, if it be blameworthy in either of us.

2. What ever sentence Francis Howgill passes upon the thing in these words
mentioned before in Page 1. and however his sentence is seconded by the
Objector, yet beside that they themselves cannot escape the censure thereof,
being in the same Condemnation; yet is it Evident notwithstanding, that is no
crime, neither in themselves nor others, to endeavor to find out the sense
and meaning of the Spirit of God in the holy Scriptures, and to give the sense
and meaning thereof, provided it be done according to truth; so did Ezra, and
the Levites, one or more of them; They opened the book of the Law, and read
therein distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them to understand the
reading, Neh: 8.5.7, 8. And our Lord Jesus himself sends the Pharisees not
only to the saying, but to learn the meaning of a particular Scripture, Mat:
9.13. But go ye and learn what that means, I will have mercy and not
sacrifice: Mat: 12.7. If ye had known what this means. Nay the Disciples
themselves understood not what Christ meant, when he spoke touching his own
rising, Mark. 9.10. and questioned one with another what the rising from the
dead should mean. Hence it is that our Lord expounded to the Disciples not
only the parables in which he spoke to the people, Mark. 4.34. but, beginning
at Moses and all the Prophets, he expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the
things concerning himself, Luke 24.27. So that to endeavor to find out the
true sense and meaning of God in the holy Scriptures, and to endeavor an
understanding thereof in others, is not a thing liable to Censure, but
Commanded by our Lord himself, and practiced by the Saints. The 2d of the Acts
give plentiful testimony where the sayings of David are applied by the Apostle
Peter unto Christ, as meant of him, and fulfilled in him, citing several
Scriptures, and giving the sense and meaning thereof.

3. It is necessary therefore In order to the fuller answering the objection,
to Consider what the Scripture phrase is, and how to be understood, which
speaks of the dawning of the day, and whether in this place of 2 Peter 1.19.
it may and ought to be understood as in the 28 Math. 1. Compared with John
20.1. for the time of the morning before the day break, or, while it was yet
dark.

For the understanding whereof I shall propose to Consideration what I observe.

That whereas in Math. 28.1. It is said, In the end of the Sabbath, or late in
the Evening of the Sabbath (i. e.) the Jewish Sabbath, as it began to dawne
toward the first day of the week. [(...), Evening, sero Mark. 13.35.]

And for that in Mark 16.2. it is said, (...), valde mane, very early in the
morning, which is in the 20 John 1. Early while it was yet dark, (...);
Tenebris adhuc existentibus die, vix adhuc lucescente, quum plus esset noctis
quam diei.

From which places it is evident, that the Dawning, which is hinted at is such
an one, as is rather an Evening then a morning, or at least it has so much of
the night in it, that the darkness was said to exist, John 20.1. While it was
yet dark, being more like the night then the day.

But in the place under Consideration, 2 Pet: 1.19 the greek word which is
there used for the day-dawne, is not the same with this in Math. 28.1. nor with
any of the other, that have been named, but imports a greater splendour and
brightness, and more open-facednesse, as will appear by comparing it with
other Scriptures. The word is (...), of (...) irradio, illucesco; fit ab (...)
lux, splendour; and is used 2 Cor: 4.4. Least the light of the glorious Gospel
of Christ, who is the Image of God should shine unto them: ut non fulgeat (...)
non splendendum, unde est nomen (...) effulgentia, Heb. 1.3. Who being the
brightness of his glory. And a word of the same derivation is used, Mark 8.25.
After that he put his hands again upon his eyes, and made him look up, and he
was restored and saw every man clearly. [ Mark 8.24, 25.]

So that it evidently appears to me, That the Apostle intends an eminent
Sunshine day of the appearance of the Sun of righteousness, whose
apparition shall be with such splendour and brightness, as wherein there shall
be clear daylight, a bright shining light. It shall be as the light of the
morning, when the Sun arises: a morning without Clouds, wherein the Saints
shall see clearly; no more through a glass, no more through riddles, parables
and prophesies, but shall now see eye to eye, face to face, when the splendour
of this day appears, when this Phosphorus or light-bringing star appears,
whose descending with great power shall enlighten the earth with his glory; and
whom every eye shall see, and all the Tribes shall behold, then shall the
Prophesies draw to an end, and veil to him in whom they Center; and unto whose
appearance and coming they all give witness: then shall that day be so bright
and clear, a morning so free from Clouds, a day-breake so scattering the
shadows, and causing them to flee away, as that henceforth there shall need no
Candle; for there shall be no night there.

If any particular person, one or more, shall say touching themselves, that
they are arived at this estate, and do witness such a day to have dawned, and
day star to be risen in them. I only entreat such to be tender and speak the
thing they know, not as in apperance, but as in very deed and truth (forasmuch
as many have been mistaken herein) And to them in Bowels of Compassion I would
say but this; Is there no Clouds in their morning? Is there no shadows in their
day-breake? Is there no need of a Candle, Moon, nor Sun? Is there no night
there, where they make their abode? why do they often times speak of measures?
What means those Cracks and Crany's in their knowledge, knowing but in part,
there is no pieces, nor parts, nor measures, nor degrees, in absolute
perfection? but when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part
is done away; but till then it is not so: let such measure themselves by these
words. For as long as any person is imperfect in knowledge in any thing, his
attainement is but in part; he knows but in part, he needs the light of Candle,
Moon, or Sun; he cannot say there is no night in him, nor that his morning
is without Clouds, or his day-breake without shadows; therefore this is a word
of advice in force unto him, and such as he, That they attend to the more sure
word of prophecy, as unto a light shining in a dark place, till The day
break forth in it is splendour and brightness and (...) (or the light-bringing
star) appear in their hearts; till they behold him without riddle or
parable, no more in a glass darkly, but with open face see him as he is.

There remains one thing more to be spoken of, and that is a passage of George
Fox touching the light in every man, viz. Waiting in the light which Christ
has enlightened you with, That Is Scripture within you, * [* Fox way to the
Kingdom, pa. 8.)

Ans. I shall in Answer to this say but little, for that I find no place of
Scripture by him quoted for proof thereof, nor do I know any, where the light
in every man is called Scripture within: And if it must be brought off with a
meaning, It will fall within the Compass of what has been spoken unto already
in the former branches, or in some one, or more of them, to which I refer the
reader: dismissing it here in this place, as knowing nothing of moment in it,
which may not be found to have been cleared in what has gone before.

I shall therefore now pass on to the second general head, viz. to Consider
what is alleged touching the light; in relation to What it does in every man.
Among many other things I find it thus expressed, viz. That

The light which Christ Jesus has Enlightened every one withal is made
manifest, and Convinces of all ungodliness and worldly lust. * [* F. Howgill
Common salvation, pa: 7.]

Loving the light it will guide to God from all men, that you need never look
at man more. [* Farnworth discovery of faith, pa: 12.]

Being obedient to the light within, it will bring you to purity, to holiness,
to uprightness; there is your teacher present with you. * [* A breife
discovery of Antichrist, pa: 4.]

That light obeying it is your salvation; Disobeying that light is your
Condemnation.

Mind your teacher within, mind the light within, Jer. 31.34. Esa. 54.13. Jo.
6.46. Jo: 2.27.

This light opens all Scriptures, and leads man out of the fall up to God the
Father and Fountain of lights, this is the true light and leads unto life
Eternal, John 1.5.8, 9.10, 11, 12, 13. John 17.10.23, 24. * [* Farnworth,
Ranters discovered.]

This pure light, that does proceed and come forth from God, which is pure and
perfect, it convinces man of all the deceits of his heart, and of all his
false ways and worships, and Convinces him of unrighteousness, and
infidelity, and all manner of evil whatsoever, and leads him into the way of
peace and salvation in obedience to it.

This light is from the Fountain of lights, it is the light of life. John
16.25, 26, 27, 28. John 12.35, 36.

God is supernatural, and this light proceeds and comes from him. [ Farnworth,
Ranters discovered.]

As in the former branch or General head, so also in this I shall not need to
say ought positively touching the light in every man, viz. What it does; Having
spoken thereof before in the former part.

But shall proceed to Consider and Examine by the holy Scriptures, whether that
which I find alleged touching it, and it is operation, be such as it is said
to be.

And herein I might Collect and gather up into one, many things, as spoken by
diverse persons, tending to the same thing, though in variety of expression; yet
if so, I should be constrained to vary in phrase, and form of speech, which by
the persons concerned may be adjudg'd a crime, as I have observed it, to be so
reputed in some others, who to avoid prolixity have done the like, and have
been censured for so doing. I shall therefore (as much as in me lies) keep to
the form of words, as they are laid down in their own terms, and proceed in
the trial and examination thereof accordingly, although I be censured by
others for tautalogy and repetition. These expressions fall in the first place
under Consideration, viz.

The light which Christ has Enlightened every one withal is made manifest,
and convinces of all ungodliness and worldly lusts. [ F. Howgill common
salvation, pa: 7.]

Reply. This passage in the first part thereof takes for granted, That Christ
has Enlightened every one. But how and under what Consideration, it speaks
not, nor need there any thing be further spoken thereunto, then to entreat the
reader to remember what he has observed upon occasion of that Scripture
passage, John 1. the first ten verses thereof; to which he is referred.

2. In the latter part thereof it says:

That it Convinces of all ungodliness and worldly lust: but produces no
Scripture for the proof thereof.

Object. Is it not said in the 3d of John 20 Every one that does evil hates
the light, neither comes to the light, least his deeds should be reproved.

Ans. 1. These are the words of the Lord Jesus touching himself, so as he was
Come a light into the world; as may be observed, verse. 16, 17, 18, 19. and is
further testified John 12.46. I am Come a light into the world.

But they speak not of any light of Christ, as derived from him, and conveyed
into the creature, calling it the light of Christ, as a thing distinct from
him, which convinces of sin, viz. of all ungodliness and worldly lusts; but
testify of Christ Jesus the light: and therefore do no way prove the thing
in hand, touching the light of Christ in every man, except it be said and
prooved that Christ the light is in every man, Convincing him of all
ungodliness and worldly lusts. And if that were said so in plain words, it
would then be enquired what testimony the Scripture gives to such a saying.

2. The property of light is to make manifest the things that are, as they are
things made or done: but that which discovers the rectitude, the straitenesse,
or crookedness of them, is the application of a rule, a reflection of the Law;
from whence proceeds the testification of the goodness, or badnesse. The light
alone does but manifest the action, but the sentence touching the goodness or
the badnesse thereof, proceeds from the Law, which is the rule of the action;
hence proceeds those rebukes, those checks, those smitings, those convincing
reproves, whereby a person is out-argued in himself, and judged in himself,
not the sight of the thing done, but of the evil of the thing done: which can
never appear to be evil by all the light that is imaginable, till the Law
discover it to be so.

For where there is no law, there is no transgression *. By the law comes the
knowledge of sin, Rom: 3 20. I had not known sin but by the law, Rom: 7.7.
[* Rom: 4.15.]

It is the property of the light to make manifest, Ephesians: 5.13. For whatsoever
does make manifest is light; And it is the property of the law to convince,
James 2.9.

If ye have respect to persons, ye commit sin, and are Convinced of the law
as transgressors.

Object. The law and the light are one, Prove. 6.23. for the Commandment is a
lamp, and the law is light.

Ans. John was a burning and a shining light, Joh: 5.35. and the Disciples were
the light of the world, Mat. 5.14. so testified of by Christ; yet John was not
that true light, but to bear witness thereof, John 1.8. nor were they the
light of the world, as he was the light thereof, John 8.12. but they were his
witnesses to the world, Act. 1.8. Ye shall be witnesses unto me, Acts 2.32.
This Jesus has God raised up whereof we are witnesses. They were lights, but
they were not that light, but bare witness of him who was That true light, the
very light of the world, yet were they lights in the Scripture sense. The lamps
which the Lord had lighted up and set a burning; John was a burning and a
shining light, to fulfill the work of his testimony according to his
Anointing, as also the Apostles were.

In like manner the Law may be called a light, as John and the Disciples in
their capacity were; and as the words of the Prophets were, 2 Pet. 1.19. The
most High and holy God, having placed such a transparency and brightness of
perfection therein, by which the rectitude of all actions is to be discovered,
and all swerving, crookedness, and turning aside reprooved. The law is not the
eye, by which we see, but the Glass in which we see our face by way of
reflection, and not the face only, but every spot and blemish is discernable,
if it be applied, and the eye acted and exercised thereon. This similitude the
Apostle makes, James 1.23, 24, 25. alluding to the natural man beholding his
natural face in a glass, retains the figure if he abide, but if he goes away
he forgets what manner of man he was.

So is he which looks into the perfect law of liberty and continues, etc.
This precious Glass of the Law discovers and reprooves by reflection, as the
light shines upon it, and the eye is exercised in beholding its face in it. The
eye can never see its own face, but by this way of reflection upon the perfect
law. As therefore in Math. 26.27. the wine is put for the Cup, when it was
said, Drink ye all of this, which could not be spoken of the Cup, but of the
wine in the Cup. So the lamp and the light are convertible terms, and put one
for another. Psalm. 119.105. How sweet are thy words unto my taste; thy word is
a lamp (or candle) to my feet, and a light to my path: it shows light, it
gives discovery to him that looks into it; according to that in Psalm. 19.8.
The Commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes. The eye is
advantaged to the knowledge of that by reflection of the purity and transparency
of the Law, without which it could never make discovery (viz.) of the
regularity or irregularity of its own actings: it is therefore well called a
light, though but a lanthorn wherein the light burns, or the Glass wherein the
eye reflects upon its own likeness, and sees its own spots, and becomes
self-smitten, and ashamed, being convicted in himself, as they John 8.9. who
being over-argued or convicted in their own Conscience went out one by one. If
what has been spoken will not convince but that the light and the law is one.
It is in the next place to be Considered;

Quest. Whether this light spoken of, as being in every man (be it the light,
or be it the Law, or be it both, or be they both but one) I say whether this
light or Law in every man, does convince every (or any) man of all ungodliness
and worldly lusts.

Answ. It is said so to do, but no Scripture brought for proof thereof, except
those words ungodliness and worldly lusts may be understood to be the
Scripture intended for proof thereof, it will therefore be necessary to
consider that Scripture, where those expressions are used, and to examine what
testimony they give to this matter in hand.

The Scripture hinted at seems to be, that in Titus 2.11, 12. For the grace of
God which brings Salvation, has appeared to all men.

Teaching us that denying ungodlynsse and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously and Godly in this present world; If this be the Scripture
intended for the proof of the point in hand, It is evident that it makes no
mention at all of the light in every man nor speaks a word thereof, nor may
any such thing be gathered from it, but by a meaning and inference, the truth
whereof will be liable to much doubt, and question, besides the censure it
incurrs, from the Author himself, see Common-Salvation before mentioned.

Object. It is said the grace of God which brings salvation has appeared to
all men; and that is the light which Christ Jesus has enlightnned every one
withal; which is in man, but not of man.

Answ. Where is it said, that the grace of God which brings salvation is the
light in every man? is not this an inference or conclusion made out of
something, which is not to be granted, nor can by this Scripture be prooved,
and is at best but a meaning, and without a warrant:

2. It is further evident, that that grace which brings salvation, though it
appear to all yet it teaches us, (viz.) the regenerate, the Children of the
new birth, the Believers, to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
righteously, and soberly, and Godly in this present evil world. It not only
points out the way, and shows it by way of direction but it gives
understanding, and causes the newborn Babe, the Believer, to taste that the
Lord is gracious; It points out the way, and sets his feet into the way, and
leads him on in the way, establishes his goings in that way, keeps his feet
that they slide not from the way; Of this David was sensible, when he prayed,
Psalm. 25.4, 5. Show me thy ways O Jehovah, Teach me thy paths; lead me in thy
truth, and teach me; for thou art the God of my Salvation, on thee do I wait
all the day. And to this agrees that blessed Covenant promise, Eccles. 36.27.
And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes and
ye shall keep my judgments and do them. This is the grace of God which
teaches both privately and positively (viz.) to deny ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and to live righteously and Godly in this present evil word.

And this grace of God does thus teach (viz.) by way of demonstration only;
showing the way and saying walk in it, but by way of effectual causation,
causeing to walk in it, giving power and strength to walk therein,
strengthening the nerves, and sinne^es, and joints upholding and leading on the
regenerate; or newborn, teaching him to deny ungodliness and to live Godly in
Christ Jesus.

But it is not so with the light in every man, for the property thereof at most
is but to discover, and make manifest the deeds done, it is not in the power of
the light (as it is in every man) so much as to call any thing that is done,
either good, or evil, but as it relates and referrs to the law; for by it,
(viz.) the law comes the knowledge of sin.

Nor does the law as its in every man, convince every man of all ungodliness;
and that may be thus demonstrated.

The Law as has been formerly minded, is either considered as the Law of
works, or Law of faith. Romans 3.27. As in the first capacity (i. e.) of works,
so every man and woman in the world, is under the Regiment thereof, Romans 2.14.
Rom 3.19.

As the Law of faith, so it is not written in every man's heart, For all men
have not faith, 2 Thessalonians. 3 2. In their hearts only is the Law written, who are
borne again of the Spirit, and from above [ Jer. 31.33. Heb. 8.8.10. Gal. 3.9.
Romans 9.8.]

The Law as considered, a Law of works, has power over every man and woman in
the world, in things appertaining to the first Covenant, both to give rule
touching things to be done, or left undone, requring obedience, yea, perfect
obedience, to its command, as well in what is to be done, as how to be done; and
this both Negatively, and Positively; Forbidding as well what is not to be
done, as commanding what is to be done: To which are anexed these conditions,
(viz.) The man that does them shall live in them, Romans 10.5. And cursed be
every one that continues not in every thing, which is written in the Law to
do it, Gal. 3.10.

In order to which conditions the Law of works as it is in every man, has
power of deicsion, to weigh and measure, and determine touching the rectitude,
the regularity of every action, and to declare it is conformity, or
nonconformity to the rule and pronounce it good or evil, and to pass
sentence according to the tenor and conditions of the Covenant; both unto them
who continue in well doing as unto them that obey not the truth but obey
unrighteousness for the doers of the law shall be justified, if any such could
be found that had or could fulfill the same in every thing [* Romans 2.6, 7.8.13.]

But this dominion which the law has over every man is limited, Romans 7.1.4.
If once that be dead wherein we were held, we thence forth serve in newness of
Spirit, and not in oldnesse of the letter; bringing forth fruit to another
husband [* Romans 7.6.]

Now it is evident that Whatsoever the law says, it says to them that are
under the Law * Romans 3.19. whether it be the Law of works, or the law of faith,
the Law of sin and death, or the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus. And
whatsoever the Spirit says to such, it says it to them according to the tenor
of the Covenant to which it relates.

Hence then it follows, that as the Law to which all mankind is subjected
being written on every man's heart, is the Law of works, so it directs and gives
rules, detects, and passes sentence touching things done, within its sphere
and compass, as a Law of the first husband, and so of the first man.

But touching such kinds of ungodlikenesse, as relate to the new Covenant, or
law of faith, viz. (among many others) the sin of not believing on Christ, the
light or Law in every man reprooves not for, nor convinces man of, neither can
it, for it is not a condition of that law; Now where no law is, there is no
transgression, therefore no reprooving for transgression, where none is
imputed. More might be added, but it will be taken in, in that which follows.

Object. This pure light that does proceed, and come forth from God, which is
pure and perfect, it convinces man of all the deceits of his heart, and of all
his false ways, and worships, and convinces him of unrighteousness and
Infidelity, and all manner of evil whatsoever, and leads him into the way of
Salvation, in obedience to it; this light is from the fountain of lights, it is
the light of life, Joh. 16.25, 26, 27, 28. John 12.35, 36. * [* Richard
Farnham, Ranters discovered, Page 12.]

Reply, This being much what the same with the former passage of Francis
Howgills, that which has been spoken in answer thereunto, may be applied to
this also, and where there is a difference in their expressions, ir shall be
considered a part and examined. Besides (and among other things) this last
writer says that this pure light (which he also calls the pure Law (Page 2.)
does convince of all the deceits of the heart, etc. Among which he reckons up
Infidelity and all manner of evil whatsoever. To which it may be Replied, that
If by Infidelity be intended a not believing in Christ; then I do affirm,
that the light or Law in every man does not convince thereof.

For though Persons are reproved of many sins by the light and Law within them,
so as to leave them inexcusable before God, yet are they not convinced, or
reproved of the sin of not believing in Christ, but by the Comforter the Spirit
of truth. Joh. 16.7, 8, 9. If I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto
you, but if I depart I will send him unto you. And when he is come, he shall
reproove the world of sin, etc.

Of sin, because they believe not on me;

By which place it is very plainly prooved that to convince of the sin of not
believing on Christ, is not ascribed to the light or Law in every man, but to
the Spirit of truth which Christ would send to his Disciples, upon his
departure, Joh. 16.7.

Object. The light which is in man but not of man reprooves the the world of
sin, and is the same which is mentioned, John 16.7, 8, 9. and convinces of
Infidelity and all manner of evil whatsoever.

Answ. 1. That the light in man discovers, and the Law in man convinces and
reprooves of sin, even to the stopping of all mouths, and making them to
become silent and guilty before God, is acknowledged and witnessed unto both by
the exercise of the accuseing conscience in man, and the testimony of the
Scriptures, Romans 2.14, 15. And has been assented unto before, except in the
case of not believing on Christ.

2. But that this light or Law in every man is the same, which is mentioned,
John 16.7, 8. (i. e.) the Comforter the spirit of truth, which convinces or
reproves the world of the sin of not believing on Christ, It may not in the
least be admitted without great injury to the truth contained in the holy
Scripture.

Forasmuch as First the Scripture says not in express terms that the light in
every man is the same Spirit or Comforter, which was promised in John. 16. to
be sent to reprove the world of sin.

Secondly nor may any meaning or consequent supply the defect by putting in for
a proof thereof, for if the light in every man and the Spirit of truth
promised, John 16 7. be both one; then there was no time since man had a being
on the face of the earth, wherein this Comforter, the Spirit of truth, was not
in every man (as the light is said to have been) and to have reproved every man
of every transgression, yea, of unbelief. Now it is plainly testified by
Christ touching the Comforter, the Spirit of truth, who was to reprove the
world of sin (viz) of unbelief, That he was not yet come, while as Christ was
not yet ascended as appears, John 16.7.13.

Nevertheless, I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that I go away,
for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you, but if I depart I
will send him unto you, when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin.

How be it, when he; the Spirit of truth, is come, etc.

By which words of him who is faithful and true, yea, Truth it self, it is
evident that the appearance and comeing of the Spirit of truth, to reprove the
world, for not believing on Christ Jesus; was not a thing which had always
been with, and in every man, since man had a being, as is affirmed of the light
with which every man which comes into the world is enlightened, Nay, the clean
contrary appears by this Scripture, which testifies that he (the Spirit of
truth) had not yet appeared a Comforter to the Disciples, nor a Reprover to the
world, for their unbelief in Christ; nor could he so appear as yet, till
Christ was glorified, and then Christ when he went away, would send him:
Therefore the light or law in every man, is not that Spirit of truth mentioned,
John 16.7. nor does that light or law in every man, reprove any man of not
beleiving in Jesus Christ.

It remains to consider of a further clause, in the Objection which says,
touching this light (viz.)

Object. That this light is from the fountain of lights, it is the light of
life, John 16.25, 26, 27, 28. John 12.35, 36.

Answ. 1. Although the Lamp or Candle of the Lord in every man proceeds from
God, as from the father, and fountain of lights, Yet that the light in every
man is the light of life, is not a Scripture Phrase, (to say no more thereof)

2. These Scriptures brought to prove it (viz.) John 16.25, 26, 27, 28. John
12.35, 36. speak not the thing (viz.) the light of life, much less do they
say, that the light in every man, is that light of life, and this will appear
to any one that examines the Scriptures which are quoted; which is conviction
enough to the meek and tender, and more need not to be said thereunto, but to
desire such to consider how it is written.

The next passage I am to consider of touching, the light (viz. what it does in
every man) I find thus expressed (viz.)

Loving the light it will guide you to God, from all wen, that you need never
look at man more, Ri. Farnworth, Discover faith.

Reply, The light which is in every man by which the deeds done in the body,
are discovered and manifested (for the light makes manifest) And the Law in
every man which gives sentence upon those deeds done, as good or evil (for by
it comes the knowledge of sin) I say this light, and law, should be by any
person loved and obeyed, yet were it not able to guide to God from all men, so
as that we need never look at man more.

For this were to ascribe falsehood, and to put a lie upon the holy Spirit of
truth, which testifies. Gal. 3.21. If there had been a Law given, which could
have given life, verily, righteousness should have been by the Law, And Gal.
2.21. If righteousness come by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain. So that
there does need a looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of faith, Heb.
12.2. Yea even the Man Christ Jesus, * [* 1 Timothy: 2.5.] who endured the Cross,
despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the Throne of God,
loveing the light that is in man, will not do it, obeying the Law will not,
nor cannot lead up to God; without looking unto him, whom God has anointed
and appointed to be Salvation to the ends of the earth, besides whom there is
no Savior. who says, Look unto me, and be you saved all ye ends of the earth
* [* Esaias 45.21, 22.] Neither is their salvation in any other; For there is no
other name under Heaven, given among men, whereby we must be saved Acts 4.12.
And other foundation can no man lay then what is laid, which is Christ Jesus.*
[* 1 Cor. 3.11.]

Christ himself, and he alone, is the true and only foundation, besides which
no man may lay any other by what name soever he call it, whether light or law,
or what ever other name may be given to it, it is a name diverse from that name,
which God has anointed to be the salvation of the ends of the earth; by
receiving of whom through faith, by believing in his name, we are privileged
with the dignity of Sonship, and declared to be born of God, John 1.12, 13. As
many as received HIM, to them he gave power (i. e.) right or privilege to be
made the sons of God, even to them that BELIEVE in his name, who are born not
of the will of man, BUT of God.

There is some what further to be added in answer to this passage, or sentence,
but I refer it to that which follows, where there will be occasion to treat
again upon the same matter though the expressions of words may be somewhat
varied.

That which follows to be considered in this passage.

Being obedient to the light within, it will bring you to purity, to holiness,
to uprightness; there is your Teacher present with you.

That light obeying, it is your salvation, disobeying that light, is your
condemnation.

Mind your Teacher within, mind the light within, Jer. 31, 34. Esaias 54.13.
John 6 46. John 1.2.27.* [* A brief discovery of Antichrist.]

Reply, It is a most certain truth, that there is in every man a Lamp or Torch,
or Candle of the Lord; which is a great light within him; together with which
there is a Law, which is holy, just, and good, whose tendency is to direct the
Creature to purity, to holiness, and to uprightness, and in that sense is his
Teacher within him, according to the divine truth of that Scripture. The Law
was our Schoolmaster, unto, or until Christ, Gal. 3.24. which is true of the
Law written, either on the heart, or on tables, or in a book (all which are
Scripture expressions?)

I say this light and Law which is in every man, has a tendency to direct
toward purety, and uprightness, but has no power to assist, it gives not the
Creature, the least abillity to perform the thing it requires Gal. 3.21. If
there had been a Law given, which could have given life, but what the Law could
not do Romans 8.3.

Nevertheless it exercises the parts of a Teacher or Tutor, in giveing rules
and precepts in pointing out to a Person his duty and reviving and calling to
account the things done, passing a righteous and just sentence, according to
the terms and tenor of the Covenant of works (viz.)

The man that does them shall live in them, Romans 10.5.

Cursed be every one that contonueth not in every thing which is, written in
the Law to do them, Gala. 3.10.

But as it does not give strength to the performance of what it requires; so it
has received no anointing to relieve the Creature against the sentence of the
curse incurred upon the transgression, which it self pronounces but wounds
him, and leaves him without pouring in either oil, or wine, according to what
is testified, Romans 4.15. Because the Law works wrath.

So that although a person by the light and law within him, may see his work
before him, what is to be done, and while he obeyes the command, is under that
sentence, which says, The man that does them, shall live in them. And he has
peace, while he continues in his obedience, But if at any time, he do amiss
in any thing, where is his Peace then? The Law is faithful, it is impartial,
it does not speak Peace to the transgressor. Nay, the Law works wrath; it
pronounces sentence, Cursed be every one which continues not in every thing.
And this sentence is absolute, without limitation.

Here Is no covering, or terms of recovery; no room for repentance, under the
leading, and teaching of this Schoolmaster, but scourging and lashing, and
wounding, without healing, having no balm, nor, healing medicine in it, but
pure wrath, and pure Justice, powered forth in a curse against the transgressor,
by a just and righteous Law of equity. May I not say then? yea, I do say it
with earning bowels of compassion. Tell me ye that desire to be under the Law
(I mean the light and Law set up in every man) do ye not hear the Law, for it
is written that Abraham had two Sons, the one by a bond maid, the other by a
free woman. I desire the Scripture might be read in its own words, Gal. 4.
from the 21. verse. to the end of that Chapter, and the Allegory thereof given
heed unto as holding forth the 2 Covenants under the Persons of Agar and Sarah
verse. 24. and the 2 seeds under the persons. of Ishmael and Isaac, who both had
but one father (Abraham) from whose loins they both descended, though not so
the one as the other, for the former was born after the flesh.

The other was born after the Spirit.

The first born of these 2. though the son of the bond woman, yet had Abraham
to his father, as truly and really as Isaac had.

Abraham's prayer touching Ishmael (the interpretation of whose name is, God
shall hear) was heard, and Ishmael was blessed, and made fruitful, and
exceedingly multipled, begot twelve Princes, and became a great nation, Genesis
17.20. Genesis 25.12, 16. But notwithstanding all his greatness, and glory, and
privilege of being Abraham's Son, yet his glory was no glory, in comparison of
that which excelled as appears, Genesis 17.19, 21. For it is said, But my Covenant
will I establish with Isaac. I will establish my Covenat with him, for an
everlasting Covenant, and with his seed after him, the Son of the bondwoman,
for all his parentage privilege, and greatness, though he say we have Abraham
to our Father, and we are a great people, yet out of the house he must go,
Cast out the bond woman and her Son * [* Genesis 21.10.] though it be never so
grievious to part with this goodly birth, the firstborn of our strength, yet
it must be done, the Son of the bondwoman must not abide in the house, though
he be Abraham's seed as it was witnessed, Genesis 21.10, 11, 12, 13. whom God will
make a nation because he is his seed.

However out of the House he must be cast; For the servant abides not in the
house for ever, but the Son abides ever, Joh. 8.35, 36. If the Son
therefore shall make you free, then are ye free indeed.

Agar the first Covenant, and Ishmael the seed of Abraham by the first Covenant
must be put away as faulty, they may not abide in the House; no, though the
first, and firstborn: For it is written, The elder shall serve the younger,
and he that caught his brother by the heel must have the dominion; The
application hereof is plain, Nevertheless, for the sakes of some, there may
be a gathering up the sum of what has been spoken touching this matter, and
it is this: That although there be a light and law in every man, which
proceeds from the Eternal God (the Father and Fountain of lights and
spirits) which has the power and dominion over every man (while he is under
age) as a Schoolmasters or Tutor: to the Edicts, precepts, and principles
whereof he is obliged to yield obedience, under the penalty of Curse and
Eternal separation from God which is the Condition of the first Covenant. Yet
this is not the abiding estate which God has appointed to perfect the Heirs
of salvation; but rather in order to the bringing in that better hope; viz. the
promise by faith of Jesus Christ. That it might be given to them that believe,
Gal. 3.22. And after that faith is come, they are no longer under a
Schoolmasters, but admitted to the Adoption of sons, and thenceforth no more
servants but sons; not now under the Spirit of bondage and fear, of being cast
out of the house, as a servant, or son of the bondwoman, who is not to abide
in the house for ever, but now as one whom the son having made free is free
indeed, and shall abide for ever, Joh. 8.35, Gal. 3.25. Gal. 4.5. Romans 8.15.

The light and law of the natural man, of which every one is partaker, and by
which they (which are obedient thereunto) bring forth fruits as unto a first
Husband, which are legitimate and lawful, and of which we are apt to say, Oh
that Ishmael might live in thy sight! Nevertheless, this Husband must dye, and
so must his offspring too, though they seem never so goodly, nor never so
glorious, whether they be mournings, prayings, tears, fastings, humblings,
abstinencies, righteousnesses, loving and obeying the light, and law, which is
in every man. These must all dye, and the glory of them become as the grass of
the field: when the glory of the Lord is revealed, bringing in everlasting
righteousness by the blood of the everlasting Covenant; when the Lord shall
pronounce against the goodlinesse of all flesh, and when the Spirit of the Lord
shall blow upon it, and cause it to wither, declaring all flesh to be grass,
and all the goodlinesse thereof as the flower of the field; which shall wither
and fade away, and its beauty shall be blasted, Isa. 40.4, 5, 6, 7.8. And the
Lord alone shall be exalted in that day. To him then shall every knee bow, and
every tongue swear, surely shall one say (or surely shall he say of me) In
the Lord is all righteousness and strength, even to him shall men come, and
all that are incensed against him shall be ashamed. In the Lord shall all the
seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory, Isa, 45.24, 25. Thus shall
glorying in the flesh and all boasting be cut off, Romans 3.27. to fulfill that
word of the Lord, Jer. 9.23. Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the
mighty man glory in his might, nor the rich man glory in his riches, but let
him that glories glory in this, that he understands and knows me, that I
am Jehovah which exercises loving kindness; Which passage of the Prophet
Jeremiah is made to Center in Christ, who of God is made to his, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption; That no flesh should glory in
his presence; But (as it is written) He that glories let him glory in the
Lord, 1 Cor. 1.29, 30, 31. This poor and base and contemptible hanged and
crucified Jesus, which to the Greeks was foolishness, and to the Jews a
stumbling block, but to the Called, to them which believe, both Jews and
Greeks, He is Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.18, to
31. This is that other husband to whom the believing are married, by whom they
bring forth fruit to God, not in oldnesse of letter, but in newness of Spirit,
Romans 7.4.6. These are they, who notwithstanding all their obedience to the law
of the first husband, wherein they were fruitful, and had whereof to glory as
unto, and under that ministration, yet all that glory and glorying was to veil
it self, yea to vanish and be done away, and rendered Inglorious at the
appearing of that which excelled: the Mother and Child must be gone; Agar and
her Son must have no tarriance, notwithstanding all their pretense of
alliance and affinity to Abraham, yet these must not abide, the Spirit of the
Lord must blow upon them; and plainly and faithfully is it declared, Joh. 3.3.
Except a man be borne again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. And except
that word be fulfilled in him, Romans 7.4. that he become dead to the Law of the
first husband, and married to that other husband, i. e. to him that is raised
from the dead, he can never bring forth fruit unto God (how fruitful soever he
may seem to be; it is not such fruit as of which it may be said, In me is thy
fruit found) i. e. fruit unto holiness, the end whereof is everlasting life,
Romans 6.22. Let a man follow the dictates of the light and law that is in him
with all possible exactness, that the creature is capable of, minding it as
his teacher, and obeying it as such, and arive at a justification in himself;
such an one may have whereof to glory, but not before God. As is testified in
the person of him, who said, I know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby
justified, but he that judges me is the Lord, 1 Cor. 4.4. Forasmuch as not he
that commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord commends, 2 Cor.
10.17, 18. Nor he that pronounces himself clean is therefore so, for who can
say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin, Pro. 20.9. But the
blessedness is thus described, Romans 4.7, 8, Blessed are they whose iniquities
are forgiven, and whose sins are covered: Blessed is the man to whom the Lord
will not impute sin. He therefore that glories let him glory in the Lord,
who, silencing and stopping the mouth of all flesh, cuts off all pretense of
boasting and glorying in his presence, how goodly soever men may seem to
appear to themselves and to one another, looking for salvation from the light
and law within them (as it is common to all men, or as it is such in every man,
for so are the terms) whereas God has not anointed it to that work, nor laid
the great weight of eternal salvation upon the shoulders thereof, it being too
weak for that service*; But upon him that is mighty to save, who is able to
save to the uttermost all them which come unto God by him; even by him in whom
all the seed of Israel shall be justified, and shall glory. [* Romans 8.3. Gal.
3.21. Heb. 7.25.]

It remains to Consider whether there be not a great mistake in the applying,
or rather in the misapplying the scriptures, which are annexed at the Close of
the recited Paragraph, as a proof of it, or of some part thereof. The words
are these, viz.

Being obedient to the light within --

That light obeying it is your salvation --

Mind your teacher within, mind the light within, Jer. 31.34. Isa. 54.13.
Joh. 6.46. Joh. 1.2, 27.

It is to be observed and remembered by the reader, that, The light within, is
all along throughout this discourse understood to be the light within every man
and woman, which comes into the world: of which light in every man it is said,
There is your Teacher present with you, mind your Teacher within, mind the
light within: and then are the Scriptures added, which are last above cited.

Reply. It may not be denied but that the light and law in every man is a
Teacher, a Schoolmasters to every man: it Commands and directs in matters to
be done; it approves, or reproves the deeds done or undone in the flesh,
according to the dispensation and administration thereof; whether it relate to
a law written in letters, or only on the heart; according to To. 2.14. such a
teacher it is of all mankind; for whatsoever the law says, it says to them,
that are under the law, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may
become guilty before God (but no mouth is stopped without a law, Romans 5.13.)
Romans 4.15. Every one is bound to hearken to this teacher, while he is under the
tuition thereof; and for his contempt is inexcusable, being self-convicted, or
convict in his own Conscience. It is the lot of all the posterity of Adam, to
be under this tuition and teaching. But by the recital of the Scriptures
abovenamed it is most Evident, that both the Teacher and the Scholars therein
intended, are differenced from these last abovementioned, and may not without
great injury to the truth and scope thereof be applied for a proof of that,
for which they are alleged, viz. to prove that the light in every man is that
teacher, those Scriptures intend, and are brought to prove; it will plainly
appear upon trial (the Scriptures being examined) that the scholars are not
every man that comes into the world, but they are the children of the New
Covenant, the borne of God, Joh. 1.13. or of the Spirit of God, Joh. 3.3.6. Nor
is the teacher That light, which is within every man, that comes into the
world, but it is the Spirit of truth, the Anointing of the Father, that Spirit
of promise which Christ would send, and which being come would guide the
Anointed ones into all truth, as has been prooved before, from Joh. 14.16, 17,
26. Joh. 16.7, 13.

The Scriptures before mentioned are these which follow, viz.

Jerem. 31.34. And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every
man his brother, saying, know the Lord, for they shall all know me from the
least unto the greatest of them, says the Lord, for I will forgive their
iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more.

And they shall, etc.

Quest. Who are they?

Ans. They with whom the Lord makes the New Covenant.

Quest. Why, who are they with whom he makes a new Covenant?

Ans. With the House of Israel and Judah.

Quest. Who are the House of Israel and Judah?

Ans. Not all the seed of Abraham according to the flesh, as is testified, Romans
9.6, 7, 8. For they are not all Israel that are of Israel: Neither because they
are the seed of Abraham are they all children; but the children of the promise
are counted for the seed. Which promise made by God to Abraham, was not made to
him as he was the father of the Circumcision only, but of the uncircumcision
also, as is witnessed, Romans 4.13.16, 17. As he was Heir of the world, and
father of many Nations, that the promise might be sure to all the seed, not
according to the flesh, but the faith of Abraham: as is further testified, Gal.
3.7. Know ye therefore that they which are of faith, the same are Children of
Abraham, and are blessed with faithful Abraham, verse. 9. For there is neither
Jew nor Greek, neither bond nor free, neither male nor female; for ye are all
one in Christ Jesus. And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and
heirs according to promise.

To this seed of Abraham, (i. e.) the Children of faith, whether Jew or
Gentile, male or female, bond or free, was the Covenant made, and this was it,
Jer. 31.33. I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people: And they shall
teach no more every man his neighbor, for they shall all know me from the
least of them, unto the greatest of them, says the Lord.

By the Consideration whereof; It may most plainly be discerned, how this
Scripture is mistaken and misapplyed, 1. forasmuch as it treats of a new and
another Covenant, which God would make after those days: not according to the
tenor of the first, which obliged the persons of all mankind, either as it
was engraven on their hearts, according to Romans 2.14. or on Tables of stone, or
in a book, under the Administration of the first Mediator, Gal. 3.19. But this
is another Covenant, called here and in Heb. 8. a New Covenant.

2. The persons, with whom this Covenant is made and confirmed, are the seed of
Abraham only, not the Race of Adam (who was the father of every man that comes
into the world) but of Abraham the father of the faithful.

3. Nor were all the seed of Abraham taken into this Covenant, and the
privileges thereof, however they were joynt-sharers, and partakers in the
former: yet not here, for the Children of the promise were counted for the
seed, Romans 9.8.

How far then is this Scripture mistaken and misapplyed, which is subjected
to the light in every man; which intermedleth not with the condition of any
man, but the children of the New Covenant only (i. e.) the believer or man in
Christ; If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to
promise. Now with Abraham and his seed were the promises made. Not with every
man that comes into the world; No more was this Covenant promise mentioned
before, Jer. 31.34. And therefore suites not with the purpose or matter
touching which its produced, viz. to prove that the light in every man is his
teacher, and teaches him (i. e.) every man, so as that he need not to be
taught by any one, saying, know the Lord; for that this Scripture speaks not
to or touching any but the Children of the New Covenant, the children of faith,
or of the new birth only, and not of every man coming into the world.

The next Scripture mentioned is Isa. 54.13. And all thy Children shall be
taught of the Lord.

Quest. Thy Children; Whose, and who are They?

Ans. The citing of the very next Scripture by themselves produced, will both
answer the question, and discover the error in their misapplying it to the
purpose in hand: the place is this, Joh. 6.46. (which I rather do judge was
intended to have been, verse. 45.) the words are these: It is written in the
Prophets, And they shall be all taught of God: Now how that saying in the
Prophet, which was last recited (and to which this in John referres) is to be
understood, will appear from our Saviors words: which are these, viz.

No man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me draw him, and I
will raise him up at the last day. It is written in the Prophets, and they
shall be all taught of God: Every man therefore that has heard and learnt of
the Father comes unto me. Not that any man has seen the Father, save he
which is of God, he has seen the Father.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that believes on me, has everlasting
life.

Who does not discern? that Esaias does not speak of every man, that comes into
the world, nor of the light in every such man, as being his teacher, nor does
our Lord Jesus so interpret his words: Nay the contrary is Evident: For our
Lord does not say every man has a teacher, viz. the light within him, and that
being obedient to that light within him it will bring him to purity, holiness,
etc. Obeying it is salvation; mind the teacher within, the light within. But
he declares plainly, That no man can come to him, except the father draw him;
i. e. teach him; for so it follows, It is written in the Prophets, they shall
be all taught of God.

Quest. Who are they?

Ans. Thy Children shall be all taught of the Lord, Isa. 54.13. Not every one
that comes into the world, but every man, that has heard, and learned of the
father, comes unto Christ, and its he that believes on Christ, who has
everlasting life. These are the children who are taught of the Lord, who having
heard, and learnt of the father, come to Christ; which is not the case of every
one that comes into the world, but of such only as being regenerate and renewed
in the spirit of their mind, become children of the Covenant and heirs of the
promises thereof, or being Christ's through believing are heirs according to
promise, Gal. 3.29.

The next Scripture mentioned is Joh. 1.2.7

But the Anointing which ye have received of him abides in you, and ye need
not that any man teach you, but as the same Anointing teaches you of all
things, and is truth and is no lie.

Reply. This Scripture (as the former) does not bear it self in its tendency
toward every one, that comes into the world, viz. the light in every one, nor
calls that light their teacher, but it speaks of the Unction which they, (
viz. the Apostles, and some others) had received from the holy one; and
describes the nature and property thereof, its efficacy and operation in them,
but what is this to the condition of every man, or to the proof of this, that
the light in every man is this Unction, or Anointing: but this Scripture having
come to hand before, and been Considered then and there, there need not more be
said thereto in this place, there having been too often repetition of things
formerly spoken, the reader is desired to bear in mind, what he has read
already, or else to help his memory by looking back into those pages where
this Scripture is examined.

That which offers it self to be Considered in the next place touching this
light in every man, and what it does, is thus expressed.

This light opens all Scriptures, and leads man out of the fall up to God the
Father, and Fountain of lights, this is the true light, and leads unto life
Eternal, Joh. 1.5.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Joh. 17. 10, 23, 24. Farnworth,
Ranters discovered, pa. 13.

Reply. God who is light, 1 John 1.5. the Father and Fountain of lights, He
reveals secrets, Dan. 2.28, 29.

God the Word, Joh. 1.1. That true light, verse. 9. being made flesh, verse. 14.
and so became the Lord's Christ, Luke 2.26. He opens his mouth in parables,
Math. 13.35. and opens the parables, which himself has uttered, verse.
18.38. Beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, He expounded in all the
Scriptures the things concerning himself Luke 24.27. He as Christ the Lord,
or the Lords Christ, Luke 2.11.26. opened to them the Scriptures, Luke 24.32.
and opened their understandings that they might understand the Scriptures, v.
45. The Spirit of truth which proceeds from the father, and whom Christ would
send from the Father, John 15.26. after he himself was departed, John 16.7.

He, that Spirit of truth, should be the Revealer of secrets, 1 Cor. 2.10. who
is called the Spirit of Revelation, Ephesians. 1.17. and should both bring to
remembrance and open the mystery of the sayings of Christ, and of the holy
Scriptures of truth, John 14.17.26. John 16.13. and continue so to do, as the
abideing Oracle: from whose blessed breathings and whispers, wisdoms Children,
the Anointed ones of the Lord, the Newborn babes, the borne of God; they
which are borne of the Spirit, or from above, are to expect openings and
leadings into truth, Joh. 14.16, 17. The light as thus considered opens all
Scriptures.

Reply. But the light in every man which comes into the world, viz. the Spirit
of a man, Zach: 12.1. or Candle of the Lord, Pro: 20.27. or the law which is
written on every man's heart, which (as has been said before) is one with the
light. This light or law in every man does not, nor cannot open all Scriptures,
nor lead man out of the fall up to God the Father, and to eternal life.

That it does not open all Scriptures, may be demonstrated from the passage now
under Consideration, if compared with the Scriptures, produced for the proof
thereof; For as much as the Scriptures produced make not so much as mention of
the thing, which they are brought to prove.

Who is there that in John 1.5.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. or in John 17.10.23, 24.
can find one word of proof, that the light in every man opens all Scriptures,
and leads man out of the fall up to God the Father, and to eternal life? which
is a plain Evidence and demonstration that the light in Richard Farnworth has
not opened these Scriptures to him, else he would have seen them, not to have
been to the purpose, or matter in hand; and if the light in this person before
named have not opened these Scriptures, then the light in every man does not
open all Scriptures.

Object. The light in every man does open all Scriptures, but it is not to
every man, but to them only, that love it and obey it.

Ans. It has been often said by many, that the Scriptures are plain, and we
deny meanings, and particularly this has been mentioned before, that sharp
sentence of Francis Howgill, Thou that tells of opening Chapters or verses by
meanings, thou never heard a word of Christ.

I would demand of any man, Are not Chapters and verses, Scriptures?

Is not opening of Scriptures, the expounding them, and giveing the sense and
meaning thereof.

Forasmuch as no Scripture needs to be opened or expounded, where there is not
some difficulty or obscurity in the sense and meaning thereof.

In the 24. of Luke. 25.26, 27. our Lord expounds to his Disciples, Moses and
the Prophets, and in them the things concerning himself, and the Disciples
testify, verse. 32. that he opened to them the Scriptures; the like did Peter,
and Phillip, and others, Acts 2.29. Acts 1.16. Acts 8.34, 35. Acts 17.35. If
the Scriptures be plain, and need no opening, how then is the light said to
open all Scriptures; and how may these two writers, (viz.) Francis and Richard,
be reconciled.

The one affirming, The light opens all Scriptures. The other saying, Thou
which tells of opening Chapters, or Verses, by meanings, thou never heard a
word of Christ.

If the light in every man, does open alll Scriptures, to every one that does
love and obey it. How is it, that Richard Farnworth does fail of the true
understanding of the Scriptures before cited? as to the end and scope thereof,
having not in them the proof of the matter, for which they are brought, is it
because he does not love the light and obey it? That will hardly be consented
unto, seeing in his book called Heart-opened, Page 12. He says of himself,
the heavenly treasure does dwell in an earthen vessel, and my joy is in doing
the will of my heavenly Father.

If then the defect be not in him through a want of love and obedience, to the
light in him.

It must be in the light, that is in him, that it cannot, or does not open all
Scriptures to him.

Another instance may be given in this case from the writeings of the same
Person in his book called Heart Opened, Page, 16. I find these words.

You say Christ did break the Passover with his Disciples, true it is, he did
so, to show what death he was to dye, his body was to be broken, and his blood
to be shed, and that was the figure; and they were to observe it tilll he came,
to rise from the dead, and they did so.

They did observe it, till he came to them again, after his death, and then the
shadow was put away, and the life was manifested in power, and the substance
was come unto them, for he showed himself to those very Disciples, which he
broke the Passover with, before his death; Now to whom Christ is come, they
need not to observe that which did typifie or held forth, that he was to come,
Page 18.

Reply, I have chosen to express this whole passage, the rather because I
would avoid the offense of such as might say, I had willingly omitted some word
or sentence to the Authors prejudice.

In this passage there is a plain discovery that the light in this Author has
mistook the Scripture, and instead of opening thereof, has darkened, obscured,
and perverted the truth therein, and that will appear upon examination and
trial.

1. Where it is said, Christ did break the Passover. The Scripture says, not
so, Exodus 12.46. Nay, the law testifies that not a bone thereof was to be
broken, Numb. 9.12. But I suspect the difference between the Passover and the
Supper of the Lord, was not taken notice of by him.

2. They did observe it till he came (says he)

What Scripture gives Testimony thereto, that the Disciples did observe the
Passover, or the Supper, dureing Christ's abode in the grave, or where, and
how, was it by them observed?

3. Then the shadow was put away, and the substance was come unto them, Now to
whom Christ is come, they need not to observe that, which did tipifie or hold
forth that he was to come.

Reply, This kind of opening of this Scripture, and the meaning that is put
upon it speaks thus much to me.

That Christ did break the Passover; but that is not so, rather he brake bread
(and so it is testified) this his breaking bread was a figure, and they were to
observe it, till he came to rise from the dead, and they did so, and they did
observe it, till he came to them again, after his death, and then the shadow
or figure was put away.

Answ. In this case the counsel of the Prophet Esaias is applyable. To the Law
and to the Testimony if they speak not according to this word it is because
there is no (morning) light in them Esaias 8.20.

1. The Scripture does not any where declare, that the Disciples brake bread in
remembrance of Christ, between the times of his death, and resurrection.

2. The Scriptures do testify that they did break bread after his
resurrection and ascension, and if both these be true, then this Author wanted
light in the opening this Scripture-passage or the light in him was not
sufficient to open this, therefore not all Scriptures.

The former of these two, (viz.) that the Disciples of our Lord did observe the
Passover, or Supper in remembrance of Christ till he came to them again after
his death; that this was true, and that the Disciples so did it, remains to be
proved, where, and how it was by them so done, during his abode in the grave.

The latter of them, that the Apostles did observe the breaking of bread after
the resurrection, and assention of Christ, is thus witnessed, Acts 2.42. And
they continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and in
breaking of bread and prayers, Acts 20 7. 1 Cor. 10.16. 1 Cor. 11.23, 24.

If this were not that breakeing of bread which is by our Lord Jesus appointed,
and by the Apostle intended 1 Cor. 11. Let it be made appear by the Scriptures
of truth, by him that can without a meaning; and this I do in an especial
manner commend to the serious consideration of Fr: Howgill.

Or let that meaning and opening of the above named Scriptures (if they need
any) be according to verity and truth, and this I commend to Rich: Farnworth
and both these writers to observe their difference herein, touching the opening
of Scriptures, (viz.) Chapters or verses, The one affirming the sufficiency of
the light in every man to open all Scriptures.

The other saying, Thou that tells of opening Chapters or Verses by meanings,
thou never heard a word of Christ.

It remains to consider touching the light in every man.

Whether it does or can lead man out of the fall up to God the Father, and to
eternal life.

Reply, The light in every man, considered either apart and singly, as the
spirit of a man the candle of the Lord; or as the Law written on every man's
heart, for so the law is light, Prove. 6.23. as before minded. The light and Law
as thus considered, does not, nor cannot lead a man out of the fall etc.

First, That it does not.

This is evident first in the person of Adam, In whom the light after his fall
was as eminent (to say no more) as in any other of the children of the
transgression, Considered as mere subjects of the light common to all or of
that light which is in every man that comes into the world, of which number he
was not the least. Yet the light in him though it discovered to him his
transgression and wrought in him fear; and hideing of himself; it led him not
out of the fall, up to God the Father, and to eternal life, for it is said
Genesis 3.8, 9, 10. And Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the
Lord, and he said, I heard thy voice in the Garden, and I was afraid, because I
was naked, and I hid my self: So true is that word by the law is the knowledge
of sin. Romans 3.20. And the law works wrath, Romans 4.15. And so far was the
light and law in the first man Adam, from leading him out of the fall up to God
the Father, that it had this effect upon him, to drive him from the voice and
presence of God, and through fear to hide himself.

As this is true of the first man, and of the light in him, so may it be
affirmed of the Generations of mankind, and of the light in them, it leads
them not up to God out of the fall nor can do, as not being thereunto enabled,
as may further appear. Those dreadful examples of Cain and Judas, in whom the
light and law did shine so eminently to their souls conviction that they saw
their sin, and owned their guilt, the latter proceeding so far, that to
conviction he added confession, I have sinned in betraying Innocent blood. And
unto both these added restitution, Matthew. 27.3. He repented (i. e.) confessed
the sin, and restored the Silver; That is (as I have heard some say) shamed the
deceit, yet did not this light, which convinced him, lead him out of the fall
up to God, but the contrary as is evident in that Scripture, and in Acts 1.18,
19. verses, other instances might be given, and experience discovers the many
self convicted ones, whose light nevertheless leads them not out of the fall,
up to God the father, but by the light and law in them, are convinced, and
condemned, and driven away from God, and made to hide themselves.

Object. These Instances (nor any other of the like kind) do not at all weaken
the truth, touching the nature and power of the light, for the defect was not
in the light, but in the persons, not loveing nor obeying the light, hence was
their condemnation, which if they had loved and obeyed it, had been their
salvation, and would have led them up to God the Father, and to eternal life.

The light and law in the first man, what ever it was to him before he
transgressed, how lovely, and delightful soever it was to him then, yet after
his fall, his heart did meditate terror; the light and sight of the law was not
desirable, it was not to be loved, but feared, it wrought wrath in him, I was
afraid and hid my self, did it require obedience after the fall so as to lead
up to God, for its work was to pour forth contempt upon the transgressor, to
execute the just, equal, and righteous (though severe) sentence of death,
having no other thing in commission from the lawgiver but death to the
transgressor. In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye. This
decree was peremptory, and without condition, and the law could propound no
dispensation; upon terms of loveing or obeying it, to encourage the Creature to
face about, much less to lead him up to God; and this was the condition of the
first man, till the seed of the woman Genesis 3.15. (As the Serpent) was lift up
upon the pole of the promise, to destroy the destroyer, and become a door at
which man through faith should enter; According to that word, I am the door,
by me if any man enter he shall be saved, John 10.9.

Nor was this Adams condition only, but it is the state and condition of every
man; to whom the light and law does discover sin, and slayes the sinner leaves
him so, till the Lord Jesus the quickening or live-making Spirit, does become a
principle of life and light within him, and he become new born. John 3.3. till
Christ be formed in him Gal. 4.19. and he created a new in Christ Jesus, 2 Cor.
5.17. being begotten of his own good will by the word of truth, James 1.18.
and so born again, of the incorruptible seed, by the word of God, which lives
and abides for ever, 1 Peter 1.23, 24, 25.

I say till a man be thus new born, and new created in Christ Jesus; and Christ
be formed in him, till the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has set
him free from the law of sin and death, he cannot see the Kingdom of God; nor
by the light and law under the former consideration (of which every man is
partaker) be led up to God out of the fall unto eternal life.

The Scripture bears Testimony of Paul. That in the heat of his zeal he made
havoke of the Church Acts 8.3. Chap. 9.1. Chap, 22, 4, 5.19, 20. and being
exceedingly mad against the Saints shut up many of them in Prison, punished
them, and compelled them to blaspheme, and gave voice against them, when they
were put to death, Acts 26.10, 11. yet he was in all this zealous toward God,
instructed according to the perfect manner of the law, Acts 22.3. and touching
the righteousness thereof was blameless, Phil. 3.6. and thought with himself
that he ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth,
Acts 26.9. he was kicking against the pricks, and persecutig the Lord Jesus,
verse. 14, 15. And knew it not, 1 Timothy 1.13. For although he were a
Blasphemer, a Persecuter, and injurious, yet obtained he mercy, because he did
it ignorantly in unbelief.

Hence it appears that Paul did obey the light that was in him, and did
prosecute with zealethe dictates thereof, and was therein zealon toward God,
according to that which is said John 16.2. The time comes that whosoever
kills you, will think that he does God service, or as they of whom Paul
bears record, To. 10 2. That had a zeal of God but not according to Knowledge.

Either the light in Paul was not sufficient to lead him out of the fall up to
God, and to eternal life, or else he did disobey and did not follow the light,
which did lead him.

That he did not disobey but follow the light which was in him, it is evident;
for then his sin had been against knowledge, whereas it is said, he did it
ignorantly, 1 Timothy 1.13. his conscience did not reprove him for the things he
did, for thus he witnesses, Acts 2.3.1. That he had lived in all good
conscience before God until that day; and in the exercise thereof was without
blame in himself, and as touching the law blameless before others, yet was he
nevertheless a persecuter of the Lord Jesus, in his Saints, and did not know
it: which discovers plainly the light in him was either not sufficient to
discover to him the error of his way, or at least did suspend its act of
enlightening him in the knowledge thereof; it checked him not, it convinced him
not, otherwise his sin had not been a sin of ignorance, which is want of light,
but a sin against light, and knowledge, and consequently against conscience,
whereas on the contrary, he thought, he ought to do many things against Jesus
of Nazareth (not knowing him to be the Lord) and he did what he did in his
persecuting and blaspheming, without light and his conscience being silent
toward him in all this; according to that saying of our Lord, Luke 23.34.
Father forgive them for they know not what they do. For it is to be remembered
that there are sins of ignorance, as well as sins against light and knowledge,
the former are not without their guilt, and punishment, though the latter
greatly aggravates both one and the other, as is witnessed in those two
Servants, Luke 12.47, 48. nor was it without the singular wisdom and mercy of
God, who appointed sacrifices to be offered for sins of ignorance, Leviticus
4.2.13, 27, 28. errors in the judgment, as well as in the will, the head and
the heart both sick, must be purged Levit. 5.15, 17, 18, 19. Levit. 4.2, 13,
27, 28.

But to sin against light and knowledge, to be reproved and checked, and
convinced by the light and yet not to reclaim but to go forward in the evil,
is not only transgression and sin, but it is sin aggravated; it is opposed to
sins of ignorance, and is called sinning presumptuously, or sinning with an
high hand, and despising the word of the Lord, such as so sinned were to bear
their iniquity, they were to be cut off, Numb. 15.27, 28, 30, 31. Deutro.
29.19, 20, 21. And to these kinds of sinning has David relation, when he
prays, Psalm. 19.12, 13. Who can understand his errors, cleanse thou me from
secret faults, keep back thy Servant also from presumpteous sins and let them
not have dominion over me, then shall I be upright and innocent from the great
transgression.

To this agrees that saying of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.3, 4. Yea, I judge not
mine own self, for I know nothing by my self, yet am I not hereby justified,
but he that judges me is the Lord.

So that hence it will appear that a person may sin through a want of light or
knowledge, and such may be great sins (viz.) Blasphemy, Persecution in an high
mannner against God and his Saints, such as of which Paul was guilty, and yet
the person committing them by reason of his want of light, to detect, and
discover them, may be without conscience of sin, as in himself, and he in this
his estate not sin against light; Nay, he may do this in the prosecution of
his light, such as it is. According to those words of our Lord, Matthew. 36.23.
If the light in thee be darkness, etc. Luke 11.35. Take heed therefore that
the light which is in thee be not darkness. They shall think they do God
service, having a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge. The light that
is in them discovers not unto them that they are in an evil course all this
while, nor are they convicted of disobedience to the light, for then their
zeal could not be a zeal of God, nor they think they were doing God service,
and have a quiet conscience therein, nor self accuseing, nor self condemning;
therefore the objection does not hold good in the terms thereof, that the light
loved and obeyed will lead up to God the father, and to eternal life,
forasmuch as persons may go on in a course of sin, and therein proceed
desperately against the Lord and his anointed ones, and yet not know it, not
have light to discover it, nor reprove them for it, much less to lead them up
to God out of the fall and to eternal life.

And where the light and law in any person discovers to him his sin, and makes
him know his transgression, yet is it not able to lead such a person out of the
fall up to God the father, and to eternal life; for it roles him in garments
full of blood, it tumbles the transgressor into his grave, and roles a stone
upon him, and seals the stone; so far is it from leading up to God from the
fall, that it drives the soul from God, and keeps him in the fall, till the
Lord who is the quickening or live-making Spirit say to him while he is in his
blood, live: by opening to him a door of hope in this valley of Achor.

Besides what is said in this instance of Paul, and that it appears plainly,
that the light in him did not discover to him his transgression, and lead him
out of the fall up to God, and unto eternal life, notwithstanding he
professes himself, to have had a zeal toward God, in what he did, and that
he did not sin against his light in what he did, but thought he ought to do as
he was doing, while he was opposing and kicking against the Lord. So may it be
further discovered touching the light in every man, that as it leads not out of
the fall up to God, and unto eternal life, those that love it, and obey it, as
in this instance last mentioned.

So neither does it lead into all truth such as love it, and obey it, as may be
discovered in several instances and examples; viz.

Who can Impeach that man of Aethiopia, the Eunuch, of not loving, or not
obeying the light in him? in whom nevertheless it appears to be insufficient,
to open to him the meaning of the Scripture of the Prophet, wherein he was
reading, but understood not of whom the Prophet spoke; for being asked whether
he understood what he was reading? he does not say, yea: But answers, How can
I except some man guide me? and discovers plainly he did not understand, what
he read by the question he propounds, when he says, Of whom speaks the
Prophet this, of himself or of some other man?

Nor is it sufficient to say, the light reveals all truth to them that love
and obey it, though not all at once, but by degrees to them which know little,
and do love and obey it, they shall know more: and so it might have been with
this Eunuch, the light in him was sufficient to have opened to him this
Scripture, and all others, though Philip had never instructed him.

This were to Impeach the wisdom of the most high, and holy God, as if he had
needlessly and causelessly appointed Philip (by the Spirit) to go near and
join himself to the Eunuchs Chariot.

And it were to impute folly unto Philip, who, when in obedience to the Command
of the Spirit, he was come to the Chariot of the Eunuch, did not bid him mind
the light within him, and inform him of the sufficiency thereof, to instruct
him, and teach him, and that he had not need of any man to teach him, if he
would but love and obey the light which was in him, that was sufficient to
direct him into all truth, and particularly into the understanding of that
Scripture of the Prophet Esaias, which he was then reading, but understood not.

Nay had he not a fair opportunity of reprooving him, and of calling him, an
Ignorant man, for saying, How can I except some man guide me? Might he not
have had just occasion, to have bid him turn his eyes inward, and mind the
light within, his guide and teacher was within, he had Scripture within? But
there is not a word of all this proceeds from him, but contrariwise as he by
the Command of the Spirit was bid to arise, and go toward the South, and
particularly was directed to the Eunuchs Chariot, to which he accordingly
applied himself, so being come thither, without any reproof to the Eunuch, or
acquainting him with the sufficiency of his teacher, the light within him. He
opened his mouth, and began at the same Scripture, and preached to him Jesus:
and accepted from him this Confession; I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son
of God, Acts 8.26. to 39.

A further example there is in the person and case of Cornelius, of whom it
cannot be said, but that he was in the meekness, loving and obeying the
light, and prosecuting the dictates thereof in all simplicity, improoveing his
measure and talent, even to acceptance with God; for that he was one that
feared God, and wrought righteousness, as Peter testifies of him Implicitly,
Acts 10.34, 35. And the Spirit of God bears him witness, that He was a
devout man, and one that feared God with all his house, and gave much alms to
the people, and prayed to God always, or incessantly. Was he one that walked
not up to his light, loving and obeying it? The Lord by his holy Angel does
acquit him of this Charge, testifying unto him in these words:

Cornelius, Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God;
Nor does the Lord by his Angel encourage him, to go on in his way, hearkening
to the light in him, and to abide therein, loving and obeying it, nor does he
call him into silence, and command him to cease prayer, and to wait in
silence, expecting his teaching from within, but expressly directs him to send
for Simon Peter, that he might tell him, what he ought to do; who accordingly
so does: and Peter being come unto him, at the special instance and direction
of the Lord, manifesting his pleasure to him in the vision: and having received
an account from Cornelius his own mouth of his being sent for; who having
called together his kinsmen and near friends said, We are all here present
before God, to hear all things that are Commanded thee of God; Then Peter
opened his mouth, and preached unto them Jesus of Nazareth, whom God anointed
with the holy Spirit and power, who went about doing good, being he to whom
all the Prophets give witness, that through his Name, whosoever believes in
him, shall receive remission of sins. And while Peter yet spoke (or while he
was speaking those words) the Holy Spirit fell on all them which heard the
word, and they spoke with tongues and magnified God. This was not a silent
meeting, for Peter opened his mouth and spoke, nor was it a fruitless and
empty meeting, notwithstanding there were words spoken, for the Lord bore
witness thereunto by the gift of the holy Spirit, yea though a Christ without
them were preached unto them, as appears by Peter's Sermon, who styles him
Jesus of Nazareth, whom God anointed with the Holy Spirit and power, who went
about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the Devil, for God
was with him; even he whom they slew, and hanged on a tree, whom God raised up
the third day and showed him openly. I say, a Christ without them is by the
Apostle Peter preached unto them, and their faith in him (as such) is borne
witness unto by the holy Spirit, which is given unto them: whence it may
without Injury to the truth be offered to the serious and sober minded to
Consider, whether the most High and Holy Lord, who does nothing in vain, would
have directed Cornelius to send for Simon Peter, to tell him what he ought to
do, if the light within had been sufficient to have done it? Or that the Lord
would have done so much, to have Convinced the Apostle of his duty, in going to
Cornelius, when he was sent? for if Cornelius had a sufficient instructor
already within him, to inform, and instruct him, to lead him up to the light of
life; or would Peter have Concealed this from his Messengers, when they came to
him, if it had been so?

Or being come, would he not have showed him, how needless a thing it was for
him to have sent so far, having a teacher within him sufficient to have
instructed him.

Or at least would he not have told him, that although he, in obedience to
the Command of God, had sent for him, and it was well, that he had obeyed the
Lord in so doing: Yet now being come, He must be faithful, and preach to him
the everlasting Gospel, and must tell him, he was come, to direct him to his
teacher within him, to the light within him, which lets him see the evil of
his ways, loving it, it would be his salvation, hating it, it would be his
eternal Condemnation.

Whereas this blessed Apostle the Messenger and Minister of the Lord, he
preaches to him the Lord Jesus, living and dying; dead and risen, whom the most
High and holy God had anointed to be a Prince and a Savior, and that through
his name, whosoever believes in him, should receive remission of sins; which
Doctrine was Confirmed by the effusion of the holy Spirit, which plainly
Evidences, that it was no Idle nor fruitless Doctrine, and may have its use to
the Conviction of those, who are contrary minded, in relation to the all, and
alone sufficiency of the teacher within, viz. the light in every man and woman
which comes into the world: and the onlinesse of that Doctrine of a Christ
within, whereas the Spirit it self is pleased, to set his seal of Evidence,
to the preaching of a Christ without, and to confirm the witness, which was
given of him upon the persons of those who received it, the whole 10th Chapter
of the Acts Conteines this instance, as also the second of the Acts from 22. to
the end thereof: gives the like testimony to the same doctrine of the Lord
Jesus, as he was Jesus of Nazareth. So that it does Evidently appear, from
what has been hitherto spoken that the light in every man, though it be loved
and obeyed, yet it is not sufficient to discover the mystery of all truth; and
this appears from the supply, which the Lord has graciously made to those,
who have been most faithful improovers thereof, without reproaching or
upbraiding them for their not abiding therein, or giving them command to abide
there, to turn in and not to look out after any other teacher, but has
contrariwise provided teachers, and sent them such, notwithstanding their light
within.

Besides what has been spoken it may yet further appear, That man cannot
thereby be led out of the fall up to God, and attain thereby eternal
salvation.

First, For that the law and light pronounces an Irreversable sentence upon
the person, that is in the Fall, or in the transgression, Cursed be every one
that continues not in every thing.

Secondly, If man by loving and obeying the light and law, that is in him might
attain salvation, then would not all boasting be cut off from the creature,
contrary to the design of God, Romans 3.26, 27. 1 Cor. 1.29, 30, 31.

Thirdly, The great End of God, in magnifying the Riches of grace by the blood
of Christ, would be frustrate and made void, and of none effect, and Christ
have dyed in vain, Gal. 2.21. Romans 3.24, 25.

Fourthly, The preaching of the Gospel by the Apostles and Messengers thereof
were an unnecessary and superfluous thing; for to what end or purpose should
Christ be preached, as dead, and risen, and ascended, to be believed on for
life, if the light and law in every man, (being loved and obeyed) could lead up
to God, and to eternal life, Act. 26, 16.18. Act. 10.39, 42, 43.

Fifthly, The Apostle expressly declares, That the law could not effect this
thing, Romans 8.3. For what the law could not do in that it was weak through the
flesh, God sent his own Son. and Gal. 3.21. If there had been a law given,
which could have given life, verily righteousness should have been by the Law;
and Gal. 2.21. If righteousness be by the Law, then Christ dyed in vain. But
Christ dyed not in vain, nor was he preached in vain, to have both dyed and
rose again according to the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15.2, 3, 4. nor is that faith
vain, which so receives and so believes, That such might receive the promise
of the Spirit through faith, Gal. 3.14. And through the Spirit wait for the
hope of righteousness by faith, Gal. 5.5. From whence proceeds that true
walking in the Spirit by such, as live in the Spirit, Gal. 5.18, 25. That
following of the Spirit by such, as are led by the Spirit, Romans 8.4.14. And
this is that, which God has anointed, to lead up to him out of the fall, and
to eternal life, according to that testimony, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19, 20, 21.

Forasmuch as ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, but with the
precious blood of Christ, who was foreordained before the foundation of the
world; but was manifested in these last times for you, who by him do believe
in God that raised him from the dead, that your faith and hope might be in God.
Through whom is preached the forgiveness of sins, and by him all that
believe are Justified from all things, from which they could not be Justified
by the Law of Moses: no nor by any works of righteousness, which they could
perform, Tit. 3.5. Ephesians, 2.8, 9, 10. Salvation is not ascribed to man's loving
and obeying the light that is in him: but unto a submitting unto the
righteousness of God; viz. Christ Jesus, who is the end of the Law for
righteousness to every one that believes, Romans 10.3, 4. Who of God is made
unto such, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, 1 Cor: 1.30.

Object. Thou have plainly discovered, that the Christ, in whom thou beleevest,
is a Christ without thee, at a distance, and afar off, and the
Righteousness, which thou tells off, is the Righteousness of another, by
which thou expectest salvation, though thou in the mean time art unrighteous,
and so thou seek a Covering, but not by the Spirit of the Lord, thy Covering
is too narrow, and thy bed is too short: For it is witnessed, That Christ is in
you except ye be Reprobates, and the kingdom of heaven is within, and Christ
in you the hope of glory: and as touching righteousness, it is said the
Righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us, which walk not after the flesh,
but after the Spirit, therefore thou must no more go forth to seek a
righteousness, but look in, the kingdom of heaven is within.

Ans. The Christ, of whom this discourse has been treating, is no other, but
the same to which the Scripture bears witness, as has been testified by many
several passages before recited, not here to be repeated; viz The Lord's
Christ; The anointed Savior, or Christ the Lord.

And it is a truth not to be disdained, but considered by the sober-minded,
(and received according to the divine Evidence that appears in it;) That the
Lord Jesus Christ is held forth in the Scriptures under a twofold dispensation.

First, Either as he was God the Word made flesh, (so becoming the Lord's
Christ) and Tabernacled among men; and as such he was to be believed on,
though he under that dispensation were without; not only before, but after his
Resurrection.

That he was without, while in the days of his flesh, none will deny: whether
he be considered before his suffering, or after his resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.5,
6, 7. That he was to be believed on while he was so, is prooved from Joh.
14.1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me: He that honors not the
Son, honors not the Father, Joh. 5.23. Thus he spoke touching himself
while yet he was in the flesh, and consequently without: during which space of
time he fulfilled all Righteousness, Math. 3.5. And became the end of the Law
for righteousness to every one that believes, Romans 10.4.

His soul being made an offering for sin, according to the Prophesies, which
went before of him, Isa. 53.10.12. He finished transgression, and made an end
of sin; Confirmed the Covenant, and brought in Everlasting righteousness,
Dan. 9.24, 27. By the sacrifice of himself, which he offered up through the
eternal Spirit at once, and that once for all, Heb. 9.14.26, 28.

This he did for his Redeemed ones without them, as is witnessed by many
Scriptures, Romans 5.8. While we were yet sinners Christ dyed for us, Romans 4.25.
Who was delivered For our offenses, and was raised again For our
Justification, 1 Cor. 5.7. Was sacrificed For us, Gal. 3.13. Was made a Curse
For us, Ephesians. 5.2. Given himself for us, 1 These. 5.10 Who dyed For us, Titus 2
14. Who gave himself For us, Heb. 9.12. By his own Blood he entered in once
into the Holy place, having obtained eternal Redemption For us, 1 Pet. 2.21,
24. Christ also suffered for us; who his own self bare our sins in his own
body on the tree: that we being dead to sin, should live unto
Righteousness, By whose stripes ye are healed, 1 John 3.16. Herein perceive
we the love of God, because He laid down his life For us. All this he did
for his: without them, not within them, as is plain by this Cloud of witnesses.

So that to speak of a Christ without, and of what he both did, and suffered
without, not in, but for his people; Even while they were yet sinners, is no
despicable thing, nay it is such a dispensation of Christ as the Scripture
gives testimony of, and bears witness unto. The belief of which is necessary
unto salvation, and without which there is no peace, according to the divine
truth of those Scriptures, Esaias 57.21. There is no peace says my God to the
wicked. And Romans 4.23, 24, 25. But for us also to whom it shall be imputed, if
we believe on him, that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead, who was
delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our Justification, Romans 5.1,
2. Therefore being Justified, by faith we have peace with God through our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom also we have access into this grace wherein we stand,
and rejoice in the hope of the glory of God: and hope makes not ashamed Romans
5.1, 2, 8, 9, 10, 11. For when we were yet without strength, in due time
Christ dyed for the ungodly: (Yea,) while we were yet sinners Christ dyed for
us, verse. 8. Much more then now, being Justified by his blood, shall we be
saved from wrath through him, verse. 9. And being reconciled we shall be saved
by his life. And hence we Joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom
we have now received the Atonement. And to this purpose is that prayer of the
Apostle, Romans 15.13. Now the God of hope fill you with all Joy and peace in
believing.

Nor is this consideration of Christ, as the object of faith for justification,
the antitype of the brazen Serpent lift up upon the pole in the Wilderness, to
which the then bitten ones, under which the sins-smitten soul, the
self-condemned sinners were figured, and to it must these look and live. Numb.
21.8, 9. Esaias 45.22. John 3:14, 15.

I say this consideration of Christ is not the whole of what the Scripture
testifies concerning him; nor may any such use be made hereof, as if the
magnifiing the grace of God were a covering for sin (as the objection
intimates) Nay, nay, should we continue in sin, because grace has abounded,
God forbid, Romans 6.1.

There is therefore a further dispensation of Christ, viz. in Spirit, according
to the tenor of that testimony of the Apostle touching the mystery of
Godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16. God manifest in flesh, Justified in Spirit: and this
dispensation of Christ in Spirit, the Scriptures likewise bear witness unto,
which is Christ's application of that, which he did for his beloved ones in the
days of his flesh, applying that to them by his Spirit (by which he dwells
in them) which he wrought for them without them. Then he prepared the medicine,
and since applies it, and gives it operation; then he wove the Garment, and
since clothes his therewith; then he was the bruised and broken Corn, now the
loaf, or staff of Bread: his flesh meat indeed, and his blood drink indeed,
both eaten and drunken by the believer.

As there was a necessity, that the Word should be manifested in the flesh, to
answer the end of that dispensation, 1 Timothy 3.16. viz. to become the end of the
Law for righteousness to every one that believes, Romans 10.4. That he might
Confirm the Covenant, viz. finish transgression, and bring in everlasting
righteousness, Dan. 9.24, 27. By being made of God (to the believing) Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30.

So it was necessary that he should be Justified in Spirit, in order to the
more effectual application of what he had done, to those for whom he did it:
To whom he was to be preached, and by whom he was to be believed on in the
world, and received up into Glory: According to the testimony of the Holy
Spirit, by the mouths of men and Angels, Luke 24.51, 52. Acts 1.9, 10, 11. 1 Timothy 3.16.

For which purpose he promised, to send the Comforter, the Spirit of truth,
that he might abide with his scholars and followers for ever, John 14.16, 17,
18.26. To teach them all things, and to bring all things to their remembrance,
whatsoever he had said unto them, viz. all things, which he had heard of his
Father, John 15.15. Who when he was come should guide them into all truth,
Joh. 16.7, 13. Nor should this be a privilege peculiar to the then Disciples
only, or to the persons of that age or generation; as appears, Joh. 17.20, 21.
Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also, which shall believe on me
through their word: That they all may be one, etc. in us.

By the Administration of which Spirit of truth, He (i. e.) The Lord Jesus
Christ, makes forth the discovery of himself his mind and will, touching
things to be known and done, believed, and practiced, Joh. 16.13, 14.
Whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak, and he will show you things
to come: He shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine, and shall show
it unto you.

As the glory of God did shine forth through the appearance of Christ, Joh.
17.4. So the glory of Christ does shine forth through the appearance of the
Spirit, Joh. 16.14.

As Christ did nothing of himself during his ministration in the world, Joh.
12.49, 50. I have not spoken of my self, but the Father which sent me, gave
me Commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak; and as the Father
said to me, so I speak.

So the Spirit of truth, he shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he
shall hear, that shall he speak; He shall glorify me, for he shall
receive of mine, and shall show it unto you.

As God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. So is
Christ in Spirit subduing the world to himself, Joh. 16.7, 8. Now the Lord is
that Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.17.

As Christ by being put to death in the flesh has once suffered for sins, the
just for the unjust, that he might bring them to God. 1 Pet. 3.18.

So by being justified in spirit, or quickened by the spirit, or declared to be
the son of God with power: according to the spirit of holiness, 1 Timothy 3.16. He
does actually effect that thing in all them, who by him do believe in God, that
raised him from the dead, and gave him glory, that their faith and hope might
stand in God, 1 Pet. 3.18. Romans 1.4. Who by faith purifies their heart in
obyeing the truth, through the spirit waiting for the hope of righteousness by
faith, 1 Pet. 1.19, 21, 22, 23.

By which spirit he does negotiate all the affairs of his kingdom on earth,
and so has done from the time of his ascending up on high, when he led
Captivity captive, and not only received gifts for men (or in the man, yea for
the rebellious, that he might dwell among them, Psalm. 68.18.) But also gave
gifts to men, Ephesians. 4.8.12. for the gathering into one, or perfecting the number
of the Saints, for the edifying or building up the body of Christ, till we all,
(that is, all the seed,) come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge
of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ, which cannot be so long as one joint, one finger, or member
of the body is uncalled, ungathered, or unjoynted: according to that of Heb.
11.40. For as they without us could not be made perfect, so neither they nor
we, apart, nor together can so be without those, which are to come after, who
altogether make up the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, whose
body cannot be complete till every joint be supplied.

The Effecting whereof the Lord Jesus Christ performs by his spirit, from the
very first stone (the foundation) to the top stone thereof: For he having been
hammered, and broken, smitten and bruised, crucified through weakness (when
his soul was made an offering for sin) yet being raised in power, and declard
to be the Son of God, with power by the spirit of holiness, and liveing by the
power of God; was made perfect through suffering and became the Author of
eternal salvation to them which obey him; being laid for a foundation, for a
Corner stone: 1 Cor. 3.11. 1 Pet. 2.6. Ephesians. 2.20, 21, 22. In whom the
building is fitly framed together, and built up together for an habitation of
God through the spirit, by which spirit the work is both begun and carried on;
by it the stones are hewn and made meet to be made partakers of a place in the
building; they are fitted, and then fitly framed, and built up together from
first to last.

The first work, which Christ by his spirit would exercise in the world after
his departure, was to reprove the world of sin, viz. of unbeleefe, John 16.7,
8, 9. and not only should they thereby be reproved of sin, and of that before
named, in particular or in special, that is, of unbelief, but it should
convince them also of righteousness and of judgment: The law under the former
dispensation, though it convinced of, and reprooved for sin, yet it discovered
not a perfect righteousness, nor brought forth judgment into victory, but
having detected the sinner, it left him under the sentence of judgment and
condemnation, but the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, That quickening
spirit proceeds at another rate, it not only reproves the Sinner, but reveals
the Savior, opens a door of hope to the convicted sinner: If so there may be
hope, and for this reason (among others) it is called the Comforter, giving to
the sin-smitten soul the valley of Achor, for a door of hope. I will be
merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and iniquities will I
remember no more; making the discovery of grace, a foundation of repentance,
and returning to a poor convicted and reproved sinner, holding proportion with
that ancient and first Gospel promise, or word of faith, the seed of the woman
shall break the head of the Serpent, Genesis 3.15. applied by God to the
trembling sinner Adam, when he was afraid and hid himself. By the same spirit
does Christ administer as a spirit of wisdom and revelation, opening the eyes
of the understanding, Ephesians. 1.17. that men may come to the knowledge of him
and may know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory
of his inheritance in the Saints (i. e.) in them that trust in Christ, or
believe, and are sealed with the holy spirit of promise, Verse. 12, 13.

Which operation of the spirit is wrought as himself lists, Joh. 3.8. and by
what means himself pleases (though ordinarily) by the preaching of the word
according to divine appointment, Romans 10.17. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. whereby the
spirit opens the blind eyes, and turns men from darkness to light, and from
the power of Satan to God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and
inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith, which is in Christ Jesus,
Act. 26.15, 16, 17, 18.

Which Faith is the fruit of his spirit in them, Gal. 5.22. whereby they are
given to believe, Phil. 1.29. and to receive Christ Jesus, Joh. 1.12. and to
submit to him for life and salvation, by which they receive the witness in
themselves, that they are adopted Sons; 1. Joh. 5.10. the spirit it self
bearing them witness that they are born of God, Romans 8.16. and are the seed,
whom the Lord has blessed, Esaias 61.9.

So that Christ is not at a distance, not a far off from such as truly
believe: but is nigh them, dwelling in their hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3.17. and by
his Spirit, Romans 8.11. and is in them the hope of glory, Col. 1.27. whereby
they being renewed in the spirit of their mind, Ephesians. 4.23. and being married
to this their other husband, henceforth they bring forth fruit to God, not
according to oldnesse of letlet, but according to newness of spirit: Romans 7.4,
6. not taking advantage of the grace of God, to dispense with themselves in
point of obedience toward God, but reckoning themselves under deeper
obligation; that as grace has abounded toward them, so might their obedience
toward him, that has manifested that grace unto them, as he who said, What
shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits; I will take the Cup of
salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord, Psalm. 116.12.

What were those benefits? The Lord has heard the voice of my supplication;
thou have delivered my soul from death, my eyes from tears, and my feet from
falling: I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living, Psalm. 116.1. I
will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will call upon the name
of the Lord, -- as long as I live, Psalm. 116.17. She loved much because much
was forgiven her, Luke 7.47. The life of the New Creature, of the renewed man,
or man in Christ, in whom Christ lives by his spirit, and dwells by faith, is no
idle unfruitful life: but as a branch in the Vine, and as a part of Gods
husbandry he is purged and pruned, and caused to bring forth fruit: filled with
fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the praise and glory
of God, Phil. 1.11.

Not living to himelfe: It is his meat and drink to do the will of his
Father; He now comes to bear witness to the truth of that Scripture, which
says, In keeping thy Commandments there is great reward. Though formerly his
soul went forth after the knowledge of Christ, sometimes the Excellency of him
as he was discovered and revealed in the Scriptures, sometimes the necessity
of him, as being the way to the Father, and the only Name, besides which there
is no other given among men whereby they can be saved. Under which
dispensation, and in the exercise whereof it was not so much Christ, that was
the ultimate object of the souls enquiry, as it was the Creatures preservation
from wrath to come. It was not so much for Christ himself, as for the
Creatures own self, that the soul was so earnest, and ardent in its pursuit
after vision and manifestation; yet it knew it not, nor could it have believed
that it had been so with it.

But Judgment breaking forth into victory, remooving the Spirit of Fear, and
giving (in stead thereof) the Spirit of love, and of a sound mind, 2 Timothy
1.7. The Grace which was given in Christ Jesus was made manifest, and by him
brought to light, and in his light was the new Creature caused to see light,
and by it to discern where it had stuck all this while, and how it had
mistook its way, and sought its self in all its seeking, under pretense of
following on to know the Lord, whom to know is life eternal. Then the fire
burned and the love was kindled toward him, who had shed abroad his love in
the heart by the Holy Spirit, setting it in an holy flame toward himself and
his service. Henceforth he became as one made up of strong desires and
breakings of heart after doing the will of God: Oh that he were then baptized
into the will of him, whose he is, and whom he would serve according to the
tenor of those Scriptures, I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies
of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto
God, which is your reasonable service. And be not conformed to this world, but
be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that
good, that acceptable, and perfect will of God, Romans 12.1, 2. 2 Cor. 7.1. 1
Pet. 1.14, 15, 16. As being bought with a price, would glorify God in body and
Spirit, which are Gods.

Not now as formerly obeying for life, or that he might live, but from life, or
because he is made to live, or because he does live by the power of Christ
living in him, Gal. 2.20. his whole life is a Thank-offering, a sacrifice of
praise, the end henceforth of all he is, and all he does, is this, that he may
live to him, who dyed for him, and rose again; to him, who has loved him, and
washed him from his sins in his blood, Rev. 1.5. to him, who has said to him,
when he was in his bloods live: not expecting a covering of sin, that he may
live in sin, nor the righteousness of another, that himself may live in
unrighteousness: but that he might live to God, and serve him without fear in
righteousness and holiness of truth, Luke 1.74, 75. But as really as he does
believe that Christ is made of God to him righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30 so verily
expects he to be made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. that the
righteousness of the Law, which could not be fulfilled by him through the
weakness of the flesh might be fulfilled in him by the power of the spirit of
life, Romans 8.3, 2 4. wherein he is made able and wiling to wait for the hope of
righteousness by faith, Gal. 5 5, 18. expecting to be led and made willing to
follow the guidance of the spirit, even the spirit of truth, by which he lives
and moves and exists in Christ, who is (by his spirit) in him, the hope of
glory, Col. 1.27.

Object. Thou have heaped up together many of the Saints words, whose condition
thou never learned of God: Tell plainly whether the Christ (thou tells of) be
within or without.

Answ. How far my soul is made one with what I bear witness unto, is known
unto him from whom nothing is hid, to whom I apply for a further measure of the
spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him, whom to know is
eternal life: remembering what is witnessed, Romans 15.4. being unmooved by the
Judgment or censure of man's day; and in relation to the objection, have spoken
in plainness already; That the Lord Jesus Christ, to whom (in this poor
stammering way) I bear witness, is considered both as being without and within
the soul.

Respecting his person or bodily presence, his glorious or glorified body, so
he is considered as being without, not within the soul: according to the
testimony of those Scriptures before-named, Joh. 17.24. Father I will that they
also, whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my
glory which thou have given me, 1. Tim. 3.16. Believed on in the world,
received up into glory.

And he shall send Jesus Christ which before was preached unto you, whom the
heaven must receive, until the times of restitution of all things, Acts 3.20,
21.

For our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior
the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body, or body of vileness,
that it may be fashioned, like his glorious body, Phil. 3.20, 21. according as
John also testifies, 1 John 3.2, 3. But we know that when he shall appear we
shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is.

Thus then in relation to his bodily presence, he is considered as without us,
as is testified 1 Pet. 3.22. Heb. 1.3. Col. 3.1. Act. 7.56.

But in relation to his spiritual presence, so he fills all things, Ephesians.
4.10. and in respect thereof it may be said,

Whither shall I go from thy spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy presence,
Psalm. 139.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. and though the influence of his supporting and
susteining presence extends to all things, upholding them by the word of his
power, Heb. 1.3. (though they see it not) Col. 1.17.

Yet his special Resience and presdence is with such, as being joined to the
Lord are become one spirit and are his house, his Temple, where he abides, as
one at home, and that for ever; as is testified, 1 Cor. 6.17, 19, 20. He that
is joined to the Lord is one spirit: What, know you not that your body is the
temple of the holy spirit in you: which ye have of God, and ye are not your
own, for you are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your body and in
your spirit, which are God's.

Nor is this union of Spirit, or spiritual union; this residence or Temple
presence; as the state of a wayfaring man, which tarries but for a night: for
this is the word of promise, Joh. 14.16, 17. I will pray the Father, and he
shall (or will) give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for
ever, even the Spirit of truth. Ye know him, he dwells with you, and shall be
in you. Now the Lord is that Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there
is liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17. The fear of Casting out is removed and gone, and the
soul put into a capacity of serving the Lord without fear, in holiness and
righteousness before him all the days of its life.

Such persons being joined to the Lord, and become one Spirit with him,
Beholding with open face (or, with the face unveiled, which veil is done away
in Christ) the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image from glory to
glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord: and of such persons, such Temples,
such spiritual houses, may it be said as anciently it was said of the typical
place of Gods residence and abode, 2 Chr. 7.16. I have chosen and sanctified
this house -- Mine eyes and my heart shall be there perpetually. Psalm. 132.14.
This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have desired it, I will make
the Horn of David to bud; which was, is, and shall be accomplished in the Lord
Jesus, whom God has raised up as an horn of salvation in the house of his
servant David. Luke 1.69. By whom he has begun to repair the breaches, and
build again the tabernacle of David, which was fallen down, and will build
again the ruins thereof, and will set it up, that the residue of men may seek
after the Lord, and all the Gentiles, upon whom my name is called, (or as many
as the Lord our God shall call, Act. 2.39.) says the Lord that does all these
things, Act. 15.16, 17.

Then shall the body be completed, and every joint supplied, the Saints
perfected, and gathered into one in the unity of faith, and of the knowledge of
the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ: Who as he is the head of the body, Ephesians. 4.16. and 5.23. in
whom the universal body or Church of the first born become a perfect man, being
fitly joined together in due order of membership to the completing thereof.

So is he the foundation or chief corner stone of the building, in whom every
living stone is framed together, and built together an holy Temple in the Lord
an habitation of God through the spirit. Thus is the Lord Jesus Christ in
Spirit both Author and finisher of faith in every one that believes.

As considered the object of faith, so is he held forth in the Word, as one,
who himself in his own body has done whatsoever was necessary to bring us to
God; and this he did for us, and without us, Phil. 2.7, 8. 1 Pet. 2.21, 24.

As considered the Author and Finisher of faith, in bringing us to God, so he
performs all in us by his Spirit, from the very first step of conviction,
laying himself as a foundation in the judgment and will; to the very top stone
of the building, and that he might be all in all.

It remains to consider some certain passages expressed in a Letter written by
a friend of this conscience and persuasion, the particulars whereof follow, viz.

Dear Friend,
I Truly own in thee a breathing after the Lord, and unsatisfiedness till thou
have found him, whom to know is life eternal; but the mistake is about the way
to attain: -- Now the way for lost man to return to have Communion and
fellowship with the pure and holy God, is by Christ; who says, I am the way.

But where to find this Christ or way, here lies not only the difference, but
also for the want of the knowledge of this, and walking in it; is the true
cause of man's misery, and thou thy self art not ignorant of the several forms
that cry, Lo here, and lo there: yet the way is but one.

Search the Scriptures, and see if Christ be not only the way, but also Christ
near: and while we consider Christ at a distance, is it any more than those,
that are of the world, which say, Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge
of thy ways --

To this will that other Scripture agree, When they knew God they glorified him
not as God, these had such a knowledge of God, that they might thereby have
glorified him as God, which not doing, they were given up to vile affections:
Now to know him that is the gift of God, if ever we will, we must know him as
God holds him forth.

Christ says of himself that he is the door:

Can any one enter to God otherwise than by Christ?

He also says he is the light:

Can any one come to God but he must receive the light?

Also, there are measures of this light: --

The first measure or degree of light is, that which discovers sin and
iniquity, and He that will not own Christ, and follow him in this, and be
faithful, he may learn to talk of Christ, yet he shall never know more until he
come down to this door of entrance.

Christ says, I am the light, and to them that receive him, to them he gives
power, to become the Sons of God: the light rejected, no power received, and
this I am a witness for the Lord in.

I am bold in the Lord to say your heart shall fail, and your eyes grow dim,
that looks for another way, or another Gospel than the power of God that
redeems out of sin.

And this I say and do testify to all, small and great.

He that receives the light, and is obedient to it, receives the gift of God,
and shall receive the power; for Christ is not unfaithful.

The name of Christ in the outward sound is pleasant, in as much as thereby men
look to have their sins taken away. But consider seriously, if the Gospel be
not clear, and without danger to be received, as it is in it self, the Apostle
says, It is the power of God to salvation to every one that believes. And let
him be accursed that preaches another Gospel; What then will become of all
those which have preached a Gospel without power.

I further say, If the first wisdom could have attained, then might thou
have had whereof to boast; but it is written, and I also set to my seal, that
man by wisdom knows not God, and it is the work of Christ to destroy the
wisdome-of that nature, and to bring in a wisdom of another nature, viz, pure
and peaceable.


In relation to what is expressed by this Friend, I might allege, that there
has been consideration had already of whatsoever is material in these passages
of his Letter: yet considering his condition, as not being inclined to reading
much, and doubting whether what has been said in the foregoing part, may be
gathered up in the application without prejudice or offense, I am free to
reassume some things formerly insisted on, for the sake of my so much longed
for and beloved Friend, (who probably may read no more than what concerns
himself) though I undergo from others the censure of Tautologie and Repetition.

I find it to be by him affirmed,

1. That the way for lost man to return to Communion with the pure and holy
God, is by Christ, who is the WAY: To which I also assent, the Scripture
testifying the same, Joh. 14.6. I am the way, no man comes to the Father but
by me.

2. That Christ is the Gift of God.

Herein I also assent; the scripture bearing testimony thereto, Joh. 4.10. with
this further consideration, that though the Lord Jesus Christ be The Gift of
God: eminently so, no gift like him, none so eminent as he, yet he is not the
alone, (or only) gift of God: there being other gifts of God beside him, though
none to be compared with him; faith is a gift of God, Phil. 1.29. Repentance is
a gift of God, Act. 5.31. so is salvation also, Ephesians. 2.8. Though all these
veil and lay down their Crowns at the feet of Christ: as being eminently the
chief; yet are they gifts of God distinct from Christ: and the Apostle James,
Chap. 1.17. puts the matter to an issue, where he says, Every good and every
perfect gift comes down from the father of lights, etc. so that though Christ
by way of eminency be the Fathers gift, yet not the alone (or only) gift of
God: Though the Father has but one only begotten Son, Joh. 1.14, 18. yet has
he many Sonns more besides him, though he be the first born among many
brethren, Romans 8.29. so is he also in relation to the manifold gifts of God,
the first born of them all: and by way of eminency called THE GIFT; yet of him
it is said, he received gifts for men, Psalm. 68.18.

3. That Christ is the door.

To this the scripture likewise gives testimony, Joh. 10.17. I am the door of
the sheep: and that no man can enter otherwise than by Christ the door, I
assent; for as much as there is no other name under heaven given among men,
whereby we must be saved, Act. 4.12.

4. He also says, he is the Light, can any one come to God but he must receive
the light?

It is indeed said by Christ himself, Joh. 8.12. I am the light of the world:
And that none can come to the Father but by him, has been said already: other
foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11.

5. Also there are measures of this light, the first degree or measure of
light, is that which discovers sin, and iniquity.

Reply. Christ Jesus, the Way, the Gift, the Door, the Light, is but one,
entire and undivided being, not admitting of degrees or measures: but a whole,
and entire Christ, is the way, the truth, the life, the door, the light. Though
there be manifold gifts of Christ who ascending up on high gave gifts to men,
and these admit of their measures and degrees, Ephesians. 4.7, 8. 1 Cor. 12.4.

Yet of him who is called (as before) the door, the way, the gift, the light,
viz. the Lord Jesus Christ, of him it is said, Is Christ divided? He is but one
and undivided.

The first measure and degree of light, is that which discovers sin, and
iniquity.

Reply. That measure and degree of light, which first discovers sin and
iniquity in any man, is the law, which God has written on the heart of the
natural man: (that is, of every man, as has been largely proved before) for by
the law comes the knowledge of sin, and where no law is, there is no
transgression, Romans 2.15. and 3.20. and 4.15.

And this first discovery of sin and iniquity may be, where the sound of
Christ, as a door, as the light, as the way, may not have been, and so it was
in the first man the root of all mankind. That measure or degree of light,
which discovered sin to him, was the law written in him, by which he was
convinced and reproved: the effect whereof was horror and amazement employed in
those two words, I was afraid and hid my self, for the law works wrath and
leaves the sinner under the sentence of curse and condemnation: it is a good
Schoolmaster, it teaches perfectly and directs plainly what is to be done, but
woe to the transgressor, it opens no door of hope to him upon no terms: no not
upon the terms of his amending, and doing better for time to come; though he
err thorough ignorance and against his will, yet this severity is found in the
equity and justice of it, (as it is written, Cursed is every one that continues
not in all things, which are written in the book of the law to do it.)

And thus the first man found it by his first measure of light, which
discovered his sin and condemned him, as the sinner; but the way, the gift, the
door, the light, (Christ Jesus) was not hereby revealed: here was the sin found
out, and the sinner driven out by the first measure of light, viz. the law: But
the Savior of the sinner from sin and death, was not revealed by this first
measure of light. The sin was discovered, but the sinner was not thereby
recovered; Till the Lord holds forth the Scepter of grace in the promised seed
of the woman, Genesis 3.15. who was to be received as the way to the father, the
door by which entrance was to be made, the gift in whom was exhibited eternal
life, Redemption from sin and wrath: a proper object of faith while yet he was
but in promise, so was he received and so believed on by all the children of
faith under the first Covenant, Heb. 11.13, 39. and the contrary with those who
mingled not the Gospel with faith, and so fell short of the rest, and could not
enter because of unbeleef, Heb. 3.19. Heb. 4.2. notwithstanding the measure of
light which discovers sin and iniquity.

So then, the first measure and degree of light which discovers sin and
iniquity, is the Law of God written in every man's heart; but it is not Christ
the light, the door, the way, the gift; for Christ is not the law, but the
Lawgiver: Christ is the end of the law, not only in the commonly received
sense, the end of all figures, types, and shadows, the substance in which they
all center.

But he is so the end of the Law, that he finishes and perfects what the Law
could not finish nor perfect: He takes up the work where the Law leaves it.

The Law may say, O my God! I have showed them thy ways, I have been a light
and a lanthorn unto them, I have kept back nothing that thou gave me in
command to show unto them, and to require of them: But they (like men) have
transgressed, and have started aside like a broken bow, and are become guilty
and filthy: Woe unto them, Woe unto them, they are polluted; my Commission is
to curse them from mount Ebal, and they shall be cursed; Cursed be Every one
that abides not in Every thing written in the law to do it: in some thing or
other, every one has transgressed, every mouth is stopped, and every one
become guilty before God. God has concluded all under sin, saying there is
none righteous no not one, Romans 3.10, 19. they are all transgressors I cannot
redeem them, I cannot bring them to God: But Christ takes up the matter, where
the law leaves it; and becomes the end of the law for righteousness to every
one believing; saying, to this end was I born, and for this cause came I into
the world, to bear witness unto the truth; giving the Valley of Achor for a
door of hope, perfecting and finishing the work, which the law had been
laboring to effect but could not; For that which the Law could not do, he did,
being not ashamed to call them Brethren, whom the law had left under the
sentence of the curse, and that he might bring many sonns unto glory, himself
the captain of their salvation, was made perfect through sufferings, delivering
them from the fear of death, who all their life time were subject unto bondage:
standing upon Gerizim the mount of blessing (in opposition to that mount Ebal,
where the law had left them) making triumph and open show in behalf of the
seed: saying, Behold I and the children God has given me, all that the father
has given me shall come unto me.

They are blessed, and they shall be blessed; though righteousness could not
come by the law (for if it could then had my death been in vain,) yet to the
believing, to every one that believes, I am the end of the law, for
righteousness being made so of God to and for them, that the righteousness of
the law may be fulfilled in them, and they be made the righteousness of God in
me.

Though the first measure of light, viz. the law written on the heart of the
natural man, be not Christ, the way, the door, the gift, the light: yet it is
such a measure and degree of light common to all men, as to the direction
whereof they are to give obedience, and in the doing whereof they enjoy much
peace, and many persons in many things done in obedience thereto, have whereof
to glory, but not before God: for their peace is seated in their understanding,
while they think they do God good service, but Gods thoughts are not as man's
neither is their peace the peace of God which passes all understanding: which
guards the heart and mind through Christ Jesus.

Nevertheless it is a good thing and has a measure of blessing annexed to it,
for a person to be obedient to the law in the measure of the knowledge whereof
he has attained according to that testimony; Happy is that man whose
conscience condemns not himself in that thing which he allows, but does
exercise himself to keep a good conscience toward God, and toward man.

But when he has done all he can there is this one thing lacking to sell all
he has; to resign up all to Christ Jesus and leave it at his foot, that when
he has done all, he reckon himself an unprofitable servant, and to have done
nothing in all that is done, to sell it all, and give it all up in sacrifice to
God, this is more than whole burnt offerings and more than is attainable under
the dispensation of the first measure of light, and obedience thereunto: for if
so, then righteousness were attainable by obedience to the law, contrary to
that testimony; If there had been a law given, which could have given life,
verily righteousness should have come by the law, and if righteousness could
have come by the law, then had Christ died in vain. But God has concluded all
under sin that he might have mercy on them that believe: to cut off boasting
and glorying in the flesh; that he, which gloryeth, might glory in the Lord,
who has said, It is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in
God that shows mercy, who testifies, That not by works of righteousness
which we have done, but of his mercy he saves his saved ones?

Leaving no room for glorying or boasting to him, that works, nor color of
confidence to him, that is in the disobedience to the first measure of light:
for even he which despised Moses law died without mercy: such will be the
portion of every one, who is willingly ignorant, and disobedient, to what is
made known to him by the law that is in him.

Yet to call this (which discovers sin in man) Christ the light, the gift, the
door, the way, is to take the Gardener for Christ, as Mary did mistake Christ
for the Gardener. The good way then is not to confound the several
dispensations of God, not to advance the son of the bond woman into the room
and place of the son of the free woman, not to prefer the servant into the
place of the Heir: but to consider every one as in his own order; giving the
honor to each dispensation according to the measure appointed unto it of God:
which is not to assign to the first (the light common to all mankind) the place
of a door or entrance into the heavenly inheritance: for there is an house
called Moses house, Heb. 3.2. which had its door of entrance or admission, and
a law of ordinances suitable, the disobedient thereunto were subject to death:
they died who despised Moses law.

But that house of Moses was taken down, the veil thereof rent in sunder: and
this other house, the Sons house is set up in the room thereof, and he himself
become both foundation and top-stone, both door of entrance and mansion of
residence: he is all in all to every one that receives him by faith, and
manifests their faith by obedience: walking obediently before him, who is Lord
of his house and faithful therein as a Son: as Moses was in his house as a
Servant; Administering therein by the law of the spirit of life: leading his
sheep, going in out and before them, guiding their feet, and causing them to
walk in his way, according to that blessed witness, and testimony, The meek he
will guide in judgment, the meek he will teach his way: and will keep the feet
of his Saints, and uphold their goings that their footsteps slide not.

It is further added in these words viz.

Christ says I am the light to them that receives him, to them he gives power
to become the Sons of God; The light rejected, no power received.

Reply. This passage touching power to become the Sons of God is necessary to
be considered: (though it has been hinted before.)

I find in scripture that the word (...) is not only used for power, which
consists in the virtue or strength which a person has to do any thing, but
it is used to signify Dignity, Honor, Right, Privilege, Prerogative,
Authority, or Liberty.

1 Cor. 8.9. But take heed lest this Liberty (or Privilege) of yours become a
stumbling block to them that are weak: the word is (...) the same which is in
Joh. 1.12. rendered power.

1 Cor. 9.4, 5, 6. Have we not power to eat and to drink, have we not power to
lead about a Sister a Wife, as well as other Apostles, have not we as much
right and Privilege as they, or I only and Barnabas have we not power to
forbear working; that is, have not we liberty so to do? It is used for dignity,
honor or prerogative which the Devil used as a bait in his tempation to our
Lord, Luke 4.6. who taking him up into an high mountain showed him all the
Kingdoms of the world, and said to him, All this power will I give thee and
the glory of them, etc.

And to this of privilege and dignity and prerogative, does the interpretation
of this word, in Joh. 1.12. agree, as may appear by the connection of the word,
which follows (...), which though it be rendered in the English to become, that
it may the better agree with the former word power: viz. power to become the
sons of God, yet the word truly and properly signifies to be made the Sons of
God: and that will appear by the interpretation of the same word in the same
first of John and in other scriptures, where it is not rendered become, but
made: Joh. 1.3. all things [(...)] were made by him, and without him was not
any thing made that was made, verse. 10. the world was made by him, verse. 14.
the word was made flesh: Gal. 4.4. Made of a woman, made under the law, Joh.
2.9. when the ruler -- Tasted the water which was made wine, Joh. 5.9. the man
was made whole: and many the like instances.

So that the reading of these words before mentioned as they are translated,
have (I perceive) misled this friend in his application, or rather
misapplication of them, which in true construction are not to be read, as they
are Englished, viz. power to become the Sons of G; but to as many as received
him to them he gave privilege, prerogative or dignity to be made the Sons of
God; to them (believing or) which believe in his name, and the Rhemists
themselves, though they use the words to prove a power of free will in man to
become the sons of God, if they will; yet is it acknowledged by Martin, that
the Greek word signifies not only power, but also dignity, and the vulgar
Latin reads it power to be made the sons of God; now what power is there in a
person in his being made a Son of God? nor will the context favor such a
construction, which plainly testifies, that such as receive Christ, are
dignified with Sonship, or are made the Sons of God, even as many as believe in
his name.

Q. How are they made the Sons of God? actively or passiively; have they power
to become Sons of God, or are they made such?

A. Nay they were born such: How? not of Bloods, nor of the will of man, nor of
the will of the flesh, but of God; who of his own good will begets, and of his
mere grace brings forth, or causes to be born the children of the regeneration,
Joh. 3.3, 5, 6. who are as merely passive in the new birth as they were in
their first generation, or natural birth; so far is man from becoming a Child
or Son of God that he must be made so, or he shall never see the kingdom of
God: where then is glorying or boasting, it is excluded; by what law, of works?
Nay, but by the law of faith.

For both will and deed own themselves to God, who of his own good pleasure,
works both to will and to do, that no flesh should glory in his presence.

The Gospel is the power of God to salvation, to every one that believes: let
him be accursed that preaches another Gospel; what then will become of all
those, which have preached a Gospel without power?

He that receives the light, and is obedient to it, receives the Gift of God,
and shall receive the power: The light rejected, no power received; your heart
shall fail, and your eyes wax dim, that looks for another way, or another
Gospel, than that which redeems out of sin.

The name of Christ in the outward sound is pleasant, in as much as thereby men
think to have their sins taken away, but the Gospel is the power of God that
redeems out of sin.

Though thy self art not ignorant of the many forms, which cry lo here and lo
there, yet the way is but one.

The Scripture says of some;

When they knew God, they glorified him not as God, these had such a knowledge
of God, that they might thereby have glorified him, as God, which not doing they
were given up to vile affections.

To speak to these promiscuously and in general might not prove so
satisfactory, as if they were particularly treated; therefore I shall speak to
each distinctly, though with all possible brevity.

Reply. That the Gospel is the power of God to salvation may not be denied:
Romans 1.16. for it is so to every one that believes and let him be accursed,
that preaches any other gospel than that which is so, Gal. 1.9. But where the
gospel (which is the power of God to salvation is preached) if it be not mixed
with faith in them, which hear it; it is not the power of God to salvation to
such according to the testimony of that Scripture, Heb. 4.2. For unto us was
the gospel preached as well as unto them, but the word preached did not profit
them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard.

So that the gospel is not the power of God to salvation to any but to such as
believe it, and by faith receive the glad tidings and message thereof, and
become obedient thereunto, Romans 1.17. For therein is the righteousness of God
revealed from faith to faith, as it is written, The just shall live by faith.

The gospel which in it self is the power of God to salvation (so named
already) may be prerched not only in word but also in power and in the holy
spirit (as twice to the Thessalonians 1 These. 1.5.) in demonstration of the
spirit and power (as to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 2.4.) (...): it may be
powerfully ratified and confirmed by signs and wonders and mighty deeds, yet
not powerful to salvation, except received by faith in them that hear it.

Such a gospel was it to the Thessalonians 1 These. 1.5. It was brought to them
in mighty power; and received by them in much assurance, as the very word of
God to which they yielded the obedience of faith, 1 These. 2.13, 14. As the
Romans also did, Chap. 15.18, 19. Wheresoever the Gospel is preached in
Evidence and demonstration of the spirit, and received by faith in them that
hear it: it is the arm and power of God to salvation to such, and does
powerfully incline them to yield obedience in word and deed, to whatsoever is
therein revealed unto them.

He that receives the light, and is obedient to it receivs the gift of God, and
shall receive the power; the light rejected, no power received.

Reply. It has been said before (by this friend to whom I now reply, That
Christ is the light; and That Christ is the gift of God. To which may be added
that which is testified, 1 Cor. 1.18.

That Christ is the power of God, as it is expressed by the Apostle.

Now let it be considered, what is spoken by the friend in this parcel of words
above recited, and whether it amount not to a repetition and Tautology of words.

He that receives the light and is obedient to it, receives Christ (for Christ
is the light) receives the gift of God, that is, Christ, for Christ is the gift
of God; and shall receive the power that is Christ, for Christ is the power of
God, and such as receive Christ, and obey him, reject not the light, nor can be
without the power, forasmuch as he whom they have received and obeyed, is both
the light and the power and the gift, and is no more than if it had been thus
expressed; He that receives Christ and obeys him, receives Christ, and shall
receive Christ, Christ rejected, no Christ received.

Your heart shall fail and your eyes wax dim, that look for another way, or
another Gospel than that which redeems out of sin.

Reply. It has been said before that Christ is the way.

Let their heart fail, and their eyes wax dim, that expect salvation by any
other way, than by him, who is the Way the Truth and the Life. Forasmuch as
there is no other name given under heaven, whereby we can be saved: and that
Gospel, which tenders salvation by Christ to sinners without redemption from
sin, let it indeed be Anathema from the Lord.

For it is witnessed of the true and only Lord Jesus, that his name should be
called Jesus, (that is, Savior) for that he should redeem his people from
their sins, Mat. 1.21. and save them to the utmost, that come unto God by him,
everliving to make intercession for them, Heb. 7.25. even for them, who by him
do believe in God, purifying their souls in obeying the truth through the
spirit, being born again, etc. 1 Pet. 1.21, 22, 23.

Which testimony is born up in the hearts of the children of the regeneration,
who are made the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus, having received the
adoption of sons they cry unto him in spirit incessantly night and day, that
this redemption from the body of sin and death may be completed in them,
saying, how long Lord holy and true? fighting the good fight of faith, keeping
up the watch and war of the Lord, as knowing that the God of peace will
shortly tread Satan under their feet; I say, their feet (as really) within
them, as he has trodden him under his own feet for them without them: And
further knowing that they shall assuredly reap in due time, if they faint not,
this being their victory even their faith, by which with patience they possess
their soul, being confident of this one thing, that he is faithful, who has
called them, who will also do it; and having begun a good work in them will
also perfect it, perform, or finish it until the day of Christ: having this
hope they purify themselves in the power of him, who of God is made to them
righteousness and sanctification, as well as wisdom and redemption.

The name of Christ is pleasant in the outward sound, in as much as thereby men
think to have their sins taken away; but the Gospel is the power of God that
redeems out of sin.

Reply. Who ever names the name of Christ, is to depart from iniquity: and he
who naming the name of Christ, how pleasant soever he count that name, yet if
such an one, depart not from iniquity, but roll his sin under his tongue as a
sweet morsel, and bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace,
though I walk in the Imagination (or stubborness) of my heart, to add
drunkenness to thirst, the Lord will not spare him, but the anger of the Lord
and his jealousy will smoke against that man: there is no such use of the name
of Christ, as to make it a Cloak for sin; for the wrath of God is revealed
against all unrighteousness in men. Whatsoever and in whomsoever it be, and he
that regards iniquity in his heart, has a root of gall and wormwood, that will
eat out all the pleasantness that may seem to be in the name of Christ in the
outward sound, Deuteronomy. 29.18, 19, 20.

Yet for as much as there may be some snare and temptation lie upon some souls,
touching those words (before minded and repeated,) viz. the Gospel is the power
of God that redeems out of sin.

Whence some persons do conclude, that they are redeemed out of sin, and that
the body of sin is destroyed in them, they are come unto mount Sion, to the
City of the living God, to the heavenly Jerusalem, to the spirits of just men
made perfect: and hence proceeds that frame of spirit of judging, others with
severity and austereness, (who dare not so say of themselves; but through the
spirit wait for the hope of righteousness) contrary to the spirit of meekness
and lowliness of mind, wherewith each should account and esteem others better
than themselves: according to the rule of Christ given by the Apostle often
repeated, Ephesians. 4.2. Col. 3.12. which requires a showing all meekness to all
men, Tit. 3.2. Jam. 3.13. to the end; as our Lord Jesus himself left example,
who quenched not the smoking flax, Mat. 12.18, 19, 20. who said, Learn of me
for I am meek and lowly in heart, Mat. 11.29. Others on the other hand judging
themselves (because they cannot so say of themselves) that they are not
redeemed out of sin, but go mourning and bowed down and are in fear
continually, because of the fury of the oppressor: the evil they would not,
that they do, and the good they would, that they do not; and are crying out in
bitterness, as Ruben for Joseph, Alas, for the Lad is not, and I whither shall
I go? (or as she) If it be so, why am I thus?

There might be some good use made of a seasonable word to each of these, if it
might please the Lord to direct therein.

Are there some redeemed out of sin, and come to the spirits of just men made
perfect: and is it so indeed with them?

What means then the bleating of the sheep, and the lowing of the oxen which
are heard in such? (I mean such) as say they have attained, but in measure: I
am not free to instance in personal or particular discoveries; But this wotd
(in measure) declares plainly, that such are not at home, they are not in the
City, they are at most but travailers toward it, they have certain Miles yet
to travail before they arrive.

Who ever says, he knows in part, declares plainly he is short of perfection,
1 Cor. 13.10, 12. and who ever says, he knows perfectly, he knows not how
imperfect his knowledge is.

Therefore to the first sort I would say, why boastest thou O vain man of that
which is not? who so boasts of a false gift, is like clouds and wind without
rain.

Or if thou do not pretend to have attained, and to be arrived at end of thy
journey, and to be perfect, as the heavenly father is perfect;

Why do thou judge thy Brother, and why do thou set at naught thy Brother,
who is in his way as well as thou? we shall all stand before the judgment seat
of Christ, Romans 14.10. who then art thou that judge another man's servant?
contradicting that rule of Christ, Jam. 4.11, 12. Mat. 7. the five first
verses, Judge not that ye be not judged, etc.

Take with thee therefore these two Cautions, viz.

1. Boast not against thy Brother: neither glory in a false gift; for thou art
not perfect, while thou know but in part, and have attained but in measure.

2. Despise not the day of small things in another, while as yet thou thy self
art not perfect: but remember that command of Christ, Learn of me for I am meek
and lowly in heart, Mat. 11.29. showing all meekness to all men, Tit. 3.2.
break not the bruised reed: Remember the parable which our Lord Jesus spoke
unto certain which trusted in themselves that they were righteous and despised
others. Luke 18.9.

To the Second Sort.

To those who are bowed down in their spirit, for fear of the fury of the
oppressor: of whom it is said in truth and sincerity of heart: the evil that I
would not do, that I do; and the good I would do, I do not: whose soul goes
forth in them for deliverance from the body of sin and death by Jesus Christ
according to the Gospel and the power thereof: to such it may be said:
(notwithstanding they may be judged and despised by the former; yet) the
foundation of God is sealed, who will bring forth judgment into victory, and
perfect the work which himself has begun in them: and having laid the
foundation will lay the topstone also, to the praise of the glory of his grace:
for faithful is he, who has promised, who will also do it, according to the
tenor of those words, Ezekiel. 17. last, And all the Trees of the field, shall
know that I the Lord, have brought down the High tree, have exalted the Low
tree, have dried up the green tree, and have made the dry tree to flowrish, I
the Lord have spoken it, and have done it.

Thou thy self art not ignorant of the many forms which cry, Lo here and lo
there, yet the way is but one.

Reply. I am not unacquainted that there are indeed many forms, which do
pretend to that one way, That only way the Lord Jesus; Among which the present
form (now under debate between us) is one, touching which I have met with these
passages, viz. Sinck down into the eternal love, and thou will see me, and the
rest, that we are in unity of that one spirit, Rich. Farn. discovery of faith,
p. 4.

Though ten thousand times ten thousand, yet they are but one in the body, one
faith, one seed, one baptizing, one Supper, one Covenant, one God, and Father,
all one heart and one soul, serving God in one way, worshipping him in spirit,
and with one mouth glorifying his great and glorious name; Who are of this
seed, are of Abraham, Rich. Farn. Rant. discov. page 17.

The contrary to which the most High and holy Lord has been pleased to suffer
to discover it self most eminently in the Schism which has been made in the body
of this so much adored and admired profession: which I cannot but take notice
of, being so opportunely led into it by this Appeal, which is made to me,
touching my not being ignorant of many forms: to all which the Lord has
suffered the addition of this one more; and that also increased into more than
one by dividing the heads thereof: which many (dear to the Lord) in holy fear
and trembling, say touching this matter, What has God wrought?

While they consider, that the unity so much gloried in being as the band or
girdle, which bound up the bundle, and was made an Eminent Character of the
verity of the persons, their Doctrine and practice: by which it was exalted,
magnified in opposition to other peoples, of whom it was said, that they were
in division and confusion, but themselves were in unity: of one heart and of
one way (as in the passages last recited out of Rich. Farnworth, beside many
others which might be named) For the most high and holy Lord in his great
wisdom to permit that this band or girdle should be rent in sunder without
hand; no man contributing toward the doing thereof but themselves: this is not
a small thing in the eyes of the impartial and sober minded observer.

Nor did this their rent or division happen among the mean ones, but between
the heads, the men of name; where the chief strength lay: persons of no small
account or esteem with the persons of this persuasion. G. F. to I. N. I. N. to
G. P. I. B. to I. N.

Nor was this in some circumstantial matter, but in their foundation, so that
it amounts unto the very same thing mentioned, that is, (lo here, and lo
there,) the one (not person only, but party) Crying down the other with great
severity, and that in the name of the Lord, as not having stood in the Counsel
of the Lord, though both avouch the light to be but one and the same in all,
yet are set up as witnesses against each other, and what further thing the Lord
will do in the end thereof, does not yet appear, but many of his poor and
tender ones lie at his foot admiting at his wisdom and counsel herein, waiting
to see his further pleasure, mourning for his Captived ones, Crying day and
night unto him, that they may be redeemed out of the snare, which God has
caused to be broken before their eyes without hand, using none other means but
themselves for effecting thereof.

When they knew God, they glorified him not as God, those had such a knowledge
of God, that they might thereby have glorified him as God, which not doing they
were given up to vile affections.

Reply: whether this passage have a special and particular application to the
Romans, or whether it relate more generally to mankind, is not declared;
however, it is thus far evident,

That the most Holy and Eternal God, the Maker and Creator of all things, the
father of lights, and spirits; has made forth the discovery and knowledge of
himself (in the majesty of his power and Godhead) to the sons of men. (Partly
by what he has manifested in them, and partly by what he has showed unto
them, viz. his eternal power and Godhead.) has been before largely proved, and
may be here but briefly hinted by way of repetition; upon this renewed
occasion, viz. That God who stretches forth the Heavens, and lays the
foundation of the earth, has formed the spirit of man within him as a Candle,
or lamp, or torch, calling it the candle of the Lord (of the nature and
property whereof much has been spoken before) together with a a law written on
his heart, by reflection upon which, not only the power, but the Godhead of God
was knowable and discernable: that as it is manifested in man, that no other
but this eternal God is his maker and Creator; so he must serve no other but
him, nor none beside him: Him only shall thou serve: and this service must be
performed (as to the only Creator and Maker) according to the tenor of that law
written upon the heart, which afterward was declared by more solemn
publication in the mount which burnt with fire, Deuteronomy. 4.11.

Nor was the power and Godhead of God only invisibly manifested in man, but was
also externally showed unto him by those outspeakings of God in the visible
parts and parcels of the Creation, whereby it evidently appeared that there was
no God, no other God besides him, whose invisible glory shined through these
visible appearances, which were seen from the Creation of the world, by which
double demonstration of his power and Godhead, he left not himself without
witness unto and in man, nor man under the capacity of an excuse before God,
nor in himself; the evincing whereof is the main scope of the holy spirit in
Romans 1.19, 20, 21. Acts 14.15, 16, 17. Act. 17. from 24. to the 30 verse.

Hence it follows, that because when they knew God, they glorified him not as
God, etc. neither were thankful, but changed the glory of the uncorruptible
God into an Image made like to corruptible man, and to birds and to four footed
beasts, and creeping things, therefore, or for this cause, God gave them up.

Though they had evident and plain discovery of the Godhead of God of his
sovereignty and supremacy together with his benignity and bounty; for which
they should have served him and praised him as their sovereign Lord and maker:
owning him to be so, and serving him as such according to those expressions,
Psalm. 95.6. Psalm. 100.1.2, 3.

Instead whereof it is testified, that they did not glorify him as God (i. e.)
they did not ascribe unto the Lord glory and strength as became the kindreds of
the people: nor although they knew) there was no God, but he which made them,
and had made manifest the same unto them, yet they liked not to retain this
knowledge of God, or God in their knowledge, but changed the glory of the
incorruptible God into an Image, made like unto corruptible man, and to birds
and beasts and creeping things; turning the Godhead of the invisible and
eternal God into a lie, and falling down thereunto worshipping and serving the
Creature more than (or instead of) the Creator, who is blessed for ever; for
this cause God gave them up, etc.

Not as if the natural man while he is such can glorify God as God (i.e.)
ascribe to God the glory due unto his name, any otherwise than as he is
demonstrated to his natural capacity; as he is pleased to give forth himself
to be discerned by his lamp or torch within, or the works of Creation without
him: forasmuch as that which to a regenerate person ( to one born of the
Spirit, or from above) is the power of God, and the wisdom of God, and owned by
him as such, and by him ascribed to God, as being so, is by the natural man
accounted foolishness, and consequently upon this account (i. e.) in spiritual
things he cannot glorify God, because he cannot discern that there is any
glory therein, The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God,
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14.

Nevertheless so much as may leave him without excuse is manifested in him and
showed unto him, and is discernable by him, viz. the eternal power and Godhead
of God in opposition to all false Gods, to every created being or likeness
thereof: so as that who ever shall willingly and knowingly depart from the
living God (or from that of God which they know as men) and erect something
instead thereof, and bow down thereto; these do herein say to the Almighty,
depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, and they may be truly
said in the sense and scope of this Scripture, Romans 1.21. not to glorify God
as God; these might have glorified him as God, i.e. owned him as such, as the
only God, the Creator and maker of all things, for so was he made out to them,
(both within them and without them) which they not owning nor acknowledging:
not liking to retain God in their knowledge, but erecting something instead of
him, are said not to glorify God as God.

The Scriptures bear testimony unto this in sundry places.

Those which have seen the mighty works of God (as a Creator) upon themselves
or others (I say the mighty works of God as a Creator) these are said to
glorify God, in owning and acknowledging him to be the Author thereof,
confessing him to be the only God, or the God of Gods: so did that proud King
Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 3.28, 29. Blessed be the God of, etc. Because there is no
other God that can deliver after this sort, Dan. 4.2, 3. I thought it good to
show the signs and wonders, which the high God has showed toward me: how
great are his signs, and how mighty are his wonders, verse. 34. And I blessed
the most high, and I praised and honored him, that lives for ever.

Now I Nebuchadnezzar praise and extol and honor the King of heaven, all
whose works are truth, and his ways judgment, and those that walk in pride he
is able to abase.

Thus he glorified God as the most high God, Dan. 5.21. ascribing to him the
glory due to his name: so may, and so ought every natural man to own God, as
his Creator, and to ascribe to him glory and honor. The contrary whereof
appears in his son Belshazzar, Dan. 5.22. And thou his Son have not humbled thy
heart though thou knew all this: and the God in whose hand thy breath is,
have thou not glorified: whence it is evident that the father did (but the Son
did not) glorify God (i.e.) ascribe unto him the greatness of his power,
sovereignty and dominion, and extol and praise him according thereunto, as the
most High, the only God of Gods: as they in Rev. 11.13. in that terrible and
dreadful Earthquake, who being affrighted gave glory (i.e.) ascribed glory to
the God of heaven.

In like manner did the Centurion glorifye God in giving testimony to our Lord
Jesus: at the time of his death, Luke 23.47. when he saw what was done, he
glorified God, saying, Certainly this was a righteous man, Luke 7.15, 16. and
there came a great fear on all, and they glorified God, saying, That a great
Prophet is risen up among us.

So that when in that passage it is said, Because when they knew God they
glorified him not as God: and the inference thereupon, viz. those had such a
knowledge of God that they might thereby have glorified him as God: It is to be
remembered what that Such Knowledge was. Now what that kind of knowledge of God
was which they had is declared, (that is,) Such as whereby they saw his eternal
power and Godhead, and could distinguish between him, and any Created being,
they were not to be instructed that a bird or a beast, or a creeping thing, or
the Image of a man, was not the true and living God, the Author and fountain of
all created beings: for they knew full well the contrary, they had sufficient
demonstration to the contrary, both without them, and within them.
Nevertheless they being so stupidly brutish as (contrary to their light and
knowledge) to bid defiance to the most high God, and to cast off the knowledge
of him, and to erect (contrary to truth and reason) such beastly and brutish
gods, which are lies and no gods, viz. Birds and beasts, and creeping things,
as they did, Romans 1.23.

The righteous Lord as a just recompense of reward, gave them up to all
uncleanesse, blindness, bruitishnesse, a dreadful reward of so horrible a
sin, verse. 24.26.28.

A fearful example to all such, who having attained to any measure of the
knowledge of God, though but as a Creator, and yet do not glorify him as
such, by ascribing unto him the honor due to his name, according to those
words of truth, 1 Cor. 16.23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. Jer. 10.7. Rev. 15.4.
Who would not fear THEE O King of Nations, and glorify thy name: sing unto the
Lord all the earth, show forth from day to day his salvation, declare his glory
among the heathen, for great is the Lord: ye kinreds of the people give unto
the Lord glory and strength, the glory due to his Name.

But for any to know the true God, and that there is no other gods but he, nor
any to be feared and served, but he, and yet to bid defiance to him, and that
measure of knowledge which they have of him, and embrace other gods, whether
birds or beasts, or creeping things; yea, though it should be a man, or the Son
of a man, the Image of a man: it is an aggravation of sin, and 'twill be so in
the judgment, and 'twere better such had never known this knowledge, but had
been made birds or beasts or creeping things: or had never seen the light, for
the untimely birth is more happy than such: Whosoever is wise, and will observe
those things: even they shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord,
Psalm. 107. last verse.

To the Soule-ly Sensual, or Natural Man Whether Civil or Profane.

SOlomon applying his heart to know, to search, and to seek out wisdom: and to
know the wickedness of folly, even of foolishness, and madness, Eccles. 9.3.
centers all in the heart of the Sons of men: from whence proceeds evil
thoughts, Adulteries, Fornications, Murders, Thefts, Covetousness, Wickedness,
Deceit, Lasciviousness, an evil Eye, Blasphemy, Pride, Foolishness, all these
evil things come from within, and defile the man (as he that is the truth it
self testifies;) Mar. 7.21, 22.

But in the beginning it was not so: and this testimony the Holy spirit gives
by the mouth of him, that made this diligent search: Ecclesiast. 7. ult. Lo
this ^nly have I found, that God made man upright, but they have sought out
many Inventions: As all the Inventions which defile the man, proceed from
within the man (as above) so all those defiling Inventions, were sought out,
and fetched in by the man: whose destruction is of himself; for in the
beginning God saw every thing, that he had made, and behold it was very good,
and Man was made in his own Image, In the Image of God created he him, Genesis
1.27. (God made man upright) Nevertheless Man in honor abides not, he is like
the beasts that perish; His bow abode not in strength he sought out many
Inventions; Tumbles down from his excellency, and is driven out among beasts,
and made to eat grass, as the Ox, or husks with the Swine: (Till the time
appointed of the most High be determined, and man's understanding be caused to
return, and the splendour, honor, and brightness of his kingdom be restored:
and excellent Majesty added to him, by being new created in Christ Jesus, and
renewed in the spirit of his mind, in righteousness and holiness of truth:
being born again by the spirit or from above, without which change passing upon
him no man can see, or enter into the kingdom of God.)

Nor is this the Condition of some men only, but it is the lot and portion of
all the Generations of mankind, all having sinned, and come short of the Glory
of God, there being none that does good, no not one: there is none that
understands, none that seeks after God, every one is turning the Glory of the
incorruptible God, into the Image of corruptible man, according to the variety
of his Invention, some into the figure and form of Birds, some of Beasts, some
of Creeping things, every one something (besides or instead of the true God,
the eternal living God) to which they bow down, seek after, and delight
themselves in, as if these were their Gods, and each ones particular own self
were the God of Gods.

Whom (by all these) they serve, and to whom they make subservient all their
other Gods: Man's Belly is his God, man's self is Man's Idol, whether he will see,
and acknowledge it to be so or no.

The true and incorruptible God is by man's Invention changed into corruptible
appearances of birds, or beasts, or creeping things, and his truth is changed
into a lie.

Therefore is man turned out from his dominion and dignity, and given up to
make abode with these birds, and beasts, and Creeping things, these lies of his
own Inventing.

Among the Sons of men, who have their habitation in this desert or vast
howling wilderness; There is a proportional difference, or different
qualification resembling that, to which they are Hieroglyphically resembled,
viz. the Beasts, and Birds, and Creeping things, among which, some are birds
and beasts of prey, and others are less hurtful, and more useful: some more
fierce, and savagely cruel, or sordidly brutish: others resembling other kind
of Cattle more serviceable and useful.

Yet all are in their understanding (in relation to the most High and holy God)
brutish, and without knowledge: though, that which may be known of God, is
manifest in them, viz. his eternal power and Godhead, Jer. 51.17. yet there is
none that understands, none that seeks after God, but they are all gone out of
the way, and are altogether become unprofitable, loving, fearing, and serving
the Creature more than the Creator; and may be thus differenced and
distinguished either into the tame Beast, the Civil Naturalist. or the wild
Beast, or the openly profane Naturalist.


If any shall say as Bildad, Job 18.3 Wherefore were we counted as Beasts? It
may be answered, because man has lost his understanding, Romans 3.11. and man
though in honor being without understanding, is like the Beasts that perish,
Psalm. 49.28. and Sol mon resolves the Case, touching all the generations of
mankind, Eccles. 3.18. I said in my heart concerning the estate of the Sons of
men, That God might manifest them, and that they might see, that they
themselves are beasts: Every man being brutish in his knowledge, Jer. 10.14. To
the Civil naturalist; whose study and exercise of body and mind is to excel in
virtue, to be serviceable and useful in his generation, who wisely considers
the nature of the things intended, and the nature of himself, that intends
them: and the coherence or correspondence thereof, and so keeps the ordinance
of nature inviolate in the transaction; which is observed in relation to
persons as to things: whose care and Industry is to discern by daily
speculation the mutual concords, and to make application thereof, doing as he
would be done by, and steering his course by that compass: though this be an
eminent part of the excellency of the natural man, yet, is not this the only or
the alone exercise of his mind, for he has also an eye to God herein.

Does not nature it self teach? has it not its rule, and its reason, its law
and its custom, yea and its Religion also? Hence that Philosopher Epictetus,
Manuale Chap. 38. Has this saying touching Religion.

Know that the first and for most point of Religon is a true belief, to be
assuredly persuaded that there is a God, and that he swayeth the state of the
whole universe, in goodness and in justice: that we must obey him, and assent
unto his commands in the smalest condition, approving all his actions and
following his directions, as the effects of that purest and most glorious
Intellect, thus doing thou shall never have cause to repine at him nor to
repute him negligent of thee -- Now as for Sacrifices and offerings let each
one observe the custom of the land, wherein he lives, doing it with purity,
-- parsimony, diligence, cleanness, and within the compass of his ability.

But who this God, this most pure and glorious Intellect is, he discovers in
these words;

In all our Enterprises we should pray thus, Jupiter thou High and holy God,
and thou O changless Fate, direct me to the end that your immutable
determinations have assigned me, for I will follow your appointments most
cheerfully, and if I would not do so I were a villain -- Chap. 77.

How evidently demonstrable is it, that the tamest and cleanliest, the most
virtuous and best accomplished among the Sons of men; the improvers, and
promoters of natures dictates, and principles, the studiers of virtue, whether
it be Socrates the wise, or Plato, whom they call the divine philosopher, or
Seneca the grave moralist, or Epictetus, or any other of the more refined sort
of Naturalists, could not by the light of their torch arrive at the knowledge of
the true and invisible and eternal God, but notwithstanding that which may be
known of God, was manifest in them, and by the visible things from the Creation
made forth unto them, yet either through the pravity and want of light, their
understanding being darkened; or through the perverseness of their will, their
foolish heart was darkened: so as that professing themselves to be wise, they
became fools, changing the glory of the Incorruptible God, into an Image made
like to corruptible man (that is,) vainly imagining the most High and glorious
God, which is invisible and eternal might be resembled by an Image of a
corruptible man or manness, Jupiter, Mercury, Apollos, Diana: or some one or
more of these or the like, priesting and sacrificing unto them with oxen and
garlands according to the Invention of their foolish and darkened heart: the
more Seraphick, Aerie, and celestial among them, soaring more loftily, devoting
and inscribing to the unknown God, while others more sordidly, crept upon the
earth and resembled the divine Majesty to four footed beasts, and creeping
things, all groping after, but not attaining the knowledge of the true God,
because thinking themselves wise they became fools, and the most high God in
wisdom would have it so; that he might make foolish the wisdom of the world,
and destroy the wisdom of the wise, and bring to nothing the understanding of
the prudent: that they by wisdom should not know him, but that he might bring
forth the knowledge of himself in a way of foolishness in the worlds account; as
he did, and has done, and has given testimony thereof both by and unto men
and Angels, testifying that the knowledge of him the true God; and of him, by
whom he has made forth this knowledge, (that is,) the Lord Jesus Christ, whom
he has sent, is Eternal life: the further demonstration of which may be
referred to those two lectures, which this messenger and blessed Apostle of the
Gentiles mannages in behalf of the most High God, against the worshippers of
Jupiter, and Mercury. Both priests and preisted people, Act. 14. v. 11, to 18.
And those lofty Athenians, Philosophers, Epicurians, and Stoics, whom he
encountered, Act. 17. from v. 16, to 31. proving and alleging their Gods to be
no Gods, and contrariwise preaching, and declaring to them that unknown God, to
whom their Altar was inscribed: calling them to repentance by an Argument drawn
from the judgment, which the most High God would administer to the world in
righteousness by Jesus Christ, of which he has given assurance unto all men
by raising him from the dead. In which he briefly lays down the foundation of
repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God (the true and living God)
of the resurrection from the dead, and of eternal judgment.

But if any shall say, What does this Babbler say? Are we Lycaonians or
Athenians, Stoics or Epicures, what does all this concern us? Whereunto tends
all this waste? Are not we Christians, born of Christian Parents? Did not our
Fathers say for themselves and us, I believe in God the Father Almighty? Did
they not promise and vow in my name, and made me say Amen to it in my infancy,
in the way that seemed good to them to signify thereby my consent? Therefore
we are no Heathens, but Christians (out of doubt) and worshippers of the true
God.

To you then O ye men, women and children (not of Athens) but of England; to
you is this poor plain word directed.

Are you of the posterity of Adam? so am I. Are you Natives of England? so am
I. Were you made to confess God in your infancy, when you were incapable of
knowing him? so was I, in such a manner as my zealous parents were instructed,
and as I in that estate was capable. Were you, any of you, put in mind of the
vow and promise, which was made in your name, and educated accordingly? I also
had my measure thereof. Were you vain nevertheless? so was I: stubborn and
rebellious? so was I. Were you foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse
lusts and pleasures? all this, and more than this, was I.

Had you under all this checks and reproofs of conscience for vanity, for
lying, even in your Childhood? so had I. Did you resolve against it? so did I.
Did you cry to the most high God for strength against it? in my degree and
measure I did so too: Were you tender in heart? so was I. Were you grieved,
when God was offended? I was the like. Saw you the root and spring of all
wickedness and noisome lusts to proceed from the corrupt and impure fountain
of the heart? I did the like; being convinced that till the heart was changed,
and a new heart given instead thereof, it would not be otherwise with me: Did
you reform what you were convinced of? so did I. Did you put on a form of
profession? so did I. Did you walk on in that form for some time? I did so
too. Suffered you any thing from Superiors or equals for walking strictly or
differently from them? I had my share therein also: Were you not even and
constant in this course of witness and walking? no more was I. Were there not
breakings out into sins, such as from whence you seemed to have been departed?
that state I witness. Had you peace then? no more had I. Durst you approach
God in prayer then? no more durst I: Did mournings and repentings, tears and
fastings renew the confidence, and create the peace? 'Twas so with me: so long
as I was obedient, I had peace, and when I was in transgression, I was afraid,
I ran away, and hid my self. Did you ever search your own heart to discern and
discover the evil thereof? so did I often.

(From all which I conclude the truth of the foregoing premises, That there is
a light and law in man, etc.)

Did you (after many years of profession) enquire into the ground of your
profession, and consider whence, as well as what it was? I did so too: Were you
convinced, that your worship and service of God was founded upon tradition, and
education, and the custom of the Nation, the light that was let in thorough
the observation of what they said and did; and that whenever you were checked
or reproved for sin, or affrighted and discouraged from approaching to God
being self-judged, and self-convicted, that it proceeded from what you had
received and learned from reading or hearing, and as you did conform or not
conform to this, so was your peace made up, or broken, and discontinued without
any other, or further ground? Have you, or have you not been acquainted with
this enquiry, and observed the result thereof?

I have known the person who upon this enquiry has been smitten the mouth
stopped, and the person silenced, and the building, which for many years has
been erecting, blown upon by the breath and spirit of the Lord, and laid even
with the ground: through the power of this discovery, that Jesus Christ was not
laid as a foundation nor corner stone in this building: But all the profession
has amounted to no more, but to a creaturely and selfe-righteousnesse made up
of reformation and purification; founded in the Creatures act and power.

But the name given of God for salvation, besides which there is no other name
given among men, whereby they can be saved, this being not understood, received
or believed on; there has appeared nothing but stones of emptiness, and lines
of confusion: persons appearing as men, which have dreamed that they were
eating, but when they are awakened by the spirit of the Lord, which reproves
and convinces of sin indeed, behold their soul is empty and faint.

To such then as not only have improved their first radical principles in the
exercise of the moral virtues: but to those especially who have made progress
in higher profession; I demand, whether they have considered the force of
natural education, what an influence it has upon the offspring: you may read
of him, who said he profited in the Jews Religion above many, being exceeding
Zealous of the traditions (or ordinances) of his fathers: and the mixed
multitude, who fell all sting, Numb. 11.4. went up out of Egypt, Exodus 12.38.
and bear a share in the external part of that song, Exodus 15.2. My fathers God,
and I will exalt him: how apt is it for man to say my fathers God, my Countries
God, my friends God, my Companions God; and yet not know the God of their
fathers, or not to know that knowledge to be indeed according to God in verity
and truth.

There are empty Vines which bring forth fruit to self, Hos. 10.1. Trees which
flourish and grow and bring forth fruit goodly to the eye, and in outward
appearance are as that green olive tree, fair and of goodly fruit, on which
nevertheless the most high will kindle a fire, and cause the branches to be
broken, Jer. 11.16, because it is not testified of them, according to that
word, Hos. 14.8. from me is thy fruit found. It Is necessary to consider the
foundation, whereon we are built: there is no other foundation, but the Rock,
nor no Rock but the Lord Jesus Christ, and him laid as a foundation, whereon
the building must stand, that will abide the storm and tempest.

There are two Common Roots of Mankind The First Adam, the Second, Adam,
two Creations, two Covenants.

There must be a breaking off, that there may be a grafting in, a dying to the
spirit, that there may be a quickening, or live-making by the second Adam: not a
garnishing the old tomb, neither with feathers nor Garlands, no nor garments
neither; but old things must pass away, and all things become new, not a new
name only, but a New nature also: For except a man be born again, he shall
never see the kingdom of God, much may the natural man do and yet but a Child
of the first birth.

To the latter of these, to such as bid defiance to, etc.

To the latter of these: to such as bid defiance to the most High God, who say
to the Almighty, depart from us, we will not the knowledge of thy ways; Even
to these, wisdom utters her voice in the streets, she cries in the chief
place of concourse. How long ye scorners will ye delight in scorning, and
fools hate knowledge, turn ye at my reproof: To day while its called to day
harden not your hearts, but seek the Lord while he may be found: for there is a
destruction determined from the Lord upon all the proud and profane ones, for
he will dash them one against another, even the Fathers and the Sons together,
and will neither pity nor spare, nor have mercy, but destroy.

Hear ye therefore and give ear, be not proud, for the Lord has spoken; give
glory to the Lord God, before he cause darkness, and before your feet stumble
upon the dark mountains, and while ye look for light he turn it into the shadow
of death, and make it gross darkness: humble your selves, and sit down, for
your Principalities shall come down, even the crown of your glory: and although
you wipe your mouths, and say you have done no wickedness, yet the pride and
rebellion of Haman and Nebuchadnezzar, the profaneness of Esau, the gluttony
and drunkenness of Dives and Belshazzar, as the iniquity of your heels will
compass you about, and what will you do in the end thereof, when the watcher,
the Holy one shall say unto you as to him in the vision; Hew down the Tree, cut
off his branches, shake off his leaves, and scatter his fruit, let the beasts
get away from under it, and the fowls from his branches, and let his portion be
with the beasts in the grass of the earth? And though you may slight and
contemn this, as being a sound of words, yet when your eyes shall see the
fingers upon the plaster of the wall, and shall read the writing: which you
cannot but see and read, for the most High has placed his candle upon a
candlestick, (and not under a bushel) and this writing is upon the wall over
against the candlestick, that thou may see, and shall not chose but see (eye
to eye) the light that is in thee reflects upon the law written in thee: and
that law written on the plaisterd wall or table of thy heart, returns a
reciprocal reflection: Then will thy countenance change, and thy thoughts be
troubled, the joints of thy loins be unloosed, and thy knees smite against each
other: but if the vision be so terrible, what will the interpretation and the
application thereof be unto thee; when thou shall be numbered, and weighed, and
found too light, the glory of thy Kingdom finished and divided from thee? Then
O thou fool, whose shall these things be? O therefore that thou were wise, and
would consider thy latter end, and honor and extol the most High God,
whose eternal power and Godhead is manifested in thee, and shown unto thee,
whose works are truth, and his ways judgment, and those which walk in pride he
is able to abase.

To the Religious man upon the Terms of the first Covenant.
Thou art persuaded that thou art passed from death to life, by all the
Arguments whereby a person may be persuaded thereof.

Thou art convinced that as absolutely as it is appointed for man once to dye,
so certainly necessary it is for a person to be born again of water, and of the
spirit, if ever he expect to see the Kingdom of God: and that thou art so born
it is to thee out of doubt: being possessed with these persuasions, or such as
these, viz.

That thou have had the spirit of bondage to fear, and haste abode under that
dispensation for a season, and this has been the hour of thy travail, through
which thou have been brought forth, and have been made partaker of the new
birth, the holy spirit testifying as much unto thee by giving thee ability to
cry Abba father.

By this thou know thou have past from death to life, because thou love
the brethren.

Thou art poor in spirit.

Thou do hunger and thirst after righteousness.

Thou art weary and heavy laden.

Thou art persecuted for righteousness sake.

Thou do mourn.

Therefore all the conditions of these promises shall be surely made good to
thee whatever becomes of others: whom thou pitiest, and over whom thou mournest
to think of their conditions: And is it so indeed?

Art thou O man or woman at rest under all this? if so, what means those doubts
and fears that so often arise within thee; and whispers these things to thee?

What if my mourning should not be mourning aright, my poverty of spirit not of
a right kind? my love to the Brethren but partial and feigned, to some, not to
others, scarce to any in a full proportion, at least not to all without
partiality? is not this friend dearer to thee, than that could thou not dye
sooner for this friend than for that (if at all for any?) oh how is thy wine
mixed with water, and thy silver with dross, thy (seemingly) unfeigned love with
respect of persons.

Say thou not sometimes in secret to thy soul, O! if I were sure my hungring
and thirsting were indeed after righteousness, for righteousness sake, and that
I were indeed heavy laden according to truth, then I were sure of satisfaction,
and were sure of ease; but while these are the private reasonings of thy soul,
and yet thou would seem and appear to be past from death to life; death's in
the window, death's in the pot, thou yet need the Physician, for thou art
sick, though thou know it not.

But admit, thou art able to deduce arguments of life, from the actions of a
living man.

Forasmuch as he that works righteousness is righteous, and such art thou, and
the course of thy life does evidence this to thine own, and all men's view:
walking in all the ordinances of God without Blame.

This is a worthy testimony indeed, and to be had in great estimation of all
that love and fear the Lord.

But may there not be a defect here, can no man challenge thee for things done
as a man? Admit they cannot, though that be rare, no inequality? no partiality?
in word or deed, having been found in thee? if so, thou have whereof to glory,
but not before God, might thou not have done the same things sooner or
better with respect to circumstances, in relation to matter or manner, to
person or thing? did thy heart never smite thee for defect or excess in
relation to these? it is with thee to give an answer according to truth: now if
thy heart condemn thee, God is greater than thy heart: and though thy heart
condemn thee not, and that thou have confidence toward God; yet must that
confidence be according to God, forasmuch as although it be a very comfortable
thing and much to be desired, to have the testimony of a man's own conscience in
the thing he does, yet this being but a single witness though it may serve a
man in man's matters, in such cases as concern a man's self: yet in the matters
between a man and his God, it is requisite that to the quietation of his mind,
and the establishing his rest, to the making up a peace in his spirit, its
necessary that his righteousness (which he calls such) be born witness to by
God, otherwise his peace flowing from his righteousness being but singly
evidenced, may be without joy in the holy spirit: As is witnessed, 1 Cor. 4.4.
For not he that commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord commends, 2
Cor. 10.18. There be some eminent cases which being considered, will give thee
and me light in this matter.

Paul was a strickt observer of the Law, highly privileged and dignified, in
walking exact and blameless, living in all good conscience, having a zeal of
God, and knew not but that he ought to do what he was doing, even then when he
was in the height and ruff of his persecution: yet this quietness of mind in
himself, nor his zeal toward God, nor his persuasion that he was doing God good
service; none of these did justify him before God, though they might
contribute to a satisfying him in his own mind, and a justifying of him in the
Court of his own conscience, which was at this time un-informed as he
testifies, 1 Timothy 1.13. That he obtained mercy, because he did it ignorantly
in unbeleef.

That person mentioned in Luke 18.10, 11, 12. who in his prayer appealed to
God, insisting upon his negative and positive righteousness, declaring what he
was not, and what he was, that he was righteous and did righteousness, he was
exercised in relation to God and man, a keeper of both tables. Yet the passage
intimates that God was not like minded, touching this boaster or cracker: Gods
thoughts were not touching him as his own thoughts were touching himself, but
the contrary, for every own that exalts himself shall be abased, and he that
humbles himself shall be exalted.

Another passage most eminently remarkable is that of Job, of whom it is
testified by God himself to the face of the accuser; that he was a perfect and
an upright man, one that feared God, and eschewed evil, and that there was
none like him in the earth, Job 1.8. and 2.3. touching his integrity he makes a
Narrative thereof, which discovers the most surpassing excellency: appealing
to God therein, of whom he says, does not he see my ways, and count all all
my steps, Job 31.4, 6. let me be weighed in an even Balance, and let God know
mine integrity; if my step have turned out of the way, and mine heart walked
after mine eyes, if any blot have cleaved to my hands: if I have eaten my
morsels my self alone; if I have seen any perish for want of clothing, or any
without covering; if I covered my transgression as Adam by hiding mine iniquity
in my bosom: much is there spoken of Jobs integrity; by which it is evident, he
had whereof to glory before men, and by his confident appeals to God, it is
evident, he did not doubt to stand also before him in the Judgment.

He was righteous and did work righteousness, and was able to bear it out with
confidence, against the accusation of his professed adversary, and his three
friends, yet his righteousness does appear to be but a righteousness of the
first Covenant, done under the dispensation of the Covenant of works: which he,
as a fearer of God, and worker of righteousness, might and did perform: which
answers the Character God gives of him, Chap. 1.8. that he was one that feared
God, and eschewed evil: agreeable to that testimony of Peter, touching
Cornelius in the tenth, Act. 31.32. in every nation he which fears God and
works righteousness is accepted with him.

And the rather is this considerable, because that notwithstanding the
testimony which God gave of the perfection and uprightness of Job, in the
before mentioned scripture, and the narrative Job gives of his own integrity as
before, yet does the Lord himself reprove him; with many repeated arguments for
his conviction as also does Job lay his hand upon his own mouth and pass
sentence upon himself, which plainly declares his perfection whatever it was in
relation to the first Covenant, and his uprightness however it might be without
blot or blame, as in reference to what was outward, and that Job might have in
respect thereof whereof to glory before men, yet in relation to the
righteousness of God, and that which give him boldness there: he with the Leper
cries, I am unclean, Job 40.4. Behold I am vile, what shall I answer thee, I
will lay my hand upon my mouth, Chap. 42, I have uttered that which I
understood not, things too wonderful for me which I knew not; I have heard of
thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee, wherefore I
abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes.

Thou may have many evidences, marks, and signs whereon thy confidence may
be built, and these nevertheless may be returned upon thee for want of
authority to confirm thee in an undoubted persuasion of thy renewed condition.

Thou may likewise abound in works of righteousness, which may have a mighty
influence upon thee, to further that persuasion and yet reach no further than
to set thee up amongst men: thou may be outdone in all thy working, and
undone in all that is done: for this is most certain, man would be at work, and
doing some thing that might render him his own savior; whereas it is plainly
declared, that it is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in
God which shows mercy: nor by works of righteousness which we have done, but
of his mercy he saves such as are saved by the washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the holy spirit; which man does not care for being acquainted
withal, as long as he has any stock of his own, so long as he has one penny
to go to the Physicians with, he will spend it there, but to be made a beggar, and
to be saved of alms, to receive salvation of gift he likes not to be accounted
so lame and impotent, so sick, yea, dead; proud man cannot bear thus, nor will
not believe this: Nor is this spoken to discourage any from waiting on the Lord
in the use of his appointments, in order to their salvation: Nay it is required
of all, that they work out their salvation with fear and trembling. Yet withal
to remember that it is God that works in them, both to will and to do of his
own good pleasure, but it is spoken to mind thee, that there is an ambitious
mind in me, and thee, and we would think we are not so poor as we are, nor so
beggarly as we are, nor so unable to help our selves, but we can contribute
much upon account of the stock we have in hand: our Candle will serve the turn
well enough, we do not stand in so much need of the sun, we may work by
Candlelight, sufficient to answer what is required of us. Whereas the scope and
tendency of the Gospel, is as to leave man without excuse, for not improving
what is left with him; so it is to cut off glorying and boasting from man in
the utmost of his improvements: that he should reckon himself to have done
nothing, but to have been an unprofitable servant, even then and there, where,
and when, he is most conversant, in what is required of him, and to be so far
from bearing himself in hand, that any work of righteousness which he can do,
has in it a virtue whereby to declare him righteous (as before God) that the
very unrighteousness, of his righteous action (either as to matter or manner)
would silence him in that persuasion, if his eye were open to see it, as it is
seen by God.

If the most high should enter with thee into judgment, thou would not be
able to answer him one of a thousand of thy miscarriages and transgressions
which pass thee, untaken notice of in the day of thine own judgment; which
would not, nor could not, if thine eye were open: there are sins of ignorance,
as well as of knowledge, yea sins cleaving to thy most holy things, sufficient
to abate thy glorying. Those things which are now of price unto thee, in which
thou confidentest thy self: are but creaturely excellencies, and may be found
in such as whom thou in comparison would not set with the Dogs at thy Table.

I mean those whom thou in thy own judgment, infinitely surpassest in virtue
and goodness, would blame and shame thee, if compared with thee: be therefore
content to be stripped of thy seeming glory, which indeed has a beauty, if
considered by it self, as that of Moses also had in its day of dispensation:
but considering it as that which was to be done away, and so the glory thereof
was inglorious; it had no glory in comparison of that glory which excelled. The
face of Moses did shine, but it was veiled, the scholars then could not behold
it with open face. But this veil is done away in Christ, in whose face the
glory of God does shine with more clearness, and with less terror and
amazedness, so as that the disciples the scholars and followers of the Lord
Jesus, those who having heard and learned of the father, come unto him: God who
commanded light to shine out of darkness, shines in their hearts, to give them
the light of the knowledge, of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ:
which they beholding (not as under a veil but) as in a glass with open face,
are changed into the same Image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of
the Lord.

To the Regenerate man upon the account of his first manifestation.
And is it so indeed? that notwithstanding all thy hitherto zealous strict and
religious appearance, putting it self forth in reformations humiliations,
resolutions, austere and strict obligations, for piety, for, purity, for
bringing under the body of sin by vows and covenants, holy purposes and
performances: in religious duties and services: neglecting of the body through
watchings, fastings and abstinence from necessary supplies, and all this in
order to the attainment of the true peace which is after God, the peace which
passes man's understanding, which thine awakened and wounded Spirit thirsted
after the attainment of, and could not be satisfied till it was enjoyed, and in
these supposed to have found it: (but it was but at times) however it was
liable to breaches, yet those breaches were healed, and made up with some one
or more of these, and this was the case of thy soul for many days, perhaps for
many years, sometimes 'twas day with thee, otherwhile 'twas night, sometime
thou saw, nor Sun, nor Moon, nor stars for many days; sometimes thou were
confident thy estate was good and safe, thy heart melted into tears of
compassion for others, which were not so as thou were, and saw not that which
thou saw, and in this thy confidence thou becamest a guide to the blind, a
light to them which were in darkness, an instructor of the foolish, a teacher
of babes Thou prayedst with and for them, thou weptst and made supplication
over them? this or something like this thou bear testimony unto, as having
been the frame of thy spirit: nevertheless in this thy bow abode not in
strength, 'twas not always bent, sometime when thou were reproving others,
thou thy self were secretly reproved in thy self, either for the same, or some
other evil: when thou were comforting others, thine own heart was in doubt
whether thou were truly comforted of God: while thou were helping others with
strengthening arguments against distrust and despair, could thou thy self
believe that thou were indeed translated from death to life? when others
thought highly of thee, and their souls blessed thee, and God for thee, did not
thine own heart (at times) tremble within thee, lest thou after thou had
comforted others, should thy self become a castaway? whence might this
proceed, these ups and downs, these yeas and nays? why did the mountains skip,
why was Jordan (the river of judgment) driven back? why did the earth tremble?
the state which seemed to be founded upon a rock, to move and step backward?
was it not because it did but seem to be so founded? It was but earth, and
therefore trembled: the bow was not the bow of Joseph, therefore it abode not
in strength; the bogh was not Joseph's bogh, therefore not increasing; it was not
rooted in him who was the excellency of Jacob, not strengthened by the arm of
the mighty God of Jacob, and therefore no marvail it admitted of such variety
and mutability, notwithstanding its seeming excellency and stability. Thy
garments were but prison garments, and thou in thy prison house, though thou
knew it not: the iron was entered into thy soul, and thou could not shake
it out, thy soul was afflicted and distressed in its season, the iron pierced
and grieved thee sore, the wounds which the archers had given thee, were not
thoroughly healed, notwithstanding all thy medicines and plasters and thus thou
remainedst, till the time the word of Jehovah came, the word of the Lord tried
thee, as the Goldsmith tries metal in the fire, (...) conflavit, purgavit, Esaias
1.25. Was not thy soul then put upon it to make diligent search to see upon
what foundation thou had been building all this while? Did not this word, (or
some such like) as an arrow from the Almighty enter into thy soul? other
foundation can no man lay then that is laid, which is Jesus Christ, (or this)
neither is there salvation in any other, for there is no other name under
heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved: (or the like) wast thou not
as one in the fire under examination and trial? Did not thine heart throb
within thee, and was not the voice of the Spirit in this word, applying it with
power to thy soul, evidencing and demonstrating to thee? that thou were as yet
unacquainted with the Lord Jesus, as being the foundation of thy rest and
peace; that name, that only name besides which there is none other given among
men for salvation, this name thou were a stranger unto, and never had any
knowledge of? this begot strange work in thy soul, great were thy strivings and
struglings to maintain thy former building,

But this error in the foundation put thee to a great stand, thou consultd'st
thy friends, with whom thou hadest mourned and fasted and prayed, thou calledst
up thy former experiences, thy tenderness of conscience, which rendered thee
exemplary to thine observers, thy reformations, vows, covenants, resolutions,
strict performances, both public and private, and concludest these could not
grow in natures garden, therefore sure it was some great temptation which had
seized upon thee to make thee to question thy former evidence, and to empaire
thy former goodly structure, and to raze the foundation thereof; thus thou
would have healed the breach, (which the Spirit of God had begun to make in
thee) by the reasoning of thine own spirit, drawn from thien own former
experiences and the suffrage of thy friends and companions.

But this work of conviction being from the Lord, and put into the hand of his
own spirit to effect; he mightily and irresistibly convinced thee of
unbelief, and as the words of the men of Judah were said (in another case) to
be fiercer then the words of the men of Israel; so was the voice of the Spirit
of God more powerful in convincing, reproving, and silencing all the arguments
of thine own Spirit, testifiing plainly that whatsoever thou had done
hitherto, not being founded upon Christ Jesus, nor done as an obedience of
faith, thou were but laying another foundation besides Christ, which no man can
or ought to lay; that thou were not building upon Christ the Foundation Gold,
Silver, precious stones, etc. But thou were laying these or something like
these for a Foundation instead of Christ; mean while he that the Father has
anointed to be the Corner stone, elect and precious, his name thou knew not;
nor were acquainted with either the necessity, or the excellency of him, whom
to know is eternal life.

But thou contrariwise were building a Tower to reach up to heaven, to mount up
by a Ladder of thine own making, the one end whereof, though it were upon the
earth, and had it is footing in natures excellencies, improved by education, and
other qualifications, yet it would and should reach to the highest attainment,
and besides it there needed no other, to give thee full fruition of thy souls
desires; Thy both foundation was laid in self, (that was the rise thereof) and
the top stone was self, (that was the end thereof) self was at ends of the
work; and this was discovered to thee by this convinceing spirit, who caused
thee to see where thou were, and the evil of what thou were doing.

That thy very righteousness (which to thee appeared so) and which was
commended of others for such) was not the righteousness of faith, but at the
best a righteousness of works; upon the beauty whereof the Spirit of the Lord
did blow, and the flower thereof past away, faded, and whithered, as the grass
or flower of the field fades, and falls off: The glory of the Lord revealing
it self in power through that word. I will make waste Mountains and hills and
dry up all their herbs, and I will make the Rivers Islands, and I will dry up
the pooles, and I will bring the blind by a way that they knew not, I will
lead them in paths that they have not known, I will make darkness light
before them, and crooked things straight; these things will I do unto them,
and not forsake them. Hear ye deaf, and look ye blind, that ye may see.

Thus wast thou convinced of thine error, thine ignorance, blindness, and
unbelief, thy mountains were laid waste, and thy pooles dried up, and thou
received'st the sentence of one, deaf, and blind, notwithstanding all thy
former excellency, which as a flower was now blown upon by the breath of the
Lord, and thy building discovered to have been begun in sand and not on the
rock, the Lord Jesus; of whose name and nature thou were yet ignorant.
Nevertheless, the Lord who leaves not himself without witness in the souls
of his, not only began his good work in mercy, truth, and faithfulness,
convinceing thee of sin even in thy holy things, viz. of unbelief; which
wrought no small stir in thee to see thy building, which had been the fruit of
many years, wherein thou had with no small cost, and travail been
exercised; to see it all tumbled down in a moment, and laid level with the
ground, and not a stone left upon a stone, but a new foundation discovered, by
thee not hitherto known, nor understood where nor what it was.

And not only so, but putting under his left hand, he sustained thee and kept
thee from sinking (under this conviction) by opening a crevis of light,
discovering the righteousness of God in opposition to thine own
unrighteousness, and to thy former seeming righteousness, wherein thou
seem to have made such progress, nor was this a bare discovery that such a
thing there was, but what it was, and how attainable, viz. by faith in Jesus
Christ, who is made of God to the believer, wisdom; righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption; thus he convinced thee not only of sin, but
also of righteousness, discovering and revealing the fountain thereof.

Nor was this all but the same spirit led thee on to further measures of
knowledge in order to the attainment thereof, not suffering thee to be
satisfied with the knowledge thereof at a distance, but raised up in the strong
desires and earnest longings to be possessed thereof, and to be made one
therewith; partly to quench the fiery sting, and not only to pacify but to
purify the conscience, and that not in relation to sins past (only) but also
that for time to come, thou might (denying all ungodliness) live
righteously, soberly, and Godly in this present world; which earnest longing of
soul was mightily raised up and increased in thee by the delays, which the
heavenly Father exercised thee with, according to his divine wisdom, to
commend his love to thee, and thereby to let thee know how great a love and
what a manner of love it was, that should bear withal thy frowardness, and
impatiency, and unbelief, and mistrust, and almost despairs; giveing thee
hints and tastes and opening certain crevises of light making darkness light
before thee, and crooked things straight, susteyning and supporting thee with
secret hope, founded upon his goodness in promiseing and faithfulness, in
performing, which thou sometimes beleeved'st (though weakly) that he would do,
and could not chose but do, because he was faithful: in this desert he kept
thee the longer to acquaint thee with the disposition of thine own heart, that
thou might see, what was in thee, and that he might cause the carkases of
the rebels (murmurings and unbelief) to fall and perish in this wilderness.

And at length thou know how (though thou thought it long first) he
caused judgment to break forth into victory, by removing all thy doubts,
fears, distrus'ts not all at once, nor on a sudden, but by measures, and
degrees, as thou wast capeable of bearing such discoveries; revealing him whom
thy soul loved, and so longed for, performing that for thee in an higher more
safe, more sure way, which thou by thine own works would have affected for
thy self in thine own strength, and in thy own way, so that the kindness
and love of God our Savior, thus appearing not by works of righteousness,
which thou had done, but according to his mercy he has saved thee, by the
washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Spirit, the shedding abroad
whereof (though but in the first fruits) were the evidence of thine adoption,
whereby in some measure thou were able to cry Abba-Father.

And could tell to others what a wonderful redemption thou have attained
unto, through grace; whereby thou art redeemed not only from thy vain
conversation, wherein in times past thou lived'st but also from all thy self
righteousness, wherein thou wast exalting thy natural man, dressing a dead
carcass with rags of thine own making, trimming up the Tomb, and garnishing
the Sepulcre, and bringing thine ointments, and spices to odoriferate a dead
Jesus; whom now thou understandest is risen and has appeared manifesting
himself, to thee, and in thee in a portion and measure, by whom thou beleevest
in God that raised him from the dead, and has given him glory; by whom thou
have received the atonement, and obtained eternal redemption, by faith in him.

And now what workings of heart are upon thee, tongue cannot express, thy new
life, and renewed being, puts thee now upon enquireing as David after Jonathan,
what is to be done to testify thankfulness to him who has loved thee, and
washed thee from thy sins, in his blood, now taking the Cup of salvation and
calling upon the name of the Lord, walking before the Lord in the Land of the
liveing. Now the new song, sing praises to our God, sing praises, etc. It Is too
wonderful to say how brim full and running over thy heart is, what would
thou not be now, and do now for him, who has done so much for thee? I want
words to express.

Now that, which thou wast exercised in, at the beginning, when thou wast
working for life, before thou were unbottom'd, laying it as a foundation
instead of Christ, will become thy soul to be conversant in, as a fruit and
effect of life, and of thy praisefull heart, for though they were not fit to be
a foundation; yet are comely and beautiful, being built upon the foundation;
who so offers praise, glorifieth God: now to live holily, Godly, righteously,
strictly, to walk watchfully, and circumspectly, humbly, to be filled with
fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the praise and glory
of God; and all this as a thank-offering, performed as a Sacrifice of praise,
was not this thy frame of Spirit then? Sure it was.

Nevertheless, The enemy of thy salvation, Satan that old Draggon, the
Serpent, that liar and murderer, did he not lie in wait to devour this new
born Babe, this birth from above? tempting thee either to doubt of the truth
and reallity of this discovery, and manifestation to thy soul, persuading thee
it was a delusion, and that the news was too good to be true, and so possessed
thee with fear, distrust, and unbelief, under which thou, for a season, were
distressed, till the Son of righteousness dispelled this cloud for thee, by
making his daylight, shine more bright upon thee.

But this bait not taking effect, this murdering tempter did insinuate to
thee, that now the bitterness of death was past, God had made thy mountain
strong, so as that thou should never be moved, thou were now called unto
liberty, and that there was not need of being so strict as thou had been,
thou need not henceforth be so watchful, nor mournful, nor prayerfull;
these had their use in their day, while thou were seeking after the enjoyment
of God, but were now unnecessary and useless for thee: (having attained) but
to live freely and cheerfully in the liberty, to which thou were called, to
enjoy the fullness and fatness of the blessing, wherewith thou were betrusted,
whether it were spiritual, or temporal, this was to walk worthy the Lord and
his high calling, and to speak good of his name, and of his Salvation, and to
declare to all that should see, or converse with thee, that thou were redeemed
indeed, and in thee was fulfilled that word, Let the heart of them rejoice
which seek the Lord (much more of them which find the Lord)

With this sort of temptation, thou were in danger of being taken, it had so
specious a pretense for God, and came so near to that which was acceptable to
the flesh, that thou listened'st to it, and to the reason that seemed to be in
it, the fruit was goodly to the eye, pleasant to look on, 'twas good for food,
and to be desired to make one wise; for it represented God in another manner of
appearance, then thou had known him; it led thee into a more seeming
Spirituality of discerning, then thou had been acquainted with; tending to a
neglect of thy former, so much prized and prospered duties of seeking the face
of God in prayer, and other exercises under this notion, that they were but
forms, and that bodily exercise peofiteth not, and that they were but
performances in letter, but not in Spirit, with many more such like as these,
till at length thou wast drawn into a disesteeme, and disuse of that, which
once was more dear, and precious to thee, then thy life, and wherein thou
enjoyest communion with God, with whom thou had confidence in thine
addresses, but thy discoveries being now of another kind, thou applyest to the
meeting with God in them, after another manner then thou wast wont.

Now thou soughtest and enjoyed'st God and the Creature under a pretense and
specious show of seeking to enjoy God in the Creature; Nay, did not the
Creature eye it with God, and take place of God, and require that of thee which
is proper only to God? did not thou by hearkening to this deceiver, who
beguiled thee as he beguiled Eve, did not thou love and fear, and seek after
and delight in the Creature more then the Creator, did thou indeed glorify
God as God in proportion to what thou knew of God, and such discoveries as
he had made forth of himself in thee, when he caused his glory to shine in thy
heart, through the face or appearance of Jesus Christ? but thou pretending to
more wisdom, and professing thy self to be wise, becamest a fool, and
changed'st the glory of the incorruptible God, into corruptible Images, and
worshipped'st the imaginations of thine own brain; Golden Gods, or Silver
Gods, or such as were formed out of baser metal, the God of this world having
deluded thee, put out thine eyes, and made thee to grind in his mill,
serveing, and loveing, prizing and delighting in lying vanities, under pretense
of liberty in Spirit, or Christian freedom in the use of the Creature, by which
thou were cheated, as Solomon's fool was by that whorish woman, who
notwithstanding her lips drop as an honey comb, and her mouth is smoother then
oil, yet her end is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a two edged sword; They which
yield to go after her flattering lips, they go as fools to the correction of
the Stocks, till a dart strike through their liver, and are as a bird hasting
to the snare, not knowing that it is laid for her life, for she has cast down
many wounded, yea, many strong men have been slain by her. Oh the number of
valiant ones! how faint and feeble are they through the subtle insinuations of
the God of this world, who has poysened them with this deadly potion in a Cup
of gold, mixing his poison with these two glittering ingredients; Liberty,
Spirituallity.

To the Virgins that having known the depths of Satan, and have kept their
garments pure, abideing in the council of the Lord, rooted and established in
him, and growing up in him, bringing forth fruit unto him. O Blessed are ye of
the Lord, be not high minded but fear!

But to the rest with whom it is not so, let it be said, do ye thus requite
the Lord? Ah foolish people, and unwise, is he not thy father, that has bought
thee, should thou sell thy rock, thy God, for a lie, a vanity? Oh that ye
were wise, and would consider, thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and
thy backslidings will reprove thee, remember therefore from whence thou art
fallen, and repent and do thy first works.

To the relapsed or backsliding Christian, considered either as unsensible, or
sensible thereof.

To the first, How is the gold become dim, how is the fine gold changed, the
precious Sons of Zion comparable to fine gold, how are they esteemed as a
common thing? The Nazarites which were once purer then snow, and whiter then
milk, more ruddie then Rubies, and polish't as the Saphir, their visage now is
blacker then a coal, they are not known in the Streets; Because they have
forgotten the God of their Salvation, And have not been mindful of the Rock of
their strength, But have trusted in their own beauty. And as its testified in
another case, Ezekiel. 16. Thou have taken of thy fair Jewels of my Silver, and
my gold, which I had given thee, and made to thy self Images of men, and
did commit whoredom with them. How weak is thy heart? says the Lord God,
seeing thou do all these things and that which is the more to be lamented is
this, that although gray hairs are upon thee here and there, yet thou know
it not, but presumest all things are with thee as yesterday, and heretofore,
saying I am innocent, I have not sinned, but do seek the Lord daily, and
delight to know his way, not forsakeing his ordinances, but approach his
presence with delight. Nevertheless thou considerest not where thou art, nor
what thou art doing, nor what will be the issue thereof; when the most high
shall recount with thee and bring upon thee the remembrance of thy ways,
saying to thine heart.

What have thou to do in the way of Egypt, to drink the waters of Sihor, or
why have thou gadded so about to change thy way? have thou not embraced this
present world? and the gloryes thereof, have not the sparkling glittering
appearances thereof taken thine eye, and thy heart? what a share have the
promotions and the preferments thereof in thine estimation, and affection,
where, and what is become of thine ancient tenderness and meltingnesse of
soul? Art not thou in the way of Assyria? and have not thou drunk of the
River? thou know the time when thou would have preferred one moments
comunion with God, before all the earthly gloryes, if thou might have
enjoyed them; Nay, thou forsookest these: that thou might enjoy that; thy
kindred, thy Country, and thy Fathers house were not dear to thee, in
comparison of thy being entertained into fellowship, and comunion with him,
whom thou esteemed'st more then thy life, thine all, what things were gain to
thee then, thou then counted'st dung, and dross in comparison of the
excelleney of the knowledge of Christ Jesus thy Lord, for whom thou wast
content to part withal, that before time had been dear to thee, but he
suffering thee to be tried that thou might know what was in thine heart, how
is thy heart become as weak as water? and how has the God of this world
blinded thee, making thee to join in affinity with his Gods of Silver, and
Gods of Gold: The Honors, Titles, dignityes, preferments, wealth, houses,
Lands, the Revenues of this earth, which are the portion of the children of the
earth, of which thou were once afraid least thy heart should be deceived
therewith, but now it is otherwise with thee, thou embraced'st, love,
pleadest for, huntest after them as though thou could never have too much
nay, scarce enough thereof. This is a lamentation, and shall be for a
lamentation, and it will so appear to thee, when this thy wickedness shall
correct thee, and this thy backsliding shall reprove thee, and thou thereby be
brought to see where thou art, and made to confess thine iniquity, giveing
glory to the God of heaven, in whose hands thy breath is, and who is acquainted
withal thy ways.

In order whereunto thou have been under-dealing more then once, whereby thou
might have been retained from the error of thy ways, but thine ears were
stopped, and thine eyes were closed; thou saw no evil in thy way, nor
regardest much to know the end and cause of thy visitation, forasmuch as in all
thy outgoings thou still kept'st on the form of Godliness, though all thy
former zeal and quickness, life and power in thy profession, were reduced to
a bare empty form (at most) especially thy secret and personal comunion, how
ever with others thou assembled'st, wept'st, and covered'st the Altar with
tears, yet when thou were alone, thou either durst not make bold with God as
formerly, or cared'st not for so doing; thy promotions and preferments, thy
Silver, and thy Gold, thine honors and possessions, some one or more, if these
make such a rattling noise in thy soul, that thou can not listen nor lend an
ear to these silent gailes, and heavenly whispers of the divine breathings of
the Spirit of truth, which thou once pretended'st to be instructed, guided, and
led by. Oh consider this you that forget God least he tear you in pieces, and
there be none to deliver.

To the awakened and sensible back-slider, I have this word.

Why cryest thou for thine affliction, thy wound is incureable, for the
multitude of thine iniquity? thy sins were increased, and now the most high
has visited them upon thee?

Have thou not heard that the everlasting God faints not? neither is weary,
and that because he changes not, therefore the sons of Jacob are not consumed;
nor that the foundation of God stands sure having this seal, the Lord
knows who are his.

I know these words of truth are with thee, but what influence have they upon
thee; thou art sensible of thy backslidings, and thou art cut to the very
heart, and pained beyond expression, and that which wounds thee is thy
unkindnesse to thy Lord and husband, to whom thou art betrothed, and espoused,
yet can not behold him, who to reprove and correct thy backesliding, has
withdrawn his presence from thee, which once was dear to thee, and however
thou have been in a, deep sleep, in a far Country, among the hoggs and swine
of the earth feeding with them, and wallowing in the mire with them, during
which time, thou wast unsensible of thy loss, yet being alarmed from on high
with that voice, What meanest thou O sleeper? arise; now thy heart is troubled,
and the thoughts of thy fathers house comes to thy remembrance and now thou
would feign return to thy first husband. But Oh the many fears and doubts
which are created in thy troubled spirit! thy sorrows are multiplied, because
thy transgression is aggravated.

Now thou find what that word means, It had been better never to have known
the way of righteousness, then after the knowledge thereof, to turn from the
holy Commandment like a dog to his vomit, or a washed sow to her wallowing in
the mire, thou can now say, what has pride profited me, mine honors my
promotions my preferments, my Silver, and my Gold; my musicks, and dancings,
what can these avail me in this hour of my sorrow? the God of this world has
by these bewitched and poisoned me, under the specious pretense of liberty and
freedom, and glorying God in, and by these, till a dart is struck through my
liver, and now woe unto me, woe unto me, I will take up a lamentation and say,
look away from me, I will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me, for it is a
day of trouble, and of treading down, and of perplexity by the Lord God of
Hosts.

In this state of perplexity and hour of visitation, thou find an emptiness
in all those imaginary delights, wherewith thou have contented thy self, these
cannot satisfy nor quiet thy restless mind, Nay, they are so far from doing
it, that they are as so many pricks in thine eyes, and thorns in thy sides,
thou art wearied in the beholding them, and that word is come upon thee in
part, and in measure already, that thou art ready to cast thy Gods of Silver
and Gold to the moles and to the batts, wishing a thousand times in secret that
thy heart had never been let loose to go out after these, and if parting from
them would give thee peace and recover thy communion with God thou would let
all go, but thou know if thou should give all thy goods to the poor and
thy body to be burned, this would be too short, and too narrow, to procure
communion with God, therefore by prayer and Supplication, thou applyest unto
God as at other times, but thou perceivest him not to answer neither by dream,
nor by vision, but is as one who has hid himself from thee in displeasure,
Has hedged thee about, and made thy chain heavy, when thou cryest and
shoutest, he shuts out thy prayer; he has covered himself with a cloud, that
thy prayer should not pass through, and has caused the Arrow of his quiver to
enter into thy reins, filled thee with bitterness, and made thee drunk with
wormwood, testifiing against thee, that all this is come upon thee because thou
have been unsteadfast with him in Covenant; forsaken thy first love, and
embraced other lovers, other contents, and delights, thy heart has been
divided between God and some creaturely excellency, with which thou have been
enamoured, and by which thou have been beguiled and deluded.

And now thine eyes begin a little to be opened, and thou beginnest to say,
where am I? what have I done? But like a silly bird thou art snared, and taken,
thy Dalilahs, in whose lap thou have been sleeping, have cut of thy locks, and
betrayed thee into the hands of him, that hunts for the precious life.

Nevertheless, though thou art ashamed as a Theife when he is found, yet thou
art not left to say, there is no hope; no (or the case is desperate) nor I have
loved strangers and after them will I go.

But thou find a secret power bearing up thy Spirit, and causeing thee to
look toward the Lord and to seek his face, thou can not give it over, but
must come unto him though the iniquity of thy heels do compass thee about,
and thou art full of secret fears, least thy locks should never grow again,
nor thy former strength return to thee again.

When thou remembredst God thou art troubled, yet that which most troubles thee
is thy own unkindnesse, and ungratefulness toward him, whose love and
goodness has been so wonderful toward thee; thou remembred'st what he has
been to thee, and done for thee, in the times of thy greatest sorrows,
streights, trials, and temptations, which thou were under, and from which none
but the eternal arm could rescue or deliver thee; and now thou call to
mind what vows, what promises, what resolutions thou then made to live to
him who had given life to thee, but compareing things together, thou art
confounded and ashamed in thy self, and yet art strangely and secretly born up
thou know not how, still to look toward God, against whom thou have sinned;
notwithstanding thy sensiblenesse of thy departings from him.

The foundation of God standing sure, and being sealed, the Lord having once
known thee, and owned thee for his, Oh how it works in thee that thou can not
give up, nor give over, though thou know not whether ever thou shall recover
thy sight of him again, to see him as thou have seen him; the goings of thy
God and King in his Sanctuary; Now the remembrance of the kindness of thy
youth, and the love of thine espousalls, and thy free and willing following of
the Lord through the wilderness, in hard and difficult and untroden paths,
when the day of his power was upon thee, while thou meditatest on these things
thy heart meditates terror, forasmuch as thou discernest that as thou have, in
great measure forsaken the Lord, and gone backward, so has he also withdrawn
himself in very great measure, and caused thy Sun not to stand still nor to
go backwards many degrees, as a testimony and sign of his presence with thee,
as of old, with Joshuah and Hezekiah, but to go down while was yet day;
withdrawing the testimony of his presence, the light of his countenance.

That whereas thou were wont to speak before him, and unto him as a friend
speaks with his friend; to be visited and supped with, to be caused to sit
under his shadow with great delight, and to be refreshed with the tastes of his
loves, but and now not finding it so as heretofore, this is thy gall, and thy
wormwood, and to consider, thou have procured this to thy self, this is the
gravel in thy teeth, the arrow in thy reins, and the Iron that enters into
thy soul, though thy nights and days be filled with terror and anguish under
these considerations, yet still thou art secretly drawn after the Lord for the
return of the light of his countenance, through a secret persuasion that, as
its of his mercy that thou art not consumed, so certainly it is the love of God
which is at work upon thy heart, and which thus constraines thee to seek after
him and which will not suffer thee to give him any rest till he make thy soul
which (as Jerusalem) is now as a plowed field, a joy and a praise through the
lifting up the light of his countenance, by restoring the years which the
Locust, the Catterpiller, and the Kanker-worm has eaten.

The sense of thy guiltiness cannot drive thee from God, but thou inclinest
toward him, and cleavest unto him, and would feign lie under his feet laying
thy mouth in the dust, if so be there may be a reviving certainly, concluding
the seed is yet alive, which his holy hand (as the blessed seeds-man) has
sown; that the Covenant he has made with thee is a Covenant of salt it is fixed,
as to him, though thou have started aside like a broken bow, yet as to him, it
is ordered in all things and sure; and that he will cause thee to revive as the
Corn after a sore Winter, sometimes such workings of heart as these have been
upon thee, and thou have had a little reviving.

But when the thoughts of thine unkindnesse, have been renewed, together with
the silence of God to thy tears and cries.

Then are thy sorrows repeated which have raised up in thee an holy
Indignation and revenge against thy self, that ever thou should be so
unkind so unfaithful, and so treacherous as thou have been to him who has
been so dear to thee.

In these workings and counter-workings that have been upon thee, the most
holy, blessed, and tender God and Father, has preserved the vital and
radical principle entire, thou have not been suffered to give up all, and to
say all was hitherto, nothing and so give the lie, to all the former workings
of God toward thee.

But wast still kept upon, and close to the foundation, thou remembredst and
often said thou had an husband, and he was still thine, though withdrawn,
through thy unfaithfulness, and unstedfastnesse, thy Father, thy Former, and
Maker, was thy husband, thou remembred'st his visits, and thy vows, and those
vows, were upon thee, thou had been treacherous in not keeping steadfast yet
thou durstest not add to all the rest this, viz. to renounce the Covenant, nor
the witness thou had born thereunto.

Thus thy root was preserved, and thou had a little strength, and were helped
with a little help, in this great hour of thy temptation, when many quit their
help and their hope, to seek for another foundation then that which had been
laid; yet the most high kept thee from turning after the flocks of thy
Companions.

And though this were to thee as an hour of sore travail wherein thy hands
were upon thy loins, and palenesse in thy cheeks, and thou were a wonder to
many, when none but the most high God (who sustained thee) was acquainted with
thy grief, and anguish, yet the fire did not burn thee, nor the waters which
came into thy soul were not suffered to overflow thee; because his arm was
under thee, and sustained thee; keeping up in thee, the acknowledgement of the
interest, wherein thou stood'st related to him as to a Father, an husband,
though thou were made and kept sensible of being a rebellious child, and
treacherous wife, yet now thou were a soul-sick, fainting, languishing, and
almost dying (both) wife and child, and cryed'st out often, Oh that one would
give thee of the waters of Bethlem to drink, no waters like those to thee, if
thou might have but a look from thy father, but a line from thy husband, for
thou assuredly knew thou had both a Father and a Husband, thus thy
rellative interest being preserved, in this storm of temptation, wherein thy
Father and Husband heard thee, and saw thee, and secretly sustained thee,
though thou were not aware thereof, and there was a door of hope further
opened to thee, by the presentation of those passages of the holy Scripture,
which discover the bowels of God, in his restoring and healing which when it
was given thee to consider, thou foundest the Lord had manifested great
tenderness to such as had dealt very unkindly with him; and thou had many
hints thereof darted into thy soul, encourageing thee to wait and expect the
discovery of the light of his countenance which thou so earnestly, and
uncessantly Soughtest.

And besides, That it was said unto thee, refrain thy voice, from weeping, and
thine eyes from tears, for there is hope in thine end, by which word a door
of hope was opened unto thee, which gave thee encouragement, not to wax weary
nor faint in thy mind. Thou had this further testimony from the Lord (at a
certain time made forth with clearness, and set upon thine heart)

I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth, for the spirit
would fail before me, and the souls which I have made.

For the iniquity of his coveteousnesse I was wroth, and smote him, I hid me
and was wroth.

I have seen his ways, and will heal him, I will restore comforts to him and
to his mourners.

Now thou came to consider where thou began'st to turn thy back upon thy God,
and to go out from his presence, and wherein thou provoked'st him to smite
thee with blindness, and to hide himself from thee, and to leave thee to
thine own hearts ^usts, to feed and lie down amongst the beasts of the earth,
till time and times had passed over thee.

But he remembering his Covenant has visited thee, putting in his finger at the
hole of the door, has reproved thee for thy backslidings, has showed thee
wherein thou have back-slidden, how it came about, that thou forsookest thy
first love, and wherein it was, has justified his dealing toward thee in
smiteing thee, Perhaps with sickness as he has done with some at least by
hideing his face, by withdrawing the light of his countenance from thee, under
which conviction he has not left thee as one without hope, but has given
argument to faith, to plead out the promise of pardon, and healing, and
restoring so that now the veil and curtain began a little to be drawn open
and thou recovered'st a little more light to look into that within the veil,
and a little more strength to approach to the mercy-seat; and in this posture
thou have been for a season exerciseing faith, according to that measure of
abillity that is given thee, in the promise of grace for healing and restoring,
which thou expectest to be fulfilled in the Lords season, according to that
good word wherein he has caused thee to hope.

And although the fig tree do not yet blossom, nor there be no fruit in the
Vine, yet thou beleevest, the vision is but for an appointed time, and that it
will speak, and not lie, nor tarry beyond the appointed season, but that
judgment will break forth into victory, and that the Eunuch shall no more say,
I am a dry tree, but shall have a name given unto him, better then of Sons and
Daughters, and that the glory of the latter house will be greater then the
glory of the former; and this Covenant renewed, will be a band of love stronger
then death.

Under such Considerations as these, that little spark of Divine fire, which is
kindled in thee, is glowing and warming, and brooding in thee, causeing thee to
increase with the increase of God, throwing down the strong holds of Satan,
which he had errected in thee, unthroneing of him; not only whipping out the
buyers, and sellers, but overthrowing the tables of the money changers, and
making thee again a meet Temple for thy Lord and Father, casting out the den
of Theives, the nest of Robbers, the brood and spawn of that filth which has
been forming it self in thee, and by which thou have been acted by setting
thee against thy self in a soule-abhorrency and detestation and selfe-loathing
with holy indignation, that ever thou should be so treacherous, so vie, and
so unworthy.

Now thou art in some competent degree and measure able to say to thy former
delights and contents (which stole away thy heart and robbed thee of thy
precious comunion with thy God) as they of whom the Prophet speaks, Esaias 30.22.
Thou can say unto these, get ye hence, Ashur shall not save us, we will not
ride upon horses, nor say any more to lying vanities, they are thy Gods, but
this den of Thieves being turned out, the Temple begins to be purged, and to
become again an house of prayer; thine ear is bored, and thou art caused to
hear instruction the whispers of God in thy soul are a little returned and
thou art caused to bear the voice behind thee, and to distinguish in some
measure between it and the voice of the stranger.

The skales (also) are made to fall from thine eyes, and thou art caused to see
and to understand where thou art, and where thou have been, what thou art, and
have been doing; that thou have been among the Tombs, and Graves, and painted
Sepulchers, and art a liveing monument raised from thence, to declare the
mighty power of God in thy recovery and restoration which in part thou can
already witness at which thou wondrest, yet art not therewith satisfied,
because that little of which thou have begun to taste, has so enlarged thine
appetite, that thou hungrest and thirstest more, and longest more for what is
behind, for what is yet further to be enjoyed, then thou did at any time
heretofore.

Thy Spiritual senses are enlarged, and more exercised to discern, relish,
and distinguish, then formerly in thy best estate hitherto. That which was
excellent to thee then, is of small account to thee now; nay, thou forgettest
it leavest it, behind thee pressing forward, toward the mark of the price of
the high-calling in Christ, for whom thou art now content to be any thing, to
suffer any thing in the power of him who gives thee to be, to do, and to
suffer for him.

It Is now made evident to thee, and by the eye of faith thou discernest that
thy first love, was but self love; and began and ended in self, and art able
now to demonstrate it to thine own heart, and unto others by arguments
undeniable, such as formerly thou could not bear the hearing of, much less
believe.

Forasmuch, As when thou had the discovery of Christ, as the Lords anointed
Savior made forth unto thee, either in the beauty and excellency which is in
him, or in the necessity which thou stood'st in, of him, for Salvation, for
setting thee free from wrath to come, It is evident that thy self was the
ultimate end of thy souls aim, in submitting to him, and closeing with him,
which though thou saw not then yet now thou discernest.

For then possibly thou might say within thy self, as some have said, that
they have apprehended such excellency in Jesus Christ, that it alone has drawn
their hearts to long for him, and desire him, to esteem him as the chiefest of
ten thousands, and for whom they could be content to suffer the loss of all
things, yet thou who so said, knew not the deceit of thy heart herein, as
it is now made manifest, for had thou indeed sought him for himself (and
not for thy own self) how could it be possible, but thou should have prized
him at as high a rate in the possession as thou did while thou were in the
pursuit, while thou were mourning after the Lord, and begging that he would
make forth the discovery of him self unto thee; renewing of thee in the spirit
of thy mind, and making thee a meet Temple for himself; that he would dwell
in thee, and walk in thee, sup with thee, and make his abode with thee, when
thou were arived at some measure of persuasion, that this thy longed for, and
so much prized beloved was thine, and thou were his, having through faith
received the witness in thy self, and had peace with God through Jesus
Christ, by whom having received the atonement thou had access through
faith unto the Throne of Grace, with boldness for help in times of need.

Yet in process of time (perhaps but a short time too) thou have neglected him
whom thy soul professed such love unto, and accounted him but a common thing;
could this be possible if he had been the alone object of thy souls desire,
and delight, is it not apparent that it was not He, but His, not his person,
but his revenue; his Salvation, his peace, his deliverance, which when thou
had attained it was enough? had he all thy heart? all thy might, all thy
strength, all thy soul, was he indeed thy all? Nay, thou know he was not;
was not self the wheel which turned every motion? was it not the center where
they all fixed? No mervaile then, that all this is come upon thee, which has
befallen thee, that the most high has suffered thee to make thine abode with
the Beasts of the field and forest; to show thee thereby what was in thine
heart, which thou before did not know, nor could believe, but now can
set thy seal to it, as true in thine own sad experience.

Thou do now understand what an influence that grand Idol Self had upon
every motion, and how it was first and last in every action, which thou were
conversant in, this discovery is now made forth unto thee, with fullness of
evidence which thou could never have believed, touching thy self before.

Therefore now thou abhorrest Self in dust and ashes, and cryest unto the
Lord, night, and day, that thou may be delivered from this secret
soul-deceiver, that henceforth it may no more be as formerly, that not Thy
self, but Himself may be the object of thy souls seeking; nor not so much
His, as He may be thy souls solace, joy, and delight, that he would glorify
himself in thee, and by thee, making manifest his strength in thy weakness,
his power in thy nothingnesse, that thou may now know him in power, and not
in word, or in form only that he would be indeed thy life, to act thee, and
lead thee, to guide thee, and preserve thee, that he would perfect the work
which himself has begun in thee, that thou may in all persons and things
thou have to do with, converse with him, and behold him, treating thee, and
administering unto thee, whether it be in plenty, or scarcity, in abundance, or
in want, in cross, or in more fair appearances; if Shimei curse, let him
alone, for God has bidden him, if Jonathan show kindness, he has his
Commission from him who is thy God, thy Rock, if when thou call he answers
thee not, it is that thou might own his Soveraingty over thee, as knowing
best what and when, and how to do thee good according to what he knows to be
best for thee, if waiting for thy mercy be best, thou shall be made to wait,
and sustained in waiting, wherein faith shall be exercised, and patience be
perfecting, being raised up into an expectation of the promised good, for which
thou art waiting: for as much as it is healing and restoring that thou wantst,
and prayest for; and God has promised to thee, and given thee to believe, that
he will heal thy backsliding, and restore comforts unto thee; thou art in good
measure quieted in him, resting upon his goodness, by which he made this
promise, and upon his faithfulness, by which thou beleevest he will make good
this promise, in expectation whereof through patience thou possessest thy
soul: Harkening what God the Lord will further speak unto thee, who will
speak peace unto his people, and to his Saints, and they shall not turn
again to folly: For he will be as the dew unto them, they shall grow as the
Lilly, and cast forth roots as Lebanon: they shall revive as the Corn, and
grow as the Vine, and be beautiful as the Olive tree: and all this not in
themselves, but in him in whom their fruit is found; even in him who is the
Root and offspring of David, who loves them freely, and therefore will heal
them perfectly. Psalm. 107.43. Who so is wise, and he shall understand these
things, prudent, and he shall know them, for the ways of the Lord are right,
and the Just shall walk in them, but the transgressors shall fall therein,
Hosea 14.9th.

FINIS.
These faults being omitted at the Press, the Reader is desired to mend as
follows.
1 PArt. P. 2. l. 1. r. 2 Cor p. 10. l. 30. r. of things. p. 11. l. 14. r. Mat.
26. p. 12. l. 3. r. was. p. 13. l. 27. r. of faith. p. 14. l. 25. r not. p. 16.
l. 14. 32. r. lessen. p. 34. l. 32 r. newcrea^e. p 39. l. 26. r. Ps. 44.11. l
38. ^^r 31. r. 24, 25. p. 41. l. 4. r. unison. p. 44. l. 12. r. 13. 2. p. 45.
l. 19 dele all

2 Part. p. 1. l. 18. r. society. l 26. r every. p. 4. l. 10. p. 47. l. 16 p.
49. l 23. r. the word. p 9. l. 32. dele mentioned before, l. 37. r. as. l. 40.
r. God manifested. p 16. l. 4. dele viz. Fox way to the kingdom. p. 17. l. 18.
dele to p. 18. l. 3. r. a more. l. 22. r. as. l. 36. r. 1 John 1.1. p. 19. l.
12. r. 1 Pet. 1. p 32. l 28. for eyes, r. ages. p. 27. l. 33. r. 1 John p. 32.
l. 1. 1. Ezekiel. l. 3. r. privatively. l. 6. r. not. l. 38. r. decision. p. 33.
l. 34. r. Farneworth p. 36. l. 2, 5. add, adm^. p. 37. l. 23. r. reviewing p.
46. l. 36. r. there. p 50. l. 36. r. neither did.

Part 3. p. 25. l. 16. r. 1 Chr p. 32. l. 33. for spirit, r. first. p 41. l.
35. dele both. l. 37. add, both, p. 45. l. 32. r. vie. i^. p. 43. l. 7. r.
reclaimed. p. 49. l. 15. r. glorifying. p. 52. l. 19. r. aside. p. 54. l. 20.
r. vile.


