M. JENKIN'S RECANTATION, OR His humble ACKNOVVLEGEMENT By way of Petition to
the Parliament. Wherein he confesses his sorrow for his Actings against the
State, and the Unsuitableness thereof to his Calling and Profession. As also
The Parliaments Answer to his Petition.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1651.

To the Supreme Authority The Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND
The humble Petition of William Jenkin, Prisoner;
Most humbly shows,
THat your Petitioner is unfainedly sorrowful for all his late miscarriages,
whether testified against him, or acknowledged by him; and for the great and
sinful unsutableness of them to his Calling and Condition.

That upon earnest seeking of God, and diligent enquiring into his Will, your
Petitioner is convinced that the alteration of Civil Governments are ordered
by, and founded by the wise and righteous providence of God; who removes
Kings, and sets up Kings, rules in the Kingdoms of men, and gives them to
whomsoever he will.

That the providence of this God, have in the judgment of your Petitioner, as
evidently appeared in the removing of others from, and investing your Honors
with the Government of this Nation, as ever they appeared in the taking away,
or bestowing of any Government in any History of any Age of the world.

That he apprehends that a refusal to be subject to this present Authority,
under the pretense of upholding the Title of any upon earth; is a refusal to
acquiesce in the wise and righteous pleasure of God; such an opposing of the
Government set up by the Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth, as none can have
peace, either in acting in, or suffering for; and that your Petitioner looks
upon it as his Duty, to yield to this Authority all active and cheerful
obedience in the Lord, even for Conscience sake: to promise (he being required)
truth and fidelity to it; and to hold forth the grounds of his so doing to any,
as God shall call him thereunto.

That though an Imprisonment, accompanied with the loss of estate, and to be
followed (without your gracious prevention) with a speedy Arraignment before an
high and eminent Judicatory, is far from being pleasing to flesh and blood; and
though the enjoyment of your grace and favor be a blessing most deserving to
be reckoned among the best of Temporals; yet that neither the feeling and
fearing of the former, nor the expectation of the latter, could have induced
your petitioner against the light of his own Judgment, and the prepondering
part of his own Conscience, to have made or presented this Acknowledgement; he
sadly forecasting, that a whole skin is but a contemptible recompense for a
wounded Conscience.

That nevertheless (he trusts) he shall be excusable in tendering thus far even
his outward condition, as to represent to your Honors, that he is in most
apparent danger of his irreparable loss of his health (the sweetest of outward
blessings) unless by your gracious grant he may speedily enjoy a more free and
open Air then this close confinement will allow him.

And this Christian favor (which even for Christ's sake your poor Petitioner
most humbly beggs) your Honors are as able to enlarge, even to a pardoning of
his offenses, and a perfect releasing of him from his Imprisonment, as he is
submissively forward in desiring them, though confessedly far from deserving
them.

He nevertheless promising, that your compassionate affording hereof, shall be
a strong and standing engagement upon him; daily beseeching the heart-making
and heart-changing God, that all those who either through former
unaccustomedness, or present inadvertency do not clearly discern the mind of
God concerning the alteration of this Government, may by observing your prime
and pious industry, to advance throughout this Commonwealth the power of
godliness, a Scripture reformation, and the truth as it is in Jesus; be won to
a yiedling to your honors conscionable obedience; and not only in word, but in
heart and life may be true and faithful to this present Government.

William Jenkin.
Resolved etc. That M. Jenkin be pardened both for Life and Estate; and that M.
Atturny General be required to prepare the Pardon to be passed under the great
Seal of England; and that his body be forthwith discharged (...) Imprisonment,
and his Estate from Sequestration.



FINIS.

