THE DECLARATION OF David Jenkins

Late prisoner in the Tower of London; concerning the Parliaments Army, and the
Laws and Liberties of the People of ENGLAND.

With the Copy of his Letter sent from Wallingford Castle, to his Dread
Sovereign the KING; and his Advice and Directions touching the Treaty.

Subscribed, DAVID JENKINS.

portrait of David Jenkins

Printed in the Year, 1648.

JUDGE JENKINS DECLARATION
Concerning The Parliaments Army, and the Laws and Liberty of the People.
Whereas the Army (under the Command of the Lord General Fairfax) have and do
still endeavor the executing and bringing to trial the Capital Offenders of
these Times, and to execute and inflict exemplary and condign punishment upon
those who have acted contrary to the fundamental laws of this Kingdom, whom
they account to be the great and sole enemies to peace and truth, and the only
Caterpillars which casts the unsavory mist to eclipse the brightness and
splendour of the true consonant Word of God; therefore, to remove those who are
the most prevalent, and by their poisonous Pills, and painted papers, infects
the hearts of diverse well affected in and about the City of London; it was
thought requisite, by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, to remove
Judge Jinkins the Oracle of his time, in esteem with many in London) from
Neugate to Wallingford Castle, and having a Convoy from the City to conduct him
thither, on Sunday last he was met by a party of horse from the Army at
Vxbridge, who desiring a conference with some of the Commanders, it was
assented to, where he declared, That he had always a good opinion of the Army,
and (notwithstanding his opposing the power and Ordinances of Parliament, and
the insufferable and long imprisonment inflicted upon his weak and frail body)
were resolved to sacrifice his life for the Laws of the Land, the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, and the liberties of the people of England; saying, that he would
submit to any thing that should be concluded by the King and Parliament, but
would dye with the Laws, rather then act against them, before they be repealed,
but then he would submit to any.

So soon as he had declared his Sense and Resolution touching the Army, the
fundamental Laws of the Land, the Government of the Church of England, the
Power and Prerogative of his Prince, and the common Rights, Freedom, and
Liberties of the people; A Colonel then present, asked him, whether he thought
the King might do what he will; he said, yes, with the consent of his Judges
and Ministers: it being objected, what if they be corrupted; he answered, they
must be obeyed, and so the Conference ended; which being done, on Sunday in the
afternoon he was conducted from Vxbridge to Wallingford, by a Troop of horse
belonging to the Army.

Omnia jura sunt in manu Regis, Ezr. 7.26. Whosoever will not do the Law of thy
God, and the Law of the King, let judgment be executed speedily upon him,
whether it be unto Death, or to Banishment, or to Confiscation of Goods, or to
Imprisonment.

EZra concludes with blessing, that the Kings heart was for God, v. 27. and
mercy to him from the Author; and so many instruments, as the King, his
Counselors, and Princes, v. 28. The King received a government from his
Ancestors, such as the Nation were never under before, and of all forms it came
next to the divine pattern, for God himself rules by seven Spirits which are
before his Throne, Rev. 1.4. and 4.5. called 7 Eyes, Zec. 4.10. not to inform
the Almighty, but to be his Witnesses, and wise workers of all his Councels:
this was derived to his people, who showed him his name in Gods Book, with his
great Office to be Gods Shephard, which caused great admiration, And Artaxerxs
with his 7 Counselors following the steps of Cyrus, honored the God of heaven
more then any hod done before them, being Pagans: So happy is it for Kings to
learn from God, and to have ^is Law go before theirs, and when there is such a
conjunction, Judgment is seasonable upon all Offenders.

His Majesty's Proposals touching Church Government, to the Parliaments
Commissioners.
1. His Majesty said, He had been bred and instructed in the way He stands for,
and that by his Father, the wisest King, and best man in the world; therefore
could not easily yield, n^r must it be wondered if He did not.

The Ministers answer for satisfaction, the course was held: and desired he
declared his scruples.

His Majesty replied, He had yielded far, having denied nothing but the sale of
Bishops Lands, and desired them to speak whether his answer was not good to the
Commissioners to that part, offering a Copy to Mr. Marshall, but he refused it
as not having power, nor was it, said he, fit they judge in such things.

When the King could nor get it received, he said, Is it so hot that you fear
to burn your fingers.

Then his Majesty declared the three scruples, which the Commissioners desired
to see before the Ministers had them.

The last, which was the Coronation Oath, because depending upon the Law, was
judged improper for them to resolve: the other two Mr. Marshall received, and
desiring to withdraw, the King consented; after they returned, Mr. Marshall, M.
Vines, and M. Seaman spoke: His Majesty desired it in writing, which they were
willing, if the Commissioners thought fit: they treated about the Oath at
Coronation, and the Ministers were Tuesday to bring their answer, which was
done. The Kings Bishops and other Clergy, and the Ministers of Parliament being
present, Mr. Vines read it, His Majesty desired it, promising to prepare an
answer; as to the sale of Bishops Lands as Sacrilege: the Commis. told his
May. that thing lay so much in the Laws of the Land, that the Ministers could
not judge of it; at last his May. appeared inclinable, but said, That if they
were alienated, then they did revert to the Crown. On Thursday the King and the
Com. debated about the Directory, and taking away the Liturgy, but nothing
concluded of. The King in this debate asked, what fault they found in the
Common prayer Book, one one of the Commis. answered, He had heard it was the
saying of a very learned man, that the Liturgy was taken out of the Mass Book
only spoiled in the translation: Who was that, said his Majesty? It was
replied, It was your Father King James: His Majesty said, If it were good in it
self, that did not make it ill: the King has since made offer of a limited
Episcopacy.

Newport, 13. October, 1648.
Other letters from the Commis. on Wednesday last, and read in both Houses say,
That the King grants the militia as is desired, that is for 20 years to be in
the Parl. and after if occasion be of using the sword, in case the Parl. see
cause, the King refusing, the Parl. may make war, and to suppress any foreign
Forces who shall invad, or endeavor to invade the kingdoms of England and
Ireland, Dominion of Wales, the Isles of Guernsey and Jersey, and the town of
Barwick upon Tweed or any of them.

As for the Church which was before it in order, the King still refuses, and
offers Episcopacy; and for the Bishops Lands, he will not consent to any other,
then a Lease for 99 years: they are now upon the 4 Bill touching Ireland: the
House voted, that the answer to the Church proposition is not satisfactory, and
ordered their Commissioners to press it to the King again, so soon as the Bill
of Ireland is over.

By an Express from Wallingford it is said, That the aforesaid Judge Jenkins
has sent a Letter to the King, (but intercepted) humbly beseeching his
Majesty, to salve up the Sores of this Kingdom, in this present personal
Treaty, and to embrace the opportunity now on foot, and to play his Cards so,
that he may ingratiate himself into the City and Parliament, by offering to
come to Westminster to treat, desiring him to court the Lord General Fairfax,
Lieutenant General Cromwell, the Commissioners, and others of the Army, by
messages from himself, for the effecting thereof; as also to send Proposals to
the Army, and to promise them large gratuities to be isntrumental therein.
This Letter is (said to be) directed from Wallingford Castle, October. 12. and
D. JENKINS.

FINIS.

