A BRIEF VINDICATION OF William Jervis, Gent. Against the scandalous Aspersions
of John Hodder, Gent.
By way of a NARRATIVE.
I Daily meeting with manifold scandalous Aspersions divulged and spread abroad
against me by John Hodder and his Accomplices, touching the Charge prosecuted by
me against the Trustees sitting at Drury house, and finding that by his subtle
insinuations they have with some persons of honor received a credit, I conceive
I am obliged to vindicate and free my self from them. The aspersions are many;
but I shall only endeavor to clear my self from those that are most material in
my judgment, and seem of greatest weight; which are,

1. That I have neglected and declined the Prosecution of the said Charge.

2. That I have received several Papers from the said Hodder, which I refuse to
deliver back to him.

3. That I have taken one or more Bribes from the said Trustees, to desist the
said Prosecution.

In Answer to which I say: As to the first, I must confess there was not that
prosecution made, as at my first undertaking taking it I did apprehend there
should have been; But whether or no it proceeded from my self, or John Hodder,
let all unbiassed men judge. For the truth of the Case is thus: John Hodder
being a Clerk under the said Trustees for some time, and they, as I since have
heard, having a just cause (which I shall for his sake forbear to name) to put
him by his Imploiment; He, to be revenged of them, confederating with some
other discontented Officers which had likewise been discharged of their
imploiments, did contrive a Charge against the said Trustees, and brought the
same to me, and pressed me very earnestly to prosecute it; with many
protestations attesting, That that and much more Vilany and Roguery (to use
their language) they could make good against them by sufficient proof. I must
confess I was at this very much startled; first because I never had any ground
till that time of any other opinion of the said Trustees, but that they were
honest godly men, and faithful in their trust but on the other hand considering
of the relations of the Informing persons to the said I rustees, with their
privity to all or most of their transactions (as I then thought) with their
multitude of asseverations of the truth of the matter, and that it was
extracted by them out of the said Trustees own Books, which operating together
with my real inclination to the Public good (of which I conceive I have in
other things and trusts given an ample testimony) prevailed with me to resolve
the owning of that Prosecution, not in the least then distrusting that the said
John Hodder and his Accomplices had any other ends or aim in the business then my
self, having not till that time been intimate with them. And indeed I can say
little else then owned it; for I protest of my own knowledge I knew not, nor
was able in the least to make out any thing that was criminal against the
Trustees; and what was done, though in my name, was wholly done by John Hodder
and his Accomplices, (except the expunging of some unbeseeming and merely
scandalous and frivolous language, proceeding from their malice, inserted in
the Charge;) He and they drew up the Charge, and all the Proceedings in order
to it, in my name, as also instructed Council, appointed Witnesses, and were
examined themselves as Witnesses, and especially John Hodder managed the same
as an Advocate at the Committee, but all indeed at my excessive charge, except
a Pamphlet printed in Hodder's name, which I utterly disown. But had I known
they would have fallen so short of their Proof as they did, I should have been
wiser then to have put my finger in such a fire. But that when I never
contradicted John Hodder in all his proceedings, but rather assisted him both
with my friends, purse and person, unto the Ordering of the Business by the
Committee before whom it was, to be Reported to the Parliament (which was as
far as I could proceed in it) I leave it to all judicious and unbiassed persons
to judge whether or no I can merit such usage at his hands. But had I at my
first entertainment of it known as well as I now do, that John Hodder and all
his Accomplices were persons better acquainted with the Proceedings of an
Alchouse, or worse, then such serious things; I hope all men that know me will
be so charitable to be of opinion that I should not have undertaken it, nor
have in the least been seen to join with such persons.

As to his second Objection, I do acknowledge I have received several Papers
from him in order to the said Charge and the making of it forth; which he has
demanded of me, and I have refused to deliver, and hope in any rational man's
judgment may justly so do, in regard they are almost the whole matter I have to
justify my self as to my undertaking and proceeding in that Charge.

And as to his third and last Objection, I cannot otherwise give satisfaction
to the world then deny it, and that I thank God I can do with a clear
conscience; and do protest by all that is dear to me, that I never received
directly or indirectly by Money, Promise, or other reward in present or in
hopes, any manner of thing from the said Trustees or any of them, or any for
them, to desist or any way in the least to decline the Prosecution of the said
Charge; neither ever did any such thing enter into my thoughts. But this I must
ingenuously acknowledge, That having (as I said before) of my own knowledge no
cause to have any ill opinion of the said Trustees, but on the contrary, and
finding the scandalous and loose condition and quality of the said John Hodden
and his Accomplices, and that their malice against the said Trustees was their
only inducement to it, and that their Proofs of the Charge fell exceeding
short of what they had so speciously pretended, I would have withdrawn my hand
if I could have done it with any safety to my reputation.

I hope (Reader) by this thou art sufficiently satisfied of my real integrity
and sincerity in that Charge, and that my mere aim and ends in it was the
Public good, and that I do not deserve John Hodder's clamorous and impertinent
Aspersions. But as for John Hodder and his Accomplices, if they want
satisfaction, they know I am able to say more then this, upon further occasion
offered.

WILLIAM JERVIS.


