A CATECHISM FOR, THE TIMES.

1 COR. 3. 2, 3. I have fed you with milk, and not with meat: for hither to ye
were not able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able. For ye are yet carnal:
for whereas there is among you envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not
carnal?

JUDE. 3, 4. It was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you, that ye
should earnestly contend for the faith, which was once delivered unto the
Saints. For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old
ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into
lasciviousness, etc.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by G. Miller, and are to be sold at his house in Blackfriars.
1645.

To the Reader.
ARt thou conceited of thine own knowledge? then read no further; thou art too
wise to learn: or do thou desire to learn new notions? then I must tell thee,
this treatise is not for thy palate: here is nothing but plain, old, and
despised truth; which thy queasie stomach will not away with: or art thou a
tender and humble Christian, willing to stoop to the contemned Ordinance of
Catechize, that thou may be confirmed against the sects, and errors of the
Times? if this be thy temper, and this thy aim, then may thou expect a
blessing, if thou shall pray, read, and study my answers; wherein I have not
been so careful, to give you the form of an answer; as to refer you to such
Scriptures as afford matter for the answer: which course I find warranted by
the like practice of our Savior, and I judge it the profitablest way in a
tractate in this nature; for thereby the reader will be constrained to study
the Scriptures to understand the force of them, before he can satisfy himself
with an answer from them: as for example, in the question concerning Baptism,
the reader must weigh the circumstances of the text, and compare it with the
History in Exodus, and so he may be enabled to satisfy himself in forming an
answer thus, All the Israelites presently after their coming forth from Egypt,
when many of them were little children, were Baptized by the cloud which hung
over their heads. Thus much, reader, I thought good to intimate to thee, that
thou might not take offense at my method.

A CATECHISM for the Times.
First Question,

WHat times do we live in?

A. In the last days perilous times shall come, 2 Timothy 3.1.

2. Q Why so?

A. For men shall be lovers of their own selves, 2 Timothy 1.2.

3. Q What speaks the Scripture of the doctrinall errors of these latter times?

A. The spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart
from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils. 1 Timothy 4.1.

4. Q. What think you of the ringleaders, and teachers of such doctrines?

A. These resist the truth; men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the
faith. 2. Tim. 3.8.

5. Q But may we not think them sincere, seeing they prosesse much holiness?

A. Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3.5.

6 Q But so far as we can judge, they are the redeemed of God: how then can you
think so hardly of them, and their doctrines?

A. There shall be false teachers among you, who pri^ily shall bring in
damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, 2. Pet. 2.1.

7. Q But if they, and their opinions were so gross, would they be followed by
so many professors?

A. Many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of truth
shall be evil spoken of, 2. Pet. 2.1.

8. Q. But the teachers are some of them knowing men; and would they, think
you, teach notorious falsehoods?

A. Speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their conscience seared with a hot
iron, 1. Tim 4. 2.

9. Q Those which you count the seduc^rs amongst us, cry out upon antichrist;
and do not they stand then for the truth?

A. It is the last time: and as ye have heard that antichrist come* even now
are there many antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last time. 1. Ioh.
2.18.

10. Q But is it not strange that you should count these antichrists, who seem
rather Angels of light, and Apostles?

A. Such are false Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into
the Apostles of Christ; and no mervail, for Satan himself is transformed into
an angel of light: therefore it is no great thing if his ministers also be
transformed as the Ministers of righteousness, 2. Cor. 11 13, 14, 15.

11. Q. But these men allege Scripture for what they urge, and can you say
then that they follow the devil as his ministers?

A. Then the devil takes him up into the holy city, and sets him on a
pinnacle of the temple, and says unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thy
self down, for it is written, He shall give his Angels charge concerning thee,
and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot
against a stone, Mat. 4.5, 6.

12. Q Those whom you count the ministers of Satan, do they not serve God
according to their light?

A. They that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but there own belly,
Romans 16.18.

13. Q You seem to imply, that their hearts are corrupt, as well as their
judgments: what corruption makes them seducers?

A. Through coveteousnesse shall they with feigned words make merchandise of
you. 2. Pet. 2.3.

14. Q. But all of them seem not to be covetous: what corruption then sways the
rest?

A. If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the
words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the Doctrine which is according to
godliness, he is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions, and
strifes of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings,
perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and distitute of the truth, 1.
Tim, 6.3.4.5.

15. Q. Is the want of Learning in some of their teachers any cause of their
wresting the Scriptures?

A. In which are some things are hard to be understood* which they that are
unlearned and unstable, wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures. 2. Pet.
3.16.

15. Q Do not the affecting of new notions, and other lusts in the hearers,
make them ready to embrace seducing teachers?

A. The time will come, when they will not endure sound doctrine, but after
their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears:
and they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto
fables, 2. Tim. 4.3, 4.

17. Q Do not also the weakness, and shallowness of the hearers, together
with other corruptions, make them apt to be seduced by such men?

A. Of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead captive silly
women, laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts, ever learning, and never
able to come to the knowledge of the truth, 2. Tim. 3.6, 7.

18. Q Do the false teachers use slights to inveigle such persons?

A. That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried
about with every wind of doctrine by the sleight of men, and cunning
craftiness, whereby they he in wait to deceive, Ephesians. 4.14.

19. Q. Are not some honest meaning persons seduced by their craft?

A. They deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans 16.18.

20. Q. How come they to seduce them?

A. By good words, and fair speeches, Romans 16.18.

21. Q. If those whom you call seducers use such good language, is there not
good hopes of them?

A. Evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being
deceived, 2 Fim. 3.12.

22. Q You seem to hate their ways that bold out the errors of the times: does
such an affection become Christians?

A. This thou have, that thou hate the deeds of the Nicolaitans, which I also
hate, Rev 2.6.

23. Q You not only distaste the errors but those also that teach them: where
is your warrant for that?

A. I know thy works, and thy labor, and thy patience, and how thou can not
bear them which are evil, and thou have tried them, which say they are
apostles, and are not, and host found them liars Rev. 2.2.

24. Q Is it likely that if these courses were so dangerous, God would suffer
so many teachers to stand for them, and prevail so?

A. There came forth a spirit, and stood before the Lord, and said, I will
persuade him: and the Lord said unto him, Wherewith? and he said, I will go
forth, and I will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his Prephets: and he
said, Thou shall persuade him, and prevail also; go forth and do so: now
therefore, behold, the Lord has put a lying spirit in the mouth of all these
thy Prophets, 1. Kin. 22.21, 22, 23.

25. Q Seeing it appears that God gives Satan a power to prevail, in the
mouths of seducers: what does God intend thereby toward such as walk closely
with him? is it likely that they shall be seduced?

A. There must be also heresies among you, that they which are approved, may be
made manifest among you, 1. Cor 11.19.

26. Q. What is Gods aim therein toward false-hearted prosessours? are not
they in great danger to miscarry?

A. Because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved,
for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a
lie: that they all might he damned, who believed not the truth, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 These. 1.10, 11, 12.

27. Q What use must we make hereof?

A. Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye
also, being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own
steadfastness: but grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, 2 Pet 3.17, 18.

28. Q. Is there any hope that the errors shall be crushed?

A. The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly, Romans 16.20.

29 Q. How is that likely, while they carry on their errors with such
plausible pretenses?

A. But they shall proceed no further: for their folly shall be manifest to all
men, 2 Timothy 3.9.

30. Q. In the mean while may not these men be connived at?

A. There are many unruly, and vain talkers, and deceivers, whose mouths must
be stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not,
Tit. 1.10, 11.

31. Q. May the civil Magistrate meddle with those that enaeavour to seduce
others into errors in matter of Religion?

A. If thou do that which is evil, be afraid, for he bears not the sword in
vain: for he is the Minister of God, a revenger, to execute wrath upon him that
does evil, Romans 13.4.

32. Q But though seducing be an evil work, may it not be good Christian
policy, for those in authority to refrain from these men, and let them alone?

A. I have a few things against thee, because thou suffer that woman
Iezebel, which calls her self a prophetess, to teach and to seduce my
servants, Rev. 2.20.

33. Q It seems you would fain have some course taken to be rid of them: what
spirit does that savor of?

A. I would they were even cut off which trouble you, Gal. 5. 12.

34. Q Till some course be taken for their suppression, what course must I take
to keep out of the way of error?

A. Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses,
contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them, Romans 16.17.

35. Q. Besides shunning their company, what else must we do?

A. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they are of
God: because many false prophets are gone out into the world, 1 Ioh. 4.1.

36. Q. You would have us very suspicious in these times; what general ground
have you, whom to suspect as unsound?

A. They went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us,
they would no doubt have continued with us: but they went out, that they might
be made manifest, that they were not all of us. 1 Ioh. 2. 19.

37. Q Many which separate, cry down your ministry for Antichristian, and
speak much of the spirit; what can you say about them?

A. Beloved, remember ye the words which were spoken before of the Apostles of
our Lord Jesus Christ, how that they told you, there should be mockers in the
last time, who should walk after theit own ungodly lusts: these be they who
separate themselves, sensual, having not the spirit, Iud. 17, 18, 19.

38. Q. They have been very earnest with me to forsake your Ministers: what is
their design in that?

A. They zealously affect you, but not well: yea, they would exclude you, that
you might affect them, Gal. 4.17.

39. Q How can you justify against them, your ministry of the Church of
England?

A. The seal of my Apostleship are ye in the Lord, 1. Cor. 9.2.

40. Q. Is then the ordinary conversion of souls a demonstrative argument of a
right ministry?

A. How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall
they hear without a preacher? and how shall they preach except they be sent?
Romans 10. 14, 15.

41. Q. They deny your Church of England, and say there is no Church visible in
the new testament, but a particular congregation: how prove you the contrary?

A. God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily prophets,
thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healings, helps in
governments, diversities of tongues, 1 Cor. 12.28.

42. Q Have you any further warrant to judge, that there may be National
Churches in Gospel times?

A. In the last days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of the house of
the Lord, shall be established in the top of the mountains, and it shall be
exalted above the hills, and people shall flow unto it, and many Nations shall
come and say, Come, let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, etc. Mich. 4. 1.2.

43. Q. Others dislike your Ministers, because they do not work for their
livings, as Paul did; what say you to that?

A. Or I only and Barnabas, have not we power to forbear working? who goes a
warfare any time at his own charges? who planteth a vineyard, and eats not of
the fruit thereof? or who feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of the
flock? say I these things as a man? or says not the Law the same also? 1 Cor.
9.6, 7, 8.

44. Q But your Ministers are maintained by tithes: were not they proper to the
Leviticall Priest hood, and therefore to be abolished with it?

A. He whose descent is not counted from them, received tithes of Abraham, and
blessed him that had the promises, Heb. 7.8.

45. Q Others separate only from the Communion, because unworthy receivers are
known to come to the table: how may their consciences be satisfied, till
discipline be restored more exactly?

A. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of
that cup: for he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
damnation, to himself, 1 Cor. 11.28, ^9.

46. Q. Others take exception chiefly at your administering of baptism: can you
show them by Scripture the baptizing of infants; and that without dipping?

A. Brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that our fathers were
under the cloud, and all passed through the Sea, and were all baptized unto
Moses in the cloud, etc. 1 Cor. 10. 11, 2.

47. Q But you serve God according to a Directory: where is your warrant for
that?

A. One of his disciples said unto him, Lord, teach us to pray, as John also
taught his disciples: and he said unto them, When ye pray, say, Our Father
which art in Heaven, hallowed he thy Name, etc. Luke 11. 1, ^.

48. Q. But where is your warrant, for singing of Psalms together at your
meetings?

A. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom, teaching and
admonishing one another, in Psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing
with grace in your hearts to the Lord, Col. 3.16.

49. Q Others dislike the matter of your preaching generally, as too legal for
these Gospel Times: what general answer will you give them?

A. Do we then make void the law through faith? God forbid: yea, we establish
the law, Romans 3.31.

50. Q Is it our duty then to keep the Law?

A. If you fulfill the royal law, according to the Scripture, Thou shall love
thy neighbor as thy self, ye do well, Iam, 2, 8.

51. Q. But what if we fail in any point of the Law?

A. Ye commit sin, and are convinced of the law as transgressiours, for
whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty
of all, Iam. 2. 9, 10.

52. Q. Should then a child of God take notice of, and lay to heart the guilt
of his sins?

A. Deliver me from blood-guiltinesse, O God, Psa. 51.14.

53. Q. Some say, David was under another dispensation then we are: can you
show them the like precedent before the Covenant from mount Sinai, which
gendreth to bondage?

A. I have sinned; what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? why have
thou set me* as a mark against thee, so that I am a burden unto my self? and
why do thou not pardon my transgression, and take away mine iniquity Job.
7.20, 21.

54 Q What should a child of God do then to get his sins pardoned?

A. Forgive us our sins, Luke 11. 4.

55. Q. What must he do besides praying for pardon?

A. If we confess our sins, he is faithful, and just to forgive us our sins,
1 Job. 1.9.

56. Q. What further condition is there required of a child of God for the
obtaining of pardon?

A. If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive
you: but if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father
forgive your trespasses Mat 6. 14, 15.

57. Q. Your doctrine implies, that God observes the sins of his people: can
you prove that?

A. Nevertheless, I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy
first love, Rev. 2.4, 23.

58. Q Does God also correct his children for their sins?

A. For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep; for if
we would judge our selves, we should not be judged, but when we are judged, we
are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world, 1
Cor. 11. 30, 31, 32.

59. Q May then a child of God, when he is corrected look upon God as angry
and upon sin as the procuring cause?

A. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him,
until he plead my cause, and execute judgment for me: he will bring me forth
to the light, and I shall behold his righteousness, Mic. 7.9.

60. Q. Why? must not a Christian look upon Gods love, and not upon his
dreadfulnesse?

A. We receiving a Kingdom, which cannot be moved, let us have grace, whereby
we may serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear, for our God is a
consuming fire, Heb. 12. 28, 29.

61. Q. Would you have a child of God mourn for his sins?

A. I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem
the spirit of grace and of supplications, and they shall look upon me whom they
have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his only son,
and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitternsse for his
firstborn, Zech. 12. 10.

62. Q. Would you have Christians to try the goodness of their estates by the
work of grace in them?

A. Examine your selves, whether you be in the faith: prove your own selves,
know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobates? 2 Cor 13.5.

63. Q. What evident mark can you instance in, for a Christian to try himself
by?

A. We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the
brethren, 1 Job. 3.14.

64. Q. Should we now have legal terrors pressed?

A. Others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire, Jude 23.

65. Q. Should wicked men pray to God?

A. Pray God, if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee, for I
perceive thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, Acts
8 22, 23.

66. Q Is the usual discourse of hard controversies among weak Christians to
be approved?

A. Him that is weak in the faith, receive you, but not ^o doubtful
disputations, Romans 14.1.

67. Q. If I have a true opinion, which cannot be vented without offense, may I
vent it?

A. Have thou faith? have it to thy self, before God: happy is he that
condemns not himself in that thing which he allows, Romans 14.22.

68. Q. I have heard of a book written to prove that the soul of man remains
not after death, how will you confute that?

A. He went and preached to the spirits in prison; which sometimes were
disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, 1
Pet. 3.19, 20.

69. Q They say, there is another book out, to prove that a man may out away
his wife, if she be not a meet helper: how may I answer all the arguments there
alleged?

A. It has been said, Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a
writing of a divorcement: but I say unto you, that whosoever shall put away his
wife, saving for the cause of fornication, causes her to commit adultery: and
whosoever shall marry her that is divorced, commits adultery, Mat. 5.31, 32.

70. Q. There are many other new opinions, that men teach and write for with
specious arguments, I would fain be satisfied about them: how shall I discern
the truth?

A. If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives to all men
liberally and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him, Iam. 1.5.

If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of
God, etc. Job. 7.17.

To the Law, and to the testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it
is because there is no light in them, Isa. 8.20.

Postscript to the judicious Reader.
IF thou have read over this Catechize, their may easily perceive that it
was penned for Christians of the lowest form: to whom the Author intended,
with briefnes, clearnes and Scripture language, to give general notes for
caution against all the dangerous Doctrines of the times, and special hints
for satisfaction concerning some of the most obvious mistakes and errors* If
the sight of this may occasion from thee a fuller, and exacter treatise of this
nature, none shall be more willing to study such a Catechize then my self.

Thine and the truths, I. K.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

JOHN DOWNHAM.


