JURORS JUDGES OF LAW and FACT: Or, certain Observations of certain differences
in points of Law between a certain reverend Judge, called Andr. Horn, and an
uncertain Author of a certain Paper, printed by one Francis Neale this year
1650. styled, A Letter of due Censure and Redargution to Lievt. Col. JOHN
LILBURN, touching his Trial at Guild Hall, London, in October. 1649. subscribed
H. P.

Written by JOHN JONES, Gent.

Not for any vindication of Mr. Lilburn against any injury which the said
Author does him, who can best vindicate himself by due court of Law; if not
rather leav it to God whose right it is to revenge the wrongs of his servants.

Nor of my self, but of what I have written much contrary to the Tenants of
this Letter; and for the Confirmation of the free People of England, that
regard their liberty, property, and birthright, to beleev and stand to the
truth that I have written, so far as they shall find it ratified by the laws
of God and this Land; And to beware of Flatterers that endevor to seduce them
under color of good counsel, to betray their Freedoms to perpetual slavery.

Hostis vera dicens amico ad gratiam simulanti omnino perponendus est: An Enemy
speaking truth, is to be always preferred before a flattering Friend.

London, Printed by W. D. for T. B. and G. M. at the three Bibles in Paul's
churchyard, near the west end

To the POLITIC BODY, And Unanimous Fraternity of the ARMY of ENGLAND;
Officers and Soldiers, Jointly and severally.
HOnored and Honorable: Commanders and Commanded: Wise and Prudent: Grave and
Valiant: Seniors and Juniors: Soldiers all: Unknown to most, Cherished by some,
engaged to many; I presume to write to you all, concerning what most concerns
us all: To Honor God: To love his Children: and hate, and quell his enemies,
are his own Commandments: And although the two first be the greatest, yet is
the third none of the least duties required of us all, as appears by that
account given by David saying, Psalm. 139.21. and 22. Verse. speaking to God, Do
not I hate them that hate thee? And am not I grieved with those that rise up
against thee? I hate them with a perfect hatred, and count them my enemies. And
the affliction of Saul for sparing Agag, was a full example to us in that case.
Nay, an Heathen could tell Charislaus King of Sparta, he did not his office
when he forbore to punish dishonest men. I confess, you have fought a good
Fight, and declared your selves constant workers in the way of our Reformation,
in our Land of Promise: promised by many, performed by none, endeavored by too
few. And I also acknowledge that you are now upon service conducing in order to
secure and maintain the model to be perfected in time, from which expedition I
desire not to divert you, (as I have written formerly to his Excellency the
Lord General) but to give you to understand you have left behind you more
pestiferous, dangerous, obnoxious, manifest, sedulous, and constant enemies to
God, your Country, your selves, and us all, then you have or can have, before
you, unless that for sparing those at home unpunished, as you might before you
went, God will raise afflictions against you abroad, to make you mind your
error before you return; And let you know Achan and his Wedg must be
discovered, and he and his Family punished at home, before you can expect
prosperity abroad, for it is usual with God to send foreign Correcters to
punish the Magistrates of his People that neglect the punishment of their
domestique wickedness. Many were our Achans, even most of our Lawyers and
Judges, that in the late Kings time Sacrilegiously, and daily by secret
briberies, and open extortions, exhausted the treasure of the people, even the
whole estates, real and personal, of many thousands of the freemen of England,
consecrated to the said freemen, and established upon them even by God
himself, and his then Viceroy's, and the great Charter of England, attesting
their agreement thereupon. And this to be done (says the Lord Cook sometimes
Chief Justice) under the Color of Justice, is the greatest kind of Injustice,
and the cunningest Robbery that can be in the World. And do none of you know
that we have still such as do the same? in comparison of which and whom, Achan
was but a sole, silly, filching thief; and his single Wedg, but a poor
trifling theft, nothing valuable to the least share of the meanest undertaker
for draining Lincolnshire Fenns, and that is nothing in respect of the constant
draining of the purses of the rest of that County, which also is nothing in
respect of the rest of all England and Wales, more perfectly and constantly
drained by the Artists of Westminster, then any Fen is or can be by Mr. Henley,
and his partners. Nay, the extorted Fees for Habeas Corpus's from the Kings
Bench and Fleet, yearly amount to a richer Wedg then Achans, which was no more
then he could carri to his Tent of the spoil of Jericho. Less loss to the
Israelites that were at liberty to fight for more, then what is daily and
hourly carried by many of the price of starvlings bread, to the several
Chambers of several Westminster Judges; so lossfull to hungry Prisoners, that
many thousands of them lose their lives by that means, before they can procure
their liberty to speak with their Creditors. Have we not had more men lost so
in dungeons in England and Wales, wrongfully imprisoned and murdered by Judges
and Gaolers, then you have lost in the field, hurt by the hands of your
enemies? And were not too many of those (so lost under the hands of Goalers and
dooms of Judges) soldiers that returned safe from the mouths of Cannons, and
the Swords of enemies, whose widows and fatherless children cry to men in vain
for Justice and relief in this case? And shall not God hear the cry of the
poor, and of the blood of so many Abels? when men will not? I beseech you lay
these things to your hearts, and consider in time; And let it not be said that
any of you accept bribes of Lawyers, to dispense with their bribing, extorting
and murdering of whom and as many as they please of your Friends, kindred and
Countrymen, whose case another day may be your own, if you timely prevent it
not. Some do inform you that they are beneficial men unto you; those are falls
counselors, for what can they give unto you, but what is none of their own? Nay
more, but what is your own? forfeited and adjudged unto you amongst the rest of
the Commonwealth, and so confessed even by their own mouths, (as I have
written and proved formerly) be therefore pleased to make your selves Masters of
your own whiles it is in your power, or expect it shall be told you the Virgins
Lamp is out. If your present engagement will not permit any of you to see this
done, cease not to solicit his Excellency to write to the House, to desire
them to put out of their assembly al mercenarie professors of Law that poison
their Counsel, no less then their predecessors did the King, making them to do
the same things which they condemned in him; to the more grief of the People,
that were promised Reformation, and are paid in more and wors deformation of
their Laws and Liberties then they were before: witness amongst many more
abuses, the Fen Project of Lincolnshire, etc. condemned in the late King, yet
supported by more Malignant Royalists then in respect of Justice, he himself
could be any, who are Judges, Parties and partners of the prey made by
themselves of other men's Rights, of whose service and affections, both
Parliament and Army have had no less experience, then of their defects and
delinquencies: And move his Excellency to desire the House further to command
the keepers of the great Seal to issue forthwith Commissions of Oyer and
Terminer (as by Law they ought to all parties grieved, that shall demand them,
directed to such Commissioners as the grieved parties shall nominat, to enquire
hear and determine the extortions, oppressions and misdemeanors of Sheriffs,
under Sheriffs, Gaolers, and other Officers subject to popular offense. And
lastly, to desire the said House to pass an Act for the settling of the Law
hereafter (in that plainness, shortness and cheapness) as has been often
desired in diverse Petitions of Londoners and others and by my last Letter to
his Excellency, bearing date about the beginning of this Month, according to
the propositions of 12 heads of Law there enclosed which I understand in
Scotland were delivered to his Excellencies hands: So God himself shall bless
you and your Actions, and the people present and future, and even your selves
and your Children have cause to rejoice in your work, and be thankful to God
and your industry for so great a favor. So shall

Your Faithful servant John Jones.
From my Lodging at Mr. Mundays house in Clarkenwel, this 29. of July, 1650.
JURORS JUDGES OF Law and Fact:
SIR!
HAving casually met with and perused your printed paper, styled, A Letter of
due Censure and Redargution to Lieutenant Collone John Lilburne, touching his
Trial at Guild Hall London: in October last 1649. I could not choose but take
hold of your first Lines, wherein you say God's strict Injunction obliges us
all to reprove sin wheresoever we find it. And thereupon I must tell you, that
whatsoever you find in Mr. Lilburne, I can find in you no less then sin
against God, whose name you abominably abuse, to reprove truth, and call good
evil, and evil good: against Mr. Lilburne, whom you make but your Instrument
to play upon, while you wound others through his sides, yea, even those most,
whom you flatter most: Against the true and Ordinary Judges of the Land, the
Jurors, whose verdict is the effectual Judgment whereby all men are judged by
their Peers, as well for their Lives as Lands, without which Judgments, the Law
of England cannot be Lawfully executed: And generally against all the Free
People of this Commonwealth, whom you endeavor to blind and enslave by your
sophistry unto usurped Authorities, persuading (as much as in you lies) all
your Countrie-men to submit, and give away their Lives, their birthrights,
Liberties, and Freedoms (for the preservation whereof all their just Laws, and
Civil Wars, and especially this last, were made) to the insatiable Tyranny of
their incroaching Impostors, as shall appear following, viz. Page 3d, of your
Letter (or rather Libell) in the second head of those things for which you say
Mr. Lilburne is liable to reproof, you tell him he laid hold of diverse shifting
Cavills, and shufling exceptions in Law, which were only fit to wast time, and
procure trouble to the Court; Sir! if Law allows Exceptions, called
delatories, and lawful Traverses as well in Pleas for Land as for Life; as you
may find it does and ought in Mr. Horns Book called the Mirror of Justice,
written by him in French in Edward the First his time, as you may observe in
the Margent of the 6th page thereof, and excellently translated into English
lately by William Heughes Esquire, a discreet and learned Lawyer living in
Grayes Inn, of which kind of Exceptions, some be Pleas for Actions and
Appeals, the Presidents whereof are briefly and diversely, according to the
diversity of their causes, natures, and uses, demonstrated unto you in the said
Book, from p. 129. to p. 143. and thence to 146. are Exceptions, or Pleas to
Indictments; the summary reason of all which is not as you call it, to waste
time, and to procure trouble to Courts, but to bestow time as it can be no
better bestowed (especially in Cases of life) then to search out the truth of
every Cause, that men's lives be not rashly lost, which cannot be recovered if
condemned and executed, how be it, wrongfully, or carelessly: so, that to be
careful, circumspect, and well advised in a Court is not to trouble it, for it
is its duty to be exercised as it is significantlie derived a Curando; that is,
a Court of Care, or Cure, Indifferently either, or rather both, as it is
Ordained Care to be troubled to hear and determine the Cares and troubles of
all men within its verge, for Controversies of Law, (that vex and trouble an
whole hundred of Friends and neighbors to see but two of them undo themselves
in suits at Law, or kill one another) with Care to examine them truly, and to
Judge them justly; And likewise to cure the Malladie of the Consciences, or at
least the intemperance of the Litigious spirits of Plaintiffs and Defendants,
by ending their differences (as may be most available for their Peace, and the
Commonwealth. And as it is the duty of a Court to be troubled to end troubles,
so says Mr. Horn p. 58. not to accuse any for matters of Crime and Life,
though a known offender, learning of Christ in the Case of Magdalen: Nor to
countenance Bloody Accusers, but to mollify their Rigor, as Christ did in the
same Case; for Judges that represent God, and should imitate his mercy as well
as his Justice, ought not to desire the death of a sinner, but rather that he
may return from his wickedness, and live; and Conveniens homini est hominem
servare voluptas: Et melius nulla quaeritur Art favor. Nothing more Convenient
for Man, or acceptable to God, then to save Penitents, whom he came not to
destroy, but to call to Repentance: Nor is it the part of a Judge (as in p. 66.
of my said Author) to condemn one for the same, or the like offense, as the
Judge knows himself guilty of. And therefore Exceptions are lawful, to the
Power of a Judge, as in p. 133. to his person; as in p. 135. and to his
condition, as in p. 59. And those that are granted to be lawful to be
propounded against his Power p. 133. are the same in substance, which you say
Mr. Lilburne made use of, and yet call them shifting cavills, and shufling
exceptions, and reprove him for using them in defense of his life. I pray
compare them together, and then consider what and whom you reprove; and you can
not choose but find that for the matter, it is not a shifting cavil, or
shufling exception, but the solid fundamental Law of England, affirmed by all
men that truly understand it, to be most Consentaneous of all Laws, to the Law
of God; And for the Persons, it is not only Mr. Lilburne that desired thereby
to preserve or prolong his life, but all the sage makers, and religious
observers thereof, whereby you persuade all your Countrymen present and future,
to disesteem such exceptions (even to save their lives) and consequently to
cast themselves away upon the wills, and have of Commissarie Judges, who may be
the only, or chief Accusers, or Adversaries the Party questioned for his life
can have; which for any such Party to do, were to be more then mad, and even
the Author of his own death, and of Gods Wrath upon his soul, which if he so
wilfully lose, what is it to him to gain a world in lieu thereof? And why do
you (more falsely then Caiphas that told one truth in his life unknown to
himself) offer to persuade us to become willing to sacrifice our selves one
after another, to the lying bloody constructions of that General, and true
Position Salus Populi, etc. The Health of the Nation; is the chiefest Law;
which you vaunt to be the empress of all your Maxims, whilst you construe it to
the destruction of the Nation (as they are very sensible thereof,) and make it
only healthie to rotten Commissarie Judges, and corrupt Lawyers, whom you make
the sole Judges thereof; for what Christian can be so senseless as to believ,
or conceiv, that the sacrificing of any one man in that manner only, for the
suspicion (perhaps of no more then the Judge that finds himself most guilty of
the Cause) as of being more able then another to raise or cause War against us;
can avail us: For Sir! God delights not in bloody and dead sacrifices, but in
our humble, penitent, and lively Prayers, who are, or ought to be his living
sacrifices; And he that is as well the Lord of Hosts, as the God of Peace, is
our loving Father, and he will hear us when we call upon him in his Sons Name,
and open his gate of mercy unto us when we knock as we ought, and whatsoever
good we ask him in that name, he will not only give it us, but moreover
strengthen us as he did Jacob, to wrestle with himself, and to overcom his
Anger, which an Heathen could understand and say: Flectitur iratus voce rogante
Deus: Gods Anger stoopeth to his Childrens Prayers: And none but he can raise
any war against them; nor will he further then their sins deserve his
punishment; and so far; Is there any evil in Israel, but it is he that does
it? What do you therefore but show your self diffident of his merciful
omnipotence, and rob him of his Glory, when you attribute his power to man, to
make War or Peace, and make your self wiser then he, when you think to prevent
his will by your policy? and stronger then he, if you could destroy whom he
would save? And therefore (says Melancton) Men are but fools Vinculacum
tendunt imposuisse Jovi: when they suppose they can Chain the Dietie. And who
can but see, that if it be granted you, that every free man of England, whom
you, or a Commissarie Judge, or any other, as bad, shall suspect, or be pleased
to accuse for suspicion, of what you think good to invent, you may accuse whom
you will, and hang whom you list, and leave none to live, but at Lawyers
discretion, whilst the truch is, that so far as any one man or more of any
kind of men, whatsoever, can be called or accounted raisers or causers of War
in England, the Lord Cook. Mr. Horn, and other sound Lawyers tell you they
ever were, and will be corrupt and mercenarie Lawyers, that sell, delaie, and
deny Justice, and the benesit of the great Charter of England to the People
thereof; the due punishment of whom, and of all Sycophants that sooth them up
in their Errors, would be Salus Populi; for they are a considerable Army that
have over-powred us these 500. years, Hyperprelaticall Spirits; Domineering
Nimrods; Undermining Pioners, (so that what was said of Rome since the Popish
Prelacy ruled it, may be said of England since Lawyers overswayed it, viz.
Servierant tibi Anglia prius domini dominorum, servis servorum nunc miseranda
subes. O thou that were the Lady of Lords, art the Slave of Slaves.) And a
subtle and viperous generation that add Policy to their Power, to gnaw their
Mothers bowels, and use to make dissentions and Factions between even their own
Brethren, to make work for themselves to reconcile them, or most commonly by the
strength of the weakest, to destroy the strongest, till they be able to Master
both, and by right seldom, and wrong constantly, to make and keep themselves
rich, whosoever be poor, to accuse and condemn all their superiors for
tyranny, to make way for themselves to be the only superviving supreme
Tyrants, and complete Dionysians. The only Monopolizers of Law, to sell,
delay, and deny Justice to the Free Men of England their Slaves, at their
wills and pleasures in their Congregational Exchange Westminster Hall. And
whereas you say those shifting eavils and shufling exceptions which Mr. Lilburne
made use of, to waste time, and procure trouble to the Court, were far from
making any defense for him: I pray you what defense could he desire thereby but
to save his life? And was not that done by the Verdict of a Jury, that heard
what he said for himself, received all the Evidences that were given against
him, and were Charged and sworn to give their Verdict according to their
Evidence: was not that Verdict confirmed and ratified by the right Honorable
the Council of State, by the assent of the most Honorable and Supreme Court of
Parliament? without which either by an implicit general Warrant, or a special
Express: no man can be so mad as to think they would enlarge him? was not this
as Full and fair a Trial as Mr. Lilburne could wish, or any man (Questioned
for Treason) had these 100. years, or since Juries, (that understood Law no
better then you) were content to be bafled by Commissarie Judges, and give what
Verdict they pleased, as well for men's lives as their lands: did not his
Exceptions and pleadings (whatever you call them) come near enough (how ever
the Court liked them) to make him a sufficient defense in that matter? does it
not follow, that by your said saying, you make your self a naked liar? and can
so apparent a liar be a Creditalb reprover of sin? the Devil he can as soon:
does it not further follow, that Mr. Lilburne has his Action of the Case
against you, for questioning him for the same offense that he is acquitted of
by so due a Course of Law? Does it not moreover follow, that by traducing that
Verdict and acquittall, you consequently traduce, not only the Jurie, but
also the Council of State, and the Parliament that Confirmed the same as
aforesaid? And are not you therefore liable, not only to the several Actions
of every Juror, but also of Scandalum magnatum? But what need you care, you
are too cunning for them all, in Concealing your name at large from them whom
you slander at large, and send your Book to them with a sine me Liber ibis in
urbem; so that they know not when, where, or how to find you out by that
uncertain notion, or mark of H. P. Which for any thing I know, may fignify some
Soapstuff, as well as any man's name; but take heed least John smell you out,
and contemperate you in his Compounds for some simple corrasive ingredient
which he uses (not to any intent of malice, but to eat off some of your proud
flesh, and not to destroy any sound part in you, as you say in the title of
your Book you use your reproof to him) to make a special kind of soap to wash
the brains of such Orators as persuade men to become such fools, as to make no
use of Lawful exceptions against their Judges (especially Commissaries) to
save their lives: and the tongues of such Sycophants as under pretense of
reproving the meanest, and weakest sort of sinners; approve, and improve the
greatest and strongest kind of Murderers, Traitors, Perjurers, etc. viz.
Commissary Judges in general, in their practice at large. But more to the
matter, where you say in your 5th head, in the same 3d page of your Libell: The
5th thing you say deserves a keen reproof of all honest men, was Mr. Lilburnes
assayling the sincerity of his Jury: and page 21. you say he promoted his 12.
men, etc. and caused them to employ their new given Jurisdiction, only to the
advantage of the giver. Truly Sir! I must confess, that if Mr. Lilburne
assailed the sincerity of his Jury, he was to blame: but I cannot find by any
thing you prove, that he did so, for the Clamor of the People (who were not his
disciples as you belie them and him too) were not in his power to stop, more
then in yours, or mine, had we been there; for if they would not obey the Crier
of the Court, they would not have obeyed us more then him, who desired (as he
needed) rather to be heard, then disturbed, and distracted with Clamors. And
for his blandishments to his Jurie, good Language became him to give, and them
to receiv, but not such adulations as you give all Commissary Judges: And to
use all the lawful means he could to inform them, and all his Auditors that
knew him not, nor his innocence in that Cause, and merit in others; and thereby
to prolong his life in the Land which the Lord his God has given him, and to
keep himself a living sacrifice to, and for his God, until it please his
Dietie to call him to his mercy by the Ordinary way of common death, or to
inspire him to fight again in his Masters Battle and Countries service:
whereby he may dye an extraordinary death, more to his Masters glory, and his
own honor, then by casting away his life (to become a dead sacrifice to the
malice of men, whether Commissary Judges, such as you plead for; or other
flattering Sycophants, such as you make your self) I conceiv to be no fault in
Mr. Lilburne. In the next place, where you say Mr. Lilburne promoted his 12 men
to a new Jurisdiction; I am sure, that is another Lie of yours, for you may
read in the Lord Cooks Institutions upon the 35 Chapter of Magna Carta: That
County Courts, Court Barons, Sheriffs-Turnies, and Leets, were in use before
King Alphreds time; In all which Courts the Jurors were the Judges, and their
then untraversable Verdicts were the Judgments in all Causes: And Sheriffs and
Stewards, who were the Kings Commissary Judges in their Turnies, and Leets, as
now they are the States, were, and still are but the suitors Clerks in
Counties, Hundreds and Court Barons, to enter their Judgments, and do execution
thereupon by themselves and their Bailiffs, as public servants, or Ministers
of common Justice to their Jurors, and the rest of the Common Wealth: See Mr.
Kitchen Fo. 43. yet were they as absolute Commissary Judges by virtue of their
Writs, when they have them for matters above 4 s. as the Judges at Westminster
ever were, or can be by their Commissions: And all Common Pleas between Party
and Party (and the King, Queen, and Prince were accounted but Parties as other
Plaintiffs and defendants in such Pleas) were holden in the County Court from
Month to Month, until for the ease of the People, especially husbandmen to
follow their business; The King with their assents divided the view of Frank
pledge from the Sheriff who by all the Peoples affent in Parliament 9. Ed. 2d
was to be thence forth assigned by the Chancellor, the Kings Commissiary Judge
in his Turnies, (called before the Kings own Turnies) to see Justice done from
County to County; And all the free pledges of every County together, once every
7. years, which is since to be done by Sheriffs twice yearly) and gave them to
Lords of Manors, so, that their Tenants and Resiants should have the same
Justice in their Leets and Court Barons, as they had in the Sheriffs turnies
and County Courts at their own doors without any charge, or loss of time? And
for the same reason (says the Lord Cook in the same place) Hundreds were
divided from Sheriffs, viz. that none should be troubled further, or out of
their Lords Court at all; at which Courts (says Mr. Horn p. 7.) Justice was so
done, that every one so judged his neighbor by such Judgment as none could
elsewhere receiv in the like cases, until such time as the Customs of the Realm
were put in writing. And as the County Courts, Hundred Courts, and Court Barons
were of one Jurisdiction, so were Turnies, and Leets, and so all of them are,
and ought to be still; therefore you must consider that there be three sorts of
Jurisdictions, viz. Sovereign; assigned, and ordinary: of these you may read in
the Mirror? p. 7. in these words, viz. It was assented unto, that these things
following should belong to Kings, and the right of the Crown, viz. Sovereign
Jurisdiction, etc. which is now fixed in the Keepers of the Liberties of
England, by virtue whereof among other things all Writs. Commissions, warrants,
Commitments, and Liberates or discharges run in their names as they did in the
Kings, so that none are Imprisonable, or dischargable, but in their names;
consider therefore again that this assent was the Peoples, whereby Kings, (who
before, and without this assent, were not Kings, but ordinary men, that could
have but ordinary Jurisdiction as others) had Sovereign Jurisdiction, as now
the Keepers of the Liberties of England have by the Authority of Parliament,
which is the Representative of the People, given them by the People with a
reservation of their ordinary lurisdiction, viz. reserved in, by, and unto them
in King Edward 1 his time, and ever before and since; by reason also of which
sovereign and Royal Jurisdiction, as you may further read Mirror, p. 287.
Kings were called and counted (as now the Keepers of the Liberties of England
ought to be) fountains of Justice, and ordained because they could not be
always every where themselves, as Moses did by Jethro's Council, Institute
Captains over hundreds, Fifties, etc. and now the Keepers of the Liberties of
England do, and must ordain Commissary Judges, viz. Commissioners or Judges, by
their Commissions missions or Writs to supply their presence, and do their
office in their stead, which in Courts, is but to give their assents to the
verdicts, which are the judgments of Freemen upon their Peers, whereby those
Judgments being so completed, the executions thereof did do, and must run in
the name of the Sovereign Jurisdiction of the State; And so Justice may be
administered in all places, in their personal absence, who are to be accounted
present in their Commissaries, who no more then their Masters can be counted
Judges of the people, because parties against them, and so made and named in,
and by all Indictments, Writs, etc. as aforesaid. Observe again, that
Commissary Judges, being ordained by their Masters to do Justice; if they fail
of so doing by their partiallitie, wilfullness, or any other consideration, as
Pilat (who was Caesar's Commissary) and others did (whom you aptly compare to
some of them) then they have no jurisdiction, or ordination at all, so that they
may be disgracefully, and that lawfully pulled, and thrown out of their abused
places: but in civilitie and respect of their Masters may be better forborne,
and referred to their Censures. And what is dissenting, or not assenting to
Jurors verdicts, but a denial, which is more then a failer of Justice, for the
speeding whereof they must have no negative voice: for ordinary Jurisdiction
that was the supreme i that gave the Sove. reign (which is superior to every
singular person) to Kings, (as now to the Keepers of the Liberties of England)
is still the superlative Jurisdiction beyond all comparison, that can be
inferior to no authority, but Gods, that gave it to his people, to his
Children, not to be given by them, to any above them in their generality, but
himself, from whom they have received, and to whom they must restore themsevs
and all that is theirs, but to be contrived, and substituted by them unto the
worthiest men amongst them, to be employed for and under them, as they might
find most convenient for their worldly peace and subordinate government; to
which end they deputed Kings, as now the Parliament has don Keepers of the
Liberties of England, reserving so much of their ancient ordinary Jurisdiction
to free men, that none but such may be Jurors, and none but such may be their
Judges for their lives, lands, and estates: And therefore as the Keepers of our
Liberties are subordinate to the Parliament, so are their Commissaries to them,
and both in their Judgments, to the verdicts of the Jurors, which is their true
saying of the whole matter, as well for Law, as Fact; and so is the full
Judgment of it, both in Law and effect, wanting only the assent of the
Sovereign Jurisdiction, which is the only party sup posed to be against the
party guilty, or so reputed, and has that Majesty (or if well considered,
that vassalage) given unto it, as to do, or command to be don Execution; which,
if the hangman refuse upon the Sheriffs command, the Sheriff himself must do;
and if he refuse, or neglect, the Commissarie Judge must, for as there is a
Writ de procedendo ad judicium, and an Alias, plures; and Attachment to compel
him to give his judgment, or, more properly, his assent (as aforesaid) to the
Iuries verdict: So that if he delay, deny, or fail to do, or cause Execution
to be don, there is another Writ de executione Judicii, and an Alias, Plur',
and Attachment upon that, to be had against him; whereupon, if a Commissary
Judge must be Attached for not giving his assent, (commonly called his Judgment)
to a verdict for Fellonie, etc. or having given his Judgment to the verdict,
shall deny or delay execution, except in special things hereafter touched, let
him not only be an hangman for his Fellows, but be hanged himself; for such
was King Alfreds Judgment in all Cases of injustice in his Commissary Justices,
as you may read in the Mirror from p. 239. to p. 245. when he hanged 44 of them
in one year. But it is observable how Commissary Judges for Gaol deliveries do
now a days use in the conclusion of their judgments upon Fellons; convicted by
luries verdicts, and their assents, to command Sheriffs to see execution, and
so to end their Sessions; and get themselves gone out of that County with all
expedition, and let the Sheriff and his hangman agree as they can bargain, for
doing the execution, while the Commissary imposter proceeds in his Circuit,
attributing all that he finds the people conceiv to be injustice, to the
Sheriff, or Jury, or both, but calling all judgments and proceedings (that are
pleasing to the people throughout his perambulation and the Ambit thereof, even
the Cirquit it self,) his own; because the people assented to such Commissions,
as the devil does the world his own, because God gave him leave to compass it;
And as proud are such Lords justices of their Lordships in a kind, as he can
be of his; yet in right ought to be accounted but servants to their Masters, as
he to his. And therefore whereas you say p. 24. though the verdict be given in
upon the whole matter, and so enclose Law as well as Fact, yet the binding
force of the verdict as to matter of Law, may be derived from the sanction of
the Judges, not from the Jurisdiction of the Inquest: And it may well be
supposed that the Jurors may err in a matter of Law, in which case the Judges
must alter the erroneous verdict by a contrary Judgment, and that Judgment
questionless shall nullify the erroneous verdict, not the erroneous verdict
the Judgment; whereby it plainly appears, That in a verdict upon the whole
matter, there is no new Jurisdiction acquired by the Jurors in matter of Law,
nor left to the Judges; sorasmuch as the Judgment stands good, and obliges not
as it is rendered by the Jurors, but as it is confirmed by the Judges. Cana Man
that would seem so Cornucopiously learned and wise as you do, be such a fool,
as to make such a medley of nonsense; surely should you but tell such a
confused story in one of the Inns of Chancerie, the puniest Attorney there
would hills you out of his mooting School. What error can be in the substance of
a true saying, but in the form there may, and that the Judges and the Clerks
assume to be their office to make in Latin, and such is the form, and Latin
they usually make thereof, that every word, or second are commonly erroneous,
and that of purpose for themselves, to make work for themselves, by spinning the
Cause in suites and vain pleadings, sometimes to seven years time, that might
have been begun and ended in a day, and by beggering both parties to enrich
themselves by damnable Fees and extortions, all that while? Can the verdict
which is the true saying of 12. Men upon the whole matter of Law and Fact, be
altered by a contrary Judgment, (as you expressly say you can) but that must
be falls and an untrue saying, for what can be contrary to a true saying, but a
falls? And which of them ought to be altered? you say the verdict. Whereupon let
all men judge whether you are not a plain liar therein, but suppose (since you
go by suppositions) that the saying of the Jurors is not true, and therefore
no verdict, such as Judges receive, or rather arrest, and cause to be given
them for verdicts by Jurors impanniled by Sheriffs, by Judges directions for
that purpose. Can the Confirmation of a Commissary Judge, by his Judgment make
that good? Its a Maxim in Law, that what is naught in the foundation, can never
be made good by Confirmation: but I confess many an honest man is hanged by
such supposed verdicts, and devilish Judgments. Can such Lies be called
verdicts, or such Judgments be called true, more then you can be called a just
reprover, or a due Censurer, that reprove truth, and justify lying? Can the
Devil be a worse Censurer or Reprover? What Judgment (mean you) stands good in
Mr. Lilburnes Case, who had no Judgment at all passed upon him, but that
verdict that saved him, and the assent of the Council of State, and Parliament
that confirmed it? And what verdict or Judgment do you find fault with in all
your Book over but that? Surely you were in a frenzy when you wove this stuff
not so good as Linsey Woolsey; but if you would know what should be done, in
case a Jury should give in an untrue saying, in stead of a verdict? (that being
made to appear to a Commissary Judge by the Party greived, or his Council
learned to be undeniably true; such a seeming verdict, in c^se of life, or land
of Freehold, is traversable; as also any verdict made defective, informed by
Lawyers as aforesaid, and thereby sounding defective in matter, and so counted
erroneous by them that made it for that purpose, to linger the matter for their
own gain, as you may read in Mr. Horns Mirror, as aforesaid, and in the
Statutes of 41. Edward 3. fol. 5. and 6. of Henry 7. and 19. Henry the eight.
Howbeit for bloodshed in Leets there is no traverse; because the fact is a
manifest wrong, and if laid upon a wrong person, he may have his Attaint
against the Jury, and recover treble damages, by the verdict of 24 better
Jurors; which remedy every party wronged by any Jury has besides his
Traverse. And in case of life, which may be lost (by the malice or ignorance of
some Juries purposly returned by some Sheriffs for their own ends) if executed
according to their saying, and is never recoverable by Law: The Commissary Judge
upon true information and proof thereof, and not otherwise, ought to stay
Judgment, or execution, or both, until he can likewise inform the Keepers of
Englands Liberties of the truth of the Cause, and repriev the Prisoner until
their pardon or Tollerance be obtained for him, as was wont in the Kings time
in like cases, so, that afterward the Prisoner may have his Attaint as he
ought against such a Jury, whose Judgment is terrible enough for example to
others, and sufficiently satisfactory to the Party, viz. to repair his wrong,
and pay him treble damages: To forfeit their lands and goods to the Lord of the
Fee; to have their houses demolished; their woods rooted; their bodies
imprisoned during their lives: And Jurors ought to try Attaints without Fee Ex
officio, as you may read in the Mirror, p. 64. And so let so much serve in this
place to inform you that the Jurisdiction of Jurors is to be Judges and
Verdictors of all controversies given them in charge upon their Oaths, as well
for matter of Law as Fact; and as ancient as, and more permanent then
Commissary Judges; for when Commissary Judges had abused their places, so that
they were beaten out of them, and Civil Wars therefore grew between Kings and
people before Magna Charta: and since, until the said second agreement made
between Ed. 1. and them, whereby Coroners and Sheriffs were reordained (for
they had been ordained before, as appears by Magna Charta, and long before
that) to defend the Country when they were dismissed of their guards, etc. for
till then guards continued for the breach of Magna Charta, begun by Hugh de
Burgo's means, and then Captains and Leiutenants became Sheriffs, Coroners,
etc. and Sentinels, Bailiffs, etc. But always the Free men judged their
neighbors constantly; And therefore Mr. Lilburn neither did, nor could give
his Jurors any new Jurisdiction, nor promote them to any preferment more then
of right they had, (as you most falsely and maliciously, however ignorantly
accuse him, and abuse both him and them to introduce the rest of your untruths
which follow, for next you say, that thereby you perceiv his Levelling
Philosophy is, that Judges because they understand Law, are to be degraded, and
made servants to the Jurors; but the jurors because they understand no Law, are
to be mounted aloft, where they are to administer Law, to the whole Kingdom:
the Judges because they are commonly gentlemen by birth, and have had honorable
education, are to be exposed to scorn; but the Jurors, because they be commonly
mechanic, bred up illiteratly to handy Crafts, are to be placed at the Helm,
and consequently Learning, and gentle extractions, because they have been in
esteem in all Nations from the beginning of the world til now, must be debased,
but ignorance, and sordid births must ascend the Chair, and be lifted up to the
eminentest Offices, and places of power, Cobblers must now practice Physic in
stead of Doctors, Tradesmen must get into Pulpits, instead of Divines, and
Plow-men must ride to Sessions instead of Justices of Peace. Sir, I shall not
meddle with Mr. Lilburns Philosophy, but shall conceiv it more reasonable, and
therefore more tolerable then your sophistry, seeing it appears by your own
setting forth, his endeavor was not to degrade Judges because they understood
Law, but to inform them better, because he conceived they understood not Law in
his Case, till they would be pleased to be better instructed by his learned
Council, which (as he aledged diverse presidents for) might have been as
Lawfully allowed him, as those that had them, for (as says Mr. Horn 65 p. they
are both necessary and allowable to such Clyents, as understand not Law
themselves. And for none so necessary as for their lives I think) neither does
it appear to be his purpose to make Judges servants to Jurors, because they
understood no Law, but to remember them to be servants to their own Masters, to
give their assent to the Judgment of Jurors that he conceived did understand
Law: And what wonder were it that these men, who by themselves and their
predecessors did put the Laws of England (that had been in the English tongue
intelligible to all men whom it concerned) into uncoth Giberish of their own
making, should understand their own contrivance better then others who do
understand Latin, French, Greek and Hebrew, better then most professors of Law
do, and English as well: What subversion of the Law can be more then so to
translate it, that those whom it most concerns, can neither understand it,
nor be excused by their ignorance in not understanding it, and so make it their
net (whose liberty it should be) and all to the end, that those whom it
concerns least, or not at all, may elevate themselves by means of so unlawful
and prestigiatorie, and illiberal an Act, (nothing so harmless, nor so free and
cheap as Canting) from little or nothing to greatness, from Lourdeyness to
Lords: And what can the subversion of the Law (especially such a subversion) be
less then treason against all the English Nation? But truly Sir! if Mr. Lilburn
should desire that Judges should be exposed to scorn, because commonly
Gentlemen by birth, and honorably educated, I know none that will agree with
him in that, nor can I believ it to be his desire, that is known himself to be
a Gentleman born, honorably extracted, Civilly bred, martially disciplined, and
very rationally endowed beyond the capacities of ordinary Lawyers. For
learned, virtuous, and upright Judges howsoever born or bred, are to be honored
for their virtue, because Honos est virtutis premium, Honor is the reward of
virtue, and the better their births, and educations be, the more fair and
fortunate are their Ornaments: but Quamvis Caesareos enumeratis Avos: though
descended of Caesar, and educated in his Court: They are not all of Israel that
are of Isaac: And golden Calvs are not to be adored. And if corrupt and
vicious, you say Gods strict injunction obliges us all to reprov sin
wheresoever we find it: behold how you contradict your self, when you would
have all Judges, because wel-born, because well bred (though as wicked as Pilat
or Caiaphas, as you say elsewhere) to be honored by all men: And yet you would
have sin to be reproved by all men wheresoever they find it oportet mendacem
esse memorem: recover your self by some distinction, or reason of policy, or
else you are fallen deep: Tend manus Solomon, etc. I remember you say Jehojada
did forbear Athalia until he gained more ability, and better opportunity to
accomplish his desires against her; I conceiv then you would have none to
reprov Judges but your self; nor will you, till you have more advantage of them
then you have yet; so the respit you give, is but till you have more advantage
against them; not unlike that sesuiticall tenet, which Ignatius never taught
his Disciples, but they learned it of his Master the devil: And therefore let
the King of Spain take heed of it, for the Pope and they wait but opportunity
to swallow his Catholic Majesty into his holiness bowels, when they preach
one vicar in earth for one God in heaven: And let Judges take heed of your
flattery which they may discern by your obligation, to reprove sin wheresoever
you find it; and by your forbearance to reprove Judges (though never so
sinful) until you get opportunity, and by your aptness to fall down and
worship them, all without distinction of good or bad; when some of them know
themselves no worthier to be worshipped then he that our Savior bad get behind
him. And what shall they be the better for your reproof, if they dye before
they have it? when you ought to speak, de mortuis nil nisi bonum; nothing but
good of the dead; therefore Paul more graciously reproved Peter to his face,
when and where he found him faulty. As for Jurors placing at the Helm because
mechanic, etc. you touch not Mr. Lilburn for his Jurors (as all others in
London ought to be) were impanneled by the Sheriffs of London, or their
secondaries, who knew them to be honest lawful men, such as their precept
required, and ^ad the Judges any cause to suspect, refuse, or chang them, they
had done by them all, or ten at least as they did by one of them, take in
others for them: And you say that Mr. Lilburn excepted against them all, and
desired to be tried by a Jurie of Surrey, where he lived when the Fact was
supposed to be committed, (and if by him, likliest to have been there) where a
Jurie might be had of no mechanics, but God, who (as you say elsewhere, and
that truly, as the devil, to be believed in more, uses to tell some truths) is
present in all Courts, was really, though not visibly present there, and had
foreordained better for his servant, then he knew how to desire; A Jurie of
Mechanics, whose persons or Estates I know not, but their carriage and
Resolution in that matter declare them knowing and understanding Men, Confirmed
in their Verdict, first by God himself then doubtlessly not only present in
the Court, but in their hearts and consciences: And afterward by the Council
of State by assent of Parliament: A President for Jurors, and a memorable
example of undantable, immovable, conscientious Judges of life and death, for
the present, and all future ages to imitate: yet traduced by you, and in them
God himself the Author of the work, and the State, and their Council
Cooperaters therein. And no mervel for all that, since you cannot be content to
calumniate all that had a hand in the matter, but also the generality of all
the constant Inhabitants of all Cities and Corporations in England and Wales,
of whom not one in a Million, ever knew Mr. Lilburn, or heard of his Cause, all
Mechanics. For what Trade, or mystery of Merchandise can be, but has its
original from some handicraft? What Merchant so easy or carless, but sometimes
uses the help of his own hand, or servants to measure, or weigh his
commodities, for which he ventureth his life, or others, and his Estate to
boot, to fetch them from the Indies, and why should he scorn to put his finger
to retail them to his customers by true weights and measures? And so I conceiv
writing is but an handi-craft taught a Lawyer before mooting, and necessary to
be used by him when he is a Judge, whose (duty as the Lord Cook upon the 29
chapt. of Magna Charta says, is, decernere per Legem quid sit justum: to
descern what is just by the rule of Law; and so to make the Law his rule, his
line, his measure, his weight, his yard and balance, which (says the same:
Author in the same place) is called Right it self, And Common Law; because it
judges common Right, by a right line, which is the Judge of it self and its
oblique. And in another sens (says he) the Law is called Right, because it is
the best Birthright the Subject has, whereby his goods, lands, Wife,
Children, body, honor and estimation are protected from injuries, and so a
better Inheritance comes to every one of us by the Law, then by our Parents:
but when appropriated by Lawyers to their own construction and benefit, how is
it to becalled common Law?) and when a Commissarie Judge like Pluto's Radamanth,
makes his will his Rule and line, and thereby squaretth and measures the Law
as he pleases, and as Virgil diseribeth him: Grosius hic Radamanthus habet
durisima regna, etc. Castigatque Auditque dolo, subigitque fateri leges fixit
precio atque refixit, etc. First he punishes, then he hears, and compels
to confess, and so makes and marreth Laws as he pleases for his profit: such
are the Commissaries I desire to reprov, and you to flatter: but I wish them to
observe Crysippus his Picture of Justice described in a Latin Diologue thus, viz.

Quae Dea? Justitia: at quid torva lumina slectis?
Nes ia sum flecti, nec moveor prctio.
Vnde genus? Coelo. Quite genuere Parents?
Mi Modus est genitor, clara fides Genitrix
Auriu^ aperta tibi cur altera, and altera clausa est?
Vna patet justis, altera surda malis.
Cur gladium tua dextra gerit? Cur laeva bilances?
Ponderat haec causas, percutit illae reos.
Cur sola incedis? quia copia rara bonorum est;
Haec referunt paucos secula Fabritios.
Pauperc cur Cultu? Semper justissimus esse,
Qui cupit, immensas nemo parabit opes.
Englished by me thus.
What Goddess art thou? Justice: why so stern?
No force shall make me bow; nor brible me yearn.
Whence sprung? from heaven. What parents gave thee breath?
Indifference was my Father; Mother, Faith.
Why open'st one ear, shutt'st the other still?
One hears the good, the other's deaf to ill.
Why right hand sworded? scald the left appears?
One weighs the Cause, the other cuts guilts ears.
Why art alone? because few good there be;
Scant one Fabritius in this age we see.
Why poor in Robe? because who would be just,
No vast estate or Wardrobe purchase must.
But I observe that as the meanest handicrafts man, when he grows rich, turns
Merchant, that he may live Lazier, and gain more by buying and selling
merchantable Commodities, then by his labor, yea, and the craftiest Merchant of
all; or as lately the poorest Scholars being attained unto Wealth, became
Bishops by the same means, and for the same reason; yea, and the precisest
formalist of all, so the simplest mooter in the Inns of Chancerie, being being
past his Apprentiship, admitted to the bar, and but botching Jorneyman in the
trade of Law, furnished with money friends and fortune, proceeds Sergeant at
Law, and ascends some Chair, or Bench of Judicature in a day, and declares
himself presently the pragmaticalest Judge of all, yet but a Commissarie Judge,
such as you extol in the general, and I except against in some particulars, as
for making the Law a mercenarie trade, or a merchantable commodity, which
ought to be free and liberal to all men; and in assuming a Mastership therein,
whereas he is and ought to be but a servant to the Commonwealth; yea, even a
Clerk (though you seem to repine at it) to say Amen, viz. to pronounce his
Masters assent to the verdicts of Jurors who by their ordinary Jurisdiction
are the absolute Judges of their Country, as before is proved. Yet shall I be
content to follow your Follies a little further for your better satisfaction
touching Mechanics, who buy and sell but what are vendible and merchantable
wares, and lawful for them so to do, which if by unreasonable penniworths,
their reasonable Customers may take or leave as their occasion requires, and
reason guides them: whilst Lawyers Clyents must buy such Law as they can find,
at such rates as they can get at Westminster, or perish in their Causes:
different from those times, when Mr. Horn, and others tell you, they had better
brought to their own doors with little charge, and less pains: and when to see
it so administered and executed by Sheriffs, Recorders, and other Country and
City Judges, that were the Kings Commissaries in their respective places, and
derived their Commissions and authorities as well as any at Westminster ever
did, or can, from the same fountain, viz Kings and people, so that (as the Lord
Cook says) Omnis dorivata potestas habet eandem jurisdictionem cum primitiva:
their jurisdictions were the same within their precincts, as the Kings at larg;
yet Kings went along with their Commissaries, or rather Deputies, for their own
Bench, from County to County, once every seven years, to oversee, and examine
how Justice was distributed to their Subjects, and to give their Royal assents
to the verdicts of Juries which were not assented unto by the ordinary
Country Commissaries since the last Size: which Commissioners therefore only,
and not the Country in general, (as now to Assizes, nisi prius, and Gaol
deliveries) or so much as the Jurors were called, or troubled to bring in any
account of what they had done since the last Eire, but those Commissarie
Officers only for that they had not done were charged to bring in their
Records, whereupon such verdicts as were found unassented unto and completed
by them, might be assented unto and perfected by the King himself, or his
Commissarie Judge, or deputy, called his chief Justice of his own Bench; or by
the Justices in Eire, who went sometimes without the King, or any of his
Justices, who when and where they came, had the prerogative of all Courts
during their stay, which was but for short Sessions) and gave forth process of
execution upon them, and meddled not with any mors Causes, but only within his
verge, by the verdicts of Jurors inhabiting within the compass, as you may read
in the Mirror, Lambert and others at larg. And why now all must come to
Westminster four times yearly; and no cause, whether over or under 40 s. can be
ended in any part of the Kingdom but there; for if under a Mutuatus shall lift
it over, and all under color of that Chapter of Magna Charta, which says
Common Pleas shall not follow the Kings Court (as his Bench, Chancerie, and his
Exchequer then did and ever might) but shall be kept in a certain place; which
came to be Westminster Hall since it was the Kings pleasure to have that Court
(which was their prerogative superindendent Court of Common Pleas, viz. for
Appeals in such Pleas, by such as found themselves grieved by partialities or
delays of their Country Commissaries, unto that Court) kept in their own
Hall, of their then dwelling Mansion, as it continued until White Hall came
into the hands of King Henry 8. by Cardinal Woolsey his delinquencie, which
(pleasing him better) he madehis Court; and gave not only Westminster Hall,
but also all the Palace of Westminster (that his Ancestors from Rufus to him,
contented themselves to dwell in) to be the Consistories of all his Courts, when
he found it chargable to remove them, though he and his successors gained least
by them. But now no King being, no Court that depended upon his Person, or his
deputies, or Commissaries, in respect of their prerogative Judicature reputed
transcendent remedies for some transcendent Injuries committed and suffered
amongst the people, can be necessary, because triennial or more frequent
Parliaments, and special Commissions of Oyer and Terminer to be granted them,
when and as their Causes require, may better supply them and with more speed
and Justice, and less charge and expense finish their Causes at or near their
homes, then all, or any the Courts at Westminster ever did or could. But if the
Keepers of Englands Liberty be pleased to have any one or more Courts, or
Judges to be superintendents above all others, besides Parliaments, and
special Oyers and Terminers, Then they are to be desired, to be also pleased
to allow, and pay them sufficient Wages at their own cost, and not the peoples,
as Kings did when their Commissarie Judges were to have of never so many
Parties in one Cause, but 12d to be divided amongst them, and that after the
end of the suit, and not before: And a Pleader (though a Sergeant at Law) was
sworn to plead as well as he could for his Master (now called his Clyent, and
counted his servant) and to abuse the Court with no falls, or more delatorie
then necessary Pleas, And was to have for every such Plea pleading, but six
pencel; and for his sallarie or Wages, for his attendance in every Cause first
to last, beginning to end, as the Court should think fit, considering the
greatness of the Cause, and merit of the Pleader, etc. as you may read in the
Mirror, p. 64. Now to return to your Mechanics, commonly (as you say) brought
up illiterat: surely it cannot be unknown to you, that there are most commonly
as many (if not more) Masters of Art in London that use Trades and handicrafts
as practice Law at Westminster, and compleater Retoritians, Logitians,
Musicians, Arithmetitians, Geometricians, Astronomers and Physicians, all which
are the several liberal sciences, and the very Encyclopedie and summarie of
all good and necessary Arts and learning: How then do you make it your
consequence, that if all Commissarie Judges be not adored as you would have
them; all learning and gentle extraction must be debased, but ignorant and
fordid birth must ascend to the Chair? as if there were no learning but in
Pedlers French and Law-Latin, the very disguises of the Law, which has no such
need of them, as a foul face of a Mask, or an hangman of a Vizard; but
contrariwise, much necessary to be rid of those Curtains, which hide both the
beautiful Shape, and material substance of it, from us, that it may appear
(even to our understandings) more gloriously, more learnedly in plain English,
then in that Canting more obnoxious then that of beggars, which would but cheat
us of necessaries to sustain their lives; whilst Law-Canters cheat both us, and
them, of all our livelihoods and liberties, to surfeit themselves with
superfluities; by making us all starvlings, pined with that extreme of wants,
the want of Justice: for put the case that those hotch-potch French, and
Quelquechose Latin were banished, and the Law rendered in English (as Scriptures
are which were hidden from us by Prelates, as our Law by Lawyers) would not all
learning, and argumentations in Law be as necessary for the continual
preservation of men's lives and estates, and therefore continued in English as
Sermons in Pulptis, and disputes in Schools and Universities, requisite for the
salvation of our souls are? Naywould not Schoolmasters (to read and teach the
Law in common Schools) beas ne cessarie in London, as Students in the Inns of
Court, or Chancerie, or as such have been (as you may read in the Lord Cooks
Preamble upon Magna Charta) and did read upon Magna Charta, when it was read
twice yearly in Churches, and 4 times yearly until full Counties, until the
same King that assented to the making, and was sworn to the observing of Magna
Charta, in the 9 year of his Reign, by the advice of his Chief Justice Hugh
d'Burgo (whose advice and his followers ever led Kings to ruin, and Subjects
to hazards) by his special Writ in the 19 year of his Reign, prohibited the
said public reading, and teaching, (as you may read in the same place.) Did
not the Eunuch understand the Language he read, yet wanted Philip to interpret
the meaning? And did not God send Philip to that end? So no doubt (although the
Law be Englished) the most part of English people will be Eunuchs in their
understanding of it so fully as they ought, until, and but whilst there be
Philips to expound it? for it is too great a Study for men otherwise employed,
to be expert in; to resolv Causes which you call Intricate, As you would make
it for Cobblers to dilucidate texts, which many call hard Scriptures: And who
can doubt it to be Gods special gift and vocation in Law to some, to be just
and learned Lawyers, as to others to be sincere and Orthodox Divines, while the
world shall consist of bodies necessary to be regulated, as of souls to be
disciplined. And then for your gentle extractions, may not they be as they were
ever wont (since Marriages were ordained in Heaven, may not a Judge bestow his
daughter upon a Citizen, and a Citizen his upon a Judge, or an Earl, (as we have
seen usual): but by your allegation that there is a general disesteem of
gentry more now then from the beginning of the World, which Mr. Lilburn can be
no cause of: It is manifest you charge the present Government as faulty for
suffering such a disesteem to be among the people, wherein you do but traduce
and wrong the State, that neither desire, nor countenance any such thing, but
when gentry (for the most part) grows degenerat, and nobility debaseth it
self, Corruption unius est generatio alterius: when Lords turn Boors and
simplicians, let Clowns turn Lords and Politicians; And let him that will carp
at the Vicissitude of things, which divine providence has ordained, blame
neither State in general, nor persons in particular, but conceiv rather, that
Ablata Causa tollitur effectus; when virtue fails, the honor follows; when
God took his holy Spirit from Saul, both Spirit and Majesty were transferred
to David in a larger measure; and thereupon be you further answered by an Hea
then: Tempora mutantur, et nos mutamur in illis: Times are changed, and we
therein: By whom, is manifest; but how, and when, are Arcana Dei: Forbidden
secrets, imputable by such as suffer therein, to their sins; and therefore you
show your self in this point, not an Alter Cato, but an Altercator: not a wise
man but a wrangler: Whilst you might observe further, that God never took his
holy Spirit from whom he gave it, but for their abusing, or not using that
power which accompanied it, as they ought, whereby they provoked him, as when
he said: It repents me that I have set up Saul to be King: 1 Samuel 15.11. When
Saul spared Agag, and his fat Oxen, etc. which God commanded to be destroyed:
So when Englands Kings and Lords made wrong use of their Judicature and power
which he and his people had given them; was it not time for God himself, to
justify himself and his people? When they and their subordinate Judges
connived together with such men as God described by his Prophet Jeremiah to be
his enemies, saying: Among my people are found wicked men, they lay wait, as he
that sets snares, they set a trap, they oath men, and as a Cage is full of
birds, so are their houses full of deceits, therefore they are become great and
waxen rich; they are waxen fat, they shine; ye, they overpass the deeds of the
wicked, they Judge not the Cause of the Fatherless, yet they prosper; and the
right of the needy do they not Judge: shall I not visit for these things (says
the Lord)? shall not my soul be avenged upon such a generation as this? Jer. 5.
v. 26. were there ever in Israel such waylayers, snare-setters, trap-setters,
and men-catchers, as were the Scribes and Pharisees, who concealed the Law
(which God made for his people) and assumed the exposition thereof to be proper
to themselves only, and thereby snared, trapped, and caught the people as they
pleased; made way for themselves to become great, rich, fat and shine; which
exposition was but of their own natural language, which their Contrymen
understood, or might as well as they, yet our Savior called them a generation
of vipers, etc. that laid heavy yoaks upon their brethren, etc. Did not our
Judges and Atturneyes in England exceed them, that not only concealed the Laws
of God, and this Land, made for this people, from this people? though partly
published in English (as our Statute Laws are) whereof nevertheless they assume
the exposition to themselves; howbeit rational Englishmen may understand them
as well as they; but also barbarized that part of our Law which is called, and
ought to be common, so that they have made it proper to themselves only,
because no other linguist (howsoever learned) can understand it, but only they
that made it such for that purpose, whereby they snare, and trap all men as
they list, and their Legion Gaolers, Catch-poles, setters, etc. (who glory
even in those names, and are rich by those means) catch, and imprison all
Debtors, and most of them to death, contrary to all Law, but what they made and
procured against Magna Charta, and maintain (though repealed) against the
Petition of Right, and above 20. Statutes, all Confirmations of Magna Charta.
Do the Judges of England, judge the Cause of the Fatherless? the Orphans of
London can tell you no. Do they judge the right of the needy? the Widows, the
Fatherless, and all that sue in forma pauperis, nay they that beg, rob, and
steal to boot, with those that starv for need, can tell you no. And shall not
God be as good as his word? Shall not his soul be avenged upon this generation?
yea, no doubt, and therefore Judgment began at the House of the Lord, which
King, Lords and Bishops, that parted the peoples spoils, neglected Achan and
his Wedg; made all covetous gripers more griping, Regis ad exemplum; and all
men more offenders because the greatest most thrived, and were never punished.
Therefore Kings, Lords, etc. whose extractions for Gentry were ever esteemed
best; And many Bishops well descended, laying aside their virtues, who shall
blame God for laying their honor in the dust? but let all that love the present
State, and Government of England, wish the Keepers of the Liberty thereof,
take heed in time they do not the same things themselves, they have condemned in
others, of whose punishments God has made them his Instruments; for we are
sure that the Judgment of God is according to truth, against them which commit
such things; 2. Romans ^. Let them not overpass the seeds of the wicked, by not
punishing them which they ^nde to be such, yea, and especially the wickedest of
them, even such as none can be so wicked; Judges that persevere in injustice,
who by suffering such offenders, become not only the committers of their
offenses, but superlative offenders, whom God nath none above them to correct,
but himself, which he therefore usually does, by raising Wars against them, and
enemies unto them, as well of their own Nation, nay their own Children, as
others; and as well Insideators of their ways to, and at their doors, and
assacinates in their houses, as adversaries in the Field. And as for your self
Sir, may not we say of you, as Jeremie said of some in his time: A Wonderful
and horrible thing is committed in the Land, that Prophets Prophecy falsely,
etc. For what do you else when you say, you are obliged, as all men are, to
reprov sin wheresoever you find it, and yet you justify and magnify such
Judges as the true Prophet reproves. Take heed therefore how you use your
tertiam Linguam (as Walterfensis calls it) which by lying and slandering, either
by way of adulation, as you do the Judges, or detraction, as you do Mr.
Lilburn: the party that so does, abuses three persons at once, viz. ^he
Speaker, the hearer, and he that is spoken of: And such leagues (says the same
Author) had the Prophets that ^ere slain; Doeg, that was resected, and Saul
that slew himself: And such tongues ^t. Bernard calls triplicit, for the same
reason; and says, that such Sycophants as use them, have the Devil in their
tongues, and Auditors in their ears, and a consenter in their hearts. And for
sordid births (except I knew yours) I know not what to say to you; but suppose
the tree may be known by the fruit, and well do I know, that as London, and
other Cities, ever had Mechanics of as great and noble extractions, as England
yielded, so the Bars at Westminster ever hitherto had long-roabed men of as
promiscuous originals, as humanity afforded: And of London births at this
present, there be virtuous and honorable Chair-men at Westminster, as e
converso, there be of Judges sons, hopeful Apprentises in London. Where you
find Cobblers in Pulpits, it is because the Divines are out. And where you say
Plow-men ride to Sessions instead of Justices of Peace; there can be no
Sessions without both, viz. Knights or Esquires to be Justices, and Plow men,
(which are the best kind of free men in England) to be Jurors. And as Jurors
are there, and elsewhere the more real Judges, so is their calling far
antienter, for sokmen were long before Justices of Peace (...) England; And
soccage was (...) a better tenure then ^^cage, or Knights service. But a
Justice of Peace, and a Plowman do well together, not only in
Quarter Sessions, but in constant hous-holds; and the eminentest, best exracted
Knights and Esquires, as they have ever been the best hous-keepers, so they
have been the bountifulest cherishers and countenancers of their Plow-men in
their most necessary calling for the Worlds sustenance: and have not scorned
to put their hands to their own plows, as Kings and Lords have vouchsafed their
names, and associacions to their Subjects, in their trades and handicrafts, to
countenance, commerce and traffic.

So not finding any more o^ your Pamphlet necessary for me to answer, as this
much was, for my reason given you in the title page thereof. I bid you heartily
farewell.

From my lodging in Mr. Mondays house upon Clerkenwell-Green, July 1650.
FINIS.

