The Pretended ANTIDOE PROVED POISON: Or, The true Principles of the Christian
and Protestant Religion Defended, And the Four Counterfit Defenders thereof
Detected and Discovered; the Names of which are James Allen, Joshuae Moodey,
Samuel Willard and Cotton Mather, who call themselves Ministers of the Gospel
in Boston, in their pretended Answer to my Book, called, The Presbyterian and
Independent Visible Churches in New England, and elsewhere, brought to the
Test, etc. And G. K. cleared not to be guilty of any Calumnies against these
called Teachers of New England, etc.

By George Keith.

With an Appendix by John Delavall, by way of Animadversion on some Passages in
a Discourse of Cotton Mathers before the general Court of Massachusetts, the
28th of the Third Month, 1690.

Philadelphia, Printed by Will. Bradford, 1690.

Introduction. To James Allen, Joshua Moodey, Samuel Willard, and Cotton
Mather.
Men and Neighbors,
I Have seen your pretended Answer to my Book, which ye call, The Principles of
the Protestant Religion maintained, etc. which I have also read and well
considered, and I find that upon the matter, ye have left the substance or
principal matter of it wholly unanswered, and that your said pretended A^^wer
contains little else but Railing after an extraordinary and unusual manner of
Speech, scarcely to be paralelled, and many very gross Mistakes and Perversions
of my words, and some absolutely false Quotations and Recitations, alleging
Words, and Sayings, and Doctrines to be mine and delivered by me in my Book,
which are neither directly nor indirectly to be found there, and which are
neither my express words nor so much as the most remote true and just
Consequence of them. But it is altogether unfair and absurd to allege any
thing upon a man which are not either his express words, or the plain and
manifest sense of them, obvious to every intelligent and impartial Reader: For,
to allege a consequential sense of a man's words, which they will no ways
bear, is most uncivil and inhumane, and argues at most a weak and desperate
Cause, when ye are put to use such mean and unlawful Arts to make your part
seem fair. And surely, ye who pretend to find so great fault at the supposed
Calumnies of G. K. should have (at least) upon some prudential consideration,
as men, shown your selves not to be so deeply guilty of that Vice of
Calumniating, which ye, only with great confidence, allege, but can never
prove against him.

I find, ye are not a little vexed at my Book; but since it contains little
else but Nonsense, Tautologies, Nauseous Repetitions, Cavils and Sophisms, as
ye allege, why are ye so angry and fretted? why should Nonsense and
Tautologies, Cavils and Sophisms vex you so very much? what aileth you, that ye
come with such a company? ye seem, in great part, to resemble Micah pursuing
some of the Children of Dan, to recover your lost gods, and to answer with him,
after some manner, Ye have taken away our gods which we made, and our Priests,
and ye are gone away; and what have we more? And what is this that thou say
unto us, what aileth us? But I assure you, I intend to make no such usage of
your gods as the Danites did of the gods of Micah, nor have I robbed any of
your gods or idols from you, but as becoming a true Christian, I have fairly
and honestly labored to convince you of your many evil and hurtful Errors
which ye set up in your hearts, as Idols and false Godds; for ye may know, that
the Scripture tells of foam, that did set up Idols in their hearts; yea,
whatever any men set up in their hearts, in the room and place of the true God,
and his Precious, holy and living Truth, and the divine dictates and
Testimonies thereof, are but false gods, and idols of men's making. It is a most
false and injurious Accusation ye insinuate against me, as if I did seek to
persuade any, to part with an infinite and eternal God, and having a created
Soul blasphemously place in his Throne, or to p^rt with the precious Bible
(viz. the holy Scriptures) as a dead Letter, and to have silent postures of
their own in the room thereof, or that I seek to persuade these called your
Congregations, to part with an inestimable Redeemer, for a dim Light within
them, which may prove Darkness it self, or to have the whole Gospel Baptism of
Christ and his Supper taken away from them, and the glorious Doctrines of
Election, Justification and Perseverance depraved with Opinions that make man
to be all, and Grace to have small or no share in the matters of Salvation. All
which are most false and injurious Accusations, with many more of that sort,
which ye very unchristianly cast upon me, as I hope will clearly appear in the
sequel, and does sufficiently appear in my former Book. My desire, and earnest
travail of soul is, That ye, and all others, who remain ignorant of God, may
come to the true knowledge of him, and of his Son Christ Jesus, whom to know is
Life eternal. I assert no created Soul or thing to be placed in the room of God
in his Throne, but plead against you, that as God and Christ dwell in Heaven,
so they dwell in the hearts of all the faithful, and that not divided or
sepera^ed from their Operations and Influences, but together with them, and one
with them, though ye would divide and separate them asunder; and that the same
God and Christ, as they are one, so their operation and influence of Light and
Grace are one, and that by some gracious operation and influence they are
pleased to visit the Souls of all men more or less; and as God and Christ are
every where present in all the Creatures, so in a more special way and manner
of manifestation, beside that universal Omnipresence, they are in all men, and
cannot be excluded from any of the Creatures; and therefore it is a most
injurious Calumny, as if either I or any of my Friends did set up any thing in
the room or throne of God; for whatover illumination, operation or influential
Effect of God and Christ we assert to be in men, we do not say that it is God
or Christ, for we do not confound the Cause and the Effect, nor the Worker and
his work, but we say, God and Christ, the Word, by which all things were made,
are most inwardly present in all Creatures; and if ye deny this, ye, and not
we, deny the true God; and God and Christ are Light, as the holy Scripture
declares, and are no dim Light, which is in you Blasphemy to assert; but, both
your Eyes, and the Eyes of many are dim, yea, and blind, that ye cannot in this
your blind state see the glory of God: And for the holy Scriptures, ye your
selves say, The MIND and true SENSE of the Scripture, is the Scripture or Word,
and that was never called by us a dead Letter, nor is the Scripture dead to any
but to such who are dead, and past feeling; we hold to Scripture phrase that
says, the Letter kills, which we thus understand, that whoever have not the
inward quickening, and living operation of the Spirit of God, that does usually
attend and accompany the outward Testimony of the holy Scriptures, to such the
Letter of the Scripture is a killing Letter, and the sober of your own Church,
I suppose, will not deny it, and so it proves to all Infidels and Unbelievers,
while remaining such, who are dead in their sins and Trespasses, but to all who
are made alive unto God, the Scriptures Testimony is a living* sweet and
precious Testimony, in all its parts, and not at all either a dead Letter, or a
killing Letter. And as for the Gospel Baptism of Christ, and his Supper, and
the glorious Doctrines of Election, Justification and Perseverance of God's
elect Saints and Children, we own them with our souls and hearts, and only
disown your false glosses of all these things; ye must not think to be both
party and judge in these matters, both ye and we have a most impartial and just
Judge, the great Lord of Heaven and Earth, to judge and witness betwixt us, and
to his Witness, Evidence and Testimony in all hearts I can and do freely leave
these matters of difference betwixt us, in the mean time ye are greatly
mistaken to think, that either I or my Friends decline all outward Evidences
and Testimonies, or just and equal Methods or Ways of fair reasoning and
argument, touching the matters of d^^ference betwixt us; nay, its a great, if
not woeful Mistake in you, we shall never fear to deal with you in all fair and
reasonable ways of dispute, either by express Scripture, or by just and
rational Consequences therefrom, and then to leave all to the impartial
judgment of all such who are both spiritual and reasonable men; for, to be both
spiritual and reasonable are well consistent.

Ye may be greatly ashamed, (if Shame be compatible unto you, to use some of
your own words) in the beginning of your Preface to tell of Persecutors with
Cain 's Club in their hands, when ye have been so deeply guilty of using Cain's
Club, and continuing to justify it, in putting to death so many innocent
Servants of the Lord. Ye are idle and impertinent to call me the Champion, whom
the American Quakers do so much admire, I know none called a Quaker in America,
or elsewhere, that does admire me; we admire and adore the glorious God and
Creator, but no man; nor do I seek the honor and praise of men, it is enough
that I am loved by my Friends and Brethren, and that I am acknowledged to have
a part and lot among the faithful. Ye acknowledge ye pass over many assertions,
called by you unsound, in my Book, with a dry foot, and so ye might have said,
ye have passed the substance and matter of the whole, and the Arguments thereof
without due notice, and rather than wet your feet ye wi^^ go far abo^^, and
digress or deviate from that which ye cannot fairly nor justly answer. As for
Cotton Mather's pretended Vindication of his Father Increase Mather, his abuses
against the People called Quakers, I have fully answered to it in Print in a
Book called, A Refutation of three Opposers of Truth, etc. to which I refer,
and which I suppose is come to his hand long before this of yours came to me.
Ye express your fear of me, as if my (supposed) Apostasy had rendered me
incurable; and elsewhere ye call me a fearful Apostate, and insinuate, as if I
were not only Apostate and Heretic, but grown beyond Admonition: But how know
ye this, seeing ye pretend not to a Spirit of discerning or a divine Revelation
in the case? Suppose I err in some things (as I have good assurance I do not in
any o^ these things ye charge me) does one or some few Errors or Mistakes (not
wilfully held) in matters that are not fundamental, render me either Heretic
or Apostate? Ye, or at least, the more sober among you, allow, that men holding
the fundamentals of the Christian Religion, although they be in an Error or
Mistake, touching diverse things, that are not fundamental, may be allowed to be
true Christians, and Members of Christ's Church; hence the mo^e sober of
Presbyterians have a charitable judgment of many, not only of Baptists and the
Episcopals, but of Arminians and Lutherans, yea, and of many in the Church of
Rome also. and I believe ye cannot give me one instance wherein ye can justly
accuse me or my Friends of any fundamental Error in Christian Doctrine, so
acknowledged by the more sober part among you, held by us. It is high and
extreme Uncharitableness for you so to unchristian us, but praised be God, we
can, and have holy confidence to appeal from your false Judgment, to the just
God, to whom we are known, and whose Peace and Justification we have in our
Bosoms, that is Proof against all your false and injurious Accusations: And I
have not dealt so with you, so to unchristian you in the whole lump, or any one
of you, altogether merely for Doctrine; for I only did charge it upon you, and
I believe I have made good my charge, That your visible Churches are not the
true Church of Christ, to wit, not having that purity of Doctrine, Ministry,
Worship, Constitution, Government, etc. that constitutes the true Church of
Christ, either as the Church was in the Apostles days, or as she is yet to be
restored, and is now restoring, after the great and dark night of Apostasy, yet
I have freely and readi y granted, that there are among you who belong to
Christ and his true Church; and though you judge his a great inconsistency and
contradiction, yet ye are in a great mistake, for my charge is as consistent,
to grant, that some among you, yea, all who are sincere and faithful to what
they do know, and are really convinced of the Truth but in part that are among
you, belong to God, and to his true Church, as the Charity of many of the more
sober among you, is consistent, to grant, That the most sincere sort in the
Church of Rome, belong to God, and his Church, and are his People; for God has
of his People in Babylon, whom he calls to come out of it; and this was the
judgment generally of these called the first Reformers, and is the judgment
generally of the more sober and judicious Protestants of all sorts, at this
day, and was my charitable judgment when I was among the Presbyterians, and
remains now to be; and yet, such who have this charitable judgment of many in
the Church of Rome, do not call her, nor own her (for most part to be the true
visible Church of Christ, but call her a Whore, and a false Church, and
Babylon, and for this cause judge, that their separation is just from her: And
as the Protestants generally, who are of the more sober and moderate sort, do
excel these called Papists or Roman Catholics, for their charitable judgment
of many among them, because scarce any Papist has the least charitable
judgment of any one Protestant of any sort; so we the People called Quakers
have the advantage over you, in that we have a real Christian charitable
judgment, not only of all the sincere hearted among you, but among all others,
that are sincere hearted, who hold the fundamenta^s of Christian Religion, that
they belong to God and Christ, and are our Christian Brethren, though in many
things dark and weak, and under great mistakes of judgment, that does greatly
hinder their growth, and endanger their Souls state, and therefore we labor,
if possible, to undeceive them; but we can have no charity for Hypocrites, and
such who are not sincere in what they profess, but having a form of Godliness
deny the Power of it, and are Proud, Envious, Malicious, false Accusers,
Persecutors, and of a persecuting Spirit, who have killed the Martyrs of Jesus,
and justify them who have so done, as you do those who put to death our
innocent and Christian Friends at Boston; and though ye allege, they suffered
for their crime, That they came purposely to undermine the civil Government,
and yet it is known generally over almost the whole World where New England and
Boston is named, and what they did in that matter, that it was simply for their
Conscience, and for no crime in matter of fact at all, but transgressing that
unrighteous Law of not returning on pain of Death; and if that be to subvert
civil Government, then all Persecutors are justified, and all the many
thousands of Gods faithful Martyrs and Witnesses are to be condemned for being
subverters of the civil Government, for they did generally transgress the
unrighteous Laws of men, under which they suffered; yea, Christ himself at this
rate is guilty (which is blasphemous to think) for as the Jews said, We have a
Law, and by our Law he ought to dye, and he is no friend to Caesar; but that
any thing directly or indirectly was ever found in any of these our Friends put
to Death at Boston, that had any the least tendency against the civil
Government, ye can never prove, nor give the least colou^able pretense, nor did
I ever hear that any such thing was articled against them, except in so far as
ye will call that a subversion of civil Government, to transgress the
unrighteous Laws ye made against the People called Quakers, only for their
Persuasions in matters of Conscience, and their innocent and harmless Practices
and Profession accordingly. And if any of them have come at time to your
public Meetings of Worship, to bear a Testimony against your Formality, and
Hypocrisy, and false Doctrine, it is but the like to what some of these, well
owned and esteemed as the Martyrs of Christ, did in Q. Mary's days, and in
other times and places of Popery, where they came openly and boldly into the
Popish Assemblies, and witnessed against them, and their Practice is commended
in Fox's Book of Martyrs, and other Historians, as Noble and Heroical; yea, how
many Presbyterians have highly commended the Women for throwing their stools at
the Bishop reading Common Prayer in Edinburgh in Scotland, above fifty years
ago, and judged it as a Noble and Heroical Act, and some have imputed it to a
divine Motion; but as I do not justify it, yet it does serve justly to stop
your mouths to make that a great crime in others, only to witness by word of
mouth against your false Way of Worship, when many or most of you, the
Presbyterian sort, justify that Practice by violent hands, first of Women
th^owing their Stools at the Bishop in the Pulpit, and then of men violently
rising against him; which is a well known Passage, and there are yet alive in
Scotland who can bear witness to it. Ye say, ye shall have no returns from me,
except those of Rage and Wrath, which ye shall not count it worth the while to
publish any Reply unto, but what the Archangel gave to a Railing Accusation.
But I hope, through Gods help to disappoint you, and to give you no returns of
Rage and Wrath at all; and though in my former Book I used some sharp words
against you, from love and zeal to the Truth, and good will unto you, and the
People of New England, yet I am not conscious of any Rage and Wrath I used
against you, though ye charge me with Pride and Gall, and Slandering, and
Cal^mniating with bitter Invictives, etc. but I stand not to your judgment;
however, as I retract nothing of what I then charged you with, so at present, I
hope, so far to disappoint you, as not to give you any just cause to say, I
give you any Returns of Rage and Wrath; for I shall most willingly and freely
acknowledge your skill and ability of using hard words and speeches, does far
exceed my Capacity, if I durst allow my self a liberty, as I dare not, to
contend with you in that manner, but I can say it singly, I love rather to
contend with strong and sollid Arguments, than any hard words whatsoever, and
so far as it shall please God to give me leave, I shall labor to refrain them,
to take away all occasion from you, of making excuse not to answer, only
remember, that ye confess, in some passages, ye have done your work cuttingly,
excu^ing you^ selves, that some are to be rebuked. But what Apology can this be
more to you than to me? you must take all liberty imaginable, yea, exceed all
bounds, to answer me cuttingly, and yet this is no Wrath or Rage in you, but
love and good will to me, ye will say; for, I hope, if I be judged your Enemy
ye will say, ye ought to love me; but if I use but a small part of hard words
toward you, and withal expressing my love, ye will needs construe it to be
Pride, Gall, Rage and Wrath; if this be not partial, let all impartial Readers
judge. However, though your words seem cutting, yet since your Reasons and
Defenses, by way of Argument, are blunt and dull, I feel no wound nor smart by
any thing ye have done, and am in no fear of any thing ye can do against me;
for the Truth, which is the strongest of all, is my defense against you, and
all your assaults. Ye not only indulge your selves, to use most hard and
uncivil Language against me, but against that Wa^ professed by me* called by
you, the Contagion of Quakerism, and the peculiar Plague of this Age; saying,
in Quakerism ye see the vomit cast forth, in the bypast Ages, by whole Kennels
of these Creatures, for whom the Apostle has found a Name, licked up again for
a new Digestion, and once more exposed for the Poison of Mankind; and it is
especially (say ye) the more ignorant, and unwary, and envious part of Mankind
which it is adepted unto; and abundance more of this sort: Which is a shame to
hear, or read such odd kind of dirty words, enough to defile the Air, etc. but
it is no new or strange thing that Light should be put for Darkness, and Good
called Evil, and Blessed are ye, said Christ to his Disciples, when men shall
speak all manner of Evil against you, falsely for my sake; if they have called
Christ a Blasphemer, etc. what may his Servants expect? So used the Papists and
Popish Clergy to abuse the primitive Protestants, the sincere sort and part of
which, who, from true inward Conviction of Truth, and zeal to Truth, did
witness against the corrupt Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome, we
cordially own, and have unity with their Testimony against the same. And though
ye four seek to gain applause and praise from the ignorant Multitude, as if ye
were mainly concerned to defend the Principles of the Protestant Religion,
against the Quakers, yet I question not but to make it appear, that the People
called Quakers are better and truer Protestants than your selves, and whatever
was of Truth, and true Doctrine, and true Christian Practice, or is among all
the sorts of Protestants, we do own it, according to our knowledge and ability,
and deny nothing of what was ever, or is true among them, only what is no true
part of true Protestant Doctrine, but dross, or dreg, and refuse, that did or
does cleave to any or all that go under that Name of Protestants or Protestant
Churches, we do justly renounce and disown; and this is not to turn Apostates,
but to go forward, and follow the Lord in his further leadings and discoveries;
for Luther (after whom, and those that did own him, the Protestants were so
called) did plainly acknowledge, That the Light of the Gospel that did shine in
his time, was a certain sign of the glorious appearance of our Lord and Savior
Christ, and like the Morning Red that appears, be ore the everlasting Day,
and rising of the Son of Righteousness, see cap. 12. page 198. of his Mensalia,
and therefore Luther did account the Light that shined in him, and his
Brethren, but as the twilight before the Sun arise; and it is certain, that
men cannot see well in the twilight, to discern many things; and ye your
selves will and do acknowledge, that both Luther and Calvin had their mistakes,
and yet ye will not allow your selves to be Apostates, that ye agree not with
them in these Mistakes; and Luther did prophecy of a horrible Darkness that
was to follow after his time, cap. 7. p. 130. of that Book; and is not this
fullfilled in great part over the generality of Protestants, as well Lutherans,
as others that go under the Name of Protestants, not to mention the People
called Quakers, whom ye will not reckon to be so considerable as to have caused
such a dark Cloud or shadow to overspread, it is manifest to the impartial,
that these called Protestants, or first Reformers, as in too many things they
fell short, and retained too many Relics of Popish Doctrines and Practices,
so in other things they did run into Extremes, as is too common for men to do,
out from the middle path; and since Protestants generally own the holy
Scriptures as the only supreme outward Rule, and Standard, and public Test and
Touchstone, whereby to try all Doctrines and Practices of Christian Religion,
the which also we do, it is evident, that whatsoever Doctrine or Practice is
agreeab e to the holy Scripture, is both Christian and Protestant; and there
are no Principles of Doctrine received by us, in opposition to Popery, but what
we have great Numbers, not only a^ good, but better Protestants than your
selves, receiving the same Doctrine, as may in t^me be made appear, and not
only confirmed with Scripture-Authority; but with a^tient Writers, acknowledged
by you to have been truly Pious. The narrow-spirited party in New England, and
in some other parts of the world, who too unchristianly judge all others who
differ from them in some matters of Doctrine, to be Heretics, Impostors, etc.
are so far from being the whole Body of Protestants, that they are but a very
small and inconsiderable part thereof, especially ye called Independents And
though ye upbraid the People cal^'d Quakers with Novelty, saying, The Novelty of
the Sect proves their Falsity, because a Quaker said, anno 1659. it is now
about 7 years since the Lord raised us up; yet this does nothing militate
against the Quakers, more than against you called Independents and
Presbyterians, for your being raised up or appearing in the World under such a
Name and Model of Doctrine, Discipline, Ministry, and as peculiarly
distinguished from other Societies, and by your peculiar circumstances is but
Novel, and o^ late years; for ye cannot trace your b^ginning, as such, higher
than the Brownists, so called, of Amsterdam in Qu. Elizabeth's days, from
which ye have not a little degenerated, both in Doctrine and Life; and your
present Model is yet later, and but erected since New England was planted with
English People, scarce seventy years ago; and in respect of Novelty there is no
great odds betwixt seven Years and seventy Years, ye^, or seven hundred Years;
for that Religion and Doctrine which cannot be proved to be as old as the
^rophets and Apostles, yea, in some sort from the beginning, is not true, but
false: It is a true saying of some ancient Writers, Antiquissima quid
verissima, i. e. The truest Principles of Doctrine are the most Ancient: and as
the Protestants used to answer the Papists, when they queried, Where their
Religion was before Luther? saying, Where Popery was not, to wit, in the holy
Scriptures sufficiently declared: we can say the same. If we prove our Doctrine
to be warranted from the Scripture, as we have done, and are able still to do,
through Gods help, we prove our Religion to be ancient enough. And though one
called a Quaker said or writ, anno 1659: that they were raised up seven Years
agone, this does not infer the Newness of their Religion, but at most, that at
that time they were but newly come to the true knowledge and faith of it, even
as when an Infidel is converted but this year to the faith of Christ, it does
not follow, that the faith of Christ is not elder than his Conversion: Its
true, the Name Quakers were not given till about the Year aforementioned, nor
had they such Discoveries and Knowledge of Truth before, as then, yet that does
not hinder, but the Truth then rev^aled unto them, was from the beginning; Men
see not the light of the Sun un^il they be born into the World, yet the same
^ight was in the World some Thousands of Years before they were born. Not one
of these twelve Principles in debate ^etwixt you and us, but I can bring
Testimonies of Protestant Writers, of great note and account, holding with us,
as may in due time appear. After ye have railed against me, after a most
unchristian and licentious manner, ye say, Ye will give no further Reply unto,
but what the Archangel gave to a Railing Accusation. But if ye think it worthy
of Imitation, to follow the Example of the Archangel now at last, why did ye
not so at first? Why did not the answer of the Archangel suffice you at first,
to have given me? What is this but to abuse the Scripture, first to use an
extraordinary Licentiousness of Railing Accusations against me, and then to
conclude, ye will bring no Railing Accusa^ion, unless ye Repent you of your
former Rai^ing and Reviling Speeches against me and my Friends? I call them
justly railing Speeches, because they are false, and grounded upon false
Surmises and Allegations that ye can never prove; but what I have charged on
y^u is true, and I have proved it, and can more abundantly do. And whereas ye
are big ^ith hope, that ye have now furnished New England with an Antidote
against that f^lsly called by you, The Contagion of Quaker sin. If the cloud of
Prejudice that are in many or most of the People, were removed, your Antidote
would prove very mean and ineffectual. It is the unhappiness of too many, the
^rejudice of their Education, and that they have sucked in false Principles
almost with their Mothers Milk, and a too great credulity to false Teachers,
all which in due time God will remove; and I believe, That ye call you
Antidote, may prove to many, an occasion to discover your Nakedness, Ignorance
and Unsoundness of Doctrine, more than formerly Ye tell us of a sort of
Quakerism not long since broached in Italy, called Quierists; but ye find fault
with ^ome of the Quakers among you, That they disturb the quiet o^ all that are
about them. As for the Quietists, so called, in Italy, they have not been so
quiet but they have made a great noise in the World; however, that they either
are, or have called themselves Quakers, does not appear, and their Principles
and ours sufficiently differ. But it will not prove, that the Quakers are not a
quiet and peaceable People, that they witness against false Doctrine and
Unchristian Practices; for so did the quiet and peaceable Christians of old,
and so did the Apostles, who yet were said to turn the World upside down, by
their false Accusers.

Ye seem to rejoice and glory, that the Religion of the Quakers has got place
but in some more obscure nooks and corners of New England: And what does this
prove against the truth of their Religion, or what does it give you of
glorying, more than that there was no room for Christ in the Inn, after he was
born? and the Foxes (i. e. the false Teachers) have holes, and the Fowls of
the Air (i. e. proud and airy men) have nests, but the Son of Man, even Christ
(and his blessed Doctrine) has scarce where to lay his head. It was not the
better for the Gadareus rejoicing, that Christ departed out of their Coasts. In
the close of your Preface ye presume to prophecy, as if some Enthusiastical
efflatus or breathing had got hold of you, although ye are declared Enemies to
the Spirit of Prophecy, or divine Inspiration now remaining, where ye say, The
day is at hand when our blessed Savior will purify his Temple, and sweep
Quakerism, with other Defilement, o^t of it, etc. But in opposition to this
your false Prophecy, I believe, and am well persuaded, that the holy Truth and
Doctrine witnessed unto by ^he honest and sincere Quakers, so called, which ye
call Quakerism, the day hastneth that God will abundantly plant it, both in
New England, and in all other parts of the World; for every plant of Gods
planting, will grow, and fill the Earth with fruit, in due time, and what he
has not planted, will be rooted up. But how think ye, shall Quakerism, as ye
call it, be sweeped out of Gods Temple? has it then got place in Gods Temple
in New England? what is that Temple, is it your Presbyterian and Independent
Churches, or any part of them? Or how can Quakerism, which ye hold so
poisonous, that it destroys all men, and makes them who hold it to be No
Temple or Church of God, but Apostates and Infidels, Denyers of God and Christ,
etc. have any place in the Temple of God? But this is none of the least of your
many Contradictions.

CAP. I.
PAge 1, ye allege, That by my over-liberal Concessions I have given cause to
my Brethren, ^alled Quakers to judge of me as the Papists judge of Bellarmine
and Erasmus, who professing to be Catholics, yet yielded too much to the
Protestants. And p. 2. ye say, It is apparent that he has mig^^^ly betrayed
the cause he undertoo^ to patronize. But all his is but your bare affirmation,
without any proof; I have conceded to nothing but what both the hol^ Scriptures
and the Quakers Doctrine, rightly and duly understood, will bare me out in: I
should know the Quakers better than any of you, and their true Principles,
having been so long, and so much conversant with them, and in unity with them;
but ye neither rightly know the Quakers Doctrine nor them, and ye are not
willing to learn, but after the manner of all such as were declared Enemies to
the Christian Religion, ye charge false things upon them, which they no wise
hold, as Celsus and other Heathen Philosophers used to charge the ancient
Christians, to whose false Accusations Tertullian, Justin, Origin, Arnobius and
many others did solidly answer. And so, in your Imagination ye make a
ridiculous thing, and call it a Quaker, and then fight against it, being your
own shadow; yet this is not to justify any unsound words that possibly may
have dropped from some ignorant and unsound persons, called Quakers; for as ye
judge not your selves obliged to own any unsound words or practices of any
called Presbyterians or Independents, no more are we to own any or every thing
said or done by them who may be called Quaker^, or may call themselves so, but
yet are not one with us in spirit and doctrine. And seeing ye only mention G.
F. but cite none of his words, ye had as good done nothing; I know not wherein
I differ from G. F. in Doctrine, and ^ judge I know him much bett^r than ye: If
it were needful I could produce plain and evident Testimo^ies from my friends
printed Books long before mine, that my Doctrine is one with theirs: But what
does it advantage you? The design of my writing to you was to convince you of
Error, and that in a friendly way, if ye could have received it; and whatever
be the Doctrine of the Quakers, ye are concerned to answer to the things
charged against you, or confess your Error.

Page 4. Ye say of me, as if Benhadad seems to be risen again, citing 1 Kings
20.10. But as I am not Benhadad in the case, so nor are ye the King of Israel.

P. 5. Ye call my Epistle to the People of N. England, Paltry Stuff, but ye
only say it, and that is all, and this is most generally, or rather universally
your way, to say and dictate things Magisterially, without proof; and since it
is so, ye might have taken a more easy way, and as effectual, to have only
said, to every passage and argument in my Book, as it is reported, how one
refuted Bellarmine, saying only to every passage and period in his Book, Thou
lie, Bellarmine.

Ye say, ye have turned your Minds to the Light o^ Christ within you, as well
as ye can, and it tells you, that my assertions are bold, presumtious and
hereti^al. But ^ake heed of such ignorant Blasphemy, and cease your Mockage.
The Light of Christ within you, that I directed you, and all unto, is that
Light of divine Inspiration and Revelation which is common, in some measure,
unto you, and all men; but this ye do not believe, and therefore ye have not
turned your Minds unto it, nor hearkened to the voice of it. And whereas I
said, It is the same Spirit that gives to all Readers a right understanding of
Scripture, ye ask, Why then have not all the same understanding o^ it? but
contradictory, the answer is easy, because all do not duly believe in it, as
my following words make clear. Then ye accuse my following words, as guilty of
contradiction, because I said, If ye believe in Christ the Light, etc. and join
your minds to his inward divine Illumination, he will anoint the Eyes of your
Understanding, and then your Eyes shall be opened, which ye put this silly and
impertinent gloss upon, I^ ye will see of your selves, then ^e will give you
ability to see; and then ye scoffingly add, This may be no Contradiction in a
Quaker's Logic. But his is not my Logic, but your Perversion; for as blind as
ye are, ye are not altogether blind, as Christ said to the Pharisees, John
9.41. I ye were blind, ye should have no sin, etc. and if ye were faithful to
what ye already see and know, your Eyes should be further opened: And this i^
good sense, and no Contradiction; and what ye see or know of Truth, in the
least thing, ye see it not of your selves, but it is given you to see by that
Light, which ye blaspheme, calling it, Ignis Fatuus, and a stinking vapor from
Hell.

In page 6. ye allege a most abominable Falsehood upon me, as that I said in my
Epistle, That the quickening in a man, as it abides, it is impossible it should
perish. This is an absolute piece of Forgery, as much as ever Tho. Hicks coined
against W. Penn; I use no such words, and nothing but Malice can put such a
gloss upon my words, which are these, p. 5. of my Epistle, And every Soul that
is thus quickened and made alive unto him, as it does hold fast this beginning
(viz. of the good Work of God in it, etc.) and as it here abides, it is
impossible that it can perish: Where my words say, the SOUL cannot perish that
abides faithful, etc. And this is good sense, and well warranted by Scripture,
2 Pet. 1.10. For if ye do these things ye shall never fall; which according to
your absurd Logic is as if he had said, If ye never fall, ye shall never fall;
or if Grace continue, it cannot be lost; this Non-fence and Absurdity ye charge
upon me, is yours, and not mine.

Page 7. Because I said, the holy Scriptures are a sufficient outward Rul^ and
Standard, whereby to try all Doctrines of men, ye most grossly, (as is your
general manner) pervert my words, as if I did intimate, as if God taught us one
thing by his Word, and another by his Spirit; The contrary whereof I have
sufficiently asserted in my Book; for what the Scripture says outwardly, the
Spirit says the same inwardly, and the Testimony of these two, to wit, that of
the Scripture without, and that of Gods Spirit within, cannot differ or
disagree. Next, ye blame me for not making Practices, as well as Doctrines,
liable to this Test. I Answ. And so I do; for all commanded Practices of a holy
Life are contained under that head of Doctrines, for things to be done, as well
as things to be believed, are belonging to the Christian Doctrine, as the ten
Commandments, and all other Moral and Evangelical Precepts and Dutites
witnessed of in the holy Scriptures. And why ye should blame me for calling the
Scriptures an Outward Rule, shows your inclination more to Cavil than to
Dispute, as men of solid Reason: Are not the Scriptures an outward thing? and
if an outward thing, then an outward Rule, seeing they are a Rule, as is
confessed ^y us both; and Protestants commonly call the Scriptures the external
or outward Word, witness the Augustine Confession, published by Protestants,
Article 5. And is not the External Word the External Rule? and does not the
external or outward Word, intimate that there is an inward Word, that is the
inward Rule? and these two agree in one, and can never differ, as an inward
Dom^nstration of any natural Science, does ag^ee with the outward, set down in
w^it or print on Paper. And though I call the Scripture an outward Rule, yet I
deny not but it has a real service in the hand and management of the Spirit,
to regulate our inward Apprehensions and Conceptions of all Christian Doctrine,
as well as our outward words and Actions, and so it may be called an Organ^^al
and Instrumental Rule, in respect of the Spirit of God inwardly witnessing,
which is the principal. Nor do I in the least retract what I have said, as ye
weakly allege, when ^ ^ay, There are many things wherein God does reveal of
his Counsel to his Children, which are not in Scripture, either expressly or
consequentially, wherein I give a five fold instance at least, that though ye
cannot disprove, ye boldly, but Ignorantly contradict, contrary to the blessed
and solid Experience of Thousands; for these things instanced, as for a man to
know his inward state before God, etc. and for a Minister to know his inward
Call, and a Christian to know both his call to pray in vocal Prayer or in
Public, and returns o^ his Prayer from God in secret; they are no matters of
Christian Doctrine, belonging to the common Faith o^ common Duty of all
Christians, but only are relative to a Christians private Condition and
Consolation; for no Doctrine or Precept in all the Scripture requires me to
believe, or to know, whether many, or one by name, besides my self, be in a
justified state, etc. but it belongs to me in particular, and therefore it is no
part of the common Doctrine, or Faith, or Practice of the Christian Religion,
to believe for another, or others, but every one to believe for himself. And
that ye allege, p. 9. that Lucas should say, Any Quaker, if he ^as a mind to
it, may make as good a Book himself, as the Book of the holy Scriptures, is out
a fal^e alledgance, from a Fo^ger of Lies against the Truth, and is
sufficiently refuted by N. Lucas's ^^i^ted Declaration, solemnly denying, That
ever he so spoke or thought, printed in the Appendix of G. W. to W. P's Book,
called, Reason against Railing, being an Answer to Tho. Hick's Forgeries
against the Quakers, see p. 11. of the said Appendix. And whereas Henry Stout
was referred unto, as a witness against N. Lucas, he (...) And thus ye give
away your cause fairly; for that work of the Spirit is a real inward Evidence,
Word and Testimony, or Witness of a Truth, not contained in the Scripture,
neither expressly nor consequentially, viz. That A. B. or J. C. has the
in^allible Marks of a justified man; for whereas ye use to resolve your
assurance into a practical Syllogism, thus, Every one that has such infallible
Marks of a j^stified man, is justified, But A. B. has such infallible Marks,
Therefore A. B. is a j^stified Man. The which Practical Syllogism having two
Propositions, the first is warranted by Scripture, but the second is no where
warrant^d by any place of Scripture, viz. that A B. or J. A. or J. M. or S. W.
or C. M. has these infalli^le Marks. This is the only work of the Spirit,
which ye confess, is neither Scripture nor Scripture Consequence, and yet
discovers a great Truth, and very swee^ and precious to such who have it; and
though the Scripture be instrumental to warrant the first Proposition, yet we
find no Scripture to warrant the second, viz. that A. B. or any of you have
such infallible Marks; or if ye have any such Scripture warrant, produce it,
otherwise acknowledge your rash undertaking.

The second Instance, that refers to an inward Call to the Ministry, ye reject,
and say, It runs upon the same fool^sh Notion with the former. Ye say it,
indeed, and that is all, but say nothing to prove it to be so; yea, by your
saying it, ye show what sort of Ministers ye are, to wit, That ye are no
Ministers of the Spirit of God, which is inwa^d in all his true Ministers, and
as he is inward, and inwardly in-dwelling, so his Call and Motion is inwardly
revealed.

And though ye make a great noise, as if ye were mighty Defenders of the
Christian and Protestant Doctrine, against the Quakers in these and other
things, ye the Q^akers, so called, are the best Christians an Protestants in
these very Doctrine; ^or have not many Protestant Ministers, who never had any
outward Call from Pope, or Clergy, or People, alleged the inward Call of God
in their hearts, to the work of the Ministry, as well as the inward assistance
^f the Spirit of God in the exercise of it, which yet h^th no Scripture to
prove, that such a particular man has it. Calvin in his Institutions says
expressly, That God did raise up in his Day, if not Prophets and Apostles, yet
Evangelists, to reform the Church. And Luther declaring his inward Call to the
Ministry, says, He was (as it were) tugged by his Hair to the Office of the
Ministry, see cap. 1. page 11. Mensal. And surely this was an inward call, and
had great inward sensible evidence. And cap. 11. p. 19. of Gods Word, he says,
Sectaries and Seducers know to preach much of Christ, but seeing they feel him
not in their hearts, they leave the right ground of the Ministry. Again, p. 3.
c. 1. he cites diverse Scriptures to prove, That God and the holy Spirit
speaks now in true Ministers of Christ, as he did in the Prophets and
Apostles, as where Christ said, It is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your
Father, which speaks in you; and where Peter said, Holy men of God spoke as
they were moved by the holy Ghost. Both which place, with others, Luther
applies to true Ministers in his day; and yet when we commonly bring these
places, the common answer of Presbyterians and Independents, is, That these
places of Scripture were fulfilled to the Prophets and Apostles, but not to any
men in our days. And though ye upbraid the Quakers Doctrine with Novelty, yet in
the former instance concerning a man's being assured infallibly of his Election
and eternal Salvation, as the Testimony of the Scripture is for us, so of
Antiquity; for Augustine says expressly, lib. 11. de Civit. dej. c. 12. What
man knows, that he shall finally pe^severe in the Action and Progress of
Righteousness, unless he be certain by some Revelation from him, who does not
teach all of this thing, by his just and secret judgment, but deceives no man.
Where it is plain, that according to A^gustine, who lived above 1200 years ago,
That all who begin in true Piety, do not persevere; and That no man can know
that he shall persevere, without divine inward Revelation. In both which he
contradicts you, and confirms the Doctrine of the People called Quakers:
And yet, though Augustine be a Saint in your esteem, the Quakers for holding
the same thing, must be Apostates, and no charity allowed them to be
Christians. And as noted and well accounted Protestants say the same with us,
as Grotius, and the Remonstrants generally, who are all better Protestants in
Doctrine than your selves, whether ye will acknowledge it or not. I had not
meddled to cite any other Authors but Scriptures, but that ye would needs be so
impertinent as to state the Debate betwixt you and us, as if the Quakers
Doctrine were a mere Novelty, and only ne^ly started up to undermine the
Protestant Doctrine. Whereas we have more and better Protestants with us, than
ye have. Ye had done better not to have brought the Controversy ^o this issue,
as if the Quakers were not P otestants, when we can easily prove our Doctrine,
in all these twelve Particulars, to be warranted by Protestants, of better and
more famous account than your selves.

In my Third Instance, ye pervert my words, after your wonted manner, saying,
p. 14. That I hold, men are to tarry for an inward call to pray, or perform any
Religious Duty. But I did not say so, but that every true Christian should know
his inward Call to pray or give thanks, from Psalm. 27.8. which ye wholly pass
by unanswered. Now to Know the inward call is one thing, and to Tarry for it,
is another; some inward calls are to be waited for, as when a duty is not
always required of a man, but only at certain times, as vocal Prayer, etc. But
all such Duties as are continually required of us to be done at all times, as
To believe in God, To love God, To fear him, yea, and continually to pray unto
him with inward breathings and desires, have a continual inward call and
command, that needs to be known, although it is given, and no man should
suppose it will be wanting to him to do every thing that is his continual Duty.

Page 16. Ye say, Ye deny not but the Spirit of God does still put an impulse
on the Spirits of his People frequently, but ye query, Is it self-evident, or
must not the warrantableness of it be tried by Scripture rules? I Answ. It is
self-evident, and yet may be tried by the warrantableness of Scriptu^e Rules;
but the warrantableness of a practice does not prove in the least the impulse
or m^tion to be divine; for a wrong or evil Spirit may move a man to do a thing
that is not unlawful or unwarrantable in it self, as to take a Journey from
England to America, and yet if he obey such a motion or impulse, he should not
do well, and might suffer great hurt thereby. And if a divine impulse have no
self-evidence, or some inward self-evidencing Light to discover it to be
divine, it is good for nothing, for it leaves a man still in the dark, and at
uncertainty; surely Gods inward leadings are sure and certain, as thousands to
Gods praise can witness against all your ignorant, but presumptious Assertions,
without ^^l Proof And ye say, I tell you, that Phillip, Peter, and others, were
extraordinaryly called to such and such Services; where ye pervert my words;
for I do not say of these particular Services mentioned by me there, that they
were extraordinarily called un^o them; for to go to a place, or Persons, to
preach the Gospel, is no extrao^dinary, but ordinary inward Call of Gods
Servants in all Ages, though Peter, and the other Apostles, had in other cases
extraordinary Calls and Revelations.

That place in James 4.15. If the Lord will, ye u^derstand it only of divine
Providence, permitting any man to do what he wi^leth, if not forbidden in
Scripture. But as this is merely begged by you, without all proof, but your
bare affirmation, so it is altogether absurd; for how many do rash and hurtful
things both to themselves and their Families, which yet are not forbidden by
Scripture, as for a man to leave one place, and remove to another beyond Seas,
is not forbidden in Scripture, and yet if he undertake such a thing, merely
because divine Providence does not outwardly stop him, by some cross event,
without the inward sense and approbation of divine will, inwardly permitting or
allowing him, he may have cause to repent it all his daye^; for many by so
doing, have fallen into great Inconven^encies. Ye are miserable comforters that
will not allow to People that privilege, that they may wait to know Gods
divine good Will and Approbation in their hearts, in their removals from one
place to another, and in other weighty concerns of this Life. And as concerning
Marriages, ye do allow People to ask Gods mind and counsel with whom to join in
Marriage, and if they are not to expect a return of their Prayers, otherwise
than a bare outward permission of divine Providence: What is this but to mock
God, and deceive poor People? But to Gods praise many can say, they have both
sought and received Gods counsel, with whom to join in Marriage, and because
thereof have found their Marriage made both blessed and comfortable unto them
in the midst of all Trials.

Page 17. Ye call my saying, That God answers the returns of the Prayers of his
People, etc. A Quakerism, i. e. Nonsense; I pity your Ignorance, and want of
Experience. May not the frequent and reiterated Prayers of his People, for the
same thing, be called, the Returns of their Prayers? as when a Child returns
again and again to seek a thing of his Father; and that God answers these
reiterated and returning Prayers, as in Paul's Case, who Prayed for one thing
thrice, thousands can witness, though to you this is Nonsen^e, because ye have
neither sense nor salt in your selves to descern it; It is a great
encouragement to pray unto God, that we find him to answer us by his living
voice and speech in us; and when God speaks to us Scripture words or promises
by his living voice and speech in us, it is a new Revelation and divine
Inspiration to us, although not of any new doctrine, for there may be thousands
of new and distinct Revelations of the same Doctrine, as there may be a
thousand sights and eyes beholding the same thing, and a thousand Voices
speaking the same thing, and all these Voices are new and distinct, and yet the
thing spokon is one and the same, and Ancient, and not New.

Page 18. That the word of the Lord grew and multiplied, ought to be understood
as well extensively, in respect of multitude of living Testimonies, as
Intensively, in respect of Efficacy; for there was both at that time; and
though there was no new Doctrines, yet there were new, and that manifold and
frequent living Testimonies to the same Doctrine; and therefore the Word it
self was properly increased and multiplied.

Ye blame me for saying, Christ and his Apostles expounded the scriptures by
Inspiration, and yet taught no new Doctrine* but it seems ye have forgot that
Paul said the same, Acts 26.22. for all that Christ and the Apostles taught and
enjoined, was either declared or foretold by the Prophets long before;
therefore the Doctrine was the same for substance, and the Gospel was preached
to Abraham, and to the Prophets, but after Christ's Resurrection, the
Dispensation of it was more clear, and full.

Page 19. ye blame me for Charging that upon you in the 12th Article which ye
never believed, much less pro^essed, viz. that the Scriptures ought to be
believed only for their own outward evidence and Testimony, and not for the
inward Evidence and Testimony of the holy spirit in men's hearts. But in this ye
are equally impertinent, as in most other things, as I have showed in my Answer
to Cotton Mather, to which I refer more at large. Ye say, The scripture is the
only Rule o^ Faith, and has a Self-evidence, but the inward Testimony and
Witness of the Spirit has no Self-evidence, but as some have called it, Medium
incognitum assentiendi, i. e. and unknown middle or mean of assenting; and that
ye deny all Inspiration and Revelation, properly so called, all this proves
you guilty in the sight of all impartial men, for to talk of an evidence or
witness among men, that has not a certainty or Self-evidencing Authority in
it, by it self, is absurd and illegal; he who is a witness or evidence among
men must not borrow his evidence from another; and to say the Spirit of God in
his inward teaching and illumination has no proper and self evidence, as it
derogates from the Glory of it, so it is as absurd as to say, the Suns light at
noon day has no evidence of its own, but men must light a Candle to let people
see the suns light at noon; This is rare Logic of yours.

Ye insinuate, I se^k out more senses of the word Logos than it can bear,
without Tautologi s; but if these be Tautologies the English Translation of the
bible has made them, and not I, and yet a true difference can be assigned by
School-boyes, betwixt Communication, as pass^ng betwixt two or more, and words
of talk and speech, that may be of one, when none does answer.

Page 20. ye will have the word of God compared to Bread, Rain and Dew, only
for the efficacy o^ it, and not for the extent and plenty of it; but for this
we have your bare authority, contrary both to Scripture and Experience of
thousands, who witness the Word of God plentifully to dwell in them, like to
the drops of Rain and Dew for plenty of the divine droppings and showerings of
it, as well as for efficacy.

Ye grant, The Scriptures are both by Metaphor and Metonyme called the Words
and Word of God; and in so doing ye give away your cause unto the Quakers, for
we say the same, although the great outcry has been against us, that we do
not allow the Scriptures to be properly and without all figure of metaphor or
metonyme, the words and word of God: And since ye thus agree with us, I see not
how ye can call us Apostates for gainsaying you in this particular.

Page 21. Ye say, I confound the Metonymie officientis with a Metonyme signi:
but I say ye prevaricate; for I neither mention the one nor the other, but the
examples brought by me signify both these kinds of Metonyme without confusion,
for Moses books are called Moses, by the Metonyme Efficientis, and Isaiah his
book is called his vision, by the Metonyme Signi.

CAP. II.
I Shall briefly take notice of your Perversions and Omissions in this Chapter,
and so proceed to the end; for it is but wasting time and paper, both which are
to be better bestowed than to follow you at large.

Ye disown the word Inspiration, as given in our days, Page 22. wherein, as ye
are singular, so ye are inferior to the Church of England, who for all your
pretense to spirituality of Worship, and Praying by the spirit, yet are short
of them; for they, in diverse places of the Common Prayer, pray for Inspiration,
and the Scots Confession of Faith, in John Knox's days, says expressly, That
Faith is the Inspiration of the holy Ghost: And therefore your Ignorance and
Prejudice does here plainly appear, and instead of defending the Protestant
Religion ye but betray it and ^onounce it; for sober Protestants, both
Epis^opal and Presbyterian do own Inspiration which ye plainly deny.

Page 23. The Scriptures that both ^he Assembly and ye cite, That divine
In^pirations and Revelations are ceased, to wit, of Ancient Doctrine (for we
plead for no New Doctrines) are wholly from your purpose, as 2 Timothy 3.6, 17.
Heb. 1.1, 2. and Prove. 2.19. or any others; for notwithstanding all these
Scriptures, divine Inspirations, and new internal divine Revelations continued
in the Church after all this, in and with the Apostles. But ye grossly
pre^^ricate, by your unfair way of answering, That there was no New Revelation
of any New Doctrine, or New Doctrinal Truth; And thus ye think to elude my
Arguments before the Eyes of ignorant Readers. But this mean Art of yours will
not do, for ye fight against your own Shadow, and not against our Doctrine; for
we assent no New Revelation of any New Doctrine, but of the Ancient Doctrine
abundantly delivered to the Prophets and Apostles; but as their Faith could not
save us, so nor could their inward Inspiration and Revelation.

Page 27. Ye blame me, for pleading for extraordinary Revelations, such as the
Apostles had; which is a gross Perversion, and plain Contradictory to my words;
for I told you, that the distinction of Ordinary and Extraordinary Revelation,
may in a true fence well be admitted, and the Prophets and Apostles had both
ordinary and extraordinary; we plead for the ordinary Revelations they had
common to them, with other Saints, but not for the extraordinary they had;
whereas your Confession denies all sort of Revelation.

Again, ye blame me for confounding Inspiration, Revelation and Illumination;
but I say, they are one and the same thing, and it is great Nonsense to
separate or divide them; and all the differences betwixt them that ye allege,
are merely begged and affirmed, but not in the not least proved. Ye should
remember, ye are not now in the pulpits, where people take things on trust for
your bare Authority, but that your Book is gone abroad; ye should bring better
Proofs than bare Assertions. 1st, Ye say, Ill^mination is common to all
Believers, Inspiration is peculiar to some: But this last is denied, not only
by us, but by the Church of England, and the Scots Confession of Faith in John
Knox's days, and by the general sense of ancient Writers, especially Augustine,
who frequently mentions Inspiration in his Works. 2dly, Ye say, Illumination
ordinarily accompanies the diligent use of the means; Inspirations, ye say,
usually come upon men, without using any means for them. But this second
distinction is also merely begged; Illuminations and Inspirations come ^t times
with the outward means, and at times without them, and yet not without all
means, very frequently even outward; for both the Prophets and Apostles used
means to prepare them to receive divine Inspirations and Revelations, and in
the use of means received them frequently; for Acts 10. while Peter went up
upon the house top to pray, about the sixth hour, he had a divine Revelation;
and when Peter preached to Cornelius, and others, the holy Ghost fell upon
them; and as they ministered to the Lord, and fasted, to wit, certain Prophets
and Teachers, Acts 13.2. the holy Ghost said, Separate me Paul and Barnabas,
etc. It is great ignorance, and want of Experience in divine Mysteries, to
think, that divine Inspirations and Revelations are without all means, or tend
to make either outward or inward means void and useless; for commonly and
generally, all ordinary divine Revelations come in the use of some means or
another, as hearing, reading, prayer, meditation, watching, and silent inward
waiting, all which are means, and most especially and always in the exercise
of true Obedience unto God. Your 3d Distinction is to as little purpose, viz.
That Illumination becomes habitual, but Inspiration is transient; for if by
Habitual ye understand permanent and abiding, Illuminations and Inspirations
may be, and are permanent, of some sorts, and of other sorts transient or
passing. Your 4th Distinction is also vain and idle, as that illumination
increases grad^ally, but not so Inspiration; for they may and do increase or
decrease, according to the various kinds of them, and he who is faithful to God
may expect his Inspirations daily to be increased, and continued with him.
Lastly, Ye say, Illumination is always understood, whenas Inspirations
sometimes are not understood; but no more is Illumination always und^rstood;
yea, how many have a divine Illumination, and yet understand it not? and ye
your selves deny that Illumination has a Self-evidence, so th^n it would be
objective Revelation, and fit to be the Rule of Faith and Life, which ye deny,
saying, the Scripture is the ONLY Rule.

Page 28. The Saint. Experience of inwa^d enjoyments of God and Christ, beyond
all words, warranted from 1 Cor. 2.9, 10. Ye call, a Rapsody in commendation o^
our silent Meetings; but this is a poor evasion and answet to so weighty a
place of Scripture, with diverse others adjoined; But blind men cannot judge of
Colors.

Page 29. My Comparison taken from the outward teaching of humane Sciences,
that presuppose some inward Principles of natural Knowledge in the Learners,
whereby to show the consistency and harmony of outward teaching of divine
things, and the inward teaching by the Spirit, as presupposed in part, and in
the other part accompanying the outward Teaching, ye understand it not, and
therefore ye call it Impertinent, but impertinently talk against it; for I do
not intend by the same to hold forth any New Revelation of any new Doctrine, as
I have often to^d you, but a new Revelation of ancient Doctrine; and the
comparison is proper and pertinent in this respect, that as outward teaching of
natural things require an inward Principle and light of Knowledge, that is
natural, so the outward teaching of spiritual and divine things require an
inward Principle of divine and spiritual Knowledge, whereby to enable the Soul
to perceive them, otherwise a man could be no more capable to know divine and
spiritual things, than a Beast would be capable to know humane things; for as
the spirit of a man teaches man things of men, so the Spirit of God in men,
teaches them, who hearken thereto, the things of God.

Page 31. Ye blame me for putting a scurrelous Title upon that ye call the
reverend Assembly, calling them Faith-makers, who never pretended to any new
Revelations of any article of Faith, more than is contained in Scripture. But
as they pretend not to that, so nor to any new Revelation or Inspiration of
that Doctrine which is contained in Scripture, and that is their great fault to
deny all such Revelation, even of that Doctrine there contained; for without
divine inward Revelation and Inspiration, the true Faith of the Doctrines
contained in Scripture cannot be discovered, no more than we can see to read
what is printed in a Book without light; and therefore their Faith is but a
made Faith, and also that in the ignorance and blindness of their minds they
have made things Articles of Faith, which are false, and contrary to Scripture,
and therefore I am not to be blamed for so calling them.

Page 33. By your granting, That there is a spiritual ^eeling and tasting, and
intuitive Knowledge of God and divine things, ye give away your cause to the
Quakers, and contradict your grand Principle, That there is no divine Immediate
Revelation; for intuitive knowledge is immediate, and immediate knowledge must
have an immediate Light and Revelation, as when I see a picture of a man in a
Table, or read a discourse of him in a Book, that knowledge of him is only
abstractive and discursive, as also when I see England only in a Map, and that
is but remote and mediate knowledge; but when I see a man face to face in the
clear light of the day, and see the Land of England it self, that Knowledge is
Immediate and Intuitive. But tell me in good earnest, do ye indeed grant, that
there is an Intuitive Knowledge of God, that is not discursive and abstractive,
that is, certainly to see God, and to hear him, without a necessity of the
interposition of words, or other means? I am sure this is Immediate Revelation,
and I am as sure that ye commonly deny it, and tell People, They shall no^ hear
God, nor see him in this mortal Life; for the vision of God is r^served to the
future life, as ye use to say. But ye say and unsay the same thing, a vice ye
charge upon me, but are guilty therein yourselves. And granti^g it be so, that
we have no Intuitive Knowledge of any divine Truth, whereof we had not a
discursive Knowledge before, this says nothing against our Principle, no more
than that a man first has a discursive knowledge of England, before he see it.
We grant, the discursive k^owledge is serviceable, and commonly introductory to
the intuitive, and yet both may consist together, though the intuitive
excels the discursive, as far as the sight of the Land of England excels
the sight of the bare Map of it. Discursive Knowledge cannot be without words,
or pictures of things, and signs of them, but Intuitive Knowledge can be
without all words and sign; and now if ye grant that men have a knowledge of
God, and Christ, and divine Things, without all words, i. e. without the
Scripture, ye fairly give away your cause; for if without Scripture, then
surely by Immediate Revelation; for the Scriptures are the means ye say,
altogether necessary to obtain all the knowledge of God that any have, or can
have in this mortal Life. But for the better Information of the Reader, I say,
the Scriptures are the usual necessary means (in God's ordinary way of working)
whereby men obtain the Doctr^nal and Disc^^sive Knowledge of the Christian
Faith and Religion. And seeing the doctrinal and discursive Knowledge is of
great service to prepare the Souls of men for the intuitive and sensible
Knowledge o^ God, that comes after, that is, an immediate enjoyment of him, a
taste and sight of him, that he is good and gracious; and also, seeing this
intuitive and sensible knowledge of God is gradual, and is to increase in the
most advanced, and that the doctrinal knowledge has still a preparatory
service to the same, it follows, that the holy Scriptures have a preparatory
service and use to Gods Saints, while in the mortal Body; yet in so far as the
end of this preparatory service is answered, by the Souls obtaining some degree
of that intuitive and sensible knowledge of God, by the sight and taste of him,
as inwardly revealed in and through Christ, that immediate ^ervice and need of
the Scripture, cease, in respect of that degree of intuition, sight, taste,
and sensible knowledge of God, that the Soul has for that present time; even
as when a Husbandman uses many means and instruments of Husbandry, to procure
Bread, and other good Provisions for himself, the use of these means and
instruments are always necessary at times, and that frequently; but there are
times that he enjoys the fruits of his labors, that he eats, and drinks,
and is refreshed; and when he sits down to eat and drink (...) his Table, he
needs not, in those intervals of time, to use his instruments of Husbandry,
as the Plow, the Cart, the Hoe, etc. nor so much as at that time to think of
them: And thus it is as touching the use and service of the Scriptures, and
other outward helps and means, the use, and service, and profit of them is
great to all the Saints and Children of God, in this mortal life, to the end of
it, even as the use of the Instruments of Husbandry is to the Husbandman; but
yet there are times of feeding in the House of God, where the Souls of the
faithful, either together or apart, eat of the heavenly Bread, and drink of the
heavenly Wine in the House and Kingdom of God; and these times are frequent;
and at such times the need of Scripture words, and of all words that consist of
Letters, do cease; as when a man eats Bread and drinks Wine, and has his
taste well, he needs no words to tell him of the taste of it, he tastes it
without all words that the mouth can utter; and even so, the Children of God at
times, yea, frequently taste of the goodness and sweetness of Christ, by an
inward sensible taste, without all Scripture words, and without all present
remembering of them, yet if at such times the Spirit of God brings them to
their remembrance, they have a service, at least t^ ^ncrease the doctrinal and
discursive knowledge of God in them, and further to open the Mysteries of the
Christian Doctrine, which is a great gift and blessing of God in its place.

Page 34. Ye allege, I introduce an Hypothesis that is a Castle in the Air,
that they say, there is no sensible or intuitive knowledge of God in this Life.
But I say, many or most of you expressly deny it, I mean, most of these called
Presbyterians and Independents, as I have had to do with them before now, who
have told me, There is no sensible knowledge of God at ^^ll, no sight, nor
feeling, nor taste of him, and they give a reason for it, viz. That only bodily
things could be seen, felt and tasted; but God being a Spirit, could neither be
felt nor tasted; and though the Scri^ture use these words of seeing, tasting a
and fe^ling, they say, they are as improper and metaphorical as when it is said
in Scripture, God has Eyes, Hands and Feet, etc. Again, though ye seem to
affirm it, yet it is in contradiction to your selves; for it is an absolute
Contradiction to say, A man has a sight of God, and taste and feeling of him,
and yet has no immediate discovery and knowledge of him; as much as to say, I
see and taste Wine, and yet I have no immediate discovery or knowledge of it:
All sensible knowledge is immediate, in regard of their Objects.

P. 34. Ye blame me that I say, ye preach altogether an absent Christ; but ye
wrong and pervert my words, as your manner is; my word^ are, p. 36. They preach
altogether an absen^ Christ, as some of them say, Christ is not really and
properly in his People; or if present, a Christ altogether dumb and silent,
etc. So ye see, my words are not positive, but dis-junctive or alternative. But
if I did say so, it is according to your own Doctrine, though ye seem to
contradict again; for do ye not generally accuse the Quakers for setting up a
false Christ, because they preach him present, and in his Saints, yea, and in
all men, in some respect* and as Pardon Tillinghast and Benj. Keech cal^ Christ
in the heart a false Christ; so John Owen whom ye esteem your reverend Brother,
in his Latin Treatise against us, answered by Sam. Fisher, says, If Christ be
in every Quaker, there are as many Christ, as Quakers. So you may see I do not
wrong you; and your Assembly ye so much honor, say, It is blasphemy to say,
the Saints are partakers of the Godhead. And this is to exclude Christ with a
witness. And if some of you say, God and Christ are in the Saints, yet ye deny
all immediate discovery, sight and revelation of them, objective, or by way of
object, which is as great Nonsense as to say, A Man converseth with his Wife
in one House, eats, drinks, lodges with her, and has fellowship with her,
and yet she has no immediate sight nor knowledge of him, which she must needs
have, if she be not blind, senseless and stupid; and it is a most palpable
Contradiction in you to say, Men have a^ intuitive and sensible knowledge of
God, that is distinct in specie from discursive knowl^dge, and yet God and his
Spirit, in all his inward operations, gives no self-evidence thereof, but is
medium incognitum assentiendi, i. e an unknown mean or Principle of assenting,
as the Schoolmen phrase it, particularly Robert Baron, Professor of Divinity
at Aberdeen, in his Book, called, Apodixis Catholica de formali objecto fidei,
against Jesuit Turnbul, more particularly cited in my Book of Immedi^te
Revelation.

Page 37. The different degrees of Revelation, well warranted by Scripture, ye
blasphemously and ignorantly call Rabbinical Fopperies: That there is not only
a gradual but specifical difference of divine Revelations, I never denied.

CAP. III.
I Intend throughout principally to notice your gross Perversions, and other
gross Abuses and Mistakes, which will in effect sufficiently answer all ye have
said, and leave my Book, and the evidence of Truth held forth in it, remaining
in its full force and strength against you, and the rather, that the principal
Controversies, viz. That o^ the Scriptures, and That of inward divine
Revelation and Inspiration, i^ the more fully already here handled; for indeed
these two are the Basis and Pillars of the following Controversies.

Page 36. Ye pervert my words, as if I did affirm, That the Scriptures only
were a Rule to try Doctrines betwixt men and men. But I neither mean nor say
any such thing. I believe they are a Rule in the hand and management of the
Spirit, to regulate our inward apprehensions and thoughts concerning all
Christian Doctrines, and yet the Spirits inward Witness is the greater Rule.

Page 39. Ye say, To call the Spirit the Rule, ^ Nonsense. I say, to call the
Spirit (not abstractly, but) conjunctly with his inward witnessing and
speaking, is good sense to all, but such as you, who have not sense to
understand it. Ignatius, as I have said above, a more worthy man and precious
Martyr of Jesus, Ep. 14. to Ephesians. called the holy Spirit one Rule.

CAP. IV.
Page 41. Ye own, That natural and acquired Gifts of Letter Learning, (without
a divine Inspiration) are sufficient to qualify a Gospel Minister; and that
Grace and true Piety is only accidental; which, ye confess, may look black at
first view. It is so far well, that since this is your Doctrine, that we have
it under your hand, and it deserves to be engraven in Capital Letters on the
Doors of your Meeti^g Houses, that the People may generally know it; for very
many to whom I have told it could not believe it to be your Doctrine; but
however, now it is a good proof th t y^ print it as yours. Another saying of
yours, equally famous, and which deserves the same equal inscription in
Capital Letters, is, that ye say, It is no absurdity, that a man may be a true
Minister, and not a true C^ristian. But how then can he beget any unto God? If
he who is no true Christian can beget a true Christian by his Ministry, it will
as easily follow, That he who is no man may beget a man; for as in spiritual
generation, a man is but the Instrument, so in the natural, when a man begets a
man child, God is the great Maker and principal Cause, and man the Instrument.
But though ye would make the ignorant multitude believe, that your Doctrine in
this is Protestant Doctrine, yet I say it is Popish, and ye have no other
Argument but the Papists Arguments to defend it, to wit, some Perversions and
false Glosses of some Scripture places, as, The Pharisees sit in Moses 's
C^air, etc. But Luther, who is judged, as it were, the Father of the
Protestants, and whose followers were first called Protestants, hold with the
Quakers against you, and called them Sectaries and Seducers that know how to
preach much of Christ* but feel him not in their hearts, cap. 1. p. 19. Men's.
^s noted above. To my Arguments against an impious Ministry, who have no true
Piety, ye answer little, but with a strong Denial, and so may any child or fool
give a denial to the strongest A^guments that can be b^ought; And seeing ye
plead so expressly, That an Impious Ministry is God's Ordinance, to wit, such as
have no true Piety, it is no wonder that New England abounds with such impious
Ministers, for this Doctrine opens a door unto them.

Page 42. Ye deny, Tha^ God gives you infallible Rules, ordinarily and
immediately, whereby to know men's hearts. It may be granted, they are not given
to you, because ye believe not that which gives a true discerning; but that
Gods People, who are made alive unto him, and begot into his Image, being
Children of one Father, and having his seal upon them, are known one to
another, where due watchfulness and diligence is used, and that kept in which
gives the true discerning, is not only a Christian Doctrine and Experience,
but has been the experience of some Presbyterian Ministers, in their purest
times, above seventy Years ago; witness The fulfilling of the Scriptures, a
Book set out by a zealous Presbyterian not v^ry long ago, who relates, how
Robert Bruce, a Presbyterian Preacher in Edinbrough in Scotland, had a spirit
of discerning, by which he freely declared to Robert Blair, That though his
Sermon was elaborate, yet it had not the Spirit of God, although the Doctrine
wa^ not blamed by him. And I have often heard them say one to another, Let us go
hear such a man, he is a living man, and has a lively and powerful Ministry;
and of others they would say, They were dead and dry. And seeing one living man
can know another naturally, why cannot one spiritual man know another living
spiritual ^an, spiritually? a Sheep can know a Sh^ep, and a Dove a Dove, and a
Man can know a Man, and yet a Saint cannot know a Saint, by your Logic, viz.
certainly and infallibly. And as to the word Immediately, used by you, I say, a
Saint may know a Saint as immediately and infallibly, as a man may know a
living man, to wit, he knows him to live by immediate Motions, and workings of
Life, that immediately reach to his natural Senses, and he sees him breathe,
and heare^h ^im speak with strength of natural Life, and ^h^t his discourse has
Wisdom and Reason in it; so a Saint or spiritual man may and does know another
Saint or spiritual man by immediate motions and operations of spiritual Life
that immediately reach to his spiritual Senses; and it is the divine
Inspiration of the Spirit of Life that makes a spiritual man, and g^veth him
both these spiritual Senses, and the infallible use of them.

Page 42. Ye say, The Apostles never pretended to a Spirit of Discerning. If ye
mean, to know all the secrets of men's hearts, I did not affirm it; but that
they had a knowledge of the sincerity of some, and of the insincerity of
others, is most clear from many places of the New Testament; for did not Paul
most positively affirm of some particular Names, That they were writ in the
Book of Life? And did not Peter know, and that by a spirit of discerning, the
dissimulation of Ananias and Saphira? And that they might be deceived before
they received the holy Ghost, in that plenty, as after Christ's Resurrection,
or even after, in some particular men, argues nothing against the infallible
sense and discerning where it is given; all it proves, is, that they had not
always the perfect exercise of it. The natural Senses are infallible, touching
natural Objects, not absolutely but according to such due conditions; and so
the spiritual Senses, according to their due conditions, have their
Infallibility.

And whereas I showed in my Book, That neither the example o^ the Pharisees,
nor o^ Judas could defend a Ministry, without Piety, because the Pharisees and
Judas were yet under the legal Dispensation. But ^he question relate^ to the
Gospel Dispensation, in its more clear and perfect discovery, after Christ's
Resurrection; this ye slightly pass, telli^g, That the Gospel was preached in
the time of the Law. But yet the Dispensation and Model was changed, as ye
confess; and as there was a change in many things, as the Sacrifices and
Circumcision, etc. so of the Priesthood, and manner of it.

Ye insinuate falsely against us, That Hypocrites may be infallibly known by
their mere looks.

Page 44. That a man may have Piety, and real Sanctification, and yet not have
a ministerial and spiritual Gi^t of Knowledge and V^terance, so as to be able
to teach others, is granted: but yet whoever have these spiritual Gifts, have
in some measure the Grace of Sanctification, which is the root of them; ^ven as
every Schoolmaster is a man, but every man is not a Schoolmaster; every man
is a living Creature, but every living Creature is not a man. Unsanctified
Gifts that any may pretend unto, are not spiritual, but carnal, and are not so
worthy as to be esteemed the f^uit of Christ's purchase. Your saying, Ye have
too much cause to be persuaded by Scripture Rules, that G. K. is an Apostate,
and unsanctified man, I little regard, your Tongue is not slander, ye know me
not, and ye pretend to no infallible discerning of me, and therefore by your
confession ye may be mistaken; and ye neither have given not can give any
Scripture Rules to prove me such. Men of your spirit called the Lord a
Blasp^emer, a Glutton and a Wine bibber, and therefore it is no strange thing
that ye ca^l me as ye do; but my comfort is, that I am known to God, and to
many of his Servants; and this your Reviling and false Speeches will turn to my
good, and to your hurt and shame, if ye repent not, which I wish ye may.

Page 45. Ye say, Ye do not plead for scandalous Ministers, whose Conversation
is contradictory to their Profession and Doctrine. But by this ye fall into a
gross Self-contradiction; for did ye not plead your Doctrine from the example
of the Pharisees, whose Conversation was contradictory to their Doctrine; for
Christ said, They did not as they said: Ye blame me unjustly of forge^fulness,
but are exceeding guilty of it your selves, and much worse. And besides, the
Qualifications required in a true Bishop or Preacher, do equally require him to
be really holy, and pious, and virtuous, as to seem or appear so to be, 1 Timothy
3.1. Tit. 1.7, 8. A Bishop must be blameless, etc. sober, just, holy,
temperate, etc. he does not say, let him be a Hypocrite, only let him seem to
be so, but let him be so.

Page 48. Ye say, Grace has a spiritual sense, and when the Spirit of God
influenceth it, it can feel it. Ye need to explain this further, how Grace
feels the influence of the Spirit; is Grace an intelligent perceiving and
intellectual being? does not the Soul feel it, or is it only the Grace that is
sensible of the Spirits influence, and the Soul insensible and stupid? If a
Quaker had so expressed himself, ye would have called it Nonsense.

My application of H b. 12.27. to things of men's maki^g, though ye call it most
gross, it is but your bare affirmation; for why may not things of men's making,
be comprehended under thing made, as well as the things of the old Law, which
though first appointed of God, yet seeing men did seek to hold them up beyond
their due season, they were nothing as such, but beggarly Rudiments, and things
of men's making; and Christ said, Every plant that is not of my heavenly Fathers
planting, must be pulcked up; and every work o^ man wro^ght, and not in the
Wisdom, Spirit and Power of God, shall be burnt up.

Page 49. Ye grossly and most falsely accuse the Quakers, That they confound the
witness of Gods Spirit, and their own Spirit. This is utterly false.

Page 50. Ye say, The Spirit, when he witnes^th, does it infallibly, yet he
does not make our Spirits infallible. Here ye use a little fallacy, but it is a
very thin fig-leaf, and will not cover your Nakedness; for though he does not
make the spirits of his Children absolutely and in all respects infallible, yet
when he speaks to the spirits and hearts of his Children infallibly, and
fitteth and prepares them to hear it and understand it, have they not so far,
i^ that particular thing or things, an infallible knowledge and assurance? for
even among men, he who tells me an infallible truth, as that the Sun is risen,
and I hear him tell it, and my sense of hea^ing i^ sound, I can say, I did
infallibly hear him; for to say, the Spirit is only infallible to himself, but
gives us no infallible knowledge and ^aith of what he says, is most ab^ur^;
for all that true and real Knowledge and Faith that God gives to men is
infallible; and to think otherwise reflects upon Gods goodness, wisdom and
veracity; for why should the infallible God give men only a fallible knowledge?
Well then, let it so remain, that your Doctrine is, All the Knowledge and Faith
that ye have of God, and Christ, and Christian Doctrine, is fallible, and may
deceive you, and be only a fancy or dream: How will this relish to sober
Pro^estants? Is not this rather, with a witness, to betray the cause of the
Protestants, than to defend it? But in contradiction again, though ye say, The
Witness of your Spirit is fallibl^, and ye may be mistaken, yet so far as the
Spirit of god confirms you by his Witness, ye are infallibly assured. What
greater Contradiction can there be in men's words, first to say, The Spirit of
God witness^th infallibly, but your Spirits are not infallible. Again, ye say,
Ye are infallibly ass^red, so far a^ the Spirit o^ God co^fi^ms you by his
Witness. So in one thing, and at one time, and in one and the same respect ye
^re fallible, and yet not fallible: This Logic is fittest for Bedlam. But ye
tell not whether the Spirit of God at any time confirms you of any Truth by his
inward infallible Witness; for if ye grant this, ye grant all that the Quakers
desire in the case, for that is divine inward Revelation and Inspiration; and
none of us pretend to an absolute Infallibility, but only so far as the Spirit
of God witnesses to us, and in us.

Page 58. Ye most grossly pervert my words, and cite them falsely, when ye say, I
make the Ministers more than merely instrumental, and that they can by their
own virtue heal and convert a Soul. Nothing can be more falsely alleged; for
when Grace, Spirit and Life or living Virtue does emanate through the Ministers
to the Hearers, they are but Instruments, and instrumental Pipes and Conduits,
yet not dead, but living Instruments; and that Grace, Spirit, Life and Virtue
is not their own, as of themselves derived, but is Gods and Christ's, and is
only freely given them.

Page 52. That ye say, The Spirit of God comes in betwixt the Mouth of the
Speaker, and the Hearts of the Hearers, is granted; but so it comes in betwixt
the heart of the Speaker, and the hearts of the Hearers* and a good Minister
out of the good Treasure in his heart brings forth good things; and that is
more than bare words.

1 Pet. 4.11. Ye say, Relates only to an outward ability or estate, enabling
them to give Alms. Which, as it is merely begged, so is singularly strange, and
will be strange to the Ears of many who hear it: Does ever the Scripture call
outward Riches the manifold Grace of God? And does not verse. 11. say, If any
man speak? So it relates to a Ministry of the Mouth, and not of giving by the
Hands.

Page 55. Ye grossly pervert, to say, I am for pulling down Preaching, Praying
and Singing, that are Gods Ordinances; for neither I nor we are against, but
for all preaching, Praying and singing, that is rightly performed, viz. by the
help and ability of the Spirit of God, and that is Inspiration, and is
confessed so to be, by better Protestants then your selves; yea, the Church of
England* prays in the Common Prayer for Inspiration, as above noted.

That men without the Spirit are under a command to pray, is granted, but yet
Prayer without the Spirit, is no Obedience to that command, as men who have no
Money, nor Goods equivelent to Money, may owe a debt to a man, and yet if they
go to pay him, without money, or moneys worth they do nothing in order to the
payment, they only but mock their Creditor, and offend him; even so, all Prayer
without the Spirit, is a Mockery; and the like of Singing.

That want of Grace discharges none from moral Obligations, is granted, but
yet without Grace, none can perform their Obligations. Ye grossly deny, that the
Prayers of Abraham and the saints, were universally by divine Inspiration,
contrary to the sense of many sober Presbyterians and Episcopals; and that
Abraham prayed for Ishmael, by a natural affection sanctified, does not prove,
that he prayed not by divine Inspiration; what is Inspiration, but the
breathing of the spirit into men's hearts, both to enlighten, and to sanctify
them, and to quicken and warm them with warm and fervent Affections. Christ
ascribes the work of Regeneration in men, to the breathing or Inspiration of
the Spirit, as the Latin ancient Christian writers did Translate these words,
John 3. Spiritus spirat ubi vult, i. e. the spirit breaths or Inspireth where
it wills; for the greek does w^ll bear it puenma is most frequently
translated spirit, in the n^w Testament, and pueo, signifies to breathe or
inspire, hence theopneustos, signifies divinely inspired.

Page 56. Ye allege, that singing without Notes and Tones, measured by art,
would be singing without singing, and that could be no melody, that is, without
Tones measured by art; and to say otherwise, ye affirm, is so foolish, that it
is not worth a Reply; but the folly is your own: the scripture speaks of
Melody in the heart, and that is without all tones of art; beside, what art is
there in the songs of Hannah, Mary, and Elizabeth? ye are extremely ignorant,
if ye know not, that singing with Rhymes, and like sounding Cadencies of words
and Musical Notes of art, as ut re mi, fa sol la, came not into custom among
Christians a long time after the Apostles, and these Notes of art Guido
Aretinus found them out, by which ye learn to sing, that is not of along
standing. These and many other things, are but late inventions introduced into
Church-worship, as Polidor Vergilus does show, and no Rh^mes were sung, that I
can understand, by the French Protestants in french, till Beza composed them,
and Translated the Psalms into french meeter, and so they were sung at Geneva,
hence they were called Geneva Jigs; the Hebrew Psalms of David have no like
sounding Cadencies, or Rhymes That Christ Condesended to sing* with the
Discples, suppose after the costomary way used by the Jews, at their feasts, is
no proof to continue that Custom, more than to continue the Jewish Feast of the
Passover, and other Types; ye greatly forget your selves, in your way of
reasonning from the time of the Law, to the Gospel time.

Page 58. Ye would clear your running into a Circle, that Ministers call the
Church, and the Church calls the Ministers; but all in vain: Ye pretend no
answer for the Presbyterians, who commonly derive their call by the Pope of
Rome, as J. Cotton did expressly say at Hampton, in the hearing of some
hundreds, and not only I, but your reverend brother as ye call him, John Ow^n
has sufficiently discovered the Nullity of that Call, and that therefore
Presbyterians while they lay the stress of their call on that rotten
Foundation, have neither Ministry, nor Gospel, nor Sacraments: And for your
call, who are called Independents, seeing your Church is not older than the
Brownists, of Amsterdam, I mean, your visible Church, or show, when it began,
what Ministers gathered your Church at first? if ye say, your Church was
invisible before; let it be so, but how could an invisible Church call a
visible Ministry? or how could a visible Church a^ise without any previous
Ministry? Ye do but triffle to make these things intelligible; who sees not
but ye are reduced to this miserable pin^h, out of p^ejudice against the inward
Call of Gods Spirit by divine Inspiration, which both Lut^er, and other
primitive Protestants did affi^m they had.

Page 59, 60, 61. Ye tug hard for a Maintenance to Ministers, not voluntary,
but of debt, and by bargain, and that may be forced by the Magistrate, if
refused; And is this also one of the Principles of the Protestant Religion.
Read Will. Thorp's Assertions and Arguments against Priests Wages and
Maintenance, save only what is voluntary, in Fox's Book of Martyrs, fol. 536,
537. and ye will find, that to force wages for preaching, was a Popish
Prin^iple, and not a Protestant: Also, read what your Fathers, the Brownists of
Amsterdam say in their Apology against the University of Oxford, in their
Address to Q. Elizabeth, 7 Position, That the duo Maintenance of the Ministers
should be of the free and voluntary Contribution of the Church: And they
expressly declare against the Maintenance that is exacted, and which the People
are constrained to yield unto them. Behold how far ye are degenerated from your
Forefathers!

Your Argument from the Tithes under the Law, serves not your turn, unless ye
will bring in the Levitical Services also; but even under the Law, the Tithes,
though commanded, the Magistrates were not to compel men to pay them, as is
most clear out of the old Testament; and grant that the e is a justice or
equity in it, that faithful Ministers wants be supplied, and so that the Poor's
wants be supplied, therefore the Hebrew word that signifies Alms signifies
Right^ousn^ss; it will not therefore follow, that the Magistrate may compel
them; there is a Justice, the Transgression of which the Law punishes, and
there is a Justice, the Transgression of which the Gospel punishes; but as for
Ministers to bargain with People, What will you give me, and I will preach unto
you? it is so sordidly Mercinary, that y^ may be ashamed to def^nd it; but that
is not enough, People must be forced to pay you Wages that own you not to be
Ministers of Christ, as has been largely practiced in New England: That ever
the Apostles bargained with People, or forced Wages of any, or received any
other than simply to supply th^i personal Necessities, has no shadow of Proof
in Scripture. The Greek word translated Wages, 2 Cor. 11.8. viz. [opsonion^]
signifies Meat, or something to eat, most properly; translated by Pasor
[edulium] and this answers to Christ's words, The labourer is worthy of his
Meat: This was no yearly stinted Sallary, it was wholly Apocriphal, and has no
foundation in the New Testament, and therefore is no Protestant Doctrine. That
Christ sent forth the Disciples to preach freely, ye say, was a special
Precept; but ye have nothing but your bare Authority for it, the Scripture
says no such thing; ye may as well say, to preach the Gospel was a special
Precept. Ye profess to have a respect to the Waldenses, who are generally well
esteemed by Protestants, as their Predecessors, and faithful Witnesses to the
Truth in their day; and it was said of them, and objected unto them, That their
Teachers were Weavers and Cobblers; whereto they replied, We are not ashamed of
our Priests, because they labor with their hands, etc. because both the
Doctrine and Example of the Apostles lead us to such apprehensions. Usher de
Succes. Eccles. cap. 8.. 8.

CAP. V.
Page 64. Ye call my Declaration of our Faith, touching the Father, the Son,
and the holy Ghost, and Christ his being both God and man, with other great and
weighty Truths, a new Quakers Creed, insinuating, that I am not so ignorant, as
to believe that that was their faith in those times; but this ye merely affirm,
without all shadow of proof.

Ye excuse the Assembly for not mentioning, Light, among Gods attributes, as
not being proper, but metaphorical: A poor Evasion. And why not as proper for
the Assembly, to say God is Light, as for John the Apostle? think ye, the
Assembly was more wise than John, and could more properly and warily, ho^d
forth Gods attributes, then John did or could: The wise Assembly, speak
properly, but Jehn a poor Fisherman speaks Improperly and metaphorically only,
when he said, God was Light. But all this is merely begged; ye say nothing for
proof that the name Light, is any more improper to be a Name of God then the
name Spirit; for the name spirit, in Hebrew, Greek and Latin has a various
signification, (as well as Light) and signifies wind; and therefore either
Light is a proper name of God, or Spirit is not; and if Spirit be improper,
than the Assembly was still partial to say, God was a Spirit, and not to say he
was Light. Indeed all Names that the language of men can express, fall
infinitely short to express him sufficiently; but in the Language of men, the
Name Light is as proper as the Name Spirit.

Page 65. Ye draw a perverse and blasphemous Consequence from a most great and
absolute Truth, God is an immense Light; and then (ye infer) Hell it self
dwells in his Light, and Devils must be full of immediate Inspirations. Its
strange that ye will so sport with so weighty matters: The Scripture says, God
is light, and God is every where, yea, in Hell, but it does not follow, that
either Hell or Devils dwell in God, for there can be no communion betwixt Light
and Darkness, God and Belial; and therefore Devils and Hell cannot dwell in
God; dwelling signifies Communion; and yet in Contradiction, ye confess, that
God is a divine Light, and derives of his wisdom voluntarily, not to all alike.
I have never found in any Book so many self-Contradictions, as ye are guilty of
in this your dark Work.

Page 66. Ye call it Giddiness and Nonsense, to say, the light is immediate,
though it comes through a medium; but ye have not sense enough to deny it: Does
not every man acknowledge that he enjoys immediately the outward light of the
sun, in the open air, and yet the Air is the medium through which it comes to
him, and also it comes into his sense and perception through the medium and
organ of his Eye; and though we hear a man immediately, yet the Voice comes
through the air, and organ of the Ear: Ye are very poor Logicians and Scholars
that cannot distinguish betwixt the medium that transmitteth, and the medium
that does intermit and hinder the action to be immediate; for the medium that
transmitteth, does not hinder the immediate action.

Ye add one Abuse to another; for ye allege, I cite Plato, saying, it was man's
in elicity, to converse with Images o^ things; and to oppo^e this, ye say, Man
shall converse with images o^ things ^orever in his perfect state of Glory. But
it is clear by my words, what Images I meant, by adding the synonymous words,
Shadows and Figures; and then, acco^ding to your Logic, man in his perfect
state of Glory, shall forever converse only with the Shadows, and Figures or
Pictures of things. but not the things themselves: But the Image of God, which
is Christ Jesus, is no Shadow nor Sign, but a most excellent Substance. Ye say,
Plato is with me little inferior to Moses: But it is a false Charge: I judge
him, beyond what I can express, inferior to Moses.

Page 66. Ye heap abuse on abuse, falsely accusing me, that I say, The Word of
God has no more of God, than a Glass Window has of the Sun: For I speak not
of the Word of God, using that Similitude; But of the Scripture* and though I
compare the Scripture to a Glass Window, yet it does not follow, that in every
respect it answers to the same.

Page 67. Ye excuse one of your brethren, for calling the Light of God in
people, a stinking Vapor from Hell, by alleging another falsehood upon us, That
we say, the poor imperfect Light of Nature, is God and Christ; which is a mere
Forgery; we never said nor thought it. But suppose neither God nor Christ is in
People, which is false, yet do ye indeed judge, that the poor imperfect Light
of Nature, that ye, Page 30. confess, Teaches so many good things, and
prepares to the receiving the Gospel is a stinking Vapor from Hell? Remember
how ye can clear this.

Ye justify the Assemblies saying, That the Communion of the Saints with
Christ does not in any wise make them partakers of the substance of his
Godhead; for that would infer, as ye allege, the Swenckfeldian Doctrine, That
a Belever is Goded with God, and Christed with Christ; and this is the thing
(ye say) that G. K. is here to prove, or he proves nothing.

I Answer; That Swenckfeldus used any such manner of Doctrine or Terms, I find
not that ye prove from any of his Writings; and it is possible that ye may
abuse him, as ye do the Quakers. But however, Swenckfeldus is to answer for
himself, I own no such Doctrine or Terms, nor my Brethren; but on the contrary,
we have believed, and do still believe, that none of the Saints are God or
Christ, and that no man is the Lord Jesus Christ, but he only who was born of
the Virgin M^ry, and suffered Death under Pontius Pilate, who is both God and
Man, and to whom divine Worship, Honor and Glory is to be given, but to no Man
else, nor to Saint nor Angel. But yet the Doctrine of the Assembly is absurd,
That the Saints are in no wise partakers o^ the Godhead of Christ; for this
wholly excludes Christ and God from the Saints: If they had said, The Believers
and Saints are not partakers of the Godhead as the Man Christ was, in every
respect, or in that respect, so as to be both God and Man, they had said well;
for the difference is wonderfully great: The Union of the Manhood and Godhead
of Christ is so great and so admirable a Mystery that it surpasses all created
Understanding, and shall be the Object of the Admiration of Saints and Angels,
as now, so in the World to come; and this Union is not through any Mediator
betwixt God and the Man Christ, but the Believers are united unto God through
Christ, the Mediator; and therefore he is the Head, and they the Members, and
that is Honor and Happiness enough unto them. But since the Scripture says,
That Believers are partakers of the divine Nature, and of the holy Spirit; and
that the divine Nature and holy Spirit is one Substance with God and Christ;
therefore the Assembly's Doctrine is absurd, to deny, That the Saints are
partakers in any wise of the substance of his Godhead.

Page 69. Ye will not own, That Believers partake either of Christ's Godhead or
Manhood; but ye say, They partake of his Graces, and they are substantial
things. But all this will not help you; for ye say in the following page Grace
it sel^ is a Creature, and created Principle. Now if the Saints partake only of
a created Principle or Creature, they partake nothing of God's Substance or
being, unless ye will say, That a Creature is any part or measure o^ Gods
Being or Substance. And whereas ye say, Graces are substantial things, and are
not mere Accidents, but Adjuncts: And thus ye seek to hide you from the
ignorant, in the Thicket of some Loicgal and School Terms and Phrases; but when
ye say, Graces are substantial things, ye do not tell whether ye call them so
properly or metaphorically, as when ye call God Light, ye say, it is not
properly, but metaphorically. And for your distinction of Adjuncts and
Accidents, I suppose I learned that thing ye call Logic (that ye seem to glory
in) as well as ye, and do remember what is any wise useful in it, as well as
ye, and I never understood, that either Logicians or Philosophers so called,
did hold, that the Soul of man had any Adjuncts, that was neither the real
Essence and Substance of the Soul, nor yet Accidents; and therefore if the
Grace of God in the Soul be no Accident, but the Adjunct of the Soul, it must
be the Soul it self, and this is Pelaganism and Socinianism, with a Witness;
for Pelagius and Socinus denied the need of any inward Grace that was not the
S^ul it self; for the Attributes of every being, and so of the Soul, are such
Adjuncts as are either essential to that being, or accidental; and for this, I
can and do appeal to all who have any ordinary taste of that called Logic or
Metaphysick; but I shall not insist on this School-nicity. And for your Proof
that Grace is a Creature or created Principle, from Ephesians. 4.29. If you mean,
the virtues brought forth in the saints, called the fruits of the Spirit, as
Faith, Hope, Love, Temprance, Righteousness, etc. we own them in the Scripture
sense to be the new man, which after God is created in Righteousness and true
Holiness, but that they are such a Created Principle as are neither the Soul it
self, nor Christ, nor Accidents, but a substance of another nature from all
these, is a novelty that I have not formerly heard of: As for our Doctrine
concerning Grace, it is plain, according to Scripture, the Seed or Original
Principle of Grace in the Soul, is a measure of the Spirit and Life of Christ,
and is not Properly a Creature, as commonly taken, but a Pure divine Emanation
and stream from Christ, the Fountain, and is of the same nature with the
Fountain, and is substantial, and every Soul that is by a true and living Faith
joined to this Seed and Principle of Gods Grace, is partaker of it
Substantially, and none else, and is there by made fruitful to bring forth
heavenly and divine Fruits, as Love, Joy, Peace Me^kness, Temperance, Humility
etc. which are Divine Effects, and may be said to be the New Creation, or the
Image of Christ formed and brought forth in us, and where these effects are,
yea, where that Seed is, neither God nor Christ can be separated from the same.

Page 69. and 70. Ye say, Nor does the Doctrine of Dr. Owen or Mr. Rutherford
in the words of theirs, which he cites, at all run into the Quakers Blasphemy.
Ans. Ye do then hold it Blasphemy for the Quakers, to say, that God and Christ
dwell in the Saints and true Believers, and therefore to avoid this Blasphemy,
ye will not own that God and Christ dwell in them, and then surely ye preach an
absent God and Christ; for if Christ dwell not in Believers, he is absent from
them: And yet ye contradict your selves herein, as your manner is; ye say, The
Person of the Holy Ghost dwells in us by his Operations. And thus ye would
falsely gloss upon the words of J. O. and S. R. for J. O. h^ld a peculiar
Persuasion, far differing from his Brethren, the Presbyterians, for which
Cauldrey severely taxed him; that whereas they held it, that the holy Ghost
dwelt not by himself (or personally, as they phrase it) in Believers, but by
his Operations, Graces and Gifts. J. O. in his Book of Perseverence uses many
reasons and words to prove, That the holy Ghost himself, together with his
Operations and Graces, he as well as they dwelt in Believers, and not the
Graces without him; and upon this he builds the Doctrine of Perseverance. And
S. R. said, He will not have the Graces of Christ without Christ. But ye plead,
that the Graces of Christ are in the Saints, but not Christ himself, and
therefore if our Doctrine be blasphemous, ye must allow J. O. and S. R. equally
guilty; but the guilt of Blasphemy is yours, who would exclude Christ from the
Saints, and divide the Graces of Christ from Christ, which is impossible, and
is contrary to all sound Reason, as well as Scripture, to divide and separate
the Operator from his Operations.

Page 70. Ye do acknowledge, That ye agree with the Ranters in that Principle,
viz. That God does all, and has unchangeably ordered all things, good and bad,
are we therefore Ranters? say ye. Answ. Let impartial men judge, seeing this is
the fundamental Error of the Ranters, and the Root and Base of all their other
Ranting Principles and Practices.

Page 72. Ye most falsely charge me, as if I were restoring Maniche^sm into the
World, as if there were two Principles or first Causes, the one of Good the
other of Evil; for ye are very ignorant if ye know not that the Manichism
Principle was, That there was an Evil first Cause or Principle, essentially
evil, uncreated, eternal, independent, and equal to the good. But we hold no
such Doctrine; there is one only first cause of all things originally, that is
essentially good and goodness, and all things were originally good; and all the
Evil that came afterward into the World, was not any real Creation or
Production of any substance; for Evil, in the abstract, i. e. Sin, is no
substance, but either a privation, as the sin of Omission, or some depraved
mode, or modification, or alteration in the Cr^ature, that the Creature it self
is the Author of; and therefore Christ said, The Devil was a Liar and Murderer
from the beginning, and when he speaks a Lie he speaks of himself.

Page 73. Ye require me to tell you, How God did foreknow all evil Actions
that should be done in Time, unless he had pre-determined them? Answ. The way
and manner of Gods foreknowledge surpasses all creaturely Understanding; and
therefore it is too great boldness and presumption in you, to imagine ye can
tell it, and it is yet worse to think y^ can tell it by a way that contradicts
the Scripture, and the inward sense of God in men's hearts, as Because God
pre-determines all evil Actions, Thefts, Murders, Adulteries, therefore he
fore-knoweth them. This is to make God equally the Author of Evil, as of Good.
It is suffici^nt to us to believe and know, that the dec^ee of God is
Permissive, but not Pre-determinative of evil Actions; and as he knows evil
Actions that are at present brought fo^th, as they now are, so he did foreknow
them before they were brought forth, as they lay hid in their seeds and causes,
which yet con'd not be without his Permission; and the k^owledge of God is one,
of t^ings past, present and to come, without any variation in him; however; the
reatures and their Operations va^y; and as all Effects he hid in their Cau^es,
whether necessary and natural, or free and voluntary before they come to pass,
so God does know them all most perfectly; for they are but hid, as unto us, and
not unto God, who sees into the most hidden things of all his Creatures.

Page 74. Ye say, My assertion is extremely ridiculous, viz. That Election and
Reprobation are not contradictory. But ye only say it, without proof: They are
not contradictory, because both positive, and a contradiction can never be
betwixt two positives, but one positive and the other nega^i^e or privative;
and Election signifies a preference, or Gods choice of some, above others, and
yet no absolute Reprobation of any; and the foresight and purpose of God
considers them as having sinned out the day of their Visitation, and as such
only they are Reprobates, and not before; and Reprobation is not the Decree of
God, as Creation is not; Reprobation is the casting away the Wicked out from
his Mercy and Favor; and this is not but for their final Impenitency and
Unbelief, and therefore cannot be before it; and this ye might easily
understand, did not Prejudice blind you.

Page 76. Ye say, The very notion of a sufficient E^ficacy of means used,
without the effect wro^ght in them, with whom they are used, is an
unintelligible Quakerism. Answ. Ye say it, but prove it not, as your manner is,
and the contrary is manifest, and generally acknowledged by all rational men,
that a Cause may be sufficiently effectual to produce an Effect, and yet the
effect not produced, not for any defect in the Cause, but some one thing or
other that is wanti^g in the Subject, by way of condition, as when good Seed is
sown in two sorts of ground, in o^e it b^ingeth forth fruit, but not in the
other, and the seed is the same in kind, equally good, and the labor of the
Hu^band-man is equally the same, and the heat and influence, and Rain of Heaven
is the same, but yet the other ground is unfruitful.

Page 78. Ye say, It concerns you not to dispute, whether Esau himself was
saved, or not, but if an eternal Election be typified in Jacob, the Reprobation
must be of the same kind.

Answ. Election was typified in Jacob, but it does not follow that an absolute
Reprobation was typified in Esau, if Esau was saved, as ye say, it concerns you
not to dispute it; for if the Type was saved, the thing typified could not be
damned, for that would destroy the Analogy betwixt the Type and the thing
typified. And surely, many of your Brethren have been highly concerned to
affirm, That Esau was reprobated absol^tely before he was born, (witness
Seaborn Cottons Sermons on Romans 9. at Hampton, which many yet living heard him
preach;) and if this does not concern you, your strength is gone: The things
typified in Jacob and Esau, are, That Esau signifies the Nature of Man, simply
as such, but Jacob signifies the divine Principle and Seed in man, which is
worthily exalted over the nature of Man, and made Lord over it; and Esau's
blessing, is, That he is subject to this divine Seed and Principle, and made
one with it; and this divine Seed is typified by Jacob, the younger Brother,
because the said divine Seed is commonly brought forth in men after the nature
of man has acted its part; but because of its weakness and imperfection, the
other is preferred as Lord over it; and as John said, He that comes after me is
preferred unto me, for He was before me; which, as it was true, with respect to
Christ as he came in the flesh, so with a respect to his inward and spiritual
coming in this divine Seed and birth.

Page 79. Ye say, God has no where revealed it, that he has accepted the
Satisfaction of Christ for all that dye in Infancy. Answ. As much for all that
dye in Infancy as for some, seeing the Scripture says, Christ dy^d for All;
and no Infants have made themselves guilty by actual Unbelief, as many men come
to Age have done.

Ye say again, from Romans 5.14. That the Sentence of Damnation has been
actually executed upon some Infants. If ye mean the final Sentence of
Damnation, ye merely beg it; it could be no other Sentence, at most, but what
passed on Adam, but that was not final, for the Promise came after it, to him
and all his Posterity. And indeed that Romans 5.14 is to be understood of
Infants, and especi^lly of one part of Infants, and not another, ye me^rly beg
it, without all proof. Ye do very u^advisedly to ground your uncharitab^e
judgment of eternal Damnation of many Infants on this place of Scripture, that
the sense of it is so hard to be reached, that it is understood after several
ways, some understanding it of men, so and so considered, others otherwise;
this may well be thought one of these places in Paul's writings, that are hard
to be understood, as Peter d^clared, which the ignorant and unlearned wrest to
their own destruction; and should I say, I could declare unto you the true
sense of it, your Prejudice would not suffer you to believe it.

Ye are so presumptious to declare it to be a Slander, that some of your
Church Covenant gloried, that none o^ their C^ildren, w^ile In^ants, were
Reprobates, as if ye were omniscient, and knew all that any of your
Church Covenant say or do, when they are not present with you; if it were worth
the while, I could produce the Name of a person of your Church Covenant, that
s^id it in mine and others hearing; and your Federal Holiness is little worth,
if any Infants within or under it perish; and I cannot find that ye understand
any thing by your federal Holiness, but a mere Nothing, clothed with an
outward Name or Denomination, o^herwise, if it have any being or reality in
Infants, how can they perish, and go to Hell with it?

Page 81. Ye grossly wrong my words, alleging, That I call that Holiness,
mentioned 1 Cor. 7. a Capacity of Holiness: Whereas my words are, a more near
capacity in Holiness in C^ildren of believing Parents, than in the C^ildren o^
Unbelievers. Whereby I imply, that there are several degrees of this capacity,
some more near, and some more remote; even as the Land that is sown with good
Seed, that has not taken root, has a nearer capacity to bring forth Corn,
than another field where no seed is sown; and there may be another field that
is yet in a nearer capacity to bring Corn, being helped by greater advantages
and conveniences than the other, and the grounds may differ also. And ye seem
to think it very islogical, to call a capacity of Holines^, Holiness. Answ. A
bare remote capacity of Holiness, that is nothing else but a simple possibility
of being made holy, without having any inward Seed or Principle of Holiness
lodged in the Soul, I call not Holiness, but because there is such a Seed and
Principle of Holiness placed in all Children, even Infants, that is the
purchase of Christ's Death, and which God first promised to our first Parents,
and renewed to Noah, saying, And behold, I establish my Covenant with thee and
thy Seed after thee; and yet again renewed to Abraham, saying, In thy Seed
shall all Nations be blessed; because of these three general Fathers, which
were as a holy Root, the Branches are holy, as I said, not actually, but in a
capacity to become actually Holy, through the holy Seed given unto them, which
before I called a near Capacity, that i^, more remote or near, as that noble
divine Seed and Principle is more or less clouded or veiled in them; and ye
show your selves more ig^orant in Logic than ordinary School-Boyes, who
generally know that distinction betwixt a thing in actu primo, and the same
thing in actu secundo, which is as much as to say in English, betwixt a thing
that is in a near capacity and readiness, or tendency to be so, and a thing
that is actually and really, or in fact so; thus, A field sown with Corn,
although the Seed is not sprung in it, nor has taken root, if sown with Wheat,
we call it commonly Wheat, if sown with Rye, we call it Rye, because the Seed
of Wheat is sown in the one field, and Rye in the other, and if nothing hinder,
it may be expected, that the one fi^l^ shall bring good Wheat in due season,
and the other good Rye, because the Seeds of Wh^at and Rye are sown in these
fields. And how generally all Infants and Men, because of Christ's Death and
Purchase, until they reject the Remedy, are clean, I proved from Acts 10.12,
13, 14, 15. for by all manner o^ four footed Beasts, and wild Beasts, and
creeping things, and Fowls of the Air, all sorts of men are to be understood,
whom God has after some sort clea^sed by Christ's Death, viz. by putting them
in a near capacity to be cleans^d and sanctified, by that divine Seed of
Holiness put in them, that is, the purchase of Christ who dyed for them. But to
this most weighty and demonstrative place of Scripture ye say nothing at all,
but pass it by with a dry foot, as you phrase it, lest if ye should have
meddled with it, your folly should have been manifest; and this is your common
way to pass by what ye cannot give some shadow of Answer unto; and if ye give a
shadow of Answer, it is all. Your easiest Answer is, and which ye have given
upon this head, viz. That our Doctrine in this i^ a per^ect Arminian Principle,
and has been eno^gh confu^ed by all that have written against them; so ye
might have spared your Paper and Pains with this one short answer to my whole
Book, That it has been enough con^uted already by all that have written
against us, as T. Hicks, J Faldo, and J. Owen, etc. a^l which have been
sufficiently answered. But as for the Arminian Principle, it is not our
Principle, nor do the Remonstrants or Jes^its hold the Doctrine of Universal
Grace, as we do, as will be obviou^ to any that will compare our Books and
theirs; for we say, The divine Gospel Principle, and Seed of Regeneration, and
Word of Faith, is put by God, as his free Gift, in all men, though it is not
manifest or known to be such in a^l; and this, neither the A^minians nor the
Remonstrants, nor Jesuits ever did affirm, but a^e generally professed
Adversaries to the inward Word and Spirit of God in men, as much as your
selves, witness Bellarmine for the Jesuits, who says, in his Treatise de Verbo
externo, That he is a madman who relieth upon the Testimony of a Spirit within
him, that is often fallacious, and ever uncertain. And Arminius and his followers
are generally against the Doctrine of inward divine Inspiration and Revelation,
as is apparent from their printed Books. It does not follow, as ye insinuate,
that the Condition of Pagans is better than that of Christians, or tha^ the
Gospel opens a door to man's undoing, which ye build on a false supposition,
That t e Pagans are incapable o^ rejecti^g the Physician who is never offered
to them; This ye assert without all proof, and the contrary I have proved, and
is clear from Scripture, that Faith is offered unto all men, and the Gospel
preached to every creature at one time or another before their end, and all are
called, some at one hour and some at another.

Page 83. Ye most grossly traduce and abuse me, by alleging and fathering upon
me, as mine, which are not mine at all, two assertions, 1st. That Grace is
propagated by our natural Parents; 2dly, That there is habitual Sanctification
in all me, by nature. That both th^se are extreme falsely alleged on me, the
Reader shall see by reading p^g. 91 and 92. cited by them; Yea, on the
contrary, I say, that Seed or Principle of Holiness put in M^n and Infants, is
derived from Christ, the second Adam, and therefore not from the first Adam, or
our immediate Parents; and I believe, the Souls of all men have come from God
by Creation, and do not believe that the Souls of the Parents generate the
Souls of the Children; and if the Souls of the Children are not generated from
the Souls of the Parents, then surely the divine Seed and Principle is not
derived by humane Generation, as if the Soul of the Parent were the Author or
Original of that divine Principle; but on the contrary, both the Soul and the
dvine Seed and Principle in it, come from God and Christ; nor do my words give
you the least occasion to think otherwise; for although the Parents are not the
Author of the divine Seed and Principle, in the Souls of their Children, yet
according to Paul's Doctrine, there is commonly a great diffrence betwixt the
Children of Believers and Unbelievers, the one he calls Unclean, and the
other Clean or Holy; and it is plain from Scripture, that the Children of the
faithful Israelites were called the Holy Seed, and had an excellency in them,
above the Children of the Moabites, Amonites, and Canaanites, etc. because the
noble divine Seed and Principle was more clouded and veiled in these last, and
lay under more Rubbish and Impurity; and therefore God forbid the People of
Israel to join in Marriage with these unclean Nations, lest their Seed should
be defiled with them, and a wrong mixture should happen, as sometimes did; and
therefore the great Uncleanness of Parents, commonly does more vail and cloud
the divine Principle and Seed in their Children, than where that Uncleanness is
not so great, and that the Parents are true Believers. And because I assert,
that there is a Seed of Holiness in all men, during a day of visitation, it
does not follow, that Habitual Sanctification, is in all men; a Seed of
Holiness is one thing, and the Habit, Garment or Clothing of Holiness is
another; as the Seed of Flax is one thing, and a Habit or Ga^ment of Flax is
another; for the Seed must g^ow, to bring the Flax, that can be made in^o a
Habit or Garment. And as for the School-notion of Habits, it is so old and
thread bare, being a Popish contrivance in their Popish P^ilosophy, promoted by
J^suites, grounded upon some mistaken notions of A^istotle, that it i^
generally exploded by learned and Judicious Protestants, as well as their other
absurd Notions of material substantial Forms and Qualitie^ of innumerable sorts.

CAP. VI.
Page 82. Ye greatly mistake that Scripture, Rom 5.13. and contradict it by
your bold Assertion, That Sin was imputed before the Law; whenas Paul says, it
was not imputed when there was no Law; which is not to be understood simply,
but comparatively; for the Times generally before Moses Law, were Times of
Ignorance, at which God wi^ked, and as the time of the Worlds Infancy; even as
Parents wink and connive at the failings of Infants; and therefore a fortiori,
I did well agrue, Tha^ sin is not imputed to new born Infants.

Page 84. Ye pervert my words, as if I meant, That the World and the Church
were the same thing, because I bring Scripture to prove, that C^r st is the
Savior of the, World, Joh. 4.42. and the Savior of the Body Ephesians. 5.23. But I
brought these Scriptures to prove, that Christ was not only the Savior of
Believers, in a special way, but of all men in a general way, yet this does not
say, the World and the Church is one.

Page 85. whereas I brought many Scriptures to prove, that the Love and Grace
of God i^ universally extended unto all, because the word All is as expressly
mentioned, frequently in Scripture, with respect to Gods Love and Grace, and
Christ's Death, as with respect to that damage suffered by Adams fall; and
therefore as it is conf^ssed, that all have s^ffered a damage by Adams fall and
sin, so all have received a benefit by Christ's Death, and the Parallel brought
by the Apostle Paul does prove it, which ye say nothing solidly against, only
nibble a little, alleging, that it will follow, that then all shall be saved
by Christ. I Answer; it does not follow, unless ye could prove, that all were
eternally lost, by having a Sentence of Eternal Damnation, equal to that of the
Wicked at the end of the World, past upon them; as to argue thus, the Sentence
of Eternal Damnation did pass upon all men, after Adams fall, and therefore the
sentence of Eternal Justification has passed on all men, because of Christ:
But the Sentence that passed on all men, was not that of Eternal Damnation; for
it was not said to Adam, Thou shall dye the second death, and be cast into the
Lake of Fire; for the Second Death, implies, that there was a first death, and
that first Death, was only that Adam was deprived of his enjoyment of God
inwa^d^y, and his Soul became dead unto God, and Righteousness, and his body
became subject to death; but this does not infer the same degree or kind of
Pun^shment with that of the Second Death, that is inflicted for contempt of the
Gospel, and final Unbelief. Therefore the Parallel still holds good, that
whatever loss or d^m^ge is come upon Adams Posterity, by occasion of the fall,
it is restored unto all men who are Adams Posterity, through the offer of the
remedy, to wit, Jesus Christ, who dyed for all, and if they neglect that
remedy, finally, they shall be punished with the Se^ond Death, that is g^eater
Punishment than the first death in Adam; and though the Remdy of Christ and his
Grace be offered and applied unto all, in a day of Visitation, yet it does not
follow, that Christ and his Grace has not sufficient Efficacy, if all are not
Saved, no more than that it does follow, that a ^ose of good Physic is not a
sufficient effectual Medicine, to cure a Disease, because some to whom it has
been applied, are not cured by it, though the same dose of Physic has cured
many, of the same Disease, which proves its sufficient Efficacy in it self,
although eventually it has not that success on some, for their own fault, that
have not duly observed the Physicians Rules, and after application, have done
some things that did hinder its operation.

And as to 2 Cor. 5.14. Whether I or y^ pervert the true sense of it, I do
freely leave to the Impartial Reader; your sense being this, I^ one died for
all Gods Elect only, then not only Gods Elect, but all others that are a mu^^
greater number, were dead; but this would make Paul's argument, alt gether void,
and reflect upon that hol^ Spirit that did dictate these words in him; for it
does not follow, from the particular to the general, as every Shool-Boy does
know as to say, Christ dyed for all Gods Elect, which are but a part of men,
and therefore all, both Elect and others, were dead; this is an u^lawful
infe^ence in the common reason of men; but this is a most just and necessary
inference, Christ dyed for all men universally, t^erefore all men were dead.

Page 86. ye perve^sly allege on me, That I own Chr^sts Death and Prayer to be
lost, and his Redemption void; and ye say, why are they not saved for whom he
came to dye? Ans. That I own Christ's Death and Prayer to be lost, and hi^
Redemption void is most falsely alleged; it has its effect perfectly, unto the
Salvation of all that believe and continue in Faith unto the end, and to the
great Condemnation of them that do not believe, and to the glorifying the
Justice of God in them that believe not; and because of Unbelief, pe^ish in
their sins most justly, whereby they are rendered without excuse; for if Christ
had not dyed for them, they could not be guilty of denying the Lord that bought
them, as the Scripture plainly declares: And the death of Christ has its
various effects on them that are saved; for as all are not saved at one time,
nor in one Age of the World, so all do not partake of the same measure of
Grace, but to some it is given, as one Talent, to some as Two, to others as
Five, and yet he who has received the Grace of God as two Talents, does not
make void the Grace of God, because he has not received as much, as the other
who had five. And though such who are saved partake most plentifully of the
Effects and Fruits of Christ's Purchase, yet even all such who are not saved,
partake of great and considerable Effects of Christ's Death, here in this World,
as that God has spared them, and exercised much long-suffering toward all of
them, for Christ's sake, who dyed for all, and has given all a Day of
Visitation, and an Opportunity, whereby they might have been saved; and that
they are not saved, it is only their own fault; for we find, that at the
Gardeners Intercession, the barren Fig Tree was spared a whole Year, over three
Years that were past, which was a Parable used by Christ, to Express how God
has spared both them that are saved, and them that perish, for Christ's Death,
and Intercession. Therefore neither Christ's Prayer nor Death, is made void to
any, but has all its effects, that it should have both to them who are saved,
and to them who perish. And the Talent that was given to the evil and slothful
Servant, was given him, for Christ's sake, who dyed for him, and so Christ's
Death, was not to him in vain* and though the slothful Servant did not improve
his one Talent, yet it was not lost, but was taken from him, and given to
another, and therefore nothing of the Grace and Gift of Christ is lost; and
though some loose the benefit of it, as to themselves, yet that loss is
sufficiently made up to another in his place.

Page 86. Ye allege, That I said, many are guilty of final Imp^nitency a
considerable time before they ^ye, which ye say, s^e^s a Contradiction: But ye
wrong my words grossly, as your manner is; for my words we^e, There is a sin
unto Death, etc. 1 John 5.16. And this is that sin of final Unbelief, and
obstinate Impenitency, wherein men may be permitted to live a considerable time
before they dye, which ye confess upon the matters, saying, many are left of
God to persist in Impenitency till they dye; And why so, but because they have
sinned that ^in unto Death, where of they are not to repent; and that may well
enough be called Final Impenitency.

Page 87. ye say, ye would fain know, where I place the inequality, since I
tell you, that God gives no greater measure of inward Grace to one than
another, but he sut^s Providence eminently. Here ye wrong my words grossly, for
I deny not, but on the contrary, I affirm, that God may, and often does give a
greater measure to one (viz. that is saved,) than to another, (viz. that is not
saved) but it is not always so, but in some cases or examples, the inward
Grace may be the same both in kind and degree, in some (Note, some) that are
saved, and in some that are not, as the Parable of the Pounds and Marks plainly
declare. He^e ye may see, how I say only, in Some it may be so, but not in all;
for I bring the example of Paul, who did acknowledge the Grace of our Lord was
exceeding abundant to him, with Faith and Love, which is in Christ Jesus, and
even in all who are saved, although the Seed or Principle of Gods Grace may be
the same; as in some who are not saved, in degree, yet the gracious Providence
of God are wonderfully extended toward all that are or shall be saved, which
are not so extended unto others that shall not be saved. And the inequality
lies here, that whoever are saved, it is not of themselves, but by Grace they
are saved, Grace has begun, and has carried on, and shall finish or perfect
the Work of their Salvation, and they are but the instruments of God and hi^
Grace, and they have loved and chosen God and Christ, because God and Christ
first did love and choose them, and God wrought that free choice and consent in
them of his free good pleasure, and thereby did not take away from them the
true freedom of Will, but begot the true freedom of Will in them which before
was rather bound than free, as Luther called the Will of unconverted men,
Servum Arbitrum, i. e. servi^e Will, and not free Will. But on the other hand,
whoever are not saved one time or another before the end of he World, the cause
and fault is only they themselves, sufficiency of Grace and Means was afforded
unto them, but they did not improve them, which they might and could have done,
but did not; and therefore they are without excuse. Nor is it enough for any of
them to say, If God had done as much for us who perish, we should have also
been saved: It suffices, that God has done enough to clear his Mercy and
Justice, and render them inexcusable.

Again, ye wrong my words, as if I had said, That al t e difference on Gods
part toward the elect, i^ a ^eer suiting of Providence, and which in p. 69. I
call gracious Providence, and Dispensations, and Means of his own choosing. All
which I did not and do not understand, as relating only to outward acts of
divine Providence, but also and chiefly to inward actings of Gods gracious
care, love and fathe^ly Providence, (...). by secret motions, and invitations,
and persuasions, and allurements of his divine Love and Goodness, all which are
not mere Moral Swasions, but divine and heavenly Persuasions, suited to due
times, places, and other ci^cumstances, (...) which are the effe^ts of Gods
disc^iminating love to all such who are or shall be s^ved, beyond them who
shall not be saved; and though th^re may be and i^ great variety and diversity
in their gracious actings of God, and divine movings in the hearts of them who
are to be finally saved, yet thi^ d th not u^iversally i^fer a difference of
the P^inciple of Gods G^^ce, either in kind or d^g^ee, in all them that are not
saved, and in all them that are saved. And c^^c^r^i^g this great discrimination
that God make^h ^etwixt Men and Men, though he call and visit all with his
Grace, Augustine says, lib. de spir. et lit. c. 34. Now if any arive us to
search into that depth, why God does so swade or call one, that he does
persuade him, and yet does not so to another? As present, only two things I
think good to answer, O the height o^ the Riches! and, Is there Iniqui^y with
God? Who disliketh this answer, let him seek more learned, but let him beware
lest he find Presumers.

Page 88. Ye say, Ye thought heretofore that Faith and Love had been Graces.
Answ. And so ye ought to think still; for so I did formerly believe, and so I
do still, that Faith and Love are excellent divine Graces, and that they are
not given to all; for all men have not Faith; but these Graces, viz. Faith and
Love, are the Fruit and Produ^t of that ^ed of Grace that is sown in all men;
and as the seed that is sown in all grounds, does not bring forth fruit in them
a^l, but only in some; even so it is in this case, the divine Seed of Gods
Grace is sown in all men, but it brings not forth these excellent Fruits, viz.
Faith and Love in all, etc. therefore when we say, Grace is g^ven to all, we do
not mean, Faith and Love, ^he Fruits, but the Seed that would produce these
fruits in all, if men did not wilfully hinder; nor i^ the Se^d lost in these
persons, in whom it brings not forth fruit, but is that Talent that is taken
away from the sl^athful and evil Servant, and given to him that had ten
Talents, accord ng to Christ's Doctrine, which still I suppose i^ a great
Mystery unto you.

Page 89. Ye allege, I perversely interpret Christ to be the Word spoken o^,
Romans 10.8. which is evident by the context, to mean the Scriptures, called the
Word of Faith, because it is an instrument of begetting it. But this is your
bare alledgance, and your proof has no weight nor solidity, that because the
Scriptu^e is the Instrum^nt whereby Faith is commonly wrought in men, that
therefore it is, that Word of Faith, Romans 10. With as great probability, ye may
say, the Scripture is the Spirit o^ Faith; but as the Spirit of God is called,
in Scripture, the Spirit of Faith, as being the Author, and Object, and
Foundation of Faith, so is Christ called the Word o^ Faith, a^ b^ing the
Author, and Object, and Foundation, together with the holy Spirit of the same
Faith; and that christ, and not the Scripture, is that Word o^ Faith, is clear
from the c^ntext v. 6, 7, 9. nor can it be the Scripture, because little of the
Scripture was writ, when Moses spoke these words to the People o^ Israel; and
the five Books of Moses were rather, the Law, than that Word of Faith; and
Moses told them, this Word was nigh them, in their hearts and mout^es, as being
of an internal, or inward nature, directing them to the heart, where it was
originally placed, and not in the outward leaves of the Book or Scroles; and he
calls it the Commandment in the Singular number, to signify the excellency
of it, that being one, contains all; and that cannot be the Letter without.
Next, what Moses said to Israel, and Paul to the Romans, may be said to every
man, in a day, the Word is nigh thee, in thy mouth, (viz. to eat it,) and in
thy heart, to believe in it, that thou need not to ascend, nor descend nor
go over the Seas, to bring this Word; and therefore it cannot b he Letter of
Scriptu^^, which came over the seas, from Judea to Rome, and other places of
the world.

Page 8^. ^d fin^ Ye most unchristianly and i^humanly wrest my wo^ds to a ^uite
contrary se^^e, saying, ^ interp^et, that Word o Faith, Romans 10. ^o^ C^rists
coming in t e flesh, both of Jews and Gentiles; and to show your gross
perve^sio^, that seeme^h wilful in you, I shall set down my words, which are
these, Page 110. And because this great M^stery, viz. the Word of Faith, which
was in the Gentiles, was much hid in the time of the Law, and in all Ages of
the world, until Christ came in the flesh, both in Jews and Gentiles, as Paul
called it, the Mystery hid from Ages and Generations: Where it is most clear to
any, that will not wilfully pervert the plain sense of my words, that the words
[untill Christ came in the flesh] does not refer to his coming in the flesh, in
Jews and Gentiles, as they wilfully pervert it, but to his coming in the Body
of his Flesh, even in that prepared body that was born of the Virgin Mary, etc.
in the fu^ness of time. So that the words, until Christ came in the Flesh, are
insert only by way of Parenthesis, although by some omissi^n, either of the
manuscript or print, the sign or note of the Parenthesis was omitted, that is
no hing material; for when men (...) a Parenth^ (...) no note (...) when ye
must needs make the poor omission of a () in my Book, a ground to raise your
change of Blasphemy, or subverting the hopes of Salvation, against me; although
in Contradiction to your selves, ye clear me, citing Page 59. that I did
acknowledge that Christ came in the flesh; but ye use a fig leaf cover, saying,
ye know not when they own any thing; And it was once the received Doctrine of
the Quakers, that there is no other Incarnation of Christ, but only as he
dwells in us: But this is a most gross Calumny and falsehood, which ye can
never prove; and because ye cannot prove it, in the least, therefore ye declare
your selves to be of that Generation, who make Lye^ your Refuge, which God has
swept away, and yet will more abundantly, and ye will be seen, what sort of men
ye are, that dare thus falsely accuse the Innocent. The like poor shadow of
advantage, ye seek to catch at, page 28. of your Book, saying, my Spirit
mi-sinformed me, when I cited Cant. 2.4. because of a mistake in the Manuscript
or Print, of the word (and again) for the word (or.) in your so doing, like the
Pharisees of old, ye strain at a Gnat, and swa low a Camel.

Page 90. Ye say, The word Reprobate, there used, intends only, that all
Unbelievers are at present unapproved by God, and in a state of Perdition. Ans.
be it so, it no wise weakeneth my Argument; for seeing all unbelievers, by you,
are not finally reprobated, but only at present unapproved, and may pass from
that state, into a better, viz. into a state of Faith, that is approved; this
quite overthrows your Doctrine of Absolute Reprobation, that denies it
possible, that a Reprobate can be saved, which here ye acknowledge: And seeing
these Unbelievers, by your confession, were not absolutely or finally
reprobated, but unapproved, or disapproved, what did so disapprove, or judge
them, but Christ in them? And therefore still it remains, that Christ is in
all, but such who are finally Reprobates.

Ye say, That Christ has commanded that his Gospel be Preached to all Nations,
and he tells us, that so it shall be before the end of the World, is no proof
of what it is brought; for the many Generations past have no advantage by that,
being ended and gone, before that time comes. But this ye merely beg, and
assert without all shadow of proof; for that Christ told, the Gospel shall be
Preached to all the world, before the end of the world, is not, surely, to be
understood, that the preaching of it to all the world, shall only be in the
Last Age, of the world, yet to come; but the Gospel that began to be preached
from Adams fall immediately, shall be preached to all men, that ever lived in
the World, some time or other before the end of the world, so that such who
shall not live in the latter ages of the world, have had it preached, in the
former Ages, when they lived in the world, and therefore the preaching the
Gospel to all the World, is the preaching of it to all Mankind, that ever
lived, and shall live in the world, in all Ages, from the beginning to the end;
for all that part of mankind, that is to live in the world, in the Last Age, or
Ages of it, yet to come, are but a small, or inconsiderable part of the world.
And though it may seem hard to demonstrate, how this has been, and shall be
effected, in a general way and manner, it may suffice unto us, to believe, what
the holy scriptures testify, that because (Acts 17) Faith is offered unto all
men, or that God has given assurance to all men, that God has raised the man
Jesus from the dead, therefore all shall be accountable to him, and be judged
by him; and whoever shall perish, their Destruction shall be for not believing
in Jesus Christ, who has been preached unto them.

page 92. Ye say, That Moral Honesty is a Meritorious Cause, either of
Salvation, or of any further Discover^e^ of saving Grace to men, (...) a
Jesuitical Principle. And this ye would fix upon me, or us, but all in vain; we
hold no such Principle, although, if we did hold it, your Refutation is poor;
Its held by the Jesuits, therefore it is false: Ye might argue as strongly, it
is held by the Jesuits, that there is a God, therefore. etc. Every thing held
by the Jesuits is not false, but some true, and some false. However, as we do
not say, that Moral Honesty is a Meritorious Ca^se, etc. so we have another
understandi^g of Mo^al Honesty, than either Jesuits or ye; for both ye and the
Jesuits, by Moral Honesty understand only some outward acts of ju^tice, and
Temperance, performed by the Authority and Powers, eitheer of some outward
rules of Honesty, or by the mere natural, and carnal, and corrupt dictates of
men's natural understanding: But we understand it qui^e otherwise, viz. that all
true Honesty is performed by the Power, Authority, and Efficacy of a divine
Principle, even the Word of Faith, divinely inspiring the hearts of Mankind
universally with a general Revelation and Discovery of the Mind of God,
relating to general Piety toward God, as a Creator, and to believe in him,
fear, love and obey him, as such, and to exercise other Acts of Temperance,
Justice, Meekness; and as this part of general Religion is sincerely performed,
though with some weakness, God is pleased, not by way of merit, but for his
great love and mercy, and for his dear son Jesus Christ's sake, to fo^low that
first more general Revelation, and Discovery of his will, with a more special
Revelation, and discovery of it, in the peculiar Doctrines (...) first part of
Religion toward God, as Creator, and^. where Christ, as come in the flesh, and
crucified, etc. is not distinctly revealed, is called by some, not so unfitly,
pe^haps, De^sm, or Th^^s^, ^. e. a Religious Worship and Service to God, as
Creator, as good, holy, just, wise, etc. and such was the Religion of
Cor^eli^s, before Christ was preached to him by Peter, and such was the
Religion of Abimelech, and others mentioned in Scripture; but the second more
exellent part, is Christianism, or the Christian Religion, where Christ come in
the flesh, and God in Christ so come in the ^^esh, is known, believed in,
worshipped, loved and obe^ed. The first is introductory and preparatory to the
second; the first may be called the Law, which as a Schoolmaster leads unto
Christ, both Jews and Gentiles. But such is the infinite goodness of God, and
so Large is the purchase of Christ's Death, that not only to such, who have been
honest, and sincere in the first Dispensation, but to the most unworthy, in all
the world, one time or another, within the day of Visitation, the Gospel is
preached unto them, and the Gospel Grace, (discovering, in some measure, Jesus
Christ, etc. (is extended unto them; else how is the Gospel preached to every
Creature? and how is Christ's Command to be fulfilled, that he has given (...)
Successors, in all Ages? and how is the Prophecy of Christ fulfi^led, that so
it shall be before the end? and how shall God be just, to take Vengean^e on a^l
the Wicked, for not obeying ^he Gospel? for let all the Scriptu^e be searched,
and it shall not be found, that the Second Death, or casting into the Lake of
Fi^e, is appointed to any, but who fina^ly reject Christ, and disobey the
glorious Gospel, and b^aspheme against the holy Ghost, which is the only
impardonable Sin, that is neither to be fo^given in this World, nor in that to
come; and therefore the Writer to the Hebrews distinguishes betwixt the
Punishment due for the breach of Moses Law, and that due for Unbelief and
Contempt of the Gospel, and not harkening to Christ, the greatest Prophet of
all; but this to you will be a great mystery.

Page 93. Ye wrongfully charge me, for pleading for New Revelation o^ things not
contained in S^ripture. If by things, ye mean Doctrines and Principles of
Faith, and general Precepts of Christian Religion, I have often told you, the
Revelation is New, but not of any New Doctrine, etc. Yet since both some
Infants and Adult Deaf and Dumb Persons belong to Gods Election, as ye confess,
God does reveal some things, without the outwa^d testimony of Scripture, by
your own confession, and therefore all divine Revelation is not ceased, nor is
all committed to writing, as if that were the only and alone means and
instrument, which ye confess, reaches not to Infants and Adult Deaf and Dumb
Persons.

Page 94. Ye say, I forget all Laws of Disputation, when I bid you disprove it,
viz that all honest Gentiles, some time or other, had not faith in Christ
crucified; for Affirmantis est probare. Answ. Ye rather forget the Laws of
dispute, and mind not rightly to distinguish betwixt a Negative, relating to a
Doctrine or Principle, and a Negative relating to a matter of Fact; the
Negative relating to a matter of Fact, often times cannot be proved, and yet
s^metimes it can; but the Negative relating to Doctrine, both can, and ought to
be proved, by him, who strongly asserts it, as Paul does excellently prove,
That by the Works of the Law, no flesh is justified, but by Faith in Christ
Jesus. And Protestants commonly prove against the Papists, that the Bread of
the Eucharist is not Transubstantiated into Christ's Body. Therefore seeing ^e
assert a Negative so confidently, That the honest Gentiles, who lived in remote
places where Christ was not preached outwardly, be one they dyed, had no
knowledge nor faith o Christ crucifi^d; ye ought to prove it; But ex abundanti,
I had pro^ed the Affirmative, to wit, That all honest Gentiles who were
faithful in their Gentile state, were in a state of Salvation begun, b^t not
per^ected, and therefore they could not perish; and consequently, they behoved
to have the Faith of Christ, some time before the end, in order to their
Perfection.

Page 94. Ye are miserably beset, and put to it, to answer to the two i^stances
I g^ve you, the one of Nathaniel, the other of Cornelius, both which had so
great a Testimony of God, that they could not be in a state of Damnation, but
were in a state of Salvation, at least begun, though not perfected; and ye grossly
abuse me, to say, as if I did affirm, they were Unbelievers; for they had faith
in God, though not in Christ come in the flesh, as I expr^sly affirmed, page 112.
Now let us hear your Answer; ye say, They had believed in a Christ to come,
though at present they knew not that ^e was come in the flesh, till it was
further rev^aled to them. A^sw. At this rate ye make all the Jews throughout
the whole World true Believers in Christ, because they all profess to believe
i^ a Christ to come, even as ye say, Nathaniel and Cornelius believed in a
Christ to come. But as it was the true Faith to believe in Christ to come,
before he was come, so it was not the true Faith, but a great mistake or error,
at least, though pardonable, to believe in Christ to come in flesh, when the
true Christ was already come; for their Faith could not be the true Faith,
which had not the true Object; for, to believe in a Christ yet to come in the
flesh, is a false Faith, such as the faith is of those hardened Jews, who
generally believe not in Christ who is already come in the flesh, but in a
Christ or Messiah, whom they imagine yet to come in the flesh. And before that
Peter preached to Cornelius, Christ was crucified and raised again: And seeing
ye grant, Cornelius had not faith in Christ crucified, until Peter preached
unto him (and yet was in a good state) ye quite give away your cause. Beside
that, ye merely allege it, without proof, That Cornelius had any sort of Faith
of a Christ to come in the flesh at that time; for it only appears, that he
was a devout and religious Gentile, but no Proselite to the Jewish Religion.

A Third Instance I gave you of Christ's Apostles, who had not the true
knowledge and faith of Christ's Death and Resurrection for some time; for it is
expressly said in Scripture, when Christ told them, he was to be put to Death,
and to rise again the third day, They understood it not; and yet, who will say,
they were altogether in a state of Damnation? Ye are so pinched here, that your
Cause is desperate, and that makes you so angry and fretful. Ye say, Faith in
God, without Christ (viz. come in the Flesh, and crucified, etc.) is not
saving, citing John 14.6. Acts 4.12. I have answered you, it is not in that
degree, so as to perfect the work of Salvation, but yet it has a preparatory
work, and may begin it, otherwise ye must say, the Apostles, that were ignorant
that Christ should dye, were not in any state of Salvation.

Page 95. Ye imagine, that ye have got a wonderful advantage, saying, What then
shall we say to his New Doctrine, that they may receive it after death? Ye
further say, We shall have a new Quakers Purgatory erected ere long. But if ye
were not very partial, ye might see, I did principally argue so with you ad
hominem, because of your Principle, according to your own Doctrine in your Conf
ssion of Faith, that says, The Souls of the Righteous after Death, [Note,
after Death] being then made perfect in Holiness, are received into the highest
Heavens: These are the expres^ words of your Catechism as I told you, cap. 32
sect. 1. and that ye say, It is a bold Untruth, for they say no such thing
there. I Answer; Let the Reader but be at the pains to read that place cited,
cap. 32. s. 1. and he shall find it expressly so; and therefore the bold Untruth
is your own, and not mine; and if they contradict it in their shorter
Catechism, by saying, at the instant o^ death, what is that to me? they must
answer for their own contradictions, and not I for them: And for my saying,
after Death, it was by way of Hypothesis, If I should say. And whereas I
brought you a Scripture out of Job, cap. 33.22, 23, 24. to show the wonderful
dealings and workings of God with men on their death bed, or at death, without
the outward Ministry of men, to show unto them their Uprightness, and the
Ransom or Atonement, see from v. 14. to v. 30. Even by his own speaking to
them in a Dream, in a Vision of the Night, when deep sleep falls upon men, in
slumberings upon the Bed, then he opens the Ears of men (and as it is on the
Margin, he reveals or uncovereth, Heb.) and seals their Instruction. What
say ye to this weighty place of Scripture, that deserves so great
consideration, as holding forth the wonderful love of God toward men in
general (for the word Man indefinitely is to be understood universally or
generally, see v. 29. Lo, all these things works God often times with man)
and his care over them, that where outward helps and means of men's Ministry
fail, he supplyeth by his own speaking to them, yea, when deep sleep falls
upon men (whether that sleep be understood natural or figurative, is not very
material to determine) and all to keep back their Souls from the Pit, and that
they may be enlightened with the Light of the living: Certainly this place of
Scripture has much in it, yea, very much, more than ye or most are aware of,
to prove, that Gods love and care is exceeding great toward Mankind, and his
patience and long-suffering is greatly extended toward them, to keep back
their Souls from the Pit; which altogether does overturn that most cruel and
Cannibal-like Doctrine of yours, that says, God damneth many Infants to H^ll,
and universally all who have not have had Christ preached unto them by the
Ministry o^ men, (except in some singular cases of Abraham, and some others
that were Prophets) But to this weighty place of Scripture ye say nothing at
all, but are as mute as a Fish; it is a cunning way in you, to pass by with a
dry foot, as ye phrase it, that which most pincheth you, lest by meddling with
it ye should not only wet your feet, but be in danger to drown your sinking and
desperate Cause: All sober Protestants, as well as others, will condemn you for
your great uncharity, to Damn not only so many Millions of honest Gentiles, but
of poor Infants, that ye say, never sinned actually in thought, word or deed,
but merely for the sin of another, that was forgiven to him and thousands more;
yea, not only the Episcopal, but many in the Church of Rome are not so
uncharitable. Your great Uncharitableness makes you cruel and ha^d-hearted,
and this begets in you a spirit of Persecution. But is it not a great sin in
you to be so uncharitable, when ye have no ground, but your own mistakes of
some place of Scripture hard to be understood. Oh! Repent of this your great
sin, not only of Un^haritableness toward so great a part of Mankind, but of
your evil and sinful thoughts of God Almighty, rendering him so cruel and so
short in his Mercy, who has declared himself to be good unto all, and his
tender Mercies to be over all his Works, and that he is slow to Wrath,
long-suffering, and with much long-suffering he endures the Vessels of Wrath,
perfected for Destruction, as the Greek word does well bear it; so that none
are finally lost and destroyed, but such who are perfected in Wickedness, after
the long-suffering of God has endured them, and waited on them, with much
long-suffering; which certainly proves, that no Infants dying Infants, are
Vessels of Destruction. However, as to the general state of Infants, and other
adult Persons deaf or dumb, and deprived of these common outward helps given to
others, the particular way, method and manner of God toward them is a great
secret; it suffices, that God disposes of them in Mercy, and does not destroy
any without sin, not only actually committed, but finally and impenitently
persisted in, and rejecting the Remedy offered. And why should it appear such a
new Doctrine to you, or inferring a Purgatory betwixt Heaven and Earth, to say,
that the Mystery of Christ crucified, and other great Mysteries, that have been
very obscurely and imperfectly known to many here in this world, shall be made
known perfectly after Death in the World to come? Is not this the general
Belief of Christians, and ground of their Consolation, that many things which
they know here but obscurely, weakly and imperfectly, they shall know most
clearly and perfectly after death, in the World to come. And as I did argue in
my first Book, that whereas perfect SALVATION i^ a Salvation from all sin, and
ignorance, and error, and is a perfect renewing into the Image of God, and the
true knowledge of Christ, even the Man Christ, is necessary, to the end we may
be made conform to him in his holy Life and Virtues, Death, Sufferings, Burial
and Resurrection, as the New Testament plainly declares; and that all who go
to Christ after Death, what has been wanting of their full and perfect
knowledge of him, here, shall be given them there after Death, when they come
to be with Christ in Heaven: And if it shall be given to Christians, who have
more knowledge of Christ here, than may be supposed many of the believing Jews
had in the time of the Law, or proselited Gentiles, or others, why not also may
not the like be said of honest Gentiles, that what was lacking of their
knowledge of Christ here, shall be given them perfectly in the World to come,
after Death, they having received some beginning of the knowledge of Christ
here, though but obscurely and weakly; as ye grant, that many of the Jews had
but a weak, and obscure, and imperfect knowledge of him; the Vail, ye confess,
was not then taken off, before Christ suffered in the flesh; and if an obscure
and weak knowledge could serve the Jews, of Christ that was to come, as held
forth under the Vail of the Rites and Ceremonies of Moses Law, which their
Faith could take hold of, even of Christ hid under that Vail: It may be said,
it could also serve the Gentiles; for the Gentiles had a Law given them out of
Noah's Family, that taught them to sacrifice to the true God; and certainly
Noah taught his Posterity that these Sacrifices of Beasts were figures of
Christ, that great Sacrifice, that was to come; and many Gentiles did sacrifice
to the true God, as no doubt Job and his friends did, and what was Job and his
friends but Gentiles? And it seems to have been a divine I^stinct put into
men generally, before Christ that great Sacrifice came, to sacrifice unto God,
as Aristotle said, It was proper to men to sacrifice; for the same that taught
them to pray to the true God, taught them to sacrifice; and that sacrifice was
the Vail to the Gentiles, pointi^g at Christ, as it was to the Jews, that their
faith might reach unto him; and though too many of the Gentiles sacrificed unto
Devils, and not unto God, yet that does not prove, they had not some sense or
knowledge that they did sin in so doing, for the Jews too often did also
sacrifice unto Devils. In short, if an obscu^e and weak, or imperfect knowledge
and faith of Christ, as he was to come and suffer in the flesh, did suffice to
Salvation, as ye say it does, and did to Cornelius and Nathaniel, it may
suffice to all honest Gentiles, who might have that obscure, and weak, and
imperfect faith of Christ, as he was to come in the flesh, or as now come in
the flesh; and what if I should tell you, that not only the Gentiles
Sacrifices, that they offered up unto the true God, did preach Christ unto
them, and his Death, etc. but that the whole outward Creation had the like use,
in some sort, to the Gentiles, to be Vails and Types, to preach Christ unto
them, though not so fully and distinctly, as these delivered by God to the
People of Israel? Did not God make the Rainbow a sign of his everlasting
Covenant betwixt him and all flesh upon the Earth, i. e. all Mankind; for so is
all Mankind often called in Scripture, viz. all Flesh; for when John saw Christ
in Heaven, he saw him with a Rainbow upon his head, and round about the
Throne; and therefore the Rainbow that appears in the Cloud in Rain, is an
universal Type and Figure, that God has given to all Mankind of his
Everlasting Covenant in Christ Jesus, that he will not destroy them, but save
them who believe in his Son Christ; and though the Rainbow has another
signification, as to give notice that God would not destroy the World any more
with Water, as he did the Old World, yet that hinders not, but that it was
given as a sign also to point into Christ, as the Passover was both a sign of
the destroying Angel his passing over them in Egypt, and yet was also a figure
and type of Christ, as Paul has plainly declared. And no doubt, God that has
given the Rainbow as an universal sign of his Love and Favor in Christ, both
God and Man, (signified by the light of the Sun, united with the Water in the
Cloud, that give most excellent and resplendent Colors, signifying the Mercy
and Justice of God, together with his divine Wisdom and Power, etc. all most
sweetly and harmoniously concurring together, with manifold divine Graces in
the work of man's Salvation, through Christ; and the string or cord of the bow
appearing next to the earth, as when a man holds his Bow in his hand, in sign
of Peace, as not intending to shoot with his Arrow) has also given other Types
and Figures in the outward Creation, to be as Va^ls and Shadows, to shadow
forth the Lord Jesus Christ, and men's Salvation by him, as Winter, Spring,
Summer and Harvest, and the sowing of the grain of Corn in the Earth, and its
rising again within a little time, and bringing forth much fruit, which our
Savior brought as the figure and example of his Death, Burial and
Resurrection, and which the Wisdom of God has recorded in Scripture, not only
as an example or emblem of Christ's Resurrection, but of the general
Resurrection of the dead; and indeed the whole Creation points at Christ as
both God and Man, that most excellent middle, that unites God and Men together;
for in all the Creation we see how the wonderful Wisdom of God, and his
wonderful Power has united extremes by certain means or middles; and these do
plainly point unto us, how as the highest and lowest Creatures are united by a
certain medium or mediating nature, partaking of both extremes; so God the
Creator and most high over all, is united with men, the noblest of his visible
Creatures, by him that is both God and Man, made like to us in all things, but
without si^, and therefore behoved to dye and rise again, to lay a Foundation
for our Faith and Hope, that though we dye, we shall also rise again. Nor is
this my single Persuasion, but that of very judicious and wise Men, long before
me; and Paulus Ricius, a Jew by Birth, but who became a Christian, in his
Treatise de Coelesti Agricultura, lib. 1. from page 40 to 52. shows how there
are many excellent Symboles in the Creation, that as Types and Examples hold
forth that great Mystery of Christ, God and Man, that were to be united in one;
and that this man could be but one only single man in the entire nature of Man
of Soul and Body, in all essential parts, who should be both God and Man; and
for this, he cites a saying in Aristotle, which is this, lib. 10. Metaph. In
quolibet genere rerum daturmum maximum, et omnium ahorum summum, i. e. in every
kind of things there is one the greatest and highest of all others: And who is
this but the Man Christ Jesus? who only among all men is both God and Man, and
the Head of all m^n? And by exce^lent Symboles and Examples he shows how this
one man was to dye for all other men, and rise again. And therefore however
strange it may seem unto you, not only many things in the Creation, but the
whole Creation it self is a Book full of Symboles, Vails and Figures, pointing
at Christ, even the Man Christ, who was to suffer Death, and rise again for the
Salvation of men; and yet I do most freely acknowledge, that the Books of Moses
and the Prophets did mo^e fully and distinctly hold forth this great Mystery.
But seeing ye grant, That the Vails and Types of the Ceremonial Law did suffice
to the Jews and People of Israel, so far as outward helps and means were
requisite, to shadow and hold ^orth Christ unto them; the same may be said as
concerning the Gentiles, that in some sort, sufficient (as in respect of
outward helps and means) for that day and time, until more knowledge should
come into the World, was the Book of the outward Creation, together with that
knowledge they had, that they were to sacrifice unto God, as is above said. And
as God gave to the Jews and People of Israel his good spirit to instruct them,
in the signification of the Mosaical and Ceremonial Law, and the Types and
Shadows thereof, so no doubt he gave a measure of his good Spirit to instruct
the Gentiles what these Types and Figures, legible in the Book of the whole
Creation, did signify; for as the Book of Wisdom says, The incorruptible
Spirit of God is in all, that is confirmed by Scripture; for God gave his
Spirit unto, and by his Spirit strove with the People of the old World; and it
is the Light of Christ, the Word, and of the Spirit, that convinces and
reproves of sin, that lights every man that comes into the World; which,
however ye call it only natural and humane, we have good cause to believe it is
divine and supernatural, yet lightning the dark nature of Man; and as it is
absurd for any to hold a Book to a man's face in the dark, and bid him read
therein, when he has no sufficient light to read with, so it were absurd, that
God has set so excellent a Book, as the whole Creation, before the Eyes of men
universally, I mean the Eyes of their understanding, and not give them
sufficient Light, in some measure, to enable them to understand what is writ
therein; and seeing that Book contains true and real Types and Symboles,
Figures and Shadows of Christ, as he was to come in the flesh, and suffer
death, and rise again, it follows, God has given all men so much inward
Light, as whereby they might read and understand what is written therein
concerning the Man Christ (although the express Hebrew and Greek Names Messiah and
Christ be not known to them) in such an obscure way and manner, as might serve
to that time; but the great Glory and Light of the Mystery of God manifest in
flesh, which is Jesus Christ come in the Flesh, who is both God and Man, and
yet one Christ, does incomparably surpass not only what all Vails and Types,
either of the Law or outward Creation, can discover, but all declaration of
words, and cannot be perfectly known but by a very high degree of divine
Revelation; and no doubt, the full discovery of it is reserved to the Life to
come, where it shall be matter of eternal Admiration and Adoration to Saints
and Angels.

And lest you should say, This is some new Fancy of mine, and some other late
Writers, or apostate Heretics, as ye use to say, I shall recite a Testimony of
a very ancient Writer, who is judged to be either Ambrose or Prosper, above
twelve hundred Years ago, in that famous and noted Treatise, De vocatione
Gentium* i. e. of the calling of the Gentiles, much esteemed and cited by
Protestants of great note, and particularly by Vossius and Grotius, learned and
judicious Protestants: In the said Treatise, de vocatione Gentium, lib. 2. cap.
1. ad fin. he says in express words, citing Acts 14. And indeed he left not
himself without a Witness, giving Rains from Heaven, and fruitful Seasons,
filling Your hearts with Food and Gladness. But what is this Testimony that was
always serviceable to the Lord, and never was silent of his Goodness and
Power, but the very indeclarable Beauty of the whole World, and the rich and
orderly largition, o^ his indeclarable benefits, by which, cretain Tables o^
his eternal Law were given to the hearts of men, that the common and public
Doctrine of divine Institution might be read in the pages of the Elements, and
in the Volumns (or Books) of the Times; therefore the Heavens and all heavenly
things, Sea and Land, and all things in them, by the ^armonious Consent of
their kind and order, did attest the Glory of God, and by a perpetual
preaching, did speak the Majesty o^ their Author. But this is not all, he
further says, And yet the greatest number of men, who were permitted to follow
the ways of their own will, did not understand, and did not follow this Law,
and the Savor of Life, which breathed, or inspired unto Life [Note, is not
this in some degree Evangelical] was made unto them, the savor of Death unto
Death, that even in these visible Testimonies it might be learned, that the
Letter kills, but the Spirit gives Life. And immediately in the following
Chapter, he says, Therefore what was done in Israel by the appointment of the
Law, and the Sayings (or Oracles) of the Prophets, the Testimonies of the whole
Creation, and the Miracles of the divine Goodness, did perform in all Nations.
And that the Rainbow was a sign of Salvation, the same Author expresses in
the following words, lib. 2. cap. 4. And the Security of Salvation (^aith he)
is consecrated in the Testimony of the Rainbow, consisting of diverse Colors,
that is in the sign of the manifold Grace; the which Mysteries and Sacraments,
did not instruct these very few men of one Family only, but in them all their
Posterity, that what was given for the Instruction of the Parents, might be
profitable to the knowledge of their Sons: Thus he. And in the same Book, cap.
9. he says, And it is manifest that by diverse and innumerable manners, God
will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the Truth; but
who come, they are directed by the help of God; who come not, they resist by
their own pertinacy. And in the beginning of that Chapter, he says, The Grace
of God indeed does principally appear in all Justifications, counselling with
Exhortations, admonishing with Examples, terrifying with Dangers, inciting with
Miracles, inspiring Counsel [Note the word Inspiring] and enlightening the Heart
it self, and induing it with the Affections of Faith. And a little after, Which
help (viz. of divine Grace) ^^ offered or applied unto all, by innumerable
ways, either hid or open; and that it is rejected by many, it is their own
Wickedness; but that it is received by many, it is both of the divine Grace,
and of the Will of Man, viz. cooperating. And cap. 10. he says, We have
labored to prove, so far as God has helped us, that not only in the last
days, but in all the foregoing Ages, the Grace of God was present with all
men, with a like Providence and general Goodness, but in a manifold manner of
working, and diverse measure; for either hidd^nly or openly he is (as said the
Apostle) the Savior of all men, but especially of them that believe. The which
Sentence, of most subtle shortness and great strength, if it be considered with
a quiet sight, does end this whole Controversy; for by saying, He is the
Savior of all Men, he has confirmed the general goodness of God over all men,
but by adding, especially of them that believe, he shows that there is a part
of Mankind, which by the merit of Faith, divinely inspired [Note the words,
Faith divinely inspired, ye who deny divine Inspiration to be remaining] 'is
carried on to the highest and eternal Salvation, by special benefits. And a
little after, he says, 'And although that general Vocation does not cease, yet
that special Vocation i^ now made common to all. And immediately before, he
says, No place of the World is destitute of the Gospel of Christ. Where it is
worth the observing, how he holds forth a twofold Vocation and Calling, both
of Grace, and belonging to the Gospel and Salvation; the one general, the other
special, and peculiar to such who have the Gospel preached to them by the
Ministry of Men, and have the benefit of the holy Scriptures. And Luther, in
the Book called his Mensalia, cap. 6. p. 101. says, In all Creatures we see a
Declaration and Signification of the holy Trinity, the Substance signifies the
Almighty Power of God, the Father; the Form and Shape declares the Wisdom of
God, the Son; the Power and Strength is a sign of the holy Ghost, in so much
that God is present in all his Creatures. Thus far Luther expressly. And since
ye say, Your Knowledge and Faith of Christ, in this Life, as well as your
Holiness and Obedience, is not perfect, do ye not think, if ye come to Heaven
(as I wish ye may, by unfeigned Rep^ntance, for your gainsaying the Truth)
that ye shall receive the more perfect knowledge of Christ at or after Death?
and then why not faithful Gentiles, as well as ye?

Page 96. Ye ask, Where do I find three Baptisms in Scripture, etc? I Answ. I
find in Scripture the Baptism of Moses, for the Fathers were baptized into
Moses, in the Cloud and in the Sea; 2dly, The Baptism of John; 3dly, the
Baptism of Christ with Fire and the holy Ghost; and some were under a divine
Dispensation, who knew God only as a general Father to Mankind, but knew not
that God had an only begotten Son; and others knew that God was, and Christ was
the Son of God, and believed, knowing only the Doctrine of John, and said, They
knew not that there was an holy Ghost, viz. to inspire men; and in this same
Ignorance ye are at this day. And without doubt, every divine Dispensation has
it^ inward peculiar Baptis^ and Washing; and that a man's Salvation may be begun
under the first, but not perfected, I still affirm, and have proved, and ye
have not disproved it.

Page 99. Ye speak very igno^antly and scoffingly against Christ, the Light in
all men, saying, Is it the Light in men that was born of a Virgin, hanged on a
Tree? I Answer; Here ye more act the part of Socinians, like your Brethren in
Opposition, Pardon Tillinghast and B. Keech, who use the same Language, and
whom I have answered, than like Orthodox and Sound Christians; does not the
Scripture say, They killed the Prince of Life; and he who was killed and hanged
on a Tree, was not a mere Body, but a Man, consisting of Spirit, Soul and Body;
and was not a mere Man, but both God and Man; and He who was hanged on a Tree
said, He was the Light of the World, and in him it pleased the Father all
fullness should dwell, of Light, Life and Grace, and a measure of his Light and
Spirit, that neither is nor can be separated from the fullness, is in all men,
in a day of Visitation, and dwells in the Saints, and is revealed in great
Glory in them; but in Unbelievers it is very greatly veiled and hid, and is the
Light shining in Darkness, etc. and the Man Christ, who did hang on the Tree,
is that second Man who is the quickening Spirit; and ye may as well say, Did
the quickening Spirit hang on the Tree? surely he who suffered Death on the
Tree was both God and Man, and not a mere Man; and yet he suffered not as God,
nor in his Godhead, but in his Manhood. Your Ignorance is greatly to be
lamented, who are thus ignorant of the first Principles of the Doctrine of
Christ, although ye profess your selves Ministers of the Gospel; Take heed of
willful Ignorance; that unless men be in the Faith* Christ is not in them, in
that peculiar sense of the word Inbeing, as it signifies union, and
in-dwelling, and enjoyment, is granted, as we say, in one sense, the seed is
not in the ground, though sown, till it begin to take root, but yet according
to the more general sense he is in all men; for his illumination and operation
cannot be separated from him.

Ye say, I falsely render the place, James 1.21. (...), Innate Word. But ye only
say it, without proof; it is composed of en, in and phyo, nascor, therefore in
true English it is innate, and is so used by Plutarch, a Greek Author, who
says, There is a Faith, innate, emphutos, in every reasonable Creature, living
and dwelling in the Soul, and never leaving the Soul destitute of Guidance; and
it is used in the same signification by Clemens Alexandrinus, writing to the
Gentiles, where speaking of the inward Witness, which was in Unbelievers, he
calls it, Emphuton Martyra, testem innatum, fide dignum, The innate Witness,
worthy of Faith; and I suppose ye judge not your selves better or so well
skilled in the Greek language, as Plutarch and Clemens Alexandrinus, who were
Greek Authors, and Grecians by Birth.

Ye say, If the Light be connate with men, what needed G. K. make such a
splutter about Immediate Revelations? It may be said to be both innate and
connate with men, not as ye imagine Accidents or Qualities to be in a subject;
but seeing the eternal Word and Wisdom has created all Souls of men after his
Image, therefore in a special way of presence that etern^l Word and Wisdom is
in all Souls of men, by a measure of it planted, or if ye will grafted in all
men; for grafted and innate may be of the same signification, and this eternal
Word and Wisdom has its operation and influence on the Understanding of the
Souls of men generally, to enlighten them gradually, first with the more common
and plain things of Religion, and then, as the former are learned, with the
more special and peculiar Mysteries of the Christian Religion, yet not without
the use of the holy Scriptures, in Gods ordinary way, so distinctly and
perfectly as Christians know them, who have the use of the Scriptures; and all
internal divine Illumination is properly Revelation.

P. 102. Ye find great fault that I conclude, That the inward Dispensation that
is among the Gentiles, that have not Christ outwardly preached ( viz. by the
Ministry of men, and the holy Scriptures) has its glory and great service to
those that are faithful in it; and ye say, This is to talk at liberty my self,
and to deny all others a liberty to judge. But herein ye wrong me, I allow all
spiritual men a liberty to judge. I question not, but to all such who have a
spiritual discerning and ability to judge what I have affirmed of the glory and
great serviceableness of the inward divine Dispensation in the Gentiles, will
be approved, and my Reasons and Proofs, both from Scripture and other Authors,
found vallid. And though ye seek to untye that ye call, a knot, that I judge is
indissolvable, p. 91. I judge so still, that ye shall never be able to untye
it, as ye persist in your Doctrine: But yet ye pervert my words, in that ye
call the Knot; for I did thus argue, That seeing Infants, by your confession,
might be saved by Christ, and regenerated by the Spirit of Christ, that works
when, and where, and how he pleases, Therefore might the honest and faithful
Gentiles be saved by the same regenerating Spirit of Christ, who works when,
and where, and how he pleases, and by faith in Christ. But that ye may with
some seeming show, appear to loose the Knot, ye word my Argument quite another
way, I Infants may be saved by the working of the Spirit in them, why may not
the Gentiles be so, by giving obedience to the Light in them? And thus ye would
make me appear to the ignorant as if I did plead, that the Gentiles were or
could be saved without faith in Christ, and the regenerating Spirit of Christ,
only by obedience to the general dictates of the Light within; but I say,
though none are saved, but who are obedient to the Light in them, yet no
Obedience can save, without faith in Christ, and the Spirit of Christ
regenerating them, that is altogether necessary to every man's eternal Salvation.

Whereas I produced diverse very convincing Arguments to prove, That the Light
in men that did accuse or reprove for sin, could not be some natural faculty of
man's Soul; these Arguments some of them ye pass over very slightly, answering
by your bare Affirmations, without proof, and some ye give no answer unto at
all, nor take any notice of, see my Book, p. 119, 120, 121. which I again
recommend to the Readers serious consideration. I argued, That since ye
confess, that man is wholly defiled and darkened, so that he i^ called Darkness
in Scripture, therefore the Light in natural men could not be any part or
faculty of their Souls; for that were to say, Men are not fallen totally, nor
totally defiled, but in part. And I further argued, That since your Confession
says, All Sin is a Transgression against the Righteous Law of God, and since
the Heathen are sinners, this righteous Law of God must be in them, against
which they transgress; and this righteous Law cannot be any part o^ faculty of
the Soul, which ye confess, is wholly unrighteous and d^filed; for a thing
cannot be wholly unrighteous and defiled, and yet in part righteous, holy and
clean; To this I find not that ye say any thing. Ye say, I mistake, when I
think ye reckon it any distinct Faculty: but the Mistake is yours, not mine; I
did not think that ye do reckon it any distinct Faculty; but on the contrary, I
blame you for saying, It is nothing else but the natural Conscience, or some
natural Faculty of man's Soul; so that ye are wonderfully careless of what ye
say; see my Book, page 119. and your Book page 98. And yet ye seem to make it
now, Not the natural Understanding, but something there imprinted. Well, let it
be something there imprinted, this evinceth, that it is properly Gods Word; for
I hope ye will not deny, but that which God writes or printeth with his own
Hand or Finger, is Gods Word, and does as well, or rather more deserve to be
accounted the Word of God, as that printed in the Bible, seeing God is the
immediate Printer of this, without the Ministry of men; but the Print of the
Bible is the work of Men, though the Truth there witnessed is immediately of
God; and therefore by your Confession, there is an inward written or printed
Word of God in Heathens, and generally in all men, and that immediately,
without the use or help of the Scriptures, commonly called the outward Word.
Hence it clearly follows, that the Word without is not the whole Word of God,
nor the only Rule, in contradiction to you who affirm it. And seeing, by your
Confession, the Word of God is in the Gentiles or Heathen, who have not the
Scriptures, why may not the same virtue and efficacy be given to it, as to that
which ye say is contained in the Scriptures? It is improper to prefer that
which is writ or printed on Paper by the labor and work of Men, to that which
by God immediately is printed on men's hearts and souls, without the wo^k of
men. And since ye grant, That there is a Law written in men's hearts
universally, by God himself, Why may not that Law be understood to be the same
mentioned, Psalm. 19.7. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul?
yea, that it must and ought to be so understood, is clear from that analogy
that the Wisdom of God in David makes betwixt the preaching of the Heavens and
Firmament, Day and Night, and the course of the Sun, and the Preaching or
Testimony of this inward Law, that as universal as the outw^rd is, so universal
is the inward; for the outward is the Symbol, Figure and Type of the inward,
as the Ceremonial Law of Moses was symb^lical of the inward Gospel-Law; and if
both had not been Universal the Analogy would have been improper and false; for
the true Analogy is betwixt two Universals, and not one universal, and another
particular: And Paul, by the Spirit of God applies the universal Language of
the Heavens and Firmament, Day, and Night, and Sun, to the preaching of the
Gospel, Romans 10.18. by the same Analogy. Ye contradict^ the Scripture expressly,
when ye deny it, tha^ the Law in the Gentiles, so far as they obeyed it, made
them excusable; for as some had thoughts that accused them when they did evil,
so they had thoughts that excused them when they did well; and this excusing of
them proceeded originally from the Law it self within them, see Romans 2.15.
which ye expressly contradict. And for Gods inward speaking to men, most
frequently without the Ministry of men or books, as outwardly, I cited diverse
observable places of Scripture, as Psalm. 94.10. Psalm. 50.1.16 to 22. Amos 4.13,
Micah 6.8. Prove. 8.1, 2, 3, 4. Job 28.28.24.13. and 21.14. and that noted
place, Luke 12.20. from all which I did conclude, that it has been the way of
God, and ever will be, to speak to men in their hearts, to call them, and warn
them, and fore-warn them of evil and danger, and to persuade and incline them
to that which is good. And all these places of Scripture prove, that God does
at present, and in every Age, move and stir upon men's Consciences, and s^eak in
them by his Word and Voice, as really as he did in the Prophets, though not
equally, nor the same in all respects, and this is immediate Revelation and
Inspiration, seeing God does it without the Ministry of men most frequently,
even in the Heathen, and in the Wicked, when they are neither hearing men, nor
reading, nor thinking on any place of Scripture; and all this ye merely slubber
over, with a bare Magisterial Affirmation, saying, That it is all but the
actings of a natural Conscience, under legal Convictions: But tell me, What
works these Legal Convictions? does not the Scripture say, it is God? and he
does it by speaking to them in their hearts; for God does not use to speak to
men by an outward audible Voice; and therefore there is more in men than what
ye call a Relic left in men of a natural Conscience; there is that which
newly, and freshly, and immediately calls to men in their hearts, and is a
new gift and visitation of God. I find not that ye say any thing but one, that
has some shadow or appearance of weight, and that is from Romans 8.3. and Gal.
3.21. viz. That the Law is weak, through the flesh, and cannot give Life: And
this is even that Law which was within both Jews and Gentiles universally, and
was not the mere outward Law. But to this I Answer, That by the [Law] in these
places cited by you, and in many other places that could be ^^ted, as Romans
3.19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, etc. and Gal. 3.8, 9, 10, ^1, 12, 13. is
indeed to be understood, not the mere outward Law given to the People of
Israel, but the Law within in its first Administration or Dispensation, that
has its proper work and service to condemn, and not to justify, to wound,
bruise and kill, and not to heal, bind up and make alive; and this first
^dministration of the Law is most necessary and proper, and is the real effect
and work of Christ in his inward appearance in men's hearts, as a Lawgiver and
judge, but not so properly, nor clearly, nor distinctly as a Savior, as he
appears in his second Administration perfectly to save the Soul, and deliver
it from Sin, and Wrath, and perfectly to restore and renew it into the
Conformity of his own Image, by faith in him, the whole Christ, entire and
undivided, both as he came in the flesh, suffered Death for our sins, rose
again, etc. ascended into Heaven, and is now in Heaven, our Intercessor and
Advocate with the Father, and as he comes in Spirit.

And of this twofold Administration of Christ, first, as a Lawgiver, secondly,
as a perfect Savior, Moses and Joshua were Types; Moses was a type of Christ,
in his first Ministration, and Joshua was a type of him, as a perfect Savior
in his second Ministration, both which are inward; for though the true
Christian Faith, respects Christ come in the flesh without us, and now
glorified in Heaven, in the glorified nature of Man, etc. yet the Mystery of
this, and the worth of his Death and Intercession, must be inwardly opened and
revealed in us, by the Spirit of Christ: And as Moses led the People out of
Egypt, through the red Sea, and through the Wi^derness, and brought them to
Jordan, and the borders of the good Land, and no further, and then dyed; so
Josh^a was raised up, to bring them beyond Jordan, into the good Land;
therefore Moses begun the wo^k, but Joshua finished it: Which two are plain
figures of the twofold inward Ministration of Christ, the one that is more
Legal than Evangelical, and has the Evangelical hid in it, but not clearly
revealed, the other that is clearly and apparently Evangelical; and because the
second inward Ministration of Christ in men's hearts does not appear at first,
in its fullness of vigor and strength, but gradually, therefore there is a
mixture of the first and second, which is a middle Dispensation, consisting of
both; and this is well known and experienced by spiritual Travelers, although
to you it is a Mystery and a Riddle, that ye mock at, rather than enquire into.
And concerning this diversity of inward Dispensations and Ministrations, both
having one Author, to wit, the Lord Jesus Christ, not only the people called
Quakers, but many sober, and juditious Protestants have given Te^^^mony, and
their Testimony is upon record in print, some calling them Three, and referring
them, the one to the Father, the other to the Son, together with the Father,
and the third and Last to the Holy Ghost, together with the Father, and the
Son; and of these three inward divine Dispensations, he called Doctor Gell, an
English Protestant, whose Works are printed in English, and well received by
many Protestants, though he was no Quaker, has particularly made mention, and
th^se three Dispensations being reduceable unto two, (a^ suppose there may be
several mixtures of Water and Wine, three, four, or seven, or more, yet still
they are but two viz. Water and Wine) some other Protestants have mentioned and
explained them, as particularly Henry Vane, in his book called, The retired
man's Meditations, etc. whom I the rather particularly mention, because there
are some in New England, and perhaps members of your Church, who both knew him,
and have a true respect to him, as judging him a sincere Christian, and neither
Heretic nor Apostate, for his Doctrine; and yet when I or any of my f^iends
hold forth the same Doctrine, of distinct inward Dispensations, and
Ministrations, nothing differning in substance, such is your want of Charity,
that we are Heretics, and Blasphemers, and fearful and incorrigible Apostates,
which shows great Partiality in you; and that we would evaporate the Gospel
into Allegories and Dispensations, as ye phrase it. But ye are greatly
mistaken; although we own the due and moderate use of Allegories, well
warranted by Paul and the other Apostles, and Prophets, and by good Christian
writers in all Ages, yet we place not the Gospel in the mere All^gory or
Figure, that is but the Shell; the Substance is the inward kirnel, hid under
the Shell. And for variety of Dispensations, the Scripture is plain and
express, and mentions the Dispensation of the fullness of Time, when Christ
after his Death, and Resurrection, gave the holy Ghost to all true Believers,
as the more excellent, far exceeding any former Dispensation, when Christ was
the Mystery hid in great part, from Ages and Generations, and not so revealed,
as when the fullness of Time came. And ye your selves hold forth differing
Dispensations of Grace, if any Credit can be given to your words, page 87.
where ye say, We thought there had been different Dispensations of Grace
clearly intimated, Romans 11.7. Whereby ye plainly insinuate, That even such who
are not saved, are under a Dispensation of Grace; and yet this, though affirmed
by us, is denied by you, who restrict the Grace of God only to such who are
saved; so ye say and unsay the same thing, little heeding what ye say; and
though ye blame me for thi^, ye are guilty of it, and not I; for I doubt not
but that I can well defend all my Sayings to be well consistent one with
another. And notwithstanding that I readily grant unto you, yea, and plead for
it, as much as any, that the first Administration of Christ and God, in men's
hearts, is weak, and is not sufficient of it self to justify and save with
eternal Sa^vation, and to give eternal Life, without the second, that is to
follow, which gives faith in Christ, as come in the flesh, dead and raised
again, and more abundant Grace that does accompany that Faith and Knowledge of
Christ, as such, yet all this nothing serves your turn in the least; for we
never asserted the sufficiency of the first Manifestation and Ministration of
Christ in men's hearts, as alone and without the second; but as relative unto
it, and as regarding it as the end of the first. And yet we still affirm, that
God and Christ is at work in all men, in a day of Visitation, in order to save
them, and God and Christ are sufficient to begin and carry on the work. And
though Paul call the Law weak, yet it is to be considered, that he calls it
not so absolutely, or of it self, but weak through the flesh, because the flesh
or nature of man is weak to fulfill it, until Christ be revealed in the second
Ministration of him, to fulfill the Righteousness of the Law; And if ye were
not very partial, ye might have understood, by what I charged against you in
Article 5. that I placed not such a Sufficiency in the first degree of Light
and Grace, and in the operation thereof, as did suffice from first to last; but
there is a Sufficiency in it to begin some good work in men, that has a proper
and real tendency to the perfecting the Salvation of men's Souls; as when a
Chyrurgion lanceth a Wound, and searches it, and washes it, that is a
necessary work, and what he does, he does as a skillful, able and sufficient
work man, and that work has a proper and real tendency to perfect the cure;
yet that alone is not enough to cure the Wound, but he must apply his Healing
Plaster to it, and make several new Applications of his Medicine.

And though we still preach God and Christ in men's hearts to be all-sufficient
to save them, yet we never said nor thought, that what is revealed or dispensed
of any inward Ability, Influence or Operation of God and Christ, is sufficient
for all time to come, either to Gentiles or Christians; for the best Christians
need a daily renewed Influence of Grace, of Wisdom, of L^fe and Ability from
God and Christ, to descend upon them, and come into them, and they are to wait
for the daily and hourly incomes of it. And therefore the weakness of the first
inward Admini^tration of Christ, I deny not, but assert; and yet it is not weak
in it self, but through the flesh; and it is weak to justify and save
perfectly, but it is mighty and powerful to reprove, to judge, to wound, to
bruise and to kill; and He, even Christ, and God in Christ, who wounds,
heals; and He who kills, makes alive, and He who bruiseth, binds up, and
He who makes the Soul sick, and sensible that it need^th the Physician,
proves the Physician to the Soul; and such kind of Doctrine I have heard among
the more sober kind of Presbyterians, and some Presbyterian Preachers have
said, That Moses and Joshua were Types of Christ, as we say; and as Moses began
a good Work, though his Ministration was weak, in comparison, and carried the
People a great way, so as to bring them to Jordan, and the border of the good
Land; so we say, Christ's inward Ministration, that Moses outwardly, by way of
Allegory and Analogy did answer unto, though weak comparatively, begins a
good work in men, and carries them a great way, as it were to the spiritual
Jordan, and to the border of the spiritual Canaan, and Kingdom, and then comes
the second inward Ministration, that answers to Joshua, that brings them
into the good Land, and gives them their Lots and Possessions therein. But
still, our Controversy is great and just with you, who say, The Law within is
so weak, and all the Light that is within the Gentiles, or unconverted men,
called Christians, is so impotent and unable, that it can do no good thing in
them, nor can begin the least good work in men, be they never so diligent to
improve it, that has a real tendency to Salvation; which we say it has. For
though the Law be weak, comparatively, yet that proves not, that it has no
ability to work or beget any good thing in men: A weak man or Child can do some
good things; and though man's corrupted Nature can of it self do no good thing,
yet this inward Law and Illumination, even in its first appearance, can and
does help the corrupt Nature of man, partly, if not wholly to cleanse it, and
being cleansed, to enable it to do some good things, which God does not wholly
reject, but in part accept, in and through Christ; and indeed Paul, as he uses
diverse Allegories and Figures whereby to hold forth the service and use of the
Law to men, before Faith came, as that of a Schoolmaster, and that of a first
Husband, so that of a Custody or place of Refuge, like the City of Refuge that
was appointed for the Manslayer to hide himself in from the Avenger of Blood,
where he might remain, as in Prison, yet safe, until the Death of the
High Priest, as does plainly appear from Gal. 3.23. But before Faith came we
were kept under the Law, (which Beza, a French Protestant, tanslateth in his
Latin Translation, sub Legis presidie, i. e. the safeguard or defense of the
Law, and the Greek does well bear it) shut up (as within a custody) unto the
Faith, that should afterward be revealed. And this is clear in the example of
Cornelius, and his Household, who were in a good state, and yet had not the ^^th
of Christ crucified and raised again, as the Christians had it, and as he
ne^ded to have it, to ^eceive the holy Ghost, and the knowledge of remission of
sin, that Peter preached to him, through faith in the Name of the Man Christ
Jesus.

Ye wi^^ not have Romans 1.28. understood prope^ly of Reprobates, but of such as
were not approved of God at that time. Which quite over^urneth your absurd
Doctrine of Reprobation before the World beg^n; for if they were not Reprobates
when ^aul w^ote concerning them, Romans 1.28. to be sure they were not Reprobates
before the beginning of the World, as every School-B^y may judge.

Moreover, ye say, That Law mentioned, James 1.22. etc. cannot be applied to
Christ, not by any tolerable Catacresis. But ye say it, and that is all; why
may not Christ be said to be the Object of our Obedience and Works, as well as
of our Words, without any Catacresis? When the Apostles preached Christ, Christ
was not their preaching or speech, but the object or ground of it, and yet they
are said to preach him, without any catacresis; so that Obedience that men give
to Christ the living Word in their Hearts, has him to be the Object and Ground
of it; and therefore they may be said, by a Metonimy, to act Christ, as well as
to speak him; as we use to say, Such a man acts the Pelagian, or Socinian,
etc. Ye do but trifle, instead of disputing; yea, men's doing the Law, is a
Metonimy; for their doing is not strictly the Law, but a conformity unto it.

And because ye make such a Clamor in the Ears of an ignorant Multitude, as if
the Quakers Doctrine concerning Christ's dying for all men, and giving a measure
of his Grace unto all, were only the Doctrine of vile Heretics, Apostates,
Impostors and Blasphemers, I shall cite some Testimonies of Augustine, and
Orosius, and Chrysostom, ancient Christian Writers of great esteem, who did
hold the same Doctrine with us, (not mentioning many more which I could cite)
Augustine lib. 1. de genes^ ^ontra Ma^ich. cap. 3. in English thus, But that
Light does not feed the Eyes of unreasonable Creatures, but the pure hearts of
them who believe God* and betake themselves from the love of visible and
temporal things, to keep his Commands, which al^ men can, if they will, because
that Light enlighteneth every man that comes i^to the World Orosius in his
Apology against Pelagius, says This is always my Persuasion, and without
doub^ that God does adminster not only in his Body which is the Church, to whom
he bestows speci^^ Gifts of Grace, for the Faith of Believers, but (...) all
Nations in this World his Long-suffering and eternal Clemency, -- daily,
momen^ly and instantly to all and singular. And again, Thou have, as I judge, a
sufficient proof of the cooperating Grace, in the Gentiles, viz. who were not
Christians, Chrysostom on Jo^n 1. If he enlighten every man that comes into
the World, how is it that so many men remain without Light, for all do not know
Christ? How there ore does he enlighten every man? surely he does enlighten
them, so far as belongs to him; but if any willingly shutting their Eyes to
the Beams o^ this Light, would not direct their sight unto it, they have
remained in Darkness, not from the nature of the Light, but their own
Wickedness, who willingly made themselves unworthy o^ so great a Gift. By all
which Testimonies it plainly appears, these worthy men had not such a mean
este^m of the inward Illumination common to all men, as ye have; but on the
contrary did believe, it was the Grace of God, and such a Gift, as being duly
improved, could give them the knowledge of Christ, and enable them to keep Gods
Commands. And the A^elatensian Synod about the Year 490. said, Anathema to him
who shall say, Christ has not dyed for all, nor would have all men to be
saved. And again, Anathema to him, who says, That he who has perished has
not received that he might be saved. And not only ancient Christian Writers,
but Protestants, yea, some Calvinists of great account, as Amyra^d and Dalce
have delivered it as their Persuasion, That Christ has dyed not only for all
kinds and sorts of men, but all, and singulars of all kinds; and have printed
in defense of it. And Testardus, another French Protestant has printed another
large Book in Latin, wherein he proves, That not only Christ has dyed for
all men, whereby all may be saved, but has given inward Grace, sufficient to
save all men; but that whoever are saved, have some special Grace and Favor of
God extended toward them. Besides that, the Arminians and Remonstrants, who
are as justly reckoned Protestants as many others that dissent from them, are
zealous for the universal Grace of God, and Christ his dying for all men; and
yet no sober Protestant will say that all the forenamed are vile Heretics,
and fearful Apostates, and Blasphemers, and Denyers of the Fundamentals of the
Christian Religion, as ye most Uncharitably and Unchristianly judge us; but
your false Judgment will be your own burden.

CAP. VII.
I Need not be large on this or the following Chapters, but take notice
principally of your grossest Perversions and false Quotations, recommending the
substance of my former Book to the Readers, remaining unanswered.

Page 104. Ye pervert my words, as if I said, Christ only adops the adopted,
because I said, Christ has left his spiritual goods, as Justification,
Remission, Adoption and Eternal Life to his Brethren, by spiritual
Regeneration; and since ye deny this, ye must allow, That Christ gives
Remission, Justification, Adoption and Eternal Life to such who are not
spiritually regenerated; which is a Contradiction to your own Doctrine. And
your own Doctrine distinguishes betwixt Regeneration and Adoption. Ye grossly
abuse me, in saying, I confound Justification and Sanctification, alleging, I
fall into downright Popery; for on the contrary I assert Justification as it
is opposed to Condemnation, and according to the most proper and frequent use
of the word, is distinct from Sanctification; as thus, Justification is Gods
act of his free Grace, whereby he forgiveth the sins of all true Believers and
Penitents, and accepts and owneth them to be righteous in Christ, being
clothed with Christ and his Righteousness, imputed freely unto them, and whom
he has truly sanctified and begot into a true and real state of inward
Holiness and Righteousness; so that true inward Righteousness and Holiness, or
Sanctification, i^ not the Foundation of Justification, but a Condition and
Qualification required, in order thereunto; and I place inward Righteousness
and Holiness no other way than Faith, by which men are justified, to wit, as
necessary Conditions and Instruments of Justification; and all true Believers
are clothed, not only with Christ imputed Righteousness, in respect of wh^t he
has done and suffered for them, ^ut with Christ himself, in-dwelling, living
and ruling in their h^arts, making them really hol^ and righteous; and this is
a double clothing unto them, or as the Scarlet that is of a double Die,
wherewith all the true Child^en of Jerusalem from above, the Mother of all the
faithful, are clothed, so that they are not afraid of the Snow, according to
Prove 31.21. But all such who think, that the alone Righteousness of Christ
without them, while they are not inwardly clothed with real inward
Righteousness, will cover them, will be greatly disappointed. True inward
Sanctification and Justification, though distinct, yea are not divided, nor is
the one perfect without the other; he, who is imperfectly sanctified, cannot,
while such, be perfectly justified; Sanctification is ingredient in the Object
of Justification, and so is distinct from it; for it is only the holy Man whom
God justifies by his act of his free Grace and Favor. And therefore
Sanctification is in the priority of order, though not of time, before
Justification, as the Object is prior in order to the Act; for as God
condemns none but him who is wicked, so he justifies none but who is ho^y;
and he justifi^th the Ungodly from their Ungodliness, not in it, viz. such who
had been formerly ungodly, being now sanctified, he justifies them; and still,
Justification is as much the free Grace of God, as our Sanctification, yea,
both equally his free Gifts and Favor. Note, that Augustine, cap. 26. de spir.
er lit. does acknowledge a twofold sense of the word [Justified] in Scripture;
1. To make just by the inward effect of Righteousness, wrought in men by the
Spirit of God: 2. To account, reckon or repute to be just. And many Protestant
Writers of great note have acknowledged that twofold sense, and for the first
they cite Rev. 22.11. He that is just let him be just still, or more justified.

Page 106. Ye say, It is a great mistake in me, to say, that Faith is one hand
to receive Christ, and Love another; and ye further say, By Faith we receive
Christ, and by Love we serve him. A very unlearned and foolish distinction; do
we not serve him both by Faith and Love? Yea, and we receive him by both Faith
and Love, and by both he dwells in our hearts. And as ye bring no proof to
contradict it, so the truth of what I say is manifest; for it is the Love of
the Heart and Soul, as well as Faith, that qualifieth it to receive Christ,
yea, Love does most sweetly embrace Christ; for it is the nature of Love to
embrace its beloved Object; the loving Parent embraces the loving Child, and
the loving Child embraces the loving Parent, and one Friend embraces another
Friend, and not only receives him into his House, bu^ into his Heart; and the
^^ore one said, The So^l is more where it lovet^, than where it breaths; and
al^ sensible Souls, who know in experience wh^t it is to love Christ, will
contradict you, and say with me, That by and with their Love, that he has
begot in them, they receive Christ, they embrace him, and hold him, as we^^ as
by Faith. It s^emeth too much, it is your want of s^iritual experience in this
Love, that makes you talk so widely. Yea, Faith, as it is a fiducial act of
the Soul, and of the Will, and not a bare assent of the Understanding, has
Love and Des^^e in it, and belonging to the very nature and being of it, as
Augustine said, What is it to believe in God? by believing, to love him, and to
go into him. The virtue of divine Love does wonderfully knit and unite the
hearts of true Believers to Christ, and one to another, according to Col. 2.2.
and this is felt by all that have any measure of the divine Love shed abroad in
their hearts; and if Love knit the heart to Christ, by Love it receives him,
as that which knitteth the Graft to the Tree, causes the Graft to receive the
Life and Substance of the Tree into it.

Ye say, In my sixth Paragraph I give up the whole cause, if I speak sincerely.
Answ. I speak sincerely, and acco^ding to the plain and genuine sense of all
the words contained in it, and yet I give up none of my Cause to you, but still
I differ from you considerably; for I say in the same Parag^a^h, That real
inward Holiness and Righteo^s^ess, as well as Faith, are the Instruments
whereby ^en are j^stified, yet they are not the Foundation and g^o^nd of
Justification. And as thi^ clear^th us of ^opery, so it does not make us one
with you, unless ye, and not I, give up your Cause; for ye say, Only Faith, and
not real inward Holin^ss and Righteousness, a^e the Instruments of
J^stification.

Page 107. That Paul, and other Saints renounced inward Holiness and
Righteo^sness, after believing, for being so much as Instruments of
Justification, ye can never prove, though neither he nor they did build on
them, but on Christ, the alone Foundation of Justification and of
Sanctification, and all other Blessings and Mercies; and to be justified by
Works, is but a secondary Justification; for inward Holiness and Righteousness
planted and begot in the Soul, is before Works of Righteousness, as the Tree is
good before it bear good Fruit, and as some Worthy Protestants have said, A
good Tree makes good Fruit; but a Tree cannot bear good Fruit before it be
good. We are created by an inward Work of Christ's new creating unto good
Works; and therefore this new Creation and work of Sanctification is before
good Works outwardly wrought, in order of cause, as the good Tree is before the
Fruit.

Page 108. That Faith is used in Scripture, not only to signify Gospel
Doctrine, as ye grant, but Gospel Holiness and Virtues, by a synecdoche of the
part for the whole, is clear to any who are not partial; for the just shall
live by Faith; and said Paul, the Life that I now live I live by Faith; and yet
certainly his Life was not only the Life of Faith, but of Love, and other
divine Virtues: And whereas the Faith of the Elders is frequently mentioned,
Heb. 11. is it only their single Faith that is there commended, or rather the
whole Body of divine Virtues, whereof the Root, as it were, is Faith, as when
we name a Tree by the Root, we understand the Branches included, and when we
number men by the Head, we understand the Body also; and Gal. 3.5. after that
Faith is come, that was not the Doctrine only, but the Grace of Faith, together
with all the other accompanying Graces and Virtues; and as Unbelief is put in
Scripture for all other sin that men generally are under, Romans 11.32. so Faith
signifies the whole Body of the Christian Graces and Virtues; but of this ye
take no notice, but pass it with a dry foot, because ye can give no sollid
Answer to it, though mentioned in my first Book.

And that it may appear I am not Popish, in the Doctrine of Justification, hear
the Judgment of James Durham, a Presbyterian Preacher, in his Commentary on the
Revelations, in one of his Digressions, where he says, Who only place
Repentance, Conversion and Holiness, etc. but as Conditions necessary to
Justification, and but equally necessary as Faith, and in the same respect with
Faith (or in words to that effect) the are not to be accounted Popish; and
therefore hitherto ye cannot, nor shall find, in what ^emaineth, any Doctrine
asserted by me* that is either ^opery or Heresy, but what is defended by as
good Protestants, and better than your selves, and which has the Scripture
Authority to warrant it.

Ye say, Ye understand not the meaning of my Rant about a Christ divided, a
Christ without, and a Christ within, a Christ in Heaven, and a Christ in the
Heart; we believe, say ye, that there is but one Christ, etc. Here ye grossly
misrepresent my words, and pervert the sense of them, as if I did divide
Christ, or hold two Christ's, one Christ in Heaven, and another Christ in the
Heart: Let the Reader see my words in my Book, and he will find, that I am not
for dividing Christ, but blame them who do divide him, either in his Offices or
in himself; nor do I use these words, a Christ in Heaven, and a Christ in the
Heart, as if they were two; but I say, it is one and the same Christ, which is
both in Heaven, and also in the Hearts of his Children; and seeing ye call this
a Rant, it is plain, that ye do not own Christ at all in the Hearts of the
Saints: Let this be well remembered against you, for ye call it a Rant, to say,
Christ is both in the Heaven, and in the Heart; did not the Lord say, He
dwells in the High and Holy Places, and also in the Hearts of them that are
Contrite, etc? Ye say, He dwells in the Hearts of all his People by his
Virtue, Influence and Grace: But I say, his Virtue, Influence and Grace cannot
be in the heart without him, and separated from him; for if by Grace ye mean,
Faith, Hope, Love, they would fail, wither and dye, if he were not present to
nourish and preserve them. And how sillily and foolishly do ye infer, page 135.
That I hold two Christ's, because I say, That by the Spirit of Christ a man is
joined both to Christ in him, and to Christ in Heaven; and if two Unions, then
two Christ's, say ye. But ye fight against your own shadow, I say nothing of two
Unions, nor do my words infer it, more than when I say, a Graft that is grafted
into a Tree is united both to the Branch that it is grafted into, and also to
the whole Tree: Does it thence follow, that there are here two Unions and two
Trees? or that the foot is both united to the Life or Soul in it, and to the
Life or Soul in the Head, that therefore there are two Unions and two Heads?
This shallow way of your Reasoning shows what learned Clarks ye are.

Page 108, 109. Ye deny, That Faith has any assurance in the being and nature
of it, but only that which is Objective, and not Subjective. And thus with
School-Terms and Phrases ye seek to cover your selves in the Clouds, from
Ignorant People: But let me explain it in English what ye say, which is this,
That Christ and H^^piness has the Assurance, but the Faith has no Assurance
of Knowledge, or Evidence in the Nature of it; as who would say, There is
assuredly such a City as London, or Paris, but he who is going toward it has
no assurance he is in the true way that leads to it. Ye say further, This
assurance may be had without extraordinary Revelation; and so say I; for it is
ordinary to thousands of Gods Saints in all Ages; but what is that to you who
deny all Revelation, both ordinary and extraordinary at present, and say, The
former ways of Gods revealing his will are ceased? And yet many Protestants
have acknowledged a Spirit of Prophecy in some of the Martyrs, as in George
Wisehart and others, as is to be seen in Fox's Book of Martyrs, which
contradict the Confession of the Assembly, espoused by you.

CAP. VIII.
Page 109. Ye commit a great Abuse, when ye say I deny the Doctrine of
Perseverance. I own both the Doctrine and Grace of Perseverance, to all to whom
God does give it; and my earnest Prayer is frequent unto God for my self, and
Brethren every where, yea, all who love the lord, in any measure, is, whatever
Name they go under, that he may be pleased to establish them in that which is
good, and crown them with that most noble Grace of Perseverance. And upon this
head, ye, and not I give a way the Cause, though ye contradict your selves in
so doing for ye grant, That not only ^ommon and preparatory works that are
wrought in men, that work a Reformation in many things, but also a Faith may be
lost, that is real and true, and not false and hypocritical, for ye say
expressly, Page 111. We must distinguish betwixt a false-Faith, and one that is
not saving. So ye grant, that Faith which is not false but true, may be lost;
but whether it may be called saving, is rather a strife of words, than any
thing else, which I love not to contend about. That it is not fin^lly and
eventually saving, is certain, otherwise it would have continued; but yet that
it had a preparatory service and use, and began a good work, that is not false
and hypocritical ye grant, and if ye did abide by what ye have said in this
matter, the Controversy might end, as to that head.

Page 110. The cutting off the Natural Branches, If we may believe your bare
Authority, for ye give no shadow of proof, ye will have it relate only to a
vi^ib^e Church state; but the contrary is manifest from this, that as the
cutting off is, so shall the grafting in again be; for that Romans 11. contains
a plain Prophecy of the Conversion of the Jews, and People of Israel, when
all Israel shall be saved. And surely, that Conversion and Salvation, is a real
thing. Ye are no less absurd to say, The Oil that the foolish Virgins had in
their Lamps was only a Profession they had of Grace; and yet ye say expressly,
Their Lamps was their Profession, which is a gross Self-Contradiction; for the
Lamp and the Oil could not be one and the same thing; if the Lamp, as ye say,
is the Profession, the Oil must be something else, unless ye will say, The Oil
is the Cask, and the Cask is the Oil.

Page 112. Ye strangely contradict your selves in answer to Ezekiel. 18.24.
saying, The Scriptures assure us, that no true Believer shall totally and
finally fall away from Grace. How strangely do ye forget your selves, who
within a few Lines before did affirm, That the Faith that may be fallen from is
not a false Faith, see page 111. line 8.

Page 113. Ye argue, That David's Fall, when he committed Murder and Adultry,
was not totally from Grace, because he prayed, Psalm. 51.11. Take not thy holy
Spirit from me. But ye are strangely inconsiderate; may ye not think, that a
Child can answer you? when David prayed that Prayer, God had begun to restore
him again, and that Psalm is called one of his penitential Psalms, and was a
Testimony, that God by his good Spirit had begun a true work of Repentance in
him, after his fall, and had given him, together with Repentance, his holy
Spirit, and he prayed, that it might not be taken from him. Do ye think ye deal
with Idiots, and persons void of common sense, when ye argue at this shallow
rate? I told you before, and I again tell you, That if a Murderer and an
Adulterer, while such, may be a real Saint, the worst of Men may believe, that
they are real Saints. Your Answer has no Validity, when ye say, They never had
the work of Conversion past upon them; but this is barely said: Why may not
others, who have had some real beginning, like that of David, in some measure,
fall into these Sins of Murder and Adultry? And surely, these who commit Murder
and Adultry, whatever they have been before, may be numbered amongst the worst
of men. They may say, a cording to your Doctrine, They had the work of
Conversion wrought upon them formerly, and they are Saints still, and ye cannot
convince them to the contrary by your Doctrine. I say still, it would argue
great Partiality (which far be it from us to think it can have place in God)
that one and the same Sin is Mortal in one, and not Mortal in the other; the
pure Life of Faith is killed by every gross Sin or Crime, such as Murder and
Adultry; for if he who hates his Brother has not eternal Life abiding in him,
surely nor he who with his hands kills his Brother. That Gods Promises are
merely Hypothetical to his elect Saints and Children, I neither said, nor say,
yet the Promises are held forth Conditionally, and some are Conditional, and
some absolute.

Page 115. Ye grossly abuse me, by alleging, That I introduce the Popish
distinction o^ Mortal and Venial Sins. I use no such words, and have not the
Popish sense of these words; but yet I believe there are lesser and greater
Sins, and great and heinous Sins and Crimes kill the Soul, such as the Crimes
of Murder and Adultry, but every smaller Offense does not kill the Soul
utterly, but yet hurts or wounds; and this both Experience and Scripture
confirms, and ye are a sad sort of men, if ye think, that the gross Sins and
Crimes of Mu^der and Adultry do no more hurt the Souls of men, than some
Weakness and Infirmities that are really culpable, yet of a smaller kind, as a
little wandering of Mind, a little slackness or remisness for a little time,
etc.

Whereas I did affirm, There is a state in Grace, that men may grow up into,
wherein they never fall away, but are crowned with Perseverance; for which I
cited diverse places of Scripture, as Psalm. 119.2, 3 and 1 John 3.9. and 1 John
2.19. and these I called such who were the Sons and Children of the Freewoman,
and who are made conform to the Image of the second Adam, Christ Jesus, (beyond
the Image of the Earthly Adam, who fell) and who sit down in Christ that never
fell; and these abide with him, and go not out. To this ye say nothing that has
any weight, but mere triffling; ye say, It belongs to Faith, where ever it is,
that who ever have it are born of God: And here ye contradict again your own
Doctrine, who granted, That there is a Faith that may be lost, that is not
false. Ye say, I mistake the Notion of the difference between Servants and
Sons; for, ye say, true Believers are both Sons and Servants. But this I did
not deny, nor do; yet the Scripture makes a distinction thus, Every Son is a
Servant, as Christ was both Gods Son and Servant, as he is called in Scripture;
and Paul was a Son of God and a Servant of God; but yet every Servant is not a
Son of God, born of the Freewoman: The Servant, said Christ, abides not in
the House forever, but the Son abides forever. The Son of Hagar must become
the Son of Sarah, that he may dwell in the House of the Lord forever. But ye
falsely allege against me, as if I said, None are in the New Covenant, until
that after Death they come into glory. And ye show your great Ignorance, and
want of Experience, to deny that men may be in a middle state, between both, as
partly of a Legal Spirit, and partly of a Gospel Spirit, for some time; for the
Disciples were too much of a Legal Spirit when Christ told them, Ye know not
what Spirit ye are of. Too many, called Christians, who have a measure of
Gospel-sincerity, are too much of a Legal Spirit, and are not wholly leavened
into the Gospel Spirit.

Page 117. Ye say, I seem to lay the stress upon the strength o^ Inherent
Grace, whereas the Scripture ass^res us, it is of God, and depends upon his
Power. I say the same, it is of God, and depends upon his Power, and both God
and his Power does preserve the Faith Love, and other Graces and Virtues of his
People, and keeps them ever green, (that they wither not) as the Cedars of
Lebanon. Ye fa^sly allege, I confound the two Covenants, and do not show
wherein. Ye say, The New Covenant cannot be fallen from. Again, ye say, It is a
Contradiction, that a man may be a Believer, and yet but in Adam 's Covenant,
and fall away: Whi h yet is your own Contradiction; for ye have granted, That
the Faith that can be lost, is not a false Faith; and therefore if not false,
it is true in its manner. But whether the Faith that can be lost, and the Faith
that persevereth and holds out to the end, and is like to Gold, and more
precious than Gold, differ in kind or degree, is a Question too subtle, and
does involve into Philoso^hical and School-Subtilties; for it is not altogether
agreed among th m called Philosophers and Schoolmen, what makes a specifical
difference in all respects, as whether Brass, Silver and Gold differ in specie
and kind, or only in degree; therefore such a dispute I waved, and do still
wave, as not being so proper to be disputed in School Terms, for it is best to
keep to Scripture words, which the holy Ghost has dictated. As Gold endures
all trial of fire, and is not consumed by it, so the most precious Faith of
Gods elect Saints and Children endures all fiery Trials of all sorts.

And because ye would appear to be such mighty Patrons and Defenders of the
Protestant Religion and Principles, I shall cite the Testimony of Luther, whom
ye will not be so bold, I suppose, to deny but that he was a Protestant, and a
better man than any of you, as concerning this matter, and another Testimony of
these who gave forth the Augustane Confession, who were followers of Luther,
and are generally acknowledged Protestants. In Luther's Mensalia, cap. 13. p.
227. he says expressly, For Faith is either false or feigned, or although it be
upright, yet it is extinguished, when People witting and wilfully do against
Gods Command; and the holy Spirit, which is given to the faithful, departs,
and is lost, through evil Works done against the Conscience, as the example of
David sufficiently witnesses: Thus Luther. And the Augustane Confession, given
forth by Protestants, says expressly, Article 12. They condemn the Anabaptists,
who deny, that they who are once justified, can loose the holy Spirit. So ye
may see, or if ye will shut your Eyes, yet the Impartial Readers may see, how
it is a Doctrine of ancient Protestants, more ancient than your New England
Model, that they who are once justified may loose the holy Spirit, and they who
say they cannot, are guilty of the Error of the Anabaptists; and the Scripture
Testimony is most plain, that they may be Partakers of the holy Spirit, and may
afterward fall away, Heb. 6. So that hitherto ye have not showed any one
Article of Faith, wherein I or my Brethren differ either from Scripture or the
best sort of Protestants; for in all these matters we have both the Scipture,
and the best sort of Protestants on our side; and therefore your Charge is
false, as if I or we did oppose the fundamental Articles of Salvation, as ye
allege, p. 127. ad fin.

Page 118. Ye falsely charge the Quakers, that they boast of Perfection. The
honest and fober People, called Qrs. hold forth the Doctrine of Pefection
according to the Scripture, as a state attainable by the Grace of God, but
boast not of their attainment; they choose rather to express any measure of
Seize, they have, by a good and innocent Life, than by a talk of it.

Page 119. Ye falsely charge it upon me, as a Cheat and Fraud, That I infer it
from your Doctrine, that the good Works of Gods holy Spirit are defil^d in and
by the Saints. Answ. I make no such ^^ference, but I did set down the express
words of the Confession of the Assembly, owned by you, cap. 16. That the best
Work of the Saints, which proceed from the Spirit of God, as they are wro^ght
by them, are defiled. Let the Reader see the place, and he will find the Cheat
to be yours, and not mine; yea, p. 119. forgetting your selves, ye say
expressly, That the Works of the Saints, (which ye confess, are wro^ght also by
the holy Spirit) are defiled by sin. And whereas ye say, The W^rk is not
totally perfect and totally sin; yet ye te^^ not what part of it is not sin;
for the whole Work, as done by you is sin; which is still a Chimaera, seeing
that whole Work is done also by the Spirit.

Page 120. Ye blame me for alleging it to be ^our Doctrine, That they must
sin, viz. Saints and Believers, as long as they live; as if there were a fatal
necessity that God laid them under o so doing. Answ. But whether this be not
the real and true sense of your Doctrine, that says, No man is able, by any
Grace of God, to keep the Commandments o^ God, but does daily break them in
T^o^ght, Word and Deed. Let Impartial Readers judge, for wh^t men cann^t do, th
y are under a necessity not to do, and not to do is sin; and ye say, God has
decreed all this, and if it be not a fatal Necessity in the sense of the
Epicureans, or others who held a fatal Necessity, and denied a divine
Providence, yet in another sense it may be called a fatal Necessity.

Page 121. Ye would cover the Impertinency of the Citation of Romans 3.9, etc.
from the description of the natural state of man there given: But this is but a
fig-leaf; for the Assembly brings that place of Scripture to prove universally,
That no man, neither Saint nor any other, can keep Gods Commandments, etc. And
truly they are sad and miserable Saints, who are in the case there described;
and yet, as I said before, too like to these in N. England, whose feet were
swift to shed Blood, and their Throat an open Sepulcher. Your answers to the
places of Scripture I brought to prove the possibility of Perfection by the
Grace of God, are mere Assertions, without any Reasons of the least seeming
weight to prove them; and therefore I refer both what I and Ye say to the
Readers further Impartial Consideration.

Page 123. Ye say, Nor was Noah so perfect, but that afterward he was drunken:
This is a weak Reason; ye may at this rate deny that God created Adam free of
all sin, because after God made him he sinned. We plead not for an
impossibility of sinning, but a possibility of not sinning, by the Grace of God.

Ezekiel. 36.25. The making them clean from all their Filthyness, belongs, ye say,
to Justification.

Answ. I doubt ye have forgot your selves, sure I ^m, it was the common
Doctrine of the P^^byterians, That Justification took away the G^ilt of Sin,
and Sanctifi^ation took away the Filt^ o^ it. But now according to your New
Model, it seems Sanctification takes no Filthilness of sin away at all; and
therefore a^ in respect of Sanctification, the whole filthiness of sin remains
in the best Saints, their hea^ts are as filthy inwardly as ever formerly; for
J^stification, ye say, puts no inward purity or holiness in men. But is not
Filthiness, and Holiness or Purity, contrary's? and therefore Sanctification,
or making pure, takes away filthiness of sin.

Page 121. Ye blame me again for alleging, They say they are only free from
sinning after death. But to this I have above answered. Let the places I cited
be read, and it will be found. Beside, it seems too great a School Nicity to
distinguish at Death, and immediately after Death; for ye will not grant, that
any man is free of all sin one instant, or any sensible part of an instant
before death; and therefore what fo^loweth, may be as well said after death, as
at death; for the Distinction, as used by you, is a Quibble; the instant of
death is but like a Thought; it is easier to understand the time be^^ ^o after
Death, than the precise instant of Death, which no wit of man can measure.

Page 124. Ye very injuriously charge me with Blasphemy against God, calling
him Cruel and Tyranical, and worse than Pharaoh. This is a most false and
injurious change; God forbid that I should have any such thoughts; I only told
what your false and unchristian Doctrine represents the most merciful God to
be. Your Answer mends not the matter; for what men lost in Adam, Christ, the
second Adam, gives Grace to restore; and ye confess, That true Believers are
under the New Covenant, and not under Adams Covenant; and all to whom the
Gospel is preached, are called to come under the New Covenant.

Ye grossly and most absurdly and falsely allege, That Gospel Obedience is
shorter, and lesser than the Obedience that the Law requires. Whereas Christ
under the Gospel not only fulfilleth the Righteousness of the Law in the
Saints, according to Romans 8. in conformity to the first Adam, but carries true
Believers further, as they follow him, to a higher and more perfect
Righteousness, like unto that of the second Adam; but this is done gradually,
until the Gospel Perfection be attained: And that the Gospel Dispensation has
more lenity and gentleness in it, than the Law, in respect of the plenty of
forgiveness that it provides for the true Penitent, is granted; but still, it
leads on and brings to a greater Perfection than that of the Law.

Page 125. Ye call me a vile Worm, and yet say, ye Rail not; And ye say, An
Holy God is not thus to be treated by a vile Worm. But I can and do in holy
fear and reverence appeal to the holy God, (before whom I and Ye are Dust and
Ashes) Whether ye, and not I, in this matter, speak not aright of God. Be not
too proud and confident, but fear to speak or think any thing of God that is so
contrary to his Nature, or to the Nature of his Gospel, as if the Gospel of God
gave men more toleration to sin than the Law, and to continue therein for term
of Life, or that God punishes men with Me^ Fire for that he never actually
gave them power to forsake.

Page 125. Ye say, Believers sin more or less till they dye, and yet dye not in
their sins. This is a too nice Distinction; can ye measure the time betwixt
until Death and the instant of Death? it is too Metaphesical or rather
Sophistical; but in the Scripture Language they are one; for said God, Your
Iniquity shall not be purged away till ye dye: What was that but that they
should dye in it?

Page 126. Ye say, They that cover, and not they that confess, their sins, are
pleaders for it; and then ye falsely charge the Quakers, That Sin had never such
Attorneys as they. Answ. They that cover their Sins do plead for it, and so
they do who confess it hypocritically, still confessing, but not forsaking, nor
believing that God will enable them by his Grace perfectly to keep his
Commands, ever in this mortal Life; how can ye pray in faith, Thy Will be done
in Earth, as it is done in Heaven? That the Quakers are in any sort Attorneys
for Sin, is but your bare Accusation, without proof, and is but a part of your
Railing Langu ge, that fills most of your Book.

Page 126. Ye falsely say, I challenge as much Perfection as Christ or Adam ever
had. I never did say, nor think, that Believers could be equal to Christ in
Perfection; it is enough they are like to him, Likeness is one thing, Equality
is another: The Saints in Heaven are neither equal to Christ nor to one
another, and yet all Perfe^t. Ye falsely allege on me, That I yield all ye
pretend unto. Let the Impartial Reader compare your Assertions and mine, and he
will find great difference: Ye not only affirm, That there may be Motions and
Tentations to sin, in Believers, but that they are consented unto, and that
they sin daily in thought, word and deed. This I did not yield unto, but plead
against, as Unsound and Unchristian Doctrine. And as ye make your Appeal in the
Conclusion, I do likewise make mine to every Impartial Reader, whose
Understanding is but commonly enlightened, and has any true m^^sure of a
spiritual U^derstanding, Discerni^g and Experience in the things of God,
Whether I have not made good my Charges against you, even all of them; and
Whether ye have not altogether failed in clearing your selves of them; and
Whether your Answers are not rather manifest Falsehoods, Slanders, Perversions,
and false Accusations, and mere Magisterial Asseverations, than having any
thing of sollid Truth in them. And that our Doctrine concerning the Possibili^y
of living without sin, by the Grace of God, is no Heresy, nor was ever
accounted Heresy by ancient Christian Writers, I can easily prove; for
Augustine, who writ zealously against those who were accounted He^eticks in his
time, and has set down^ Catalogue of all the Heresies he knew, being in
Number, as he reckons them, Eighty Eight, does not mention the Doctrine of a
possibility of living without sin, by the Grace of God, any of these Heresies,
nor yet any other of these twelve Articles, as held by us, in Contradiction to
you, are judged by him or any other ancient Writers, Heretical, unless ye will
say, That was condemned by Augustine for Heresy, That Children dying without
Water Baptism could be saved: And if this be a Heresy in us, it is a Heresy
in you, for ye say the same. And Augustine was so far from condemning it, as
Heresy, that men may live without sin by the Grace of God, that he says
plainly, lib. de Spiritu et Litera, cap. 2. If any defend it, that some have
lived without sin, they do not much err, nor dangerously, seeing be is deceived
who thinks so of others by some Benovelence, if so a man think not himself so
perfect, except he do really and evidently find himself to be such. But he
says, They are earnestly and vehemently to be resisted, who think, that they
can perfect Righteousness by the mere Power of Man's Will, without the Grace of
God: Which was the Pelagian Error, and is altogether denied by us; and of the
same mind was Jerome, lib. 3. adv. Pelag. And the Augustane Confession, Art. 12.
set forth by Protestants, does not condemn them as Heretics, who say, they can
live without sin, by the Grace of Grace, but such who say, They are come to so
great Perfection that they cannot sin in any respect; which we do not affirm;
for we plead not for the absolute impossibility of sinning, but for the
possibility of not sinning, by the Grace of God. And of the same mind with us
have been many Protestants of good esteem, as not only the Remonstrants, who
are as good Protestants as ye, (and have better Protestant Doctrine, for all
that ye deny it) but Castellio (who translated the Bible into Latin, called
Castellio's Translation, and was the Author of that little Book, called,
Dialogus Sacrorum, much used in Protestant Schools) in a peculiar Tractate on
that subject.

And thus it may plainly appear, how falsely ye accuse me, That I would beat
down the Foundations of many Generations, Unchurch all Christendom, make the
Scripture to intend just contrary to what it speaks, and oppose almost all the
Fundamental Articles o^ Religion that have been maintained almost Seventeen
H^ndred Years, as ye say, page 155. wherein ye show, either your great
Ignorance or Malice; for in all those twelve Articles, above recited, we have
the generality of the best ancient Christian Writers on our side, as well as
the best sort of Protestants, and it is but too much Self-love, and vain
Conceit, and narrowness of Spirit in you, to think, That because we oppose
twelve, or some more Presbyterian and Independent A^ticles of false Doctrine,
that therefore we unchurch or oppose all C^ristendom; for we do n^ mo e
unchurch them than your selves do, who think, Ye, ( viz. the Presbyterians and
Independents) are the only true visible Church, and that but of late ye have
made to your selves a Mu^geril new Church Model the Independents refused to own
the Presby^erian to be a true visible Church, because of her being N^tional, or
that her Mini^ters were true Mi^isters because deriving their call by the Pope
of Rome, and consequently had no true Ministry not Sacraments, as witness what
J. Owen has printed against them: We believe God has many that truly belong
to him, and are Members of his true Church, in Christendom, among the several
Professions o^ it, though we cannot own the visible Con^^^tution of their
Churches to be true, and conform to the true Pattern of the primitive Church in
the Apostles days.

CAP. IX.
Page 128. Ye wrongfully blame me that I charge you for holding, That nothing
of Grace, or of the Power of Godliness is requisite to constitute a Member of
your visible Church; which, ye say, is all Railing; And yet within a few lines,
page 129. ye plainly confess, That such a Profession both of Words and
Practices, may be, where sincerity is not; And thus Hypocrites, ye say, may
belong to the visible Church. And page 131. ye say, it is nothing else, but an
outward form of Profession, that can make them a visible Church. And therefore
ye sufficiently clear me, that I have not in the least wronged you, unless ye
hold, that Hypocrites have the Grace and Power of Godliness indwelling in them,
which ye deny.

Page 132. Ye say, I am deceived, when I say, every Member of Christ is a
living Member; Christ has said otherwise, John 15.2. How in Christ, but by
Profession, their being fruitless, proves them dead. But your reason ye bring
does not prove, that Christ has said otherwise; all it proves is, that a man
may be a branch in Christ, not only seemingly, but really, and yet if he leave
off to bring forth fruit, he is cut off; that proves the possibility of
falling away, from a good and true beginning of a good Work, against your
unchristian Doctrine; for it is usual to Branches of Trees, that are real
Branches, and not only seemingly so, that did once bear some fruit, to leave
off bearing, and then the Husbandman cuts them off. Your citing the Church of
Corinth, 1 Cor. 3.6. or any other instances, can never prove, that any
Hypocrites, were ever acknowledged to be Members of the true Church, they were
but the Tares, and Chaff, and Weeds that were mingled among the good Wheat, but
were none of it. Your Notion of a visible Church, whose Members have only the
Profession, and Form of Godliness, but not the power, and sincere practice of
it, was not according to the ancient doctrine of the best Protestants; for the
Augustane Confession, presented to Charles the fifth, by the Protestants, who
were the only Protestants of greatest note, at that time, defines the Church
of God, expressly thus, in so many words, Art. 8. That the Church is properly
the Congregation of the Saints and true Believers, although in this life there
are many Hypocrites and evil Men, that are mix^d. Whereby it is plain, that
they did not judge Hypocrites to be Members of the Church, any more then Tares
to be Wheat, though mixed among the Wheat. I told you, that the Invisible
Church and the Visible, do not differ in substance, or nature, but in some
Circumstances of Time, Places, and outward Actions To this ye object nothing of
any weight, but that ye will have the Invisible Church and the Visible to
differ in being and nature, still affirming, that nothing can constitute a
Visible Church, but that which is only or merely Visible; that ye confidently
assert, without any shadow of proof or reason; and a Child may be too strong
against you, in his reason, in this thing; for what makes a visible man? is it
only his skin, or visible part? does not any ordinary Schoolboy know, that he
who is a true visible man, must be a real man, and have his invisible parts, as
Heart, Stomach, Brain, and other inwards, yea, and Life also; and as he must
have seeming motions of Life, so real, proceeding from true Life in him, which
is invisible, otherwise it might be said, the mere Skin, or out side of a man,
is the whole visible Man, which none of common wit will say; for take the mere
skin of a man, and fill with hay, or some other matter, none will say, that is
a true visible Man; and yet such a visible Man, as this would be, such a
visible Church Member, would he be, that has only but the Skin or Outside
Profession of a Christian, without the inward Life and Power of Christianity.

Page 129. Ye say, Profession, as it is understood by the Assembly, is not a
mere verbal thing, but Practical too, it contains in it an Orthodoxy in the
Principles pro^ess^d, and a Conversation framed thereto, a professing in words,
and a not denying in works, else men are not visibl^ Christians, but to be
turned from, citing 2. Tim. 3.5. But this is your gloss on the w^r^s of the
Assembly, without any proof; And that your imposed Gloss is not the real sense
of the Assembly, is manifest from this, that the far greatest part of them
being Presbyterians, and but few Independants in comparison of the ^ajor part,
the Presbyterian Church was then a National Church, composed of the whole Body
of the Nation, both in England, Scotland and Ireland, as much as possible could
be, and the Presbyterian League and Covenant did not only take in all, who were
willing, however many thousands of them were of a Scandalous Life, but the
Promoters of it forced them who were unwilling, that either they must take the
Covenant, or suffer Banishment; And it is manifest, that the Presbyterian
Church in England, Scotland and Ireland, was as National, and consisting of as
gross a mixture, as the Episcopal, or even as the Church of Rome it self, as in
respect of Scandalous Livers, so that what Luther said of his followers in his
day, may be as much applied to the Presbyterian Church, whose Ministers did
mostly compose that Assembly, in the forecited Book, called Mensalia, cap.
22.^.290. The manner of Life (said Luther) i^ as Evil among us as among the
Papists; wherefore we strive not with them, by reason of the manner of Life,
but for, and about the Doctrine. And it is manifest as the noon day, that not
only the far greatest part of the People, composing the Presbyterian Church,
were of a dessolute and scandalous Life, but too many of their Ministry and
Elders, which occasioned the breach betwixt the Independents and them, that
these called Independents, thinking that the multitude of Presbyterian
Professors, were not duly qualified to be Church Members, as in respect of a
strict life, erected a new Model of Congregational Churches, which are now
again almost wholly degenerated, if not altogether into a Presbyterian
Laxeness; and how can it be supposed that a National Church, as such, can have
the multitude of its Professors to be free of a scandalous Life, seeing no such
instance can, as yet be given; for the Presbyterian National Church, as well as
the Episcopal and Church of Rome, receives Men and Women to be Members of
their Church, either how soon born, or by Infant Baptism, and rarely, if ever,
does excommunicate any for their Vicious manner of living (except in some
extraordinary cases of Adultery, Incest, or Sodomy, etc.) but if any dissent
from them in Doctrine, then nothing but dreadful Thunderings of
Excommunication, like the Popes Bulls, against the primitive Protestants: All
which shows, that by Profession the Ass^mbly understood, much rather a mere
verbal thing, than the Practice of a holy Life, or so much, as the outward
appearance thereof; And ye may be ashamed, to cite 2 Timothy 3.5. for that
requires us To turn away from s ch, as having a fo^m of Godliness, d^ny the
Power thereof; and that is to be sure, from all Hypocrites, and such who have
not real inward Piety and Holiness; for who have not true piety, deny the Power
of Godliness. And that either the Presbyterian or Independent Constitution of a
Church require an uniform Practice of a Godly and Christian Life, in all the
necessary parts of it, as of living Soberly, Righteously, and Godly, and
denying Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, is no wise apparent from their Practice;
however it may be allowed, that some external Practices in some things, that
Hypocrites may most easily perform, yea, and Scandalous Persons also, may be
and are required, as particularly, To present their Children to be sprinkled,
To break Bread twice or four times a year, more or less, etc. together, To come
to Church, as it is called, once or twice a week, To salute the Minister with a
Ha^l-Rabbi, and a low Cringe, in the streets, and putting off the Hat, and most
especially, as a most necessary practice, To pay every one his share of the
Priests Wages. These and the like v^ry ordinary and superficial Practices, are
the most that I can find, are required in your Church Members; and what is
there required of the Spirit of God, or real inward Holiness in all this?
surely nothing, by your own confession. Nor ought ye to blame me, for this
Character of your Church Members, seeing John Fox gives me a President in his
Book of Martyrs 1. volum. Page 43. in the like cass, where he d^fineth a
Christian man, after the Popes making by his practisi^g some outward things, no
wi^^ in^^rring inward Holiness of Life; and afte^ concludes with these expres^
words, Now look upon this Definition viz. that he has given of a Member of the
Popes Church) and tell me, good Reader, what Faith, or Spirit, or what working
of the holy Ghost in all this Doctrine, is to be required. Whereby it is most
plain, that John Fox, a man of great Authority among Protestants, agrees with
the People called Quakers, against both Presbyterians and Independents, in the
true definition of a Member of the true Church visible, viz. That every such
Member should have the true Faith, and Spirit, and working of the holy Ghost,
which yet ye openly deny to qualify them thereunto, requi^ing only an outside
Profession of words, and at most some outward Practices, that may be, and are
commonly practiced by the greatest Hypocrites.

Page 132. Ye say, I find fault with you for using an Hourglass to know how
the time spends, and a Bell to gather your Ass^mblies together. But for the use
of an Hourglass, simply to know the measure of Time, I did find no fault with
you, but that ye commonly measure the Time of your preaching by the Hourglass,
which shows, that none of you preach by the Spirit of God, which is not
limited to any stinted measure of Time; and the primitive Christian Preachers
had no such thing as either Hourglass or Dial, to measure the time of their
Preaching; nor are we against the civil use of Bells, Clocks or Dials, but the
superstitions use of Bells, hanging in high Steeples, like the high places used
by Idolators of Old, and which ye follow the Papists in, to call your Assembly
together, and the sound of which many ignorant and carnal People are vainly
delighted with. Hospimian de orig. Templ. says, Bells were not used for
certain, in the first five Centuries, at most, of Christianity; when yet their
Parishes or Church-Precincts were of a greater extent than the most diffused
among us.

P. 133. Ye call the inward Gospel spiritual Bell, ringing in the hearts of the
faithful, which is the living Word sounding in the hearts, a Fancy, more
fabulous than any thing in Aesop. Whereby ye show, how carnal, dark and
ignorant ye are; for hereby ye deny the inward Call, Voice and Sound of Christ,
the Son of God, in the hearts of the faithful, which by a figure I call the
Gospel Bell, whereof Aarons Bells, that did hang at his Garments, were a Type;
and it is common in Scripture, that the name of the Type is given to the thing
typified by it. But that Psalm. 89.15. intends the Silver Trumpets in the time
of the Law, ye barely allege, without proof; and that ye say, Ancient and
Modern Interpreters agree therein, y^ show your rashness, for ye name no
ancient Writer that says so: And Theodoretus, a very ancient Writer,
expounds that place, Psalm. 89.15. in his Commentary on the Psalms, of the
J^bilation, or joyful Sound in the Gentiles in Gospel-dayes, who should believe
in Christ; and it is evident that the Psalm is a Prophecy of Christ, and of the
great blessings that should come to all Nations, both Jews and Gentiles, by
him, as both Theodoretus and other ancient and modern Writers understand it, as
is clear from verse 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, etc. that is not applicable to David,
but to Christ, whereof David was a Type. And that ye say, The Quakers give
notice of their Meetings, we grant, but yet we use neither Bell nor Drum to
give such notice, and find no need nor occasion for any such superstitious
Custom.

Page 135. Ye query, May ye not succeed the Apostles in their Ministry, though
not in their Apostleship? I Answer; Nay, seeing ye deny that which qualifieth
all true Ministers of Christ, which is the Spirit and Power of Christ inwardly
revealed, and that ye require nothing of real inward Godliness necessary to
constitute a Minister of Christ, ye have no President for your Ministry that ye
plead for, without true piety, from the true Apostles, but from Judas the
Apostate, that betrayed the Lord Jesus Christ, and in so doing fell from his
Ministry; yea, ye are not ashamed to mention him and the Pharisees for your
Presidents and Patrons, to which I have formerly replied. And though the
Apostles ordained Elders and Overseers over gathered Churches, yet it was by
the direction of the holy Ghost, and this ye deny, that your Ordination was
such. Nor was it proper and peculiar only to the Apostles to travel through the
Nations to preach the Gospel, but was common to other Pastors and Teachers, as
to the Apostles, as is clear from the Acts of the Apostles, and from Christ's
Commission. And every true Minister of Christ is to know his place and calling
by the Spirit of the Lord, how long he is to stay among a People, whether all
his Life time, or for some season. But if ye were indeed called of God to sit
down all your days in one pl^ce, how comes it to be so usual among you, to
remove from one place to another, and most commonly to some new place, where ye
can have a greater Benefice, or some better outward Accommodation?

Page 136. Ye say, I reflect a Scandal upon you, in respect of the endeavors
for the Conversion of the Indians; and for this, ye refer to the printed
Accounts. But ye should have mentioned in particular what these printed acounts
say, that they might be examined, whether true or false; for we know many
printed Accounts are false; and it is most manifest, that great Sums of Money
have been sent out of Old England to encourage that work of preaching to the
Indians, and it is as manifest, that much of that Money has been ill bestowed
and improved, as the Country of New England knows well enough; and these
called Christian Indians, your pretended Converts, are known generally to be
worse than the poor Heathens.

CAP. X.
Page 136. Ye say so little in defense of that ye call your Two Sacraments,
(confessing withal, That the Scripture says nothing of the word Sacrament)
that I shall not spend Paper nor Time to answer all your Impertinencies,
considering that I have said enough that may suffice to answer you in my former
Reply to Pardon Tillinghast; for if Water Baptism be no Gospel Precept, then
surely sprinkling Infants is none; only I shall consider some of the grossest
of them. Page 137. As for sprinkling, ye say, ye plead not for it, but for
pouring Water, not on the forehead only, but on the face: This seems a
learned distinction, that may pass current among ignorant People; what
difference betwixt sprinkling and pouring? seeing all the Water ye pour is
neither gallon nor pint, but so much as ye can hold in the hollow of your hand,
which cannot well wet the whole face, and therefore is more sprinkling; but
still, ye are to seek for a proof, that either sprinkling or pouring Water on a
child's fac^ was ever commanded by Christ, or practiced by any of the Apostles
or Ministers of Christ record^d in Scripture. Ye say, Origin and Cyprian tell
us, that the Apostles gave order for the baptizing of Infants, withal citing
Augustine; but this is no Scripture Proof, and Authority of ancient Writers,
without Scripture, ought to be of no weight among true Protestants. The Church
of Rome does so argue for her unscriptural Traditions, and is more ingenuous
than ye, that she does confess, There is no A^t^ority for Infant Baptism, but
only the Tradition of the Church; and if ye have no better Authority than
Tradition, your cause is desperate, and your Refuge to the Tradition of ancient
Writers, proves you more Popish than Protestant. And as for Origin, Cyprian
and Augustine, they lived long after the first Century, and ye can give no
evidence in Church History that Infant Baptism was practiced until Cyprians
time, past two hundred years from Christ's Resurrection; and whereas while the
practice of Water Baptism continued in the Church, it was required, that before
Baptism, the Persons that were to be baptized should confess to the Truth, and
also that they did confess their sins, and declare their Repentance and Faith,
which Infants could not do, and therefore were incapable of Water Baptism; to
supply which defect, in after Ages the invention of Godfathers, that should
confess and vow for them, was set up, that has no shadow of ground in
Scripture.

Page 139. Ye say, I fraudule^tly omit that clause, citing Luke 18.15, 16. For
of such i^ the Kingdom of God. Answ. I do not fraudulently omit it, but saw no
necessity to repeat it, as having not the least seeming strength in it for
Water Baptism to Infants; for granting that those Infants, or such, belonged to
the Kingdom of God, it does not therefore follow, that they were baptized with
Water; ye must show either Precept or Practice, but ye do neither; and that ye
say, It is above the capacity of Children to receive the Lords Supper, so
called, ye give no instance wherein that is more above their capacity, than to
receive Infant Baptism by sprinkling or pouring, seeing both, ye say, are signs
of spiritual Mysteries; and in Augustines time, that called the Supper was
given to Children, or Infants; if they be incapable of understanding the thing
signified by the one, so are they of understanding the thing signified by the
other. Ye falsely allege, That Contra-distinguished signifies two Contraryes
the one to the other; but I did not un^e^stand any c^ntrariety betwixt John's
Baptism and Christ'^, but only a diversity; nor does the word
contra-distinguished import any other contrariety, but as the Type has to the
Antitype, i. e. counter-type.

Page 140, 141. Ye contend, that Mat. 28.19, 20. mu^t be Water Baptism, because
the Apostles ever renounced doing any of th^se things, as begetting or
converting men unto Go^, and baptizing with the Spirit by their own virtue. But
^his is a most poor Evasion, we do not say they either did or could do any of
these things by their own virtue, that is not the thing in Controversy, for
what they did they did not by their own Virtue, but by the Virtue and Power of
Christ. Ye still beg the Question, (though to deny it ye call Infatuation, but
the Infatuation is your own) that Christ commanded these words to be used, as
words of Institution, In the Name of the Father, etc. for we find not that he
bid them say or repeat these words. Ye put a mere precarious gloss on Paul's
words, (That he was not sent to Baptize) That he was not obliged by any
necessity to do it ordinarily personally; And hendes, this is as much as to
say, that Paul thought it enough to obey Gods Command by a Proxy, and so ye may
as well say, he was not under any necessity to preach, but by a Proxy or
Deputy; this is to abuse Scripture, and not to expound it; for if Paul might
obey one Command of God by a Proxy, why not all others? And thus ye teach men
to excuse themselves from Personal Obedience to Gods Commands; it is enough,
according to your gloss, that others obey for them; but would Paul thank God
for not obeying a Gospel-Precept? and yet he said, He thanked God for not
baptizing any of them, but some few: Paul might have baptized some without a
Commission, as well as he circumcised Timothy.

Page 142. Ye say, Ye have always professed your zeal for the inward Baptism
with the holy Ghost: But this is a great Falsehood and Contradiction, when ye
deny all present inward divine Revelation and Inspiration, and the real in
being and Presence of Christ or God immediately in the Saints.

Page 143. Ye most grossly pervert and abuse my words, because I said, Christ
had an outward Supper with his Disciples, when he did eat the Paschal Lamb with
them, ye put this your false gloss on it, as if I said or thought, That he had
the thing without the thing signified, i. e. that Christ ate the Passover
hypocritically. Nothing can be more grossly alleged; for I said expressly, that
the Disciples at that time when Christ had that outwa^d Supper with them, had
an inward enjoyment ^f him given them by Christ, in the use of the Bread and
Wine, see page 190. And by your many such gross Perversions, that seem wilful
in you, ye show what men ye are. Ye allege, The first Cup belonged to the
Passover, Luke 22. But ye may as well say, so did the second; for ye give no
Reason why one, rather than another; and ye may with as much color say, that
the second Cup did not belong to the Supper, because it is said, Luke 22.20. He
took the Cup after Supper, etc.

Page 143. Ye allege, I arrogate Gods Prerogative, who only can judge the
heart immediately, when I say, your Sacrament has no inward spiritual
signification unto you. But I speak not so simply nor absolutely, as I can and
do appeal to the impartial Reader; for ye leave out my following words, that
qualify them, viz. As ye use it, while ye altogether deny that the Saints are
partakers of the Substance of Christ, or that Christ really and substantially
dwells in his Saints, and while ye also deny all inward Revelation of him, in
these latter Ages. And thus I presume not to judge you, as if immediately I did
know your hearts, but by your words ye are judged, even as I may judge of that
man, who denies, that he has eat any substance of Bread or Food, that he has
not received of Bread, etc. For as he who eats Bread, receives the Substance
of it into his body, so he who eats Christ, the Bread of Life, receives some
measure of him substantially into his Soul. And though this is denied by many
of you, and as I said, in my former Book, the man^ lean and dead Souls among
you, void of inward and spiritual discerning, taste or savor too manifestly
demonstrate, ye are generally strangers to the Supper of the Lord, [here Note,
I say not universally, but generally] yet I have that charity, that some called
Presbyterians and Independents, of the more sober kind, and who allow in part
of inward divine Revelation, and of a real inward indwelling of Christ in
Believers, may truly know somewhat at times of the inward and spiritual
Signification of that Figurative Supper, yet not because of that outward manner
of using it, but indeed because there is some secret breathing and desires
after the Lord in some of them, and such are sober, and tender, and not of a
malicious and persecuting Spirit, as too many among you are, who continue to
justify the putting to Death our innocent worthy Friends at Boston; and thus
our Charity is greater than yours; for ye call me a fearful Apostate, and so
ye, and not I, arrogate Gods Prerogative, who only can judge the heart
immediately; for ye can give no probable signs of my Apost^cy, seeing in the
judgment of all sober Protestants, I own all the Fundamental and most necessary
Doctrines of the Christian Faith, and ye can charge nothing in my Conversation
or manner of Life inconsistent with true Christianity; I have departed from no
good thing either of Doctrine or Life, that I had when among these called
Presbyterians, I have only relinquished their Errors, and that will no more
prove me Apostate, than Luther and Calvin their relinquishing Popish Errors,
does prove them Apostates, although the Papists have so charged them; yea, I have
known Presbyterians accuse the Independents for being Apostates. But as I value
no^ your uncharitable Judgment against me, so I cannot but take notice how
guilty ye are to blame me for Incharitableness in judging, when ye are so
deeply guilty in that very thing.

Page 144. Ye grossly abuse and pervert my words, when ye allege, That I say,
ordinary eating, as it is the common Duty of all men, is the Supper of the
Lord. I said no such thing; but that often in the use of outward eating and
drinking, being sanctified and blessed by the Word of God and Prayer, we have,
together with the outward ^^ting, eat the inward and spiritual Bread; and
together with the outwar^ Cup, ^^re drunk that spiritual Drink, and withal,
remembering the Lords Death, and what he has done and suffered for us: And I
distinguish betwixt the Saints more solemn eatings together (upon frequent
occasions, where their thus eating together was a figure or sign of their
inward Communion) and their daily eating a part; and withal, I declared, how in
all our eatings and drinkings, and at all times, we should remember the Lords
Death even until his last coming, and to the end of the World, see page 188, to
19^. And when the Saints outwardly eat together, and then also inwardly eat of
that inward and spiritual Food, and have together an inward enjoyment of the
Lord in their hearts, that may be called the Supper of the Lord (which both may
be without and with the outward eating) but I did not say, nor do I now say,
that always when the Saints eat outwardly at their ordinary Meals, they eat
together inwardly, but that the times are very frequent of their outward and
inward eating together at one time, wherein they remember the Lords Death, and
praise him, as for all his Mercies, so for what he has done and suffered for
them; and this Solemnity may be well used by any Number, as well small as
great, and without any Gown-Man or ordained Priest, either of Pope, Prelate or
Presbyter; for all the Faithful are a Royal Priesthood unto God; and there is
no shadow of ground in Scripture, that Saints may not eat and drink together,
remembering the Lords Death, with Prayer, and Blessing, and Thanksgiving, and
enjoying an inward and spiritual Communion together, though they be ever so
small a Number, and though having no Priest outwardly ordained, as above said.
And seeing outward Ordination of Priests or Presbyters, either by Pope, Prelate
or Presbyter (none of whom have any inward and immediate call) is a mere human
Invention (as John Owen, whom ye esteem your reverend Brother, has
sufficiently proved) and that ye lay the main stress of this Ordinance, its
being observed or practiced hereupon, that some ordained Minister consecrate
it, or Independent Pastor, which is of no better Authority than the former. Ye
can never prove that that ye call the Supper, is any thing beyond what is
frequently practiced among us, even as outwardly, although as to the inward, to
Gods praise, we know we have the advantage incomparably beyond all of you. And
instead of proving that your eating together has any advantage above ours, ye
say, Ye think your Supper is beyond ours, as being an holy Ordinance of Gospel
Worship, and ours is only the common Duty of all men. But as ours is not the
common Duty of all men (as ye falsely allege) so yours is not an holy Ordinance
of Gospel Worship; for it is essential to all Gospel Worship to be performed in
the Spirit, because God is a Spirit; but ye plead, That men, called Ministers,
who have nothing of true Piety, or the Spirit of Truth and Holiness, may
consecrate the Bread, and make it a Sacrament of the Supper of the Lord.

Page 145. Ye commit another gross Abuse, falsely alleging on me, that I said,
All outward eating and drinking is a natural and necessary sign of the inward,
see my Book, p. 192. I say not All outward eating and drinking, but I say, such
a figure as is natural and necessary to be used by us all, etc. where ye may
see, I restrict it to Believers; so that the outward eating and drinking of
Believers, is a natural and necessary sign or figure of the inward, to
Believers (but not to Unbelievers) as the whole outward World is a figure of
the inward and spiritual, as Paul does expressly call it, 1 Cor. 7.31. But
whereas ye say, There is not one Syllable, expressly nor consequentially
intimating any such thing there; ye show your great Rashness, or Ignorance; for
in the Greek (to which I did refer) the word is (...), Latin, Scema, and
Englished, Scheme, that most commonly signifies figure, and is expressly
translated Figure, in that very place, by Pasor, a zealous Protestant, in his
Lexicon, thus, Figura hujus Mundi preterit, i. e. the Figure of this World
passes away. Hence in all Mathematical Schools, in teaching Geography or
Astronomy, we call the draught or figure proposed in the Lesson, the Scema or
Sceme; and any ordinary Schoolboy, or common Shepherd or Plowman may inform
you, that this visible World is a Figure of the invisible, and the outward a
figure of the inward, which is a common Saying in the mouths of men generally,
and is further confirmed by Paul, saying, The invisible things of God are
understood by the things that are made, Romans 1.20. and by the forecited Saying
of Luther, That in all Creatures we see a Declaration and Signification of the
holy Trinity. And whereas I said, That in our outward eatings, sometimes we do
use both inward and outward Prayer and Thanksgiving, and sometimes only inward;
this in a way of Scoff, ye call, A new way of Consecration; whereby ye declare
your selves too great strangers to inward and mental Prayer, performed only
with the heart and mind; for if ye did rightly understand inward and mental
Prayer, ye would acknowledge that the outward eating is sanctified by the Word
of God, and by inward Prayer, as well as both inward and outward, but the
outward without the inward, has no virtue to sanctify the Creatures of God;
and yet certainly ye give too much cause to judge, that your outward Prayer
wants the inward, when ye allow both the Members and Ministers of your Church
to be Members and Ministers, without all inward Holiness, or working of the
Spirit of God. And how the Prayer of Unholy Men, (as ye allow your Ministers
may be, that consecrate the Bread and Wine to be the Sacrament of the Supper)
can consecrate, sanctify, or make holy, ev^^ ^es Instruments, these Elements,
is as strange a Paradox, as how an unclean thing can bring out a clean, or one
contrary another.

Page 146. Ye allege, That the Seventh day was appointed, viz. for a Sabbath,
before the Fall, and so was no Type of Christ. But the former ye barely
allege; for that the Seventh Day, its being said to be blessed, etc. (suppose
a natural or common Day) before any mention is made of the Fall of Adam, no
more proves its Institution before the fall, for a Sabbath, than that it can
be proved, there were diversities of Languages before Babel, because Languages
or Tongues are mentioned, Genesis 10.5.20.31. and yet in the following Chap. verse.
1. its said, The whole Earth was of one Language; for diverse things are
recorded in Scripture by Anticipation.

Page 147. Ye say, Heb. 4.9, 10. it is said, Christ entered into his Rest; and
does that mean, that he entered into himself? Answ. It is not said that Christ
or God entered into his Rest, but That God ceased from his Works; but allow it,
That Christ entered into his Rest, is not That that he entered into that Glory he
had with the Father before the World was? and can God or Christ have another or
better Rest than Himself? or can any natural or common Day be a Rest unto God?
O blind Man! Ye call an inward Day, Nonsense, but it is because ye have not
sense to understand it: Is not the Day of Gods Power, and the Day of Salvation,
mentioned in Scripture, an inward and spiritual Day? Ye say again, If I can
find an inward Seventh Day in Scripture, it will be a rare Invention. I Answer;
As I find Moon and Sun inwardly and spiritually understood in Scripture, so I
find seven Days, and a Seventh Day inwardly and spiritually understood, see
Isa. 30.26. but this to you is still a Mystery. And whereas it is the outward
and natural Sun that constitutes common and natural Days, therefore did
Origin, Augustine, and many others conclude, That the seven Days, mentioned
Genesis 1.2. and Exodus 20. could not be common and natural Days, for there was no
Sun until the fourth Day, nor Firmament until the second, nor dry Land and Sea
till the third.

P. 147. That God altered the Sabbath from the Seventh Day to the First, ye
merely allege, without any proof, as your common manner is. I suppose ye are
not so ignorant as not to know that Calvin, the Father, so called, or Founder
of the Presbyterian Church, and the French Protestants generally, and also the
Dutch, though they keep the First Day for worship, after the manner of primitive
Christians, as we also do, yet do not judge it to be the Sabbath, or commanded
by divine Institution; and we set apart that day worthily and commendably, with
other Protestants, neither for any betterness in it, simply as a Day, nor as
being commanded for a Sabbath, but in honor of our Saviors Resurrection,
after the Example of the primitive Christians in the Apostles days, mentioned
in Scripture, and that we see a great convenience and service in it, to keep a
Day weekly unto the Lord, and as said the Apostle, He who keeps a Day,
keeps it unto the Lord, and that Day rather than another, because of Christ's
Resurrection on the first day of the week, and the worthy Example of primitive
Christians, recorded in Scripture.

And thus I have gone through all the Heads contained in your Book, relating to
the Doctrinal part, and have showed our agreement in every one of them, with
the holy Scriptures, and also with famous Protestants, and Ancient Writers,
called Christian Fathers, except in that one matter of Infant Baptism, wherein
if we differ from many of these called Ancients in one thing, ye differ in
another; for they generally judged it absolutely necessary to Salvation, which
ye, as well as I, judge an Error in them, and these called Baptists commonly,
who may be judged as good Protestants as ye, deny your Infant Baptism, as a
humane Invention; and yet ye have no other: And if this does not unchristian
them, so nor can it us; and ye deny their baptizing into Water such, who have
been baptized, when Infants; why then may ye not allow the same Charity to us,
that ye, viz. the more fober part both of Presbyterians and Baptists, so called
(though the more Rigid sort call one another Heretics) allow one to another, and
that we allow to the sober, and tender, and honest hearted of you both, yea,
and to such in all Professions, where the Head and Foundation is held, which is
Christ? and we have that Charity, that there is a sincere sort among all
Professions, who belong to God and Christ, and though they have wrong Notions and
Conceptions of some things belonging to Christian Doctrine, and have not a form
of sound words, in delivering some matters of Faith, which is a great hurt unto
them, yet they have some true inward sense of Christian Truth and Doctrine, and
their faith and sense may be partly sound, where their words, where by they
express it may be very unsound; for many have a right sense and feeling of
things, whereof they have not a right Elocution, Utterance and form of Speech,
as in Naturals, so in Spirituals, as when Men taste Money, and their taste of
it is the same, yet they differ in the Names they give it, or in some subtle
and curious Questions about the Nature of it, or the nature and manner of
tasting it, that is not so very material. So men may have some real sense and
experience of the workings of the holy Spirit, and inward divine Revelations
and Inspirations, that work and beget in them some measure of true Faith, Hope,
Love, and other Christian Virtues, and yet by the Prejudice of Education, and
wrong outward teaching, or ill wording of things, may give wrong Names to
things, yet God forbid we should unchristian them, simply for a Mistake, or
defect in not giving proper words and names to things; and yet many things of
Controversy, among single hearted men, lie but in words, and such should have
a regard to that which is good, tender and sensible one in another, where it is
felt: But where a persecuting and malicious Spirit, and great hardness of Heart
prevails in any, these are not to be regarded as Christians, whatever they
profess. So I would have you all to know, all the sober and tender hearted
People of New England, and elsewhere, whether called Presbyterian,
Independent, Baptist, or Episcopal, yea, and others, holding the Head, and
being sincere in the main, That we can, and do own that your sincerity, although
we cannot but differ from you in matters both of Doctrine and Practice, wherein
we find you to err from the path of Truth, and so far as we have together
attained and are agreed in all good things of Christian Doctrine or Practice,
let us walk by the same Rule, and live in Charity one with another.

Page 148. In your Reflections on that I called, A Call and Warning to the
People of Boston, etc. first, ye falsely charge me, That I arrogate as much to
my self, as any of the Prophets of Old had, of an immediate Mission from God.
But let that Paper be considered, and it shall not be found that I arrogate or
assume any thing equal to the Prophets of Old, only I did, and I do still
affirm, That I had the Word of the Lord to declare to the People of Boston,
etc. and it was as a burden unto me, until I had delivered it; and he who has
not Gods Word, as it lives and is the Word of Life in his heart, is no true
Minister of Christ, but every Minister of Christ is not either Apostle or
Prophet, in that high and eminent sense that is frequent in Scripture. Ye
charge me with, 1st. Lying, 2dly, Slandering, 3dly, Railing, 4thly, False
Doctrine, 5thly, Nonsense; but all this ye allege without proof, as your
manner is: Sharp Speeches are not Railing always, but commendable in some
cases; for both Christ, and the Prophets and Apostles used them to men of your
Generation, and your Speeches are more sharp against me and my Friends than
ours are against you; and which are most deserving, we freely leave it to the
Lord, and his Witness in men's Consciences. Ye would six Nonsense on my words,
that I said, Your Self-actings of all sorts, in that ye call your Duties and
Performances, ye are to repent of, etc. Where it is clear, by that ye call your
Duties, I did understand, (and so might ye) your Preaching, Praying, Singing
without the Spirit of God, and them page 149. ye call Dirt and Dung; and yet ye
continue to offer up this Dirt and Dung unto God, but remember that God will
cast the Dirt and Dung of your Sacrifices on your faces, and the Dung of your
solemn Feasts, according to Mal. 2.3. And surely, seeing by your own
confession, your Prayers are Dirt and Dung, they cannot be that pure Offering
which God promised his People should offer up unto him, Mal. 1.11. 6thly, Ye
say, Prophets do not use to call men to Repent of their holding the Truth as it
is in Jesus, and his Call is nothing else. Ans. I bid you not Repent for your
holding the Truth in Jesus; for that is false, ye hold it not in Jesus, but as
ye hold many Errors in Doctrine, so ye hold something of Truth in
Unrighteousness, according to Romans 1.18. and I bid you Repent of your
Hypocrisy, Pride, Vanity, Blasphemy, hard Speeches, Cruelty, etc. 7thly, Ye
say, Prophets had wont to show some proof of their Call; but ye allege, I have
shown none; but ye have not told what proof they used to show, or what proof
John, a great Prophet, showed to the Pharisees, for he wrought no Miracles;
their ordinary proof was, Hear the Word of the Lord, and Let the Lord be
Witness, and this is my proof, who do not equal my self to any of those
Prophets; it suffices, that I am one of the least of the Servants of Christ.
But it is hard to prove a thing to be White to a blind man, or that I speak to
a deaf man: When ye can prove, that ye have Ears to hear what God says in his
Servants, or that your Ear^ are open to hear, I can prove, That God spoke by me
unto you; but ye shut your Ears against Gods Call, as many did of Old, and
said, The Lord has not spoken, when he did speak. I say it with Sorrow, if ye
were not blind, ye might see some of the Judgments of the Lord begun to be
executed upon you, which I was made, with great sorrow to declare, I did feel
were to come upon the People both of Boston and New England, if they did not
speedily Repent; and though Ye have not considered and laid it to heart, yet
some have, and more I hope will, for their Amendment; but as for me, I have not
desired the Evil Day to come upon you, but greatly desire, if it be the good
will of God, that ye may find Mercy to Repent, and so his Wrath that is began
to kindle against you, may be quenched. And though I told you, That whatever
Doctrine cannot be proved from Scripture, is to be rejected, whatever pretense
men may make to Immediate Revelation; yet this does not reach me, for I bring
no Doctrine but what I prove from Scripture; but as for the Call that Gods
Servants used to have, they proved it not by Scripture, but by the living Voice
of God speaking in them, to all who have an Ear open to hear, but your Ear is
shut, as so was Pharoah's Ear, against God's Call in Moses, though accompanied
in him with great Miracles; and as some believed, that saw no Miracles of old,
so many did not believe, that did see them; and so would it be now, if Miracles
were wrought.

In your Appendix, which contains a poor empty shadow of Answer to my Letter
unto you, I need not take notice of all your Impertinencies, nor reply unto
them, as judging it loss of time and paper. Ye say,

1st, Ye hope, ye have now given a satisfactory Reason, why ye called my Letter
a Blasphemous and Heretical Paper. But your hope will prove vain, I freely
leave it to all that are sober, and able to judge in these matters. 2dly, Ye
think, ye have now found spiritual Weapons, if the Word of God be the Sword of
the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.17. But the Word of God ye are ignorant of, and also of
the Scripture that testify of it, and ye have only wrested and abused some
places of Scripture, to defend your bad Cause, as I have made sufficiently
already appear. 3dly, Ye say, your preaching is open, and ye shut out none, but
those that will not come. But this is a poor excuse, do ye not deny, to give us
a fair hearing, when if any come to answer to your false accusations, and
gainsay your false doctrine, before they can speak one sentence they are
carried away to the Goal? 4thly, Ye allege, when I came unto you, your
Liberties were taken away. But this is a notorious Falsehood; ye had all the
Liberty that we or I had, or could be desired: None of your Meetings were
disturbed by them in Authority, nor no Prohibition to hinder you fairly to
debate things of Religion, only ye had not power to persecute as formerly, and
your Sun of Persecution was set. 5thly, Ye falsely allege, I boast of my great
Conquest; for I only publish your Cowardice. And that ye say, Ye suppose ye
have made my Cake appear to be Dough, it is but a supposition, and has nothing
of truth in it. 6thly, Ye say, Ought not the Shepherd to be aware when the Wolf
comes to his Flock? But suppose I were a Wolf, (as I thank God I am not) when
the Wo^f comes among your flock openly, should the Shepherds abscond, and not
give the Wolf an open Assault? Is this the way to defend your Flock? unless ye
did judge, that by your open appearing in a public Dispute, ye would discover
your weakness. 7thly, Ye say, Ye knew I was a Quaker, and therefore doubted my
design. But I told you plainly what my design was, viz. To discover you to be
Teachers of false Doctrine in many things. 8thly, Ye say, I give no
demonstration, that I came in the Will of the Lord unto you* But ye should say,
ye are blind, and cannot see it, as all false Teachers and Persecuters were,
who did not acknowledge that the true Servants of God, who came unto them, were
sent of God. 9thly, Ye falsely, and without all shadow of proof, say, It was of
God, doubtless, to leave him in the hands of Satan, to be thus acted: I value
not your false Judgment, further than to pity your great Blindness. 10thly, Ye
say, I have set you a President, viz. To Lie and Rail, but ye follow it not.
But let all sober and impartial Readers judge, whether ye have not both Lied
and Railed most grossly; and though I have used some sharp words toward you
according to your desert, as Gods Servants have done formerly against men of
your Spirit, yet my tender Conscience bears me witness, with the help of God,
that I have neither lied nor railed upon you. 11thly, Ye say, It has been
proved, that I bring another Doctrine, than that of Christ. But ye say it, and
that is all: And whereas I told you, an Heretic (though I am none) should be
twice admonished, before he is rejected; Ye answer, Have I not been more than
so? But I say, I never to this day received Admonition from any Church,
Presbyterian or other, according to due Church Order, as Christ has
instituted; and though I have had diverse Debates, some in writ, and some by
word of Mouth, with diverse Opposers, yet that says nothing that ever I was
duly admonished, according to Christ's Order, nor rejected out of any Church
Society; for these I had to deal with were only private Persons; and therefore
ye are impertinent to mention, for your excuse, either John Alexander in
Scotland, whose Book I have many years ago answered in print, and my Answer to
it is now in New England, or these Baptists (who are judged by many of you to
be Heretics) at Barbycan in London, or any at Hampton; Public Disputes are
one thing, and an orderly Church Admonition or Censure, is another. But whereas
ye mention Salem, your insinuation fails you, I writ a fair Letter to the
Priests at Salem, to have some discourse with them before the People, but they
refused, and I had no further meddling with them. And though ye grant that Christ
and the Apostles disputed with men of ill Principles, yet ye must not dispute
with me, because I am worse than any of those, and grown beyond Admonition: But
this is your bare alledgance, and none will believe you, but who are blinded
with the same Prejudice as ye are. But ye give me no Answer, why though ye will
not receive Quakers into your Houses, yet some of your sort will receive their
Goods, taken from them by force, because they could not for Conscience sake
give you Maintenance. That your preaching in your public Houses, are
instituted means of our Conviction, ye take for granted, without proof; nor can
we believe you, so long as ye are declared Enemies to the Inspiration of the
Spirit of Truth, that does only qualify Peachers to convince men of their
Errors. But ye forget how ye contradict your selves in two weighty particulars,
1st, That we are past Admonition, and Incorrigible; and yet your Preaching in
your public Houses, are means of our Conviction, but not your Conference with
us in private Houses: If we are past Admonition and Incorrigible, how can your
Preaching be a means of our Conviction, any more than private Conference in
your private Houses? If it be a Duty to preach to us, is it not also a Duty,
when ye are desired, to discourse with us in private, at least before
Witnesses? 2dly, Ye are guilty of another great Contradiction, That because I
am a Heretic, and worse, ye must not dispute with me, but reject me; and now
at last ye dispute with me in Print, that is a more open way of dispute, than
by word of Mouth; or can ye find any ground in Scripture to warrant you to
dispute with me in Print, and yet to forbid you to dispute with me by word of
Mouth?

My comparing you to Turkish Pirates that hang out false Colors, ye say, holds
not Parrallel; but that I can freely leave to the judicious and impartial
Readers. But it seems, all your former Reasons were but made or feigned, not
real, why ye refused a public Dispute with me; therefore ye proceed to give
other new Reasons, that ye think will appear more sollid. First, therefore ye
begin again to say, It was not in your power to grant it it to me, to have a
public Disputation with you, without laying your selves obnoxious to the then
Government, who had expressly forbidden the People to take liberty of any
public Meeting together on any occasion on the week days, besides the usual
(...) to this I ansvv^ (...) ^cture, to have allowed the time of your Lecture
to a public Dispute. 2dly, If ye had given this Reason for your denial at
first, without all doubt a liberty could have been most readily procured unto
you, from the then Government. 3dly, Many of the People took a far greater
liberty afterward, not only to meet openly, without leave of your then
Governor, but to do a great deal more, etc. But if it was unlawful to dispute
with an Incorrigible Heretic, why do ye now insinuate, that had it not been
for laying your selves obnoxious to the then Government, ye would have given me
a public Disputation with you? Surely ye do greatly forget your selves, to
write such Contradictions. Secondly, Ye say, Ye knew none of your Hearers had
any scruple about your Doctrine. But what then? ye should be ready to give a
Reason of your Hope to every one that asks you, and to convince Gainsayers,
if they be out of the way, and ye in it. Thirdly, Ye say, Ye knew there would
be no holding of me to any Law or Rule of Disputation, partly because a Quaker,
and partly by Reports of me, and that I would bring all to my Revelations, etc.
But who sees not the weakness and shallowness of these Fig-leaf Reasons? These
called Quakers are known to be men of Reason, and many of them know as well as
ye, how to hold to the true Laws of fair Dispute, and false Reports of me I
value not; it never was nor is my way to bring any matter of Dispute (leaving
the Scripture) to inward Revelation; but if I cannot prove the Doctrine,
whereof I charged you to be false, from Scripture, I should be silent; and Ye
and the Readers may see, I have not left the Scriptures, and run to inward
Revelations (though I own, that without inward divine Revelation no man can have
a right understanding of Scripture) for proof against you, but hold to
Scripture end Scripture Proof, in a way of fair Reasoning. 4thly, Your last
Reason is as false as any of the rest, That I had declared my self at once in
opposition to almost all the fundamental Articles of Religion, which have been
maintained almost Seventeen hundred Years by the Church of Christ. The
falsehood of this will sufficiently appear, from both my first, and this latter
Book, to all sober and judicious Readers. And whereas ye say, Who but Madmen
would expose these to be publicly debated? Why then have ye exposed them that
ye call Fundamentals (but are no Fundamentals of Christian Doctrine, but
Fundamental Errors, that false Churches have been built upon) now to be
publicly debated? Why do ye thus declare your selves, by your own confession,
to be such Madmen, to debate them so openly in the face of the Nations, both
in America and Europe, yea, much more openly than they could have been by 2 or
3 hours discourse before two or three hundred People? And that ye your selves
gave the rise to this so public way of disputing in Print, is evident from the
words of your Letter, saying, If he would have a public Audience let him Print.

I desire the Reader to take notice, That what Testimonies of ancient or latter
Writers of good esteem among Protestants, I have cited in this Treatise, is not
for want of sufficient proofs of Scripture Testimony, on every head of
difference betwixt our Opposers and us; for I have brought sufficient
Testimonies of holy Scripture to confirm every one of these heads, as the
judicious and impartial Reader may observe in both my Treatises; but because
these men who are our Opposers, thinking to render our Doctrine odious, do
accuse it, either as Novel, or as Old Heresies revived by us, and as
contradicting almost all Fundamentals of Christian Religion for almost
Seventeen Hundred Years past, held by good Christians; Therefore I found it
convenient to cite these Testimonies, to show our agreement, not only with the
holy Scriptures, but also with other Writers of good esteem among Protestants,
even in these very Heads, called by our Opposers Heresies and Blasphemies, that
their Ignorance and Partiality may appear, and their evil Design to render the
Truth Odious, may be discovered.

In the end, I desire the Reader to take notice how that after C. M. and his
Brethren have been disputing against all divine Inspiration, as a most absurd
and false Doctrine, so much as to suppose it remaining or in being, whereby men
may be assisted to preach or pray, yet in his Postscript to his Thanksgiving
Sermon, printed in 1690. he gives an account of some prophesying Boys and
Girls, and other Men and Women now in France, that both pray and preach by
Inspiration; and he says expressly, He dare not say what Authority or what
Original is to be assigned unto these Inspirations. But seeing, according to
his Doctrine all divine Inspiration is ceased, he ought to conclude, they are
not of God, but of the Devil; but because he dare not so conclude, he allows
it to be possible they may be divine; which is a manifest Contradiction, and
giving away his Cause; as also that he allows, that Girls and Women may
preach and pray in Christian Assemblies, which the Priests of N. England have
so much opposed. G. K.

An APPENDIX.
AMong the many Writers this scribbling Age has furnished the World with, there
is none in these American parts has been so busy as one Cotton Mather, a
pretended Minister of the Gospel in Boston, whose public Discourses in print
sufficiently evince^ to the serious Intelligible] Reader, how little reason
himself has to assume that Title, or his Brethren to confer it upon him. I
shall only at this time take notice, as the Lord shall assist me, of that, by
him sent forth to public view, under this Title, The Serviceable Man, A
Discourse made unto the general Court of the Massachusetts Colony in
New England, at the anniversary Election the 28th of the 3d Mo. 1690. The
style, tendency and purport of this Discourse more resembles the Harangues of a
Mountebank or Comedian, than of a serious sober Christian, much less a Minister
of Christ; its plain, this Author has been more solicitous to please the Ears
of his credulous Auditors, than to consult how Truth would vindicate his
Assertions, as appears partly by his Self-Contradictions, and also by his false
malicious Slanders and Reproaches of an innocent People, by him and others in
scorn called Quakers, whose Principles he is either unacquainted with, or else
wickedly perverts them; if the first, he manifests his Ignorance, if the
latter, his Envy and Malice, both ill Companions for a Minister of Christ. In
proof of his Self-Contradiction, read page 28. of his said Book, compared with
page 57.

Page 28. thus, It Is the Prerogative of New England, above all the Countries of
the World, That it is a Plantation for the Christian and Protestant Religion:
You may now see a Land filled with Churches, which by solemn and aweful
Covenants are dedicated unto the Son of God; there are, I suppose, more than an
hundred of these holy Societies among us, which would in Luthers judgment
render the meanest Villiage more glorious than an Ivory Palace; in these you
may see Discipline managed, Heresy subdued, Profaneness opposed, and Communion
maintained, with a careful respect unto the Word of God in all; you may see
faithful Ministers and sincere Christians, and multitudes of Souls ripening a
pace for the Kingdom of God; you may see proportionably as much of God among
them, as in any spot of Ground which the Children of Adam walk upon. This is
greatly in praise of N. England, if he had not as fully and amply contradicted
it, p. 57. in this manner; But if our Fathers were to write unto us from that
Heaven unto which they are gone, I am thinking what they would say; Would they
not write in very disgracing Terms unto us, and say, Alas! you don't walk in
our ways: we left in your Hands, a work to be done for the People of God; but
you have thrown by that work, and found something else to be concerned about.
We hoped that you would have trod in our Steps, and that we should have shortly
congratulated your Arrival to the Glorious place, which we are Triumphing in;
But we now fear, That we have dropped you and lost you forever; and that we shall
never see you more, till we behold you wringing your Hands and Gnashing your
Teeth among the Goats at the Left Hand of the Lord Jesus in the Day of His
Appearing.

If what this Writer so confidently affirmed before were undeniably true, let
the Reader judge, how unlikely it is, an Epistle from Heaven should be filled
with such Contents against so holy a People; and for the future the Author will
do well to avoid the like Contradictions. It cannot be counted Breach of
Charity in me, or any other, to give greater credit to what I am ready, with
him, to believe would be the Contents of an Epistle from Heaven, from such of
their Fathers as are gone unto those heavenly Mansions, prepared for them by
our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, than unto this Author's Character,
directly Contradictory hereunto.

This Author has plentifully vented his Envy and Malice against an innocent
quiet peaceable People, whose behavior under all Governments (where by the
Providence of God they have had their abode) has been such as loudly gainsays
the bitter Invictives belched forth against them by this Satirical Author in
page 34, 35, 36. of his book: I shall cite the Passages verbatim, and so make
some short Reply.

C. M.
While these Enemies are seeking to involve our Civil Concerns in Confusion,
there are Sectaries and Seducers that are using their Batt'ring Rams upon our
Sacred Ones. And among those, the Quakers are certainly the most Malicious, as
well as the most Pernicious Enemies.

Reply.
Here is a heavy Charge against an innocent People, that they are not only
Sectaries and Seducers, but the most Malicious and Pernicious Enemies among
those. Were this as firmly proved as it is boldly asserted, it were enough to
render us Odious: Its no less just than strange, this man should be so
infatuated, as to imagine, those many thousands, unto whom his Discourse is
made public by print, should be so easily imposed upon as his credulous
Auditors were that day; for may not by this manner of Reasoning, without the
least shadow of proof, the best of Societies, as well as particular men be
grossly abused: A Method the Papists-use against the Protestants.

C. M.
They were once in a ready way to have broken up all the Good Order whether
Civil or Sacred, in the Infancy of this Plantation; which occasioned the
Authority whom they would have undermined, then to turn a Sharp upon them, by
Laws not so severe as those in the Realm of England against (their Fathers) the
Jesuits, on the same Account: yet those Troublesome Heretics, who had no
Business here at all, but the overthrowing of our whole Government, would push
themselves on the Swords point; and though repeated Banishments with merciful
Entreaties to be gone, were first used unto them, nevertheless, two or three of
them would rather Dye, than leave the Plantation undisturbed.

Reply.
How or after what manner the Plantation in its infancy was in such danger, our
Author is silent in: True it is, that upwards of thirty Years past, some of our
Friends, as faithful Servants, in obedience to their Lord and Masters command,
the great God of heaven, by the spirit of his Son in their hearts, did visit N.
England in true and tender Love to the Inhabitants thereof, for whose Immortal
Welfare they earnestly travailed, and were bowed down before the Lord, and
being amongst them in much brokenness of Heart and contrition of Spirit, they
were grieved and weighted in their Souls with the Hypocrisy in New England,
against which they witnessed, sealing it with their Blood, their hearts being
filled with that Message the holy Apostle Paul, in his day, was employed in,
Acts 26.17, 18. To open their Eyes, and to turn them from Darkness to Light,
and from the Power of Satan unto God, directing them to the manifestation of
the Spirit of God in them; A Teacher not to be removed into a corner, nor that
would any ways deceive them, or suffer them to be at ease in sin: This High way
of the Lord, cast up in his Son Christ Jesus, the Light of the World, the Sound
thereof offended the Ears of New-England's Teachers, who not unlike Demetrius
the Silver-smith, Acts 19.24. proved notable Incendiaries against the Lords
Servants, left their craft should be in danger, so far did they kindle the Rage
and Fury of their bigoted Rulers, that by cruel Usage and inhumane Laws they
far exceeded any thing in the Realm of England against the Jesuits. And whilst
I am writing, there livingly springs up in my heart, to you the Inhabitants of
Boston and New England, a weighty Exhortation, and that in tender Love, That
you would mind the Grace of God that brings Salvation, and as the holy
Scripture testifies, has appeared unto all men, 2 Tit. 11. that in the same
you may see your blind Guides, for if the Blind lead the Blind, both shall fall
into the Ditch: Beware that it be not your Condemnation that Light is come into
the World, and that you love Darkness rather than Light, because your Deeds are
Evil: I have neither Envy nor Malice against the Priests or People of
New England, but earnestly desire the Eternal Welfare of both; yet I cannot
but lament the present state of New England, as well as its former, whose
Priests, to the life, are drawn out in the 3d of Micah, v. 5. Thus says the
Lord concerning the Prophets that make my People Err, that bite with their
Teeth, and cry Peace; and he that puts not into their Mouths, they even
prepare War against him; and verse. 11. The Heads thereof judge for Reward, and
the Priests thereof Teach for Hire, and the Prophets thereof divine for Money;
yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among us? none Evil
can come upon us. O New England! New England! is not this your present state?
Are not your Priests crying Peace unto you, as if no Evil could come upon you,
in the midst of these Clouds of Dangers that are hanging over your heads? some
of them you have, for more than a Twelve Month felt, to wit, A Bloody and
Cruel War with the Heathen, the loss of so many Lives has humbled me before
the Lord, and at this time the earnest Cry and Supplication of my Soul unto
God, is, That you may by your speedy and sincere Repentance unto him, prevent
his Judgments for the future. That the Jesuits may be properly termed the
Fathers of New England Priests, none can doubt, if they differ not from their
Brother John Cotton of Hampton, who in a public Dispute with G. K. owned, To
have received his Ministry by the Pope of Rome, whose Emisaries they are.
Beside, as they can never prove the Quakers guilty of any one Jesuitical Error,
yet we can prove these Priests of Boston guilty of many, and more especially in
their being Incendiaries, against the Peace of the Government. The further
calumniating those who suffered Death, to answer your Crucity, is but a mean
way to expiate the Crime of their innocent Blood, which cries aloud for
Vengeance, and the Lord, unto whom it belongs will repay it. Thou Cotton
Mather, nor all thy Fraternity will never be able to prove these 4 Worthies
troublesome Heretics, that patiently endured Martyrdom for the Testimony of
Jesus, by their crul Hands; neither will thy poor Insinuation help, That two or
three of them would rather dye, than leave the Plantation undisturbed. They had
no reason to hearken unto your Hypocritical entreaties to be gone, it was their
Birthright, as freeborn Subjects of the Kingdom of England, and so might
claim it to inhabit N. England, as well as any that there resided, as not being
forbid to them by either the Law of God, or the Realm of England; so that being
innocent, they feared not man, that could only hurt the Body, but feared him
that could cast both Body and Soul into Hell Fire.

C. M.
It is possible a Bedlam had been fitter for those Frantic People, than what
was inflicted on them; and for my own part, I must profess with regard unto
such Heretics, Ad Judicium sanguinis Tardus sum; nor have I the least
inclinations to Hereticide as a fit way to suppress their Errors.

Reply.
Here our Author does not a little impeach the Authority of N. England, at that
time, who were accessory to the Death of those ^ Worthies, by him called
Frantic People, for if, according to him, a Bedlam had been fitter, surely
they greatly sinned in passing and executing Sentence of Death upon them; the
present Governor Simon Broadstead, then a Magistrate, is greatly concerned in
this Charge, which amounts to no less than the taking away four Lives by an
unjust Judgment; for how can that Sentence of Hanging be just against such for
whom a Bedlam had been fitter. Such as this Author renders our Friends to have
been, are by the Laws of England exempted from the punishment of Death; as
also, its reckoned amongst the Abuses of the common Law, That such who kill
People by false Judgment, be not destroyed as other Murderers, as may be seen
in that noted Book, called, The Mirror of Justice, C. 5. Sect. 108. in express
words thus, It is abuse that Justices, and other Officers, who kill People by
false Judgment, be not destroyed as other Murderers, which K. Alfred cause to
be done, who caused forty four Judges in one Year to be hanged, as Murderers,
for their false Judgments; which in the said Book are particularly noted, and
in the 4th Case he instances, how King Alfred hanged Cole, because he judged
Ive to death, when he was a Madman. Cotton Mather forgot his respect to the
venerable Mordocai of his Country, as he at other times terms him, when he thus
exposed him.

M. C.


