The Prologue to all the Commons of England.
Worthy Freemen of England, the former public Magistrates of this Kingdom,
by their Machivilian empoysened principles, and specious pretenses of common
good, whereas nothing less was intended, have most cunningly and fraudently
cozened you of your native freedoms, to which by the fundamental laws and
constitutions of the Kingdom, ye were born unto, and secretly by wicked
patents have stolen away your Birthright, to set up the particular and self
interests of private societies: One of which I here present to your serious
consideration, as a great grievance and burden under which the honest Clothier
especially, and thousands of poor people groan: ye know for what this
Kingdom has almost been wasted to ashes, ye have spent so much of your
estates and blood, viz. the subjects liberty, to which all civil government is
subservient. My advice to all is this, especially the clothiers and others, who
are deeply interessed, that as they love their bleeding dying Country, their
deliverance from so great a thraldom, they would by petitioning, and all
lawful means, be earnest with the Parliament, for the removal of this and all
other pressures. They are bound in duty to God, in justice to you, in
dischargall of so great a trust committed into their hands, to ease you of all
unjust grievances, intolerable burdens, be therefore active in the work. For
very importunities sake, your endeavors will be crowned with a happy successes
and (if you faint not) reap the benefit of your labors, which shall always be
the desire of him who is willing to serve you.

Thomas Johnson.

WHosoever survayes this Island in her radiant and shining luster with community
and freedom, cannot but say, o quanta mutatio! oh how great a change! for
indeed, this Kingdom is a corporation or society of men under one form of civil
government, made by common consent in Parliament, who are all bound by the law,
to maintain common freedom, and the general good of each other.

But particulars, Patent societies swelling with a luciferian spirit, in
desiring to advance into a higher room then their fellows, did by seruptitious
Patents incorporate themselves, exclusively became destructive to the whole
body, and subverters of the true ancient privileges of the people, and of all
societies, those of Merchants are the worst, having no foundation on the laws;
The fellowship and charter of those that style themselves Merchants of
East-land, is a monopoly of this kind, according to the true genuine sense of
the word monopoly, relating to a private company, who ascribe unto themselves
the sole exercise and benefit of such a trade, wherein every subject has
equal freedom with them, all which this monopoly does, and is illegal, being
contrary to magna Charta, the petition of right, Statutes of monopolics, with
diverse others, and in particular these 3. following: 1. is of the 14. of Edw.
3.2. Item, Where it is contained in the great Charter, that all Merchants shall
have safe and sure conduct to go out of the Realm of England, and to come, and
abide, and go through the Realm of England: as well by water as by land: we at
the request of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and Commons, will and grant for
us, and for our heirs and successors, that all Mirchants, Denizens, and
Foraigners (except those which be of our enmity) may without let, safely come
into the said Realm of England, with their goods and Merchandise, and safely
tarry and safely return, paying the customs, subsidies, and other profits
reasonably thereof due, so always, that franchise and free customs
reasonably, granted by us and our ancestors to the City of London, and other
cities and good Towns of our Realm of England, be to them saved. The 2. is of
18. Ed. 3.3. That the ordinance made before this time, upon taking of sorts of
wools in every County, be wholly nulled and defeated, and that every man, alwell
stranger as privy from henceforth may buy wool, according as they may agree
with the seller, as they were wont to do, before the said ordinances, and that
the sea be open to all manner of merchants, to pass with their merchandise
where it shall please them. By both these statutes it evidently appears, that
every Englishman may transport his commodity without molestation, to what port
beyond sea he pleases, and make sale for his best advantage, every Englishman
being a native denizen and privy man of this kingdom, according to the true
meaning of the saw: for it is imaginable to me, that the law should provide
better for aliens, then her own children; the 3. is of 12. H. 7.6. viz. as
follows To the discreet Commons in this present Parl shows unto your
discreet wisdoms, the Merchant Adventurers inhabiting and dwelling in diverse
ports of this Realm out of the City of London, that where they have their
passage, resort, course and recourse with their goods, wares, and merchandise
in diverse coasts and parts beyond the sea, as well into Spain, Portugal, Britan,
Ireland, Normandy, France, Civil, Venice, Dansk, Eastland, Freezeland, and
other diverse and many places, regions and countries being in league and amity
with the King our sovereign Lord, there to buy and sell; and make their
exchanges with the said goods, wares, and marchandizes, according to the law
and custom used in every of the said regions and places, and there every person
freely to use himself to his most advantage, without exaction, fine,
imposition, or contribution to be had or taken of them, to, for, or by any
English person or persons. etc. By which Statute, all merchants, as well those
inhabiting in diverse parts of the Kingdoms, as of the city of London, as also
every free born subject, is acknowledged as his right to have freedom to trade
to the said parts mentioned, and to diverse other regions and countries without
subjection to any patent or paying any exaction, fine, etc. for in that the
statute says, every person is freely to use himself to his most advantage,
without exaction, etc. to be had or taken of them, or any of them, to, for, or
by any English person, or persons, it clearly holds forth, that the merchant,
and consequently every man that uses comerce to these parts, ought not to come
under the obedience of any opressing corporation whatsoever: now Danst and the
East-land being expressed in the statute, which are the principal parts to
which these Eastland merchants are privileged by their monopoly, and indeed
the crown and glory of the rest for venting our native commodities, as also the
other included, when the stitute says, and other diverse and many places,
regions, and countries, I hope every honest man will be willing with heart and
hand to endeavor the recovery of our birthright which the law so evidently
makes out own from these unjust oppressors.

2. Contrary to the light of nature, which teaches men to walk by congruity
and equality, not to oppress, because they would not be oppressed, not to take
away any man's right, because they would not have another use the same measure
to them. Which principles of nature are engraven upon the hearts of heathens,
who certainly will rise up in judgment one day against these men that sell us
for slaves in our own land.

3. It is irrational, reason being the fountain of all honest laws, gives to
every man propriety and liberty: propriety of interest, freedom of enjoyment
and improovement to his own advantage, from that propriety take away freedom,
and a considerable part is gone nay we see it by experience, that those who
have bereft us of our liberty, have made bold with our propriety, and indeed if
prerogative may take away the one, why not the other from the same principles?
so that it appears to be rational, that every native who has propriety of
goods, wares, and merchandise, has freedom to transport them to any port
beyond Seas, and there convert them, to his own profit, it being his true and
proper inheritance so to do, it is very strange to my understanding, that one
man should do the work, and another man receive the wages, I mean, that the
honest clothier who has toyled much in the making of his cloth, shall not have
the benefit to sell it here for his own gain, or to ship it for more profit,
but being debared of freedom in both, must make sale to them, in whose power it
is to give him what price they please, whereby he is cheated of the fruit of
his labor.

4. That the monopoly is against the honor of the Nation, because by it the
people are put in acondition of vassalage in their own country, it takes away
industry the spring of wealth, the hearts of the people being brought to
servility, and not able by reason of this, and other the like patents, to
employ themselves, cannot choose but procure sad effects if not timely
prevented, for

5. The pattent was illegally procured by the solicitation of evil Counselors,
under the broad seal of England, in the 25 year of the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, it being of no longer standing under specious pretenses, as the
profit of her then Majesty, the good of the Kingdom, etc. whereas by it the
natives have bin weakened and spoiled, which will easily appear, if we consider
these particulars.

1. By reason of this patent, thousands of poor people are in a condition of
beggary, who otherwise might maintain themselves in honest callings, by the
making of cloth, and other woolen manufactures, by carding, spinning, weaving,
etc. and certainly this one thing thoroughly considered, should stir up the
bowels of every truly noble spirited Englishman, to double his strength, if it
were possible, an hundred fold, in all just ways, for the removal of so great
an obstruction.

2. The poor Clothier suppressed, none being to trade to those parts but the
company, the clothier makes not half the clothes he might; and for those he
does make, they being of a confederacy, and having all the privilege of buying
in their own hands, by reason whereof, many times he is forced to fell them at
a far less. price then they cost him in making, or else to keep them till the
next year, which discourages and slackens the clothier in the prosecution of
his calling, and causes some to fail, others to give over, and those which
remain, many of them scarce can make a living.

3. This Monopoly greatly impareth the trade of cloth, those who are judicious
affirm that 5000 cloths more then are, would be made, shipped, and expended
yearly in those parts to which they are authorized to trade to, which I verily
believe and prove thus, all the cloth they ship, some extraordinary times
excepted, is but to 1. or 2. Towns, and there residing their Factors, who
making sale to the Binger, he sends the cloth up and down the Country, from
whence arises many mischiefs, the Countries not being furnished as they
should: as also the selling at such excessive rates, causes the Datch to make
cloth in an abundant manner, and to be satisfied with it, though it be
exceeding course: and again, there being diverse Kingdoms, Dominions, Dukedoms,
Countries, Cities, and Towns, to which by their patent they are licensed, what
advantage would the young merchant have, having so vast a compass, how active
would he be from Town to Town, from City to City, from one Country to another,
and selling cheap, would invite foreign parties to set a true estimate upon
our native commodities, and certainly were trade free, Sweedland, and
Pomerland, would vent much cloth, whereas the company is not able to satisfy
the Eastland it self, by reason of the smalnesse of their stock, it may be
easily conceived, that such a small Company of private men, are never able to
suffice such famous Kingdoms and Dukedoms to which they only are licenced to
traffic.

6. It causes a great decay of Navigation, which sustaineth the mariners, so
that by this and other the like patents, the saylor is greatly suppressed.

7. It obstructeth returns, diverse of the most stable commodities which our
Country stands in, need of, are imported by them, viz. flax, hemp, potashes,
pitch, tar, course linen, packing, canvas, with diverse other very considerable
merchandise, now they bring over when they please, and what they please, and
sell at what price they please, which cannos but have sundry evil concomitance.
1. Our Country is not satisfied with that variety and convenience it should:
and 2. By reason the Citizen gives such an unreasonable rate to the merchant,
the poor have all excessive dear, giving many times half as much more then the
comodity is worth, or then it would be sold for were the trade but open, from
which and such other dealings it is, that the people are unconscionably wasted,
and weakened, and therefore what ere it cost us, lets have this ravenous patent
down, whereby there would be all these gallant effects: multitudes of poor
maintained, the clothier raised, the trade of cloth greatly augmented, by
reason that thousands might be vented more, then are the number of merchants
increased, the art of navigation furthered, and lastly, an universal benefit to
the whole nation, from the plenty of merchandise imported, which we should have
at far easier and more valuable considerations. Ob. But if trade be free, the
Alien will expect freedom also. An I see no ground but aliens paying custom,
provided always that we enjoy as full and large privileges with them, they
ought to have the like here with us. but 2. suppose the State should prohibit
strangers, yet there is no shadow or color of right reason, that we who have
equal liberties in the laws, have ventures our estates and lives so freely to
preserve them, should be deprived of our true inheritance, and therefore for
further satisfaction, I shall here insert part of their charter, that every one
may judge whether it be just or no: Forasmuch as we be credibly informed etc.
that you our Subjects merchants, and others, exercising and using the
trafficque and feat of merchandise, out and from any our Dominions through the
Sound, into the Realms, Kingdoms, Dominions, Dukedom, Countries, Cities and
Towns, of Norway, Swethia, Poland, and the territories of the same Kingdoms, as
also into Letto, and Liefland, under the dominion of the King of Poall,
Prussia, and also Pomerland, from the river of Odera Eastward, and also Ry and
Kevil in Liesland aforesaid Kingsbrough, Elbinge, Brownsbrough, and Dansick in
Brusia, Copenhiven, and Elsenore in Dansk, except the Nerve, and the
territories thereof belongings as also into the Island of Finland, Goteland,
Eweland, and Berntholme, within the Sound aforesaid, by one consent are willing
to gather, congregate, and assemble your selves into one followship, and to be
one body incorporate and politic, in deed, and in name; we considering that
your purposes in this behalf are very laudable, do therefore not only approve
and fancy the same, but will you to persevere in your good minds and purposes,
to the establishment and perfection thereof, and earnestly desiring that our
merchants and their successors haunting the said Kingdoms, Dominions,
Countries, Cities, and Towns, before mentioned, or any of them, for
merchandise, in and through the Sound of the Kingdom of Denmark (except before
excepted) may from hence forth profit and increase as prosperously a^ any
merchants of this Land have aforetime increased and prohibited, and do grant
for us, our heirs, and successors that from hence forth there be and shall be,
of the said Fellowship, one Governor, and one Deputy, or Deputies, and four
and twenty assistance of the said fellowship; and that they, or the major part
of them, may make statutes, Laws, and ordinances: and that the aforesaid
Governor, or Deputy, or Deputies, and their successors, or the major part of
them, as is aforesaid then present, as often as need shall be; the said
Statutes, Laws, and ordinances, shall and may execute and put in execution
as well within our Realm of England, as within the said Realms, Dominions,
Cities, and Countries, and every of them: and for that diverse persons, our
subjects, being not brought up in merchandise through their ignorance and lack
of knowledge, commit many inconveniency, we willing to resist and prevent them,
and intending to further the expert merchant in their lawful and honest trade:
will, and by our Regal Authority we Command, and also prohibit and forbid by
these presents, that no subject of us, our heirs, or successors, which is not,
nor shall be by force of these presents made free of the said Felloship shall
by any manner of means at any time hereafter inter meddle in the trade of
Merchandise; or by any means buy and sell, or use any traffic into the said
parts of Eastland, and Countries aforesaid, or any of them, (except before
excepted,) upon pain to incur our indignation: as also to pay such fines, and
emercements, and to suffer imprisonment, and such other pains due to the
Transgressors of the said sttatutes, ordinances, and constitutions of the said
Fellowship, or to the said Governor or his Deputy and assistants aforesaid,
shall seem meet and convenient, any Law, Statute, Custom, or Ordinance, to
the contrary thereof, many other things notwithstanding etc.

And do further by these presents inhibit and forbid, all and every our
subjects, and the subjects of us our heirs and successors, not being licenced
and authorized by virtue of those presents, to traffic in and to the said
Countries, Kingdoms, Towns and places before recited, or use any manner of
trade in and to them, contrary to the tenor of these presents, upon pain to
incur the displeasure of us, our heirs and successors, and to be fined,
payned, and imprisoned, according to the several discretions and laws of the
officers of the said former several Companies and their successors, witness
our self at Westminster, the 17. of August, in the 21. year of our Reign.

I no sooner made a surveyal of this cruel engine, what intolerable breaches
and inrodes it has continually made upon us, but was cast into a sudden
admiration, that so free a people as England, should suffer themselves so
violently to be grownd to powder, which I shall illustrate to be treasonable in
the practisers of it by these positions: 1. If to surrender a Castle by the
Captain of that Castle through fear and cowardice, and not from any compliance
with the enemy be treason, as was adjudged in the Parliament 1. Rich. 2. then
is this a treasonable patent, for besides the place, there is only a loss of
the adjacent parts, but by this patent our laws, liberties, nay our very
lives, in pursuance of both the former, are subjected to will and tyranny, he
that walks in the exercise of freedom, according to law, is subject to their
counter commands, and to be fined, payned, and imprisoned and to suffer such
other punishments as to them shall seem meet and convenient.

If to kill a judge upon the bench be treason, because of malice, not to the
person, but to the law, then is this a treasonable patent, here is not only a
malice to the law, but a most butcherly weapon killing and destroying of it,
these 2. cannot dwell together, for the life of the patent, so far as it
extends, is the death of the law, which stops its free course for the benefit
of the people, and makes it merely a dead letter, a carkas without a soul, a
power being given to Mr. Governor and his companions, to make laws, statutes,
and ordinances which power is more and far greater then belongs to the chief
magistrate to give, or can legally or justly be exercised by any but the
Parliament, and therefore not to be received by any person or persons
whatsoever, and certainly those laws, and all that government derived from
Queen Elizabeth's broad seal commission are according to the lusts of these men,
being extrajuditiall, in that they are above the sphaere of the law. 2.
Contrary to the law, if the endeavoring the subversion of the ancient
fundamental laws and government of this Kingdom, and to introduce an
arbitrary and tyrannical government be treason: as was adjudged in the case of
the Earl of Strafford, and in the case of Sir Robert Berkley, by the first
article of impeachment by the House of Commons, July 6. 1641. then is this a
treasonable patent, for here is not only an endeavor, but an actual surrender
of both law and government, which have made England a free people, and what
more ancient or fundamental, then those laws which gratify the Commons; and by
which they enjoy their very lives, here is an arbitrary government introduced,
and put into the hands of those whom the subject does not own to have any right
of power and rule, and that in so high a nature as can be no less then
monarchical, for what can a monarchical power be, but to make laws, and to
punish the transgressors according to those laws, by confiscation of goods,
imprisonment, or taking away the life of the vassals, all which they may do by
their patent, and certainly this company of Merchants of East-land, who have
practiced arbitrarily for so long a time as they have done, against the
liberties of the natives deserve for all their cruelties to be proceeded
against as public delinquents to the State.

As touching their oath, it is one of the worst (I am confident) that ever was
made, which I shall here insert for every man's knowledge. You shall swear to be
good and true to out Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, and to his Heir as and
Successors, you shall be obedient and assistant to Mr. Governor, his Deputy,
and Deputies, and assistants of merchants of Eastland, all statutes and
ordinances which be, or shall be made by the said Governor, or by his
deputies, and assistants standing in force, you shall truly hold and keep,
having no singular regard to your self, in hurt or prejudice of the commonweal
of the said fellowship, you shall heal, and not bewray, and if you shall know
any manner of person or persons which intend any hurt, harm, or prejudice to
our said Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, or unto his land, or to the foresaid
fellowship or privileges of the same you shall give knowledge thereof, and do
it to be known to the said Governor or his deputy, and you shall not color or
free any Forraigners goods not free of the said fellowship, all which you shall
hold and keep to the uttermost of your power, or else being justly condemned
for making default in any of the premises, you shall truly from time to time,
being orderly demanded, content and pay to the treasurer of this Company for
the time being, all and every such mulcts and penalties which have been or
shall be limited and set for the transgressors of the same. So God you help.

Lieutenant Col. Lilburn in his late book called Innocence and Truth justified,
being an answer to Mr. Prius look, called the liar confounded, has these
passages, page 53. And i^ the second place, seeing they know, viz. the merchant
adventurers, that the Petition o^ Right does condemn the King and his Privy
Counsel for making and administering o^ oaths, not made by common consent in
Parliament, and seeing the Parliament us they very well know, was lately so
angry at the Bishops, and their convocation, for assuming to themselves the
boldness to make an oath, although they were invested with a more colorable
authority to justify them therein, then these can pretend, how exemplary ought
the punishment of these men to be for their impudence and boldness, after the
knowledge of all this, to force and press upon the freemen of England, an oath
of their own framing and making, and to keep their freedoms from them, because
out of Conscience they dar^ not take them, which at this present day is the
condition of one Mr. Johnson, late servant to Mr Whitlock, one of the East
Country Monopolizing Merchants, which is all one in nature with the Monopoly of
Merchant Adventurers: And not only do they most uniustly keep my freedom from
me, for which I have so often ventured my life in the Northern service
according to the Custom of the City of London, but most inhumanely have taken
from me my place of Factorship in the Eastland, and all because I have rejected
their monopoly and diabolical oath, and this was the gallam service of Mr.
Burnell Governor and his associates, the 3. October. 1645. but I expect to see
Justice (that banished exile return in all her glory, and these oppressing task
masters called to a just account: for certain I am, that the law never gave
them authority to make an oath, or to force it upon (...) conscience; besides
the oath contains many perjuries, in the second branch it ties the swearer to
be assistant to Mr. Governor and his confederates in all their dishonest
proceedings. In the third branch, to keep all their pernicious laws and
ordinances, which (...) and ordinances are to deprive the Subject of his right,
and this will not satisfy, but to all that are to be made, O intolerable
burden! whither will this bottomless pit (...) is etc. etc. etc. and
innumerable company of etc. In the fourth branch, to keep all the^^ cozening
secrets and underhand dealings in the pursuance of their patent. And in the
(...) branch, for making default in any of the premises, that is, for
forswearing himself, wh^^ he does that keeps it, as well as he that keeps it
not, because he swears not in truth, in (...) and in righteousness, to pay such
mulcts and penalties which have been or shall be limited and set for the
transgressors of the same, as if such great crimes could be wash^^ away with a
penance: for my part I am clear in this point, that whosoever he be th^^ bends
and yields obedience to this or the like oath, deserve not the name of an
Englishman surely their designs are to use the expression of Lieu. Col.
Lilburn, in p. the 54 of his (...) speaking against the merchant adventurers,
to make England a land of slavery, ignoran^^ and beggary, or else a land of
perjury: I have now learned the meaning of that Scripture Rev. 13.16.17 And he
causes all both small and great, rich and poor, free and boun^ to receive a
mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads that none might buy or sell,
save be that had the mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name:
which relates as I conceive to all monopolies whatsoever, sublat a causa
tollitur effectus take (...) away these merchants patents, and all other of the
like nature, and there will a sudden (...) appear to the relief of the honest,
comfort and tranquillity to the whole Nation for the effecting whereof, if I
shall but erritate the courteous Reader, it is price sufficient for him whose
desire it is not to live, but in the truth.

FINIS.

