False Judgments Reprehended: AND A Just Reproof to Tho. Everndon, And his
Associates and Fellow-Travellers, For the false and rash Judgment T. E. gave
against G. K. and his faithful Friends and Brethren, at the public Meeting at
Philadelphia, the 27. of 10. Mon. 1692. And also for their bringing with them
their Paquet of Letters (Saul* like to Damascus) containing the false Judgment
of a Faction of men, calling themselves the Yearly Meeting at Tredaven in
Maryland the 4 of 8. Mon. 92. And another false Judgment contained in another
Letter from William Richardson, All which will return upon their own heads.
IT is greatly worth the noticing, that these men who call themselves the
Yearly Meeting at Tredaven in Maryland. met the 4th of the 8 Mon. 1692. have
most rashly and unchristianly, contrary to all Gospel Order, condemned G. K.
and his Friends, a^ appears, by their Paper signed by Thomas Everndon, Rich.
John, Richard Harrison, John Pit, W. Dixon, Ja. Ridley, and several others,
without all hearing of him, or sending any of their Brethren to enquire into
the truth of things, or true cause and ground of the Separation here, and such
other things as they lay to his charge.

And whereas they say in their Letter, That he accuses his Brethren and
renders them to the World as a People not fit to hold Communion with; and that
there are more damnable Heresies and Errors cloaked amongst the Quakers there
(viz. in Pennsilvania) than in any Protestant Society in Christendom.

Answ. Oh! the gross Partiality and Injustice of these men! when was it that G.
K. published this to the World, viz. That they cloaked more damnable Heresies
and Errors here, than in any Protestant Society in Christendom? was it not in
answer to the 28 false Judges, that had published in the face of the world
their false Judgment against him, in which they published these words, and not
G. Keith, for he spoke them in a private Meeting at a private house in
Burlington, where about 20 men called Ministers were met; and had they been
wise they would not have so publicly accused G. K. for them in their said
Paper, which though they did not print, yet caused it to be read at Monthly and
Quarterly Meetings, and at other Meetings on first days and week days, where
many that did not profess to be Quakers were present, whereby it was noised all
about; and G. K. was publicly opposed and interrupted in his Testimony in most
places, and when he prayed in Meetings, many kept on their Hats, and all
because of this Paper of false Judgment against him by the 28. and it is but a
circumstance whether a thing be printed or not, seeing they published it all
over the Country, and sent it to most parts in America where there is of the
People called Quakers, before G. K. published it in print; so they were the
Publishers of it, and not G. K. And this is sufficient to discover their
Partiality and Injustice in this particular, which is the principal thing they
pretend to have against him.

Again, whereas they blame him for Seperating from Friends and Brethren: by
this it plainly appears that they own such to be their Brethren, who are
guilty of denying and opposing Faith in the Man Christ without us, which these
here have done. And for the Separation which our Opposers first made, and were
the cause of, we are well warranted by the holy Scripture, that says, Come out
from among them, and be ye separate; Be ye not unequally yoked with
Unbelievers; what fellowship has a Believer with an Infidel? and such indeed
are all them who have not Faith in the Man Christ without them, as in Christ in
them, as these our Opposers have not, who set up the Light within to be
sufficient without any thing else, as their Judgment against him plainly
expresses, so excluding the Man Christ Jesus without us from having any part
in our Salvation

Again, they tell G. K. That if any of them had been guilty of these things, he
ought to have labored their Recovery in love and in the Spirit of Meekness.

Answ. And so he did for above a year, with much love and patience and met with
great Contradiction, Hatred and reviling Language from them for his pains: and
he did bear and suffer so long, that he could not with peace of Conscience
suffer it any longer, and brought the matter of Difference orderly from one
Meeting to another, but there was no Remedy. And whereas they say, He ought to
have stated the Difference and sent it to London: He did write to G. Whitehead
and Friends at London, and had their answer, approving his Doctrine, before he
printed any thing, and yet this prevailed nothing. But G. K. did not write to
them as having any uncertainty or doubt in himself of the truth of the Doctrine
asserted by him, nor was he free to submit so great a matter of Faith and
Conscience, by way of Absolute Submission, to any man or number of men, as
Whether Christ without us was to be believed in, as well as Christ within us,
as necessary to our Salvation? for things of that nature are not to be
submitted, by way of Absolute Submission to the best of men, it contradicts
our ancient Principle, viz. That the Spirit in each particular is the Rule of
Faith and Doctrine. But G. K. did never refuse to appeal or submit to the
Spirit of Truth in any of his faithful Friends in Old-England or any where
else, but proffered it, and was refused, not doubting their unity with him in
this weighty matter, but because it is so unquestionable a Truth among
Christians, That Christ without is as necessary to be believed in for our
Salvation, as that God in Heaven is to be believed in; therefore he thought it
not necessary to concern his faithful Friends to seek their assistance to
determine that which all Christendom grants in words, and none but the greatest
Apostates and Heretics dare deny.

Next, let it be observed, that after Tho. Everndon and the rest had given
forth the said false Judgment in Maryland, T. Everndon, accompanied with Rich.
John's, Rich. Harrison and Humphry Hodges, comes to Philadelphia, and before
they had been here 48 hours, out of the Meeting) on the ^7 day of 10 mon. in a
public Meeting appointed at Philadelphia, where was present about 500 People,
T. Everndon said, That having seen certain printed Books that came down to
Maryland, wherein his Brethren were charged with denying the Man Christ Jesus,
and Faith in him, and the Resurrection of the dead; I said (said he) I would go
up and see what the matter is among my Brethren, whether these things be so or
not, that these Books come down among us, wherein they are charged with denying
these things; and now since I am come I have made enquiry of the Parties so
charged, and I find my Brethren sound in the Faith concerning all these things,
and therefore these are Lies and Calumnies cast upon us, and I have this word
of Comfort further to deliver to you, my Brethren, from the Lord, That the
Judgments of the Lord will overtake them that have printed and published these
things to the Dishonor of God, and his Truth, etc.

Where Note first, That he said, He came up to enquire whether these things
were so or not, and yet near 3 Months before he came here to see whether these
things were so or not, he and his Companions believed Reports against us in
Maryland, and signed the said Judgment against us. Now pray consider whether T.
E. and Companions were the Impartial men they pretend to be to enquire and
judge of this great Controversy, when 1ct, before they came here they gave
their Judgment against us upon bare Report: 2ly. When they came here, before
they had time to make due enquiry ( viz. in less then 48 hours) to say, That he
found his Brethhen sound in the Faith, and That these were Lies and Calumnies
cast upon them, was great rashness: First they condemned us, and then T. E.
said he came some hundreds of Miles to enquire whether these things (for which
they had condemned us) were true, or not: Was ever greater Folly acted by men
pretending to Reason, Conscience and the highest Perfection in Christianity?
Our Souls pity them, and heartily desire that they might see their Rashness,
and Repent.

But to demonstrate that T. Everndon had but one ear to hear, or at (...) to
give credit to one party in prejudice to the other, pray note these following
Observations.

Observe. 1st. That at the said Meeting 27 of 10 mon. before T. E. bore his
Testimony, John Wilsford declared a long time concerning the Faith of Christ,
saying, He had the TRVE Fa^^h of Christ, as he dyed, and rose again, and
ascended, and was our Mediator in But J^^^ Wilsford ^as not told us whe^^er
that heaven be (...) ^in or without, into which the Man Christ is go^; Rob.
Young says it is within us.
Heaven, before he came among Friends, and even from his Childhood he had that
True Faith, but yet that Faith did not purify him, nor gather him to God, but
he remained in the dark, and his Religion was only an outside Profession, etc.

Observe. 2ly. That T. E. did not only hear J. W. speak this, but he also heard
G. K. reprove diverse things in his Doctrine, and prove it to be false and
unsound, especially that he said, He had the true Faith of Christ as he dyed
and rose again, and yet that Faith did not purify him, etc. This, said G. K.
is unsound Doctrine to call that the true Faith of Christ that does not purify
nor gather to God, nor bring a man out of the dark, and to have no more of
Religion than an outside Profession; this is not the true Faith, but a false
Faith; for the true Faith purifieth the Heart, and gathers unto God, and brings
him that has it to know the Kirr^d and inward Life of Religion. If he had
said, he had not the true Faith of Christ crucified, etc. but a dead literal
and notional Faith of it, he might have said true; but to say he had the true
Faith, and yet that it did not purify him, does prove him to be yet ignorant
of the true Faith, and that he is yet in the dark: There is a true and a false
Faith both of Christ without and of Christ within, the False is only Literal,
Historical and Notional, and many have no other but a bare literal, historical
and notional Faith of Christ within, as others have of Christ without; they
say, they believe that Christ is in them only because they read it, and hear it
preached, but this Faith is dead, and is not true, more than a dead Picture of
a Man is a true Man; but the True Faith of Christ, both without and within is a
living fruitful Faith, wrought in them who have it by the Power and Spirit of
Christ, accompanying the Preaching of it, and the Testimony of the holy
Scriptures concerning the same.

Observe. 3dly. That at the same Meeting F. E. heard John Hutchens grossly
pervert that place of Scripture, 1 These. 4.15. We which are alive and remain to
the Coming of the Lord, shall be caught up to meet the Lord in the Air, etc.
which most evidently relates to his coming in his glorified Body without us at
the great Day of Judgment, whereas J. ^. appl^ed it wholly to men's being caught
up in the Spirit, grossly confounding Christ the Son, the Heir, with the Air,
which he also heard G. K. (...) contradict and reprove.

Obser. 4ly. That the Printed Judgment concerning Will Stockdale, (which is a
true Copy of the Original) says, That it was proved by two Witnesses that he
said G. K. preached two Christ's, because he preached Faith in Christ within and
without, is evidence sufficient of his unsoundness, and yet he was all along
allowed to preach and pray in Meetings.

Obs. 5ly. That by their printed Judgment concerning T. Fit^^^^^^ its evident
that they clear T. F. and condemn G. K. for saying, (...) Light is not
sufficient without (...) thing else (to wit, the Man Christ Jesus, and what he
did and suffered for us on Earth, and what he is now, doing for us in Heaven,
and which at the next Monthly Meeting, The L^o^^^ at the Month of the Meeting
acknowledged, They knew G. K. meant the Man, Christ Jesus, and what he did and
suffered for us, and what he (...) now a doing for us, to be that something
else; thereby denying the Man Christ Jesus from having any part or share in our
Salvation.

Obser. 6ly. That both on the first day before in the public Meeting, and in
the evening before this Meeting G. K. gave T. E. and Companions a faithful
account how John Delavall had accused him of being guilty of Heresy and Error
in a Fundamental Doctrine, for asserting that the Light within is not
sufficient without somewhat else: thereby excluding the Man Christ Jesus
without us.

Now after this, which T. E. could not but be sensible of, for him to say in
such a great Auditory, That he had made enquiry, and sound his Brethren sound
in the Faith, and these things in our printed Books were Lies and Calumnies,
bewrays his great weakness in this, as Folly and Rashness in his Signing a
Paper of Judgment against us in Maryland upon bare Report. And therefore it is
manifest that T. Everndon has been very imprudent in the management of this
weighty Affair, thus to clear the guilty and condemn the Innocent, and that in
the Name of the Lord. Oh! the righteous Judge of the whole Earth, who knows the
secrets of all hearts, will judge for these things.

And in private Conference that Evening aforesaid, the principal thing for
which T. E. blamed G. K. was, for making known to the World, the Errors of some
called Preachers among the Quakers here, saying, he had made Friends stink, and
become the Song of the Drunkards. But G. K. said, he had not made then stink,
but themselves had done it, as when the Sun shines warm on a Dunghill, the
Dunghill is to be blamed for the stink, not the Sun. Also, G. K. did
expostulate with T. E. and his Companions, Why they did lay open to the World
the Adultry of T. T. once a great Preacher among them, whereby the Quakers
generally there away became a stink and a Song of the Drunkards, and many on
that very account left the Quakers Meetings; They replied, His Wickedness
rested on his own head. To which G. K. said, If Carnal A^^^try be not to be
hid, no more is spiritual Adultry, as this is to d^^^ the Lord that bought us.
So that their blaming G. K. for not sending to Friends in other parts, or to
London, is as idle as if we should send to London to enquire wheth^^ Adultry be
a sin for which we ought to deny them who are guilty, as (...) to be separated
from and not fit to hold Communion with. And why should G.K. and his Friends
any more delay their publishing to the world, (after endeavors used to reclaim
them) a Testimony against some men's spiritual Adultery here, which is their
gross Heresy, in denying the Faith of Christ without us, as he dyed for our
sins, etc. as necessary to our Salvation, any more than they in Maryland
delayed to publish T. T's carnal Adultery? Or why should G. K. and his Friends
call for the assistance of Friends in remote Parts, or at London, to condemn a
Heresy that is as manifest a sin as Adultery is? And if Friends at London
found themselves concerned to give forth a Testimony in print against one that
was said to carry the Bible to the Exchange to burn it, ought not G. K. and his
Friends to be concerned to give forth a Testimony against them that deny Christ
without us, not owning him to be concerned in our Salvation, but only the Light
within us, seeing to deny Christ, of whom the Bible declares, is more than to
deny the ^^^^e, that is a declaration of him.

And one of T. E's Companions, viz. Richard John's, charged G. K. for casting
the Errors of particular Persons on the Body of Friends, which G.K. denied, and
proffered to show him that he cleared faithful Friends of it, and did not
charge these Errors and Heresies upon all here nor elsewhere, nor yet upon any
others that are not guilty, as we believe many are not, but only upon a Party
or Faction of men that are no true Quakers, but degenerated from the true
Principles and Practices of the Quakers. And in their Paper Richard John's and
the rest give false Judgment in matter of Fact, viz. That we have rent and
separated from Friends; for these who have separated from us, and we are
separated from them, are no true Friends and Brethren, because holding
Antichristian Doctrines; and we have not rent, nor are separated from faithful
Friends, as we have always declared; see our first Book, called, Some Causes
of the late Separation, p. 23. we say, We design not any Separation from our
faithful Brethren here or any where else in any part of the World, for we
declare we are one with all our faithful Brethren in all parts of the World,
both in Spirit, Doctrine and Practice of true Christianity; and we faithfully
believe, that our Faith in all things does well agree to all our faithful
Brethren every where, and is the real sound and upright Faith, as it has been
received, not only by ancient Christians in all Ages of the World, but also by
the most sound, ancient and present Friends of Truth, called in scorn Quakers.
And in The Plea of the Innocent, p. 10. it is expressly declared, That G. K. is
in unity with Truth and faithful Friends, not only in Old England, but all
places where they are.

The next is a Letttr from William Richardson to G. K. dated the 20 of ^o mon.
92. from West-River in Maryland, who charge G. K. That his Spirit strikes at
the Light as not being sufficient, and sets People a gazing in the Air, and
some to question whether they have received the Truth or not; saying further,
What is the meaning of these choises of Faith in Christ without, and Faith
within (like to what (...) Jo^ns said to G. K. That it was a needless
destinction, viz. Christ within and Christ without) seeing no true Believer in
Christ within; dare ^^s^on the Work, Miracles, and holy Doctrine performed in
that Body. Note Reader the fallacy of his words concerning Christ without,
which are no more than any Socinian or Pelagian will own; but he has not a
word of owning (...) Christ without us being necessary to our salvation; for it
is not enough to own the Doctrine, Miracles and Works of the Man Christ without
us, for the Doctrine, Miracles and Works of the Prophets and Apostles are to be
owned, but yet none of them are to be believed in as the Author of our Eternal
Salvation, but Christ only; and it is apparent by his Letter, that he agrees
with J. Wilsford and other his ignorant Brethren, that only the Faith of Christ
within is the true Faith that purifieth the heart, and that the Faith of Christ
without is historical, outward (...) traditional, a made and formed Faith that
the Lord ^ever was the Author of; and this is that Faith which he (...) for
contending about, whereby he shows his exceeding (...); ignorance for G. K.
has preached in the hearing of William (...) several times the Faith of Christ
does without and within, (...) be any made or formed Faith of men's making, but
the inward Work and Gift of God, wrought in all who have it, by the Spirit and
(...) of God, even that mighty Power that raised Christ from the (...).
Therefore let who will despise and reject this faith, we are (...) assured we
have many faithful Brethren both in America, England, (...) ^^nd, Ireland, and
other parts of the World, who are lovers of the (...) Jesus, and will bless God
in our behalf, that he has raised us (...) and Witnesses for his holy Truth in
the midst of such great (...) ^^^diction and Opposition.

To conclude, it is no small matter of Admiration to us, that so many (...)
Quakers in Maryland, who have all along pretended, That they (...) free in
Cons^^^^ to contribute to the Militia, yet no^ (...) with (...) Opposers here,
who have begun to persecute some of (...) Fines imprisonment, for asserting the
Quakers Principle against (...) use of (...) Sword; see our printed Appeal.

George Keith, Thomas (...).


