Unto the Right Honorable, the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Conncil, The
PETITION Of Patrick Iohnstoun, late Bailie in Edinburgh, Alexander Campbel,
Alexander Clerk, and Alexander Mackgill, Merchants in Edinburgh, David Waike,
and Ralph Spurri Englishmen.
Humbly shows,
THat by your Lordships Proclamation, published the 20 of July instant, all
Victual to be Imported is declared to be liable to Custom and other Duties, as
before the Proclamation published upon the sixth of August, 1696. And the
Collectors of His Majesty's Customs are appointed to Collect and Count for the
same accordingly, wherethrough your Petitioners being heavily prejudged, humbly
beg liberty to lay before your Lordships the Reasons following, why the
particular quantities of Victual belonging to them, cannot be liable to pay
Custom, viz. 1. In cases of the like nature formerly, when Victual was
discharged to be Imported, or Burdened if Imported; your Lordships were always
so tender of the prejudice Merchants might suffer, that upon their giving Oath
that they had Commissioned and Loadned the Victual before the Publishing of
such Proclamations or Orders, they were always allowed to Import the same free
of the burden of the said Orders: And here our case is much more just and
favorable, where we are content to make Faith, or if need beis, to prove by
Witnesses, or other Documents beyond exception, that part of the Victual
belonging to us the said Patrick Johnstoun Alexander Campbel, Alexander Clark,
David Waike and Ralph Spurrie did Arrive at Heymouth before the 12th or 14th of
July instant, and a great part of us Arrived since at Leith two days after the
Proclamation, and the rest at Holy-Island, detained by contrary Winds since
that time; and that the Victual belonging to me, the said Alexander Mackgill
was partly lying upon the Road of Leith in a Ship, long ago reported, and a
sufferance given for Livering, and whereof above 300 Bolls was Livered
accordingly, and the rest of my Victual is at Haymouth and Holy Island,
detained in manner foresaid: And it were the hardest thing imaginable to make
us liable for Custom, who have Bought, Loadened, Imported, and partly Livered
that Victual, directly upon the prospected being free of Custom, and yet upon
such a surprise to cause exact it from us; which in effect is to take as much
Money out of our Pocket: And its hoped your Lordships will be far from such a
measure of rigor toward us. 2. It was never controverted, but where any
Vessels touched at any Port, Creek, or Harbor within this Kingdom, with an
intention to Liver; and much more out of doubt, where they had broken bulk, and
Livered any part of their Cargo; but these Goods were reputed already Imported;
so that in this case, even in the rigor of the Proclamation, all Victual in
that condition must be free of Duty, as being already Imported: And it were a
very great hardship to make your Petitioner suffer for contrary Winds, and to
be liable for the burden of Custom, I upon account, and for Causes they could
no ways prevent.

May it therefore please your Lordships to discharge the Collectors and others
employed, in Collecting His Majesty's Customs, to Levy and Exact any Custom, or
other Duty from us, for the Victual belonging to us, and lying either in the
Road of Leith, or lying at Haymouth and Holy-Island before the said
Proclamation, and to appoint any of your Lordships Number, or of his Majesty's
Collectors or Magistrate in the place, to take our Oaths, or receive such other
sufficient (...) the quantity of the forsaid Victual, and where it lies, and
when it Arrived there. To the effect we by your Lordships goodness may be saved
from so heavy prejudice, as will far exceed what ever benefit we could have
made by Importing the forsaid Victual upon the Faith and encouragement given by
the Government.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray.

