Every Man's Case, OR, Lawyers Routed.

In seven Treatises, the Titles whereof you may find in the ensuing page.

O ye Sons of men, how long will you turn my glory into shame; how long will
you love vanities, and seek after leasing.

Selah. Psalm. 4.2. Thou shall destroy them that speak leasing. The Lord will
abhor bloody and deceitful men.

Psalm. 5.6. Their mouth is an open sepulcher, they flatter with their tongue.
Destroy them, O God, let them fall by their own Counsel. Cast them out in the
multitude of their transgressions, for they have Rebelled against thee: But let
those that trust in thee rejoice; For thou Lord wilt bless the righteous, with
favor will thou compass him as with a shield. Written by John Jones, Gentl
prisoner in the Fleet.

LONDON. Printed, and are to be sold at the Cock in Paul's Churchyard. 1652.

SEVEN TREATISES IN Reference to the Reforming of the Law and Lawyers.
1. Every man's case, or Lawyers Routed. 2. The Judges Judged out of their own
mouths. 3. Eight observable points of Law, fit to be known by every Justice of
Peace. 4. The authority of a Justice of Peace. 5. The new Returna Brevium; or
the Law returned from Westminster: to which is added the Petition of Right
granted by King Charles the first. 6. Jurors, Judges both of Law and Fact. 7.
Theery of blood; or a true answer to those 13 false Reasons of the Filicers,
Attorneys, etc. for the maintenance of Capias, and Arrest of men's bodies for
Debt.
TO HIS EXCELLENCY OL. CROMWELL, Lord General of the Army of the Commonwealth
of England.
The Humble Petition of John Jones Gent. and others.
Showing,
THat whereas your Petitioner Jones, and another were committed and kept
prisoners in the Fleet by the Barons of the exchequer, for executing
Commissions under the Seal of that Court, and Test of the Lord Wild for the
discovering of diverse lands in diverse Counties forefeited to the
Commonwealth, and concealed from them: Which your Petitioners have sound out
by the Oaths of lawful men, and returned as they were commanded, some of them
to the said Court upon the expirations of their Commissions. And have another
unexpired with the Inquisitions thereupon made and found in their hands, which
Commissions and Inquisitions that were filed, the said Barons having notice by
the Lawyers hired to attend them by the Concealers of the said Lands, that the
Petitioner Jones wrote the book called Judges judged out of their own mouths,
and other books which he dedicated to your honor and your Army, against
corrupt Lawyers and their unlawful practices, for their own unconscionable
gains and extortions contrary to all Law, Justice and Equity, and in
subversion thereof, In their malignity to Jones, looked upon their own
Commissions as erroneous and unwarrantable by Law (though presidented by
learned and Judicious Lawyers in former ages) which presidents, the now Barons
and Lawyers disregarding for the respect aforesaid, have ordered all the said
Commissions to be suppressed and no more such to issue. And those that were
together with the said Inquisitions thereupon to be vacated, to the damage of
the Commonwealth found and to be fined 100000. The legallity of which
proceedings is a matter of great concernment decidable by Law, wherein (if the
Barons have erred in their Commissions, and Commands) The Commissioners that
did but execute the same, ought not to be inprisoned and condemned by such
Barons, nor the Commonwealths Interest be determined or waved by them, without
Consent of Parliament and decision of the law upon the matter at large, being
too much mischief to be committed or suffered to be done to the Commonwealth in
the general, your Petitioners in particular, and to the Law it self by such
dunstable Barons, as dare assume the chair of Judicature, upon the strength of
their late unreasonable Statute for their excuse by way of misprision. Which is
as much to say they may do what they lift under the name of mistake. And so
they may mistake not only the Law of England, but also the Law of God in both
Testaments. In all which it is an Infallible Scripture, Ignorance is no Plea.

The premises tenderly considered, may it please your honors to mediat to the
house that the commitee for the Regulating of the Law be empowered to examine
the Petitioner Jones and all his proceedings, and the legallity thereof,
according to the ancient practice of the fundamental Law of England; and also
the illegallity and present practice of the now Judges and Lawyers, contrary to
the former, and to certify their opinions therein to the house for Reformation
to be had as to Law shall appertain. And that none of the Judges or prosessed
Lawyers, who have declared themselves, your Petitioner. Jones his adversaries,
be admitted to be his Judges, though members of the house, or of the Committee
aforesaid. And that the Warden of the fleet be required to Enlarge your
Petitioner Jones upon Reasonable bail to attend the said Committee, and the
house, until his cause be determined. And that the Barons be Commanded
forthwith to restore the said Commissions and Inquisitions to the file, which
they have ordered to be taken off. And to issue more such Commissions to any
that shall require them in the behalf of the Commonwealth. And that the
Commission and inquisitions remaining in the Petitioners hands be returned to
the said Committee to be determined accordingly.

And your Petitioner Jones shall pray, etc.

Dedicated to the Commonwealth in general with this short epistle, As the voice
of the people is said to be the voice of God, let the glory of God be the voice
and vote of his people. Amen yours John Jones.
The case is.
THat Right once so known ought to be so continued and maintained to the Right
heir by the supreme magistrate, who is the Immediate vicegerent of God the
Father, Protector of Right and truth, and hater of deceipts, and falsities, nay
is all and always himself nothing but Truth, Right, Justice, Love, Mercy, and
Equity, unchangeable, everlasting, whose vice-Royes therefore ought not to
carrry his sword in vain, but defend Right, and cut off wrong at all times, all
opposers and oppositions to the contrary notwithstanding: And to restore and
Revive right, if suppressed or mortified by any force or fraud: how or how long
soever any false laws, made by false Lawyers, contrary to the laws of God and
Nature, and to the great Charter of England notwithstanding, proved by
principles of Divinity, maxims of Law, And axioms of Philosophy as follows.

God is almighty Genesis 17.1. Heb. 6.18. Lawyers can bend their tongue like a bow
to speak lies Jer. 39.5. (In every court it Westminster nothing more common,
especially Chancery) They have made their statutes of champertite to deter all
men but themselves to take any part of poor men's Rights, to recover the rest
from their oppressors, that forciblie and fraudulently detain all from them:
their statutes of Fines and Recoveries to Establish the Right of the oppressed
in the oppressor, their statute of Limitation to continue that wrong for ever,
that cannot be righted within such a time as to their gain by both parties:
They spin out with delays in Law, and make the right that it can be but
Remediless by their Law for ever. Their Statutes to imprison men for debt, and
make all banckrupts to enrich themselves, and many more, which I shall not here
speak of in particular, but wish them for all their Inventions in general, to
hear the word of the Lord, saying, ye scornful men that Rule his people,
because ye have said we have made a Covenant with death, and with hell are we
at agreement. When all the overflowing scourge shall pass through, It shall
not come unto us, for we have made lies our Refuge, and under falsehood have we
hid our selves; Isa: 28.15. Therefore thus says the Lord, I lay in Zion, for a
foundation, a stone etc. Judgment also will I lay to the line, and
Rightcousness to the plummer, and the hail shall sweep away the Refuge of lies
etc. And your Covenant with death shall be disanulled etc. When the
overflowing scourge shall Pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it
verse. 16.17.18.

God is everlasting Deuteronomy. 33.27. Heb. 6.18. his truth endures to all
generations Psalm. 100.5.117.2.146.6. But the Viperous generation of Lawyers
confine and limit it by their Statutes, that it shall by their consents endure
no longer, nor reach surther than they please. The lip of truth shall be
established for ever. Prove. 12.16. But Lawyers lips and labor run counter. Buy
the truth and sell it not Prove. 23.23. But Lawyers sell the Law which in it
self is truth, and buy salfe titles. And purchase to themselves great Revenews
without Right Psalm. 19.8.

God is a god of truth Psalm. 31.5. Isa. 65.16. Jer. 10.16. 2. Cor. 1.18. And
Commands his children not to lie one to another, Levit 19.11. Col. 3.9. And a
Righteous man hates lying Prove. 33.5. The devil is the father of lies and
liets Jo. 8.44. He that speaks lies shall not escape Prove. 19.5. but shall
perish: verse. 9. If a Ruler hearken to lies, all his servants are wicked: Prove
29.12. our Lawyers love lying and make their livings thereof. Whose sons and
servants they be, I leave to the Judgment of God and his Saints.

God is a God of peace, yea even the everlasting Father and Prince of peace, of
the Increase of his government and peace, there shall be no end, upon the
throne of David and upon his kingdom to order it and to establish it with
Judgment, and with Justice, from henceforth even for ever. The zeal of the
Lord of hoasts will perform this Isa. 9.6.7. Now my Lord General, and all you
valiant and incomparable Commanders, officers and soldiers of the host of
God, raised and continued by Gods providence for the Reformation, as well as
preservation of this our English, Israel, digest these promises of the Lord of
hoasts into your hearts, Act them with your hands, confide in his zeal who
tells you he will perform, and sear not the vain threats of Babbling lying
Lawyers, who out of the confusion which they find in their Consciences, since
they are uncased of their Canting pedlers french, have lately and frequently
menaced you behind your backs, that if you should offer to ungown them, they
would unsword you: yet persuade you to your faces that their said Statutes and
the like were by their predecessors devised, and are by them maintained for
preservation of peace. Consider what peace it is thatestablisheth wrong instead
of Right deceit and falsehood instead of Truth and Righteousness. Is it a
peace for any but themselves and their Adherents, to withhold heir wrongful
possessions from the Right heirs and owners. Does not the Lord tell you and
them, there is no peace to the wicked? Isa. 48.22. And Moses forbid you to seek
their peace, Deuteronomy. 23.6. Have not you a further promise of God which concerns
not them, saying, the Lord will bless his people with peace Psalm. 29.11. Not
Scribes and Pharisees, the chief Lawyers in Christ's time, who denounced eight
woes against them. Matthew. 27. Luke. 11. And not such peace as can be separated
from Righteousness, for says the Royal Prophet, Righteousness and peace have
kissed each other Psalm. 85.10. Believe them nor therefore that have healed the
daughter of my people slightly, saying peace, peace, when there is no peace.
Were they ashamed when they committed abt homination, nay they were not a all
ashamed, neither could they blush, Therefore they shall fall amongst them, that
fall at the time that I visit them. They shall be cast down says the Lord Jer.
6.14.15.

God is a God of Love, Levit 19.18. Matthew. 5.43. Mark. 12.31. were Lawyers Gods
children, and loved their neighbors as themselves, how could they cheat them
as they do, and possess themselves and their brood by force, fraud and deceit
of all they can of their neighbors rights, and by such means make themselves
so potent and numerous a generation, as they are in this land. Yet if thou
shall say in thy heart These nations are more than I, how can I dispossess
them. Thou shall not be afraid of them: But shall well remember what the Lord
thy God did to Pharaoh, and unto all Egypt Jer. 7.14.15. Thou shall love the
Lord thy God, and keep his charge and his Statutes, and his Judgments and his
Commandments always. And know you this day, for I speak not with you children,
that have not known and which have not seen the Chastisements of the Lord your
God, his mighty hand and stretched-out Arm, and his miracles etc. Deuteronomy
11.1.2.3. Oh love ye the Lord all his Saints, because he has set his love upon
you. Therefore will he deliver you Psalm 91.14. But favor no oppressor, and
know that in a magistrate to spare them is to help them: Which who does, let
him hear what the Son of a Prophet asks such a magistrate, and Answers himself.
Should thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord: Therefore is
a wrath upon thee from before the Lord 2. Chron. 19.2. And learn of a Prophet
these ensuing Characters of the ungodly. Who hate the good and love the evil,
who pluck their skins from off them, and their flesh from their bones, and chop
them in pieces as for the pot, and as flesh within the Cauldron (who when they
shall be visited) Then shall they cry unto the Lord, but he will not hear them,
he will even hide his face from them at that time as they have behaved
themselves in their doings, Thus says the Lord concerning the Prophets that
make (his) people err, that bite with their teeth and cry Peace Micah
3.2.3.4.5. More principles of divinity could I allege for this purpose, might
I think these Joined with all our experiences should not suffice to delcribe
our Westminster Lawyers, in their own kinds and colors, but believieng thus
much will serve for this time, I shall apply my self to the Maxims of the Law
of England, which I find conducing to the same end as follows.

First Right cannot dye says Littleton, Sect 479. And Cook upon the place fol
279. Yea, although the disseised should Release his Right to the disseisee, or
turn Tenant, It is inconvenient that the Right should dye, but live Recoverable
in and to his heir. Which if true (as all Maxims are or ought to be) How can
our Recent and present Judges and Lawyers, that murder this everlasting Right
with their Statutes of Fines, Limitations, etc. maintain their predecessors
Inventions against the Law of God, the great Charter, and this Maxim, without
appearing manifest subverters of the Law of England, which Doctor and Student
affirms, and the mirror of Justice proves punctually by Analysis. And these
men themselves sometimes bragg of to be derived from, and grounded upon the
Laws of God, and nature, According to the Advice of Eleutherius the 3. to King
Lucius recorded by Mr Fox and others, and consequently Traitors to the Law and
Commonwealth, whose estates Real and Personal-ought to be confiscated to the
use of the Commonwealth, from which they filched them (as I have proved to be
their own censures in my treatise called Judges judged out of their own mouths)
And their costly Carrion Carcases, fit to be hanged as 44. of their
predecessors were in one year in King Alfreds time, as witness the mirror page
239. 240. 241. 242. 243. etc.

Secondly it is a Maxim of Plouden in his Commentaries upon the Law of England,
Earl of Lesters Case. That all humane Laws made contrary, or not consentaneous
to the Laws of God and nature, although by Acts of Parliament, are void, and
need no Repeal to vacate them: Which if true, how can our filicers maintain
their blasphemous Reasons Printed, and published under their hands, and
Continue their extortions. And how can the Judges and pleaders of the Law,
Countenance or suffer them and their prothonotaries, and the Rest of their
ministers, to continue their said extortions, and increase them more than ever
before? And do the same themselves without incurring the penalties aforesaid.

Thirdly it is a positive Maxim of Law declared in the great Charter cap 29.
England shall be disseised of his Inheritance or birthright, without the
Judgment of his peers and vicine neighbors. Which if so, how can any
disseisor disseise or dispossess any freeman of England of his inheritance or
birthright by force or fraud? Or how can any Judge or pleader of the Law
countenance, or maintain, or suffer such disseises unrestored by them to the
right heirs without incurring like penalties as aforesaid.

Fourthly it is another Maxim declared in the said Charter cap. 11. Common
Pleas shall follow the upper bench (which if true) how can the Judges of the
upper bench by Law Commit men for debt, which is a Common Plea? That has no
Relation to felony, trespass upon the case, trespass vi et armis, or any
trespass at all, to their marshallsey, or any bailiff arrest them, or any
Gaylor Receive and detain them, upon bills of Middlesex, and Latitates (which
expressly run for Trespass) and famish them to death (an Incomparable false
Imprisonment and murder) in the name of Law and Custom because long practiced,
not only without any color of Law, but expressly against it without incurring
like penalty as aforesaid.

Fifthly it is a chief Maxim of the Law of England, all Judges and Lawyers, by
which they ought to be ruled, and not offer or presume to overruled their Rule,
which if they could but rightly understand (says Cook upon Magna Charta) would
never suffer them to err; had Baron Tomlius understood this Rule, he had not
tumbled himself upon his tellclock seat as he did to convay the poor opinion of
a prattling Barrester, which stood on his left hand to another Baron that sat
on his Right, to hasten my Commitment to the fleet, in respect of my books, not
my cause or had his fellow Barons known how unlawful it is that I should be
examined upon interrogatories, by or before such Judges as declared themselves
my adversaries in their open Court. Or how little I care for their malice, I
believe they would not have been so hasty to commit me as they were, but shall
Judges and Lawyers, that profess knowledge in Law, subvert it when they please,
by pleading misprision, that is to say mistake. And their late Statutes made
for that purpose, and alleging, that if they should be hanged, none would be
Judges after them. Did King Alfred find it so, did not a heathen King make the
Son sit Judge over a cushion, which he had caused to be made of his fathers
skin, His Predecessor Judge in the same place, to mind him, that if he would
violate the Law as his father did, he would serve him alike? does not our Law
compel men to be Shreiffs and Constables etc. If they Refuse being chosen? And
do not we find such Refusers, when they are sworn officers, fittter and
honester men than offerers. Are not I gnorant intruders without either choice
or approbation of their Countries, worthiest to be hanged of all Interlopers,
for taking and keeping places of Judicatures from more knowing Justicers; Baron
Thorpe insisted much in Court upon the statutes of misprision, whereof a Judge
of his name could make no use to save his hanging, nor did his hanging deter
the Baron to become a Judge, and an over-ruler of the exchecquer Court, though
not half so knowing a Justicer as his names sake, or Wild his foreman. Who is
so Just as to detain 500. l. Land a year from the Right heir, without any good
title (as is Reported) And therefore thought it Just to wayve and damane his
own Commission to Inquire for such things, and punish me for the excuting of
it. To conclude this point, were all prevaricating Lawyers hanged, honester men
would be found for their places. And have they not incurred the said penalty by
this Maxim.

Sixthly, Northyes Resolution, the other Bailiff, and Willmot. But do not all
such Judges, as prefer wrong before Right, and falsehood before truth, Incurr
the said penalty.

Seventhly, it is a Maxim of Reason, England, in and by the great Charter cap
29. And is not the great Charter confirmed by above 33 Parliaments,
corroborated upon the Petition of Right Tertio Caroli, and Ratified by this
Parliament, which if it be so, how can it be said that any Statutes made
contrary to the Law of God and nature, and the great Charter, shall stand up
against them, although not expressly Repealed. Or how can they be alleged to
bind the supreme Magistrates, that are sworn to do and maintain Right and
Justice to all men, at all times, in all places of the land by their proper
subordinates in every County from so doing, but by traitors to God and the
Commonwealth? or how can the Judges at Westminster confine and contract all
the Law of England in and to Westminster, and into 4 terms yearly to be only
determined by them, that surcharged with multiplicity and abundance, end not a
Rich cause in 7 years, nor a poor man's while he lives. And when they seem to
finish a cause or decree or Judgment, it is more to their gain than their necks
are worth, and cost to their Judicated than their causes are worth, (nor do
they commonly finish any cause at any time, but leave it upon a quillet,
whereupon to revive it at their pleasures without their incurring like
penalties as aforesaid.

Eighthly, England. That by the Law of the Land no man is bound to accuse
himself; If so, what means the Jesuitical Spanish Inquisition, Introduced to
the Exchecquer and Chancery of England to interrogate men against themselves,
and imprison them until (to attain their liberties) many faint-hearts are
forced to perjure themselves, to accuse themfelves of things whereof they are
guiltless. That Judges and Lawyers and their Impes may beget causes to extort
Fees as well by Innocent men's forced Oaths against themselves, as by their own
wilful and malicious perjuries against all men but themselves. Whereby
contrary to Saint Paul's Doctrine, that an Oath for confirmation is unto men an
end of all strife, Heb. 6.15. Lawyers make it a beginning, and contrary to
Gods commandment, saying, love no false Oath, Zachar. 8.17. Lawyers love to
force, procure, and multiply them. And shall they not incur the said penalty
by this Maxim?

So much for Law Maxims for this occasion at this time, to conclude with Axioms
of Philosophy conducing to this matter.

Health is the greatest happiness man can desire. Sphinx Theologica
Philosophica de Medicina, page 539. It is two fold, that is to say, first of
the Soul, for which Christ is the only Physician, who to ease man of his sin,
the chief cause of all diseases, both Ghostly and humane, took upon himself,
that had none, all the sins of the World. And died to redeem all penitents from
eternal death, the due punishment for sin. The second is of the body, for
which the best man Physician called by God to that vocation, and gifted
accordingly, is to be honored before many, because by his faculty with Gods
assistance the Corporal afflictions of many are restored to sound health, the
agony of others qualified; And which is most of all worthy consideration,
stays the Souls of many in the prisons of their bodies (by Gods Providence)
until longer and seasonable times of Repentance and amendment of their lives.
And these are the gifts of God, and endeavors of good Physicians.

Contrary-wise our Judges and Lawyers, and their monstrous many headed whelps
requite their patient profitablest clients with, not only sickness both of
souls and bodies, but also the death of both, so far as in their power lies,
as is proved by woeful experience thus. Debtors, not able to pay their debts,
are committed for their debts upon capiases, Latitates, and out-laries for
trespass, by the Judges of the upper bench, being no Judges in that case, to
their marshallsie; become there sickned in their minds and souls upon such
their commitments, considering there is no Law to Warrant such doings, but the
wilful Customs and practice of the said supposed Judges, to murder men in
and under the name of their Law, for their own gain and superfluities, worse
than high-way-men that act manfully to relieve their wants. By the name and
Custom of Lawless necessity, for which, if convicted of the fact, they submit
to the Law, which Lawyers would defeat by calling their facts misprisions,
which in effect are prises less lawful than Robbers, and more abusefull to the
Law and Commonwealth, because committed under color of Law and Justice.
Further the sickness of the minds and souls imprisoned, is aggravated with the
consideration of the wants, and miseries which their wives, children and
families (that were wont to be sustained by their liberty to care and provide
for them) must endure by their Captivity, their bodies and their families
participating of these and more griefs of their souls. But more sensible of
their hunger and thrist, cold, and nakedness when they have sold even their
apparel as well for night as day, to pay their Goalors and their masters
extortions; and prolong their own miseries so far as their abilities last. And
the cruelty of their Goalers (when they fail to bribe them) in crouding them in
dungeons where they must infect on another, with a necessitated Contagion
caused by their Goalers covetousness, to gain by hiring all the Rooms and
liberties of the prison, ordained by Law to lawful prisoners, to cheators,
voluntary prisoners, and wilful assumers of the denomination of prisoners, to
defeat their Creditors of their Rights by which they live Riotously upon their
Creditours charge, and their Creditours perish for want of their own. Judges,
Lawyers, Gaolers live, and flourish by the ruin of them both, granting
liberties to all such said cheatours, contrary to all Law, to walk and take
their pleasures as they list, some throughout England, and others to the East
and West Indies. And thereby feasting their bodies and their Impes upon the
fast of their finders, and thriving in their wickedness till God rebuke them.
The Warden of the Fleet I find by Law is no Jailer within the Statute of H. 6.
And by experience a Gentleman merciful and affable to the poor, satiable and
unburthensom to the Rich, compassionate, and comfortable to all his prisoners,
so that (by Gods providence and his clemency,) he and we live wholesome in our
bodies, and cheerful in our hopes. I write not this digression in flattery;
but in duty to declare truth as I find it. So returning to my tenet, it is the
sickness and death of the Souls and bodies of all their Clyents and their
Families, (except those of their Consorts) that the Art of our modern Lawyers
practices upon, And if perchance they ease a Rich clyent of some part of his
pain for their own extraordinary gain (except their deed be taken for their
will) they shall hardly obtain heaven by their merit. These are the
instigations of the Devil, and endeavors of bad Lawyers. It is the health of
their patients souls and bodies that the art of Physicians works upon. And
although some Medicasters, that have not the art, Intrude into the profession,
and kill more than they cure for want of skill, not good will, their will being
taken for their deed pleads more in mercy than Lawyers misprisions.

It is an Axiom which Theodectes a famous Philosopher, Stobaeus in his 66.
Sermon, That all men endowed with natural abillities desire 2 things before
they have them, which many when they have them, desire to be rid of. That is to
say old age and wives. Cicero upon Cato Major maintains the same in effect.
The causes of these 2 desires are twofould. That is to say in good men for
divine ends, In bad men for their worldly pleasures, Their summum bonum, beyond
which they have neither hopes nor desires: But for the desires of good men to
be old men, Ambrose Hex lib 1. says, that although old age, in most men, is
most subject to corporal Infirmities, It sooner ends the miseries of this
life, and opens the gates to a happier. In good manners it is most decent, In
Counsel most subtle, in constancy to embrace death most stable, in Repressing
lusts most strong, and finally the Infirmity of the body, is the sobriety of
the mind.

In bad men their desire of old age is to prolong their earthly pleasures in
their enjoyment of other men's Rights, which they possess by force, or fraud or
both, and famishing the Right heirs in dungeons, while they pamper their own
bodies and their Impes in their sumptuos Palaces, built upon their prisoners
Inheritances. Living in which Condition we may observe them in their health
secure, in their sickness timorous, and Commonly distracted, in their deaths
desperate, in manners riotous, in counsel wicked, in lusts insatiable, finally
the strength of their body is the madness of their minds. And are not these
the true Characters of our Lawyers and their adherents. To the next point, good
men love to meet with good Wives, like Isaac and Rebecca, to be their Consorts,
Comforts and helpers in goodness, to propagate Saints as well by their examples
of life and Conversation, as by their natural endowments to accomplish the end
of their Creations, that is to say, to fulfill the number of the elect, to
inherit the Kingdom of Heaven by the merits of their Savior. And in the time
of their pilgrimage, and way thither, to endeavor the Increase of the glory of
God, and the Peace, Love, and Unity, of his people in this world. Bad men
desire wealthy wanton mercenary Wives, to be their Companions and helpers in
mischiefs, as Isabel was Achabs. To incarnate and multiply Devils as well by
their examples of life and Conversation, as by their natural endowments to
accomplish the end of their miscreancie. Briefly to cooperate with them in all
endeavors to increase the delusions and dominion of the Devil, and the
sedition, hatred and enmity of this world. So that at last they must as
brothers in Iniquity, with Antichrist, become possessed of hell, where there is
endless sorrow and gnashing of teeth, a place provided for them before the
world began, from which God deliver us: But are not these also true characters
of our Lawyers?

Popes, that have thought themselves as omnipotent as Common Lawyers, never
offered to divorce men from their Wives, but where they Judged the marriage
unlawful for some Reason, or pretense of Reason in their Laws. But our Lawyers
and their Goalors etc by fetching men from the Remotest parts of England to
Westminster, and Committing and detaining of them for debts, or most commonly
for supposed debts or trespasses without any color of Law, while their
adversaries (most frequently Lawyers Attorneys) etc. Insinuate, solicit, and
at last, by their diligence, lies, false messages from their husbands, and
other diabolical practices, overcome their feminine frailties, and make them
their Whores, get their consents to possess themselves of all their husbands
estates, real and personal, consume part of the personal to feast their
Whores at the lower end of their tables, where their own Wives sit at the
upper, and their families between. While they contrive Conveyances with fines
and proclamations to assure their prisoners Real estates to themselves and
their heirs, to which their bewitched Whores give way, and their Imprisoned
husbands never hear of the matter till too late to be remedied by our Lawyers
Law. Is not this more and worse than a popish divice: Others they fetch from
nearer parts Prisoners to their Marshallseas, suffer their Wives to board and
bed with them until they have sold beds and all, and then failing to satisfy
extortions, their husbands are dungened and their Wives cast and kept out in
the street, except yielding to the lust of a turn-key, such as he likes, be
let in to serve his turn and after turned again to the rest in the street,
where often they and their children starve, not daring when they find any
scraps to aneer their husbands and parents, to relieve them with any till all
be starved. In streets and dungeons Husbands Wives and Children. Creditors look
after your debts, what might have paid you part, if nor all in time, had you
taken a lawful Course, Goalers and their partners have parted in fees, usurer
dye with grief, not for the loss of thy debtors but the debt and boast of thy
Revenge, thou have dice of his bones. Is not this more and worse than the Popes
divorce, yet more and worse then this, Judges and Goalers do in diverting and
restraining the Saints of God from his service, and hearing of his word
preached, by which faith comes and is maintained, so far as in them lies,
except when in malice to some Orthodox minister, not love to the prisoners they
cast him amongst them, not to the end to better them, but to worse himself.

The premises considered, Let all men assure themselves, God has a greater
quarrel with this Nation than can be appeased till the land be cleared of such
Achans. Parliament spue them out, Army drag them out, to quarter them is freer
for thee than any free quarter in the Country. Because their wealth, filched
from the Commonwealth, ought to be restored to it, and to thee first that best
deservest thy share therein Read the Histories of England, and find Lawyers the
causes of all our Civil Wars in all ages, observe what success we have at this
present by employing men of that profession to mediate with forriners for
Peace, and so soldiers look to your own, and fare well upon your own, which
the Law makes and will maintain to be your own as shall be made good to his
death, by your faithful and loving friend

John Jones.

The General Case concerning the relief of right Heirs, dispossessed of their
Estates by force and fraud
THat Right once known so to be by Records, or other sufficient testimonies,
ought to be so continued and maintained by the Supreme Authority, appears by
the writ of Right both patent and close, both in the Register and Fitz-Herberts
Natura Brevium declared at large, commanding inferior Magistrates to hold
right in its right place against all deforcement committed by force or fraud,
and that without delay, and so righteously and fully, Ne amplius inde clamorem
audiamus.

2. That as what is right, is just, and what is just, is right; So the Supreme
power is bound to maintain both, without denial, delay, or corruption,
appears by the great Charter, which says, we shall deny, delay, or sell
Justice to no man.

3. That not to do right and maintain it, is in a Magistrate, to do wrong and
maintain it, is a Principle of common reason, which is one of the chief grounds
of all humane Laws.

4. That all Supreme Magistrates, are or ought to be bound by Oath to maintain
right and truth against force and fraud, to all their Inferiors; and both to
restore and defend the oppressed, and punish the Oppressor, appears by the
Oaths of Kings, and late Covenants and Votes of this Parliament, the
performance and practice whereof, is all that ought to be wished by any wronged
person.

5. That by virtue of such Orths, Votes, and Covenants, and the Authority upon
that Trust settled in the Supreme Magistrate, he becomes interessed in all men's
Rights; so that when they are wronged, the Party grieved ought to sue for
redress, as well for the State, as for himself, as appears by the Writ of
Deceit and discourse thereupon in Fits. Herbert; Natura Brevium, and the
Register, and Rastall and Cooks. Books of Entires at large.

6. The Sepream Magistrate being so invested in the right of the oppressed,
cannot be disinvested, disseised, expulsed, or outed of that Right by any
inferior, having the posse or Power, not only of the County, but also of the
Law and Commonwealth, to right and restore the Party expulsed to that Right
remaining in the Eye of the Law fixed in the Magistrate; so that it can be said
to be but intruded upon, and wrongfully detained from him, and not disseised or
expulsed, and the Party grieved and expulsed of his right of possession, has a
right of Inheritance by descent, as appears by Inquisitions upon post mortem,
where the Party grieved is found Heir to his Father or Cousin; and said, that
the Inheritance of right, is descended and come Prout Lex postulat to him, and
the Writ of Right determines as well the right of Inheritance, as the right of
possession, as appears by the judgments thereupon related by both Rastall
and Cooks Books of Entries at large.

7. That the late Statutes for Champertie, Fines, and Limitations, reach not to
the Supreme Magistrate, that is sworn to restore and maintainright, without any
respect of time, person, or condition, appears rational and necessary in
construction of Law, to save his Oath.

8. That they are void Laws, appears by three Reasons, ratified by sound and
approved Lawyers: First, for that they are contrary to the Law of God, which
admits of no time or means to bar or keep a man from his Right, but his own
Decree upon the merit of the Party interressed; as the Captivity of the
Israelites in Babylon and Egypt for seasons; or the consent of the Party to
divest himself of his Right by slighting it; as Esau sold his Birtht right for
a mess of Pottage: Secondly, for that they are against the great Charter which
allows of no Disseision or Possession gained thereby: Thirdy, for that, where
Deceipts are the Grounds of Fines, those Deceipts found and proved, shake off
all Buildings raised thereupon, as appears by the proceeding usual upon that
Writ in the Books of Entries and Terms of the Law.

9. That Parties grieved have used to entitle the Supreme Power for the time
being to their Rights of Inheritance, by Gifts, Grants, and Forfeitures, upon
Conditions not performed, whereby to overpower those that over-powred them
appears by several Presidents extant.

10. That the Exchecquer, is the proper Court for the intituling of the Supreme
Power to such rights, appears by the Great Charter, which established it
several Ages before the Chancery came to being: and the practice there was
never discontinued, as appears by Commissions granted to inquire, and
Inquisitions returned there, and Proceedings had thereupon in all ages.

11. That the Supreme Power being entitled, ought not to be suspended or
Wayved without his consent, is to be considered.

12. That an Attachement before summons, is an unlawful Process, especially
against such, as offer to appear gratis, appears more hasty, than wise in the
Procurers.

The premises considered, and the Weight thereof being matter of Law, and the
prosit tending to the enabling of the Parliament to pay their debts, and
disoharge their Trusts to the Commonwealth, and the opposition made in this
case, being but by such as have gained the Estate, and Right of the
Commonwealth to their own particular possession by fraud or force, and further
gained Acts of Parliament contrary to the Law of God, and the great Charter, to
settle them in other men's Rights, under pretense of a peaceable way, contrary
to the Scripture, No Peace to the wicked, let all honest and right Christians
deliberately ponder the matter, and aid the Truth in what they may, so craveth
the well-wisher of all such,

John Jones.


