A SERMON Preached at CHRISTS-CHURCH DUBLIN Before the GENERAL CONVENTION OF
IRELAND. May 24. 1660.

By Henry Jones D. D. Vicechancellour of the University of Dublin and Bishop of
Clogher.

LONDON, Printed by J. C. for J. Crook at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1660.

A Declaration of the General Convention of Ireland, for a day of public
Thanksgiving to be observed throughout the Kingdom.
WHereas it has pleased Almighty God, after so many and various Revolutions,
to look upon these Kingdoms of England, Ireland, and Scotland, with the eye of
Mercy, by resettleing them upon the ancient basis of their lawful Government,
in which, only they, can be happy.

And, whereas God has made his arm bare, in this signal and eminent
transaction, that no flesh might assume glory to it self; and has removed all
those great obstructions, without the effusion of blood, a mercy, as much
beyond, humane expectation, as our merits.

We, therefore, the General Convention of Ireland, that we may give unto God
the things that are Gods, as unto Caesar what belongs unto Caesar, do in
manifestation of our sense of this high and undeserved mercy, and the humble,
yet fervent, return of our praises to him, for placing his royal Majesty King
Charles King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith,
etc. not only in the throne of his Ancestors, but in the hearts of his people,
Appoint, and accordingly ordain, that Thursday the 24. day of this instant May,
be a day, appointedand set apart, throughout all the Churches in this Kingdom,
to praise God for this great and seasonable deliverance afforded to us that are
less then the least of his mercies, and that this Declaration be then publicly
read by, the respective Ministers, in their Congregations; and all Mayors,
Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and other Officers and Ministers, are,
respectively, to take notice hereof, and to take care that the samebe put in
due execution accordingly; and that all persons do forbear to labor or exercise
their ordinary calling on that day.

God save the King.
Dated at Dublin the 15. day of May 1660. Ordered, that this Declaration be
forthwith Printed and published Mat. Barry Cl. of the General Convention of
Ireland.



Ordered Monday 14. May 1660.
THat Dr. Henry Jones, Lord Bishop of Clogher, one of the Members of this
Convention, be, and is hereby desired to carry on the work of the thansk giving
day appointed upon thursday next come seven night being the 24. day of this
instant May at Christ Church Dubl.

Signed by Order. Math. Barry Cl. of the General Convention of Ireland.

Thurseday 24. May 1660.
WHereas Dr. H. Jones L. B. of Clogher, one of the members of this Convention,
was desired to carry on the work of this day appointed a day of thanksgiving
that God in much mercy has restored his Majesty to the Government of these his
Kingdoms, which was both learnedly and piously performed by his Lordship.

It is Ordered, that the Chairman of this Convention do return their hearty
thanks to his Lordslip: And, that he be desired to cause his Sermon to be
printed and published at the charge of the said Convention.

Signed by Order, Math. Barry Cl. of the General Convention of Ireland.

PSALM 118. 24, 25, 26. This is the day which the Lord has made: We will
rejoice and be glad in it.

Save now I beseech thee, O Lord: O Lord I beseech thee, send now prosperity.

Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord: we have blessed you out of
the house of the Lord.


I Have chosen these words for this time, A Psalm, and of praise, is a fit
subject for this occasion, such is this psalm; It begins and ends with praise,
ending as beginning, and with the same words, O give thanks unto the Lord, for
he is good: for his mercy endures for ever, (ver. 1. 29.) There, are we called
on, and invited to the Duty; but here in the Text, we are in the duty, in the
practice of it, This is the day which the Lord has made: we will rejoice, and
be glad in it, etc.

This Psalm has not the Author in its Title, yet may we probably conclude it
David's. A general consent of Writers, ancient, and modern, is for it. The
matter also of the Psalm leads to it, being, much the same with the second
Psalm, that being, as this, of David's and Christ's Kingdom, both first opposed
and after established, notwithstanding all to the contrary, Why do the Heathen
rage, and the People imagine a vain thing, the Kings of the Earth set
themselves, and the Rulers take Council together, against the Lord and against
his anointed. Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion (Psa. 2. 1, 2,
6.) where note, that that Psalm has also no title as this here; yet is that
declared to be David's by the Testimony of the holy Ghost (Acts 4. 25, 26, 27.)
Who, by the mouth of thy Servant David, have said, why did the Heathen rage,
etc. Nor is this our Psalm, as to the matter of it, to be Apropriated unto
David: for here we find Jesus Christ, of whom are, principally, the words which
are next foregoing in the Text (v. 22, 23.) The stone which the Builders
refused, is become he head stone of the corner. This is the Lords doing: it it is
marvelous in our eyes. Which are applied unto Chr is it (Acts 4. 11, 10.) So also
are these words in the Text, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord,
(v. 26. with Math. 21. 9.)

David was here the tipe, and what is to be said of David, must be principally
referred unto Christ the Antitipe, the same matter, being here (as in many
other Psalms) common to both.

And whereas David is said to be A tipe of Jesus Christ; it is intended,
Principally, as he was a King, he a tipe of Christ's Kingly office, as were
others of his other offices, prophetical and Priestly. Therefore, and for
other reasons, is Christ, as a King, called by the very name of David, Ezech.
34. 23, 24. I will set up one Shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, even
my Servant David; he shall feed them, and he shall be their Shepherd, and I
the Lord will be their God, and my Servant David a Prince amongst them, I the
Lord have spoken it. Therefore must this Psalm be understood of David and of
Christ, as to the Kingly power and Government, vested in them; therefore is
this Psalm, in that, yet nearer to the present occasion.

And yet more particularly; these words seem to point to that very period of
time, when David first entered on his Kingdom in peace, freed from those
disturbances, till then, given him, as it was also with Jesus Christ; of either
of them, it might be said, that he was A stone which the builders refused:
being after made the head stone of the corner. (v. 22. 23.) unto this, this
tryumphant day in the Text does particularly referr, This is the day, etc.

In all which you may already see how suitable this Text is to the present
occasion. It is David's, in the History; Christ's in the prophecy, (so must it,
then, have been) and it will be found ours in the Application.

I shall not at present insist on the opening of the words, only as to that
here, where the Lord is said to make this day: This is the day which the Lord
has made, etc.

All days are the Lords, and made by him. Times, as things, are from him, but
some days are his* more especially, having his stamp, and being owned by
himself as his, above others of this kind were those.

1. Which had his appointment, in his word, by special command; as the
Sabbath; also other days mentioned and observed under the Leviticall
Priesthood, called also Sabbaths, and his Sabbaths.

2. There are days also of the Lords making which are so made by the ways and
works of his Providence, made by the voice of his Providence, as were those
other, by express appointment in his word written.

Such are (1) days of the Humiliation (private or public) in them is Gods
voice heard. The Lords voice cries unto the City, and the man of wisdom shall
see thy name: Hear the Rod, and who has appointed it. (Mich. 6. 9.) Do we see
a rod, cross dispensations from the Lord, then, and in that, is the Lords voice
heard and what then speaks that voice unto us, and In that day did the Lord God
of Hosts call to weeping and to mourning, etc. (Is. 22. 12.) That is a day
then, and thereby, made by the Lord for Humiliation, for Weeping, and for
mourning, etc.

In like manner (2) when the Lord does speak good to his people (to some in
their private, or to mauy, or all, in public concernments) thereby is there a
day of the Lords making, a day of thanksgiving, such as is this which we now
celebrate.

These are days of the Lords making, 1. Because they are from him, and by that
his voice of Providence called for, and appointed to us for days of praise.
The day is made by him, when the good given in the day is by him and from him.
2. A day of praise is then of the Lords making more especially, when the Lord
not only gives good in it, but that is done in such a manner, and with such
eminent Manifestations of his goodness, and glory, that it cannot but be owned
his, and from his hand, and his only. The right hand of the Lord does
valiantly, the right hand of the Lord is exalted: the right hand of the Lord
does valiantly.) [v. 15. 16.] For the Stone which the builders refused: is
become the head stone of the corner. [v. 22.] which must be acknowledged the
Lords doing, and mavelous in our eyes. [v. 23.] thereupon it follows, This is
the day which the Lord has made. v. 24. And this is this, above others, a day
of the Lords making.

The point on the whole shall be.

Doct.
That those days made by the Lord, for good unto his People, are to be of them
particularly observed.

I shall reduce this into parts.

That the Lord does many times make days, in

That it is our duty to improve such opportunities.

In the first, is Gods work: this is the day which the Lord has made, in the
other, is our work, we will rejoice and be glad in it.

I shall begin with Gods work.

2. Doct.
That the Lord does many times make days in which he gives good to his People.

There is none of you which hear me this day, who in your own experiences
cannot but witness to this truth. But I am, at present, for this, in a more
public consideration, so does the (...) require it, and in the proof of this
doctrine, I shall confine my self unto the Lords dealing, with those two,
hinted at in my Text, David the tipe, and Christ the Antitipe, to both whom
these words particularly referr; and what will be said of these, will fall into
our present work so naturally, that little application will be therein
necessary.

I shall speak first of David, of whom are these words (as to the letter) that
he was a stone which the builders refused, and after made the head stone of the
corner. (v. 22.) concerning which it might well be said, This is the Lords
doing, it is mavelous in our eyes.

David, although he were not that stone (which is properly understood of
Christ) yet was he a stone refused by the builders. etc.

A stone, in the Scripture sense, and as here intended, signifies Government,
principality. Sovereignty. A King is in this sense a stone, so we find it in
the blessing of Joseph, that from him should be the Shepherd, the stone of
Israel (Genesis 49. 24.) Intending the Kingdom of the ten tribes, and beginning
in the house of Jeroboam, of the tribe of Ephraim. For on that sin of Reuben
Jacobs first born, desiling his Fathers bed, was the birthright and
principality, given, from him, unto Joseph, or to Ephraim his Son. (1 Chr. 5.
1, 2.) And in that sense, is Christ also called, a stone cut out without hands,
smiting and breaking the Image in pieces, (Dan. 2. 34.) after expounded; a
Kingdom which should break in pieces and consume all those Kingdoms, and it
self for ever (v. 44. 45.) and where a King is called a stone; in that, is
intended, a foundation stone: so is it said of Christ's Kingdom, Behold, I lay
in Zion, for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious co^^^r stone, a
sure foundation, etc. (Is. 28. 16,) A King is therefore a stone, a foundation
stone, the basis and foundation of a Peoples happiness.

And how David (this stone) was first refused, and after made the head stone of
the corner, is worthy our consideration, in the several steps and degrees of
it; wherein we shall find a parallel and lively Portraicture of our gracious
Sovereign, whose day is thus celebrated of us, and on the same occasion, as was
that day of David's.

First, David you know had been anointed King, and, by the Lord, appointed the
Shepherd and stone of Israel; that notwithstanding that his right (which was
well enough understood) he was refused and opposed by Saul; and by the people,
and the chief of them (here called builders) they joining with Saul against
him. Also after the death of Saul, David found opposition from Ishbosheth Saul's
Son, who succeeded him, although he were far short of his Fathers resolution,
and parts for Government, being a weak Prince, and governed rather then
governing; easily checked by his great ones; especially Abner, General of his
Army, by whom, whilst he stood by him, he was supported, but was soon cast down
when forsaken of him, (2. Sam. 2. 8. (3. 8. 9. 10. 11.) And what David suffered
in all this, especially under Saul, is evident, he being persecuted, pursued,
prescribed, declared against, and at length, enforced to flee his Country into
foreign parts to a People of a strange Language and Worship, with other his
distresses in that kind, of which I need not speak, nor make farther
application.

That, not withstanding such his sufferings, yet was David forsaken, for first,
even then, when at lowest, he had the hearts of many who followed him in all
his troubles, so as that, even then, he was not altogether inconsiderable (1.
Chr. 12. 1, to the 23.) but after, when the Lord had indeed prepared the hearts
of his People, and that they were generally bowed to him, how great then was
the confluence to him, from all parts of his Kingdom? and that, when he was yet
at a great distance and far off; they then inviting, and pressing his return
to his own Country and people, (1. Chr. 12. 23. to the end.)

I know not why in this parallel I should omit the David made this his entrance
in to his power. It was long after his having been anointed King by Samuel, he
had at first, his right of title to the Government, but had not until now,
possession of it. And his right considered, he might, in his very first
entrance, have written the 12th. year of his Reign (supposing him to have been
about 18. when he was anointed by Samuel) as some have it, although that others
(whom I reverence) add more to his years; but as to David's age when he was
actually brought in, it is clear, that he was then about Thirty years old. (2.
Sam. 5, 4.) An age, that carries in it an Omen for good, for so was Josetph
when he stood before Pharaoh, and was made Governor of Egypt [Gen. 41. 46.]
And of Jesus Christ also, it is said, that he began to be about thirty years of
age when he did first put himself forth into the World in his baptism (Luke 3.
23.) Nor have we reason to debarr our selves of our hopes of his Majesty (among
those) he beginning to be now about 30. years of age, the 29th. of this Month
giving the entrance thereunto, as does this Month to his happy Government over
us.

David's return to his People, was with general acclamations. Blessed is he
that comes in the name of the Lord: So here (v. 26.) taking this in the letter
to be of David; such a Prince could not but be a blessing to his People; so as
they had good cause to bless him, and God for him: He came to them in the name
of the Lord, Saul did not so come to them, he came not with a blessing to the
People, his reign was with confusion and with blood, even of the very high
Priest himself, also of other the Priests, cruelly murdered by him, on a charge
of compliance with David (1. Sam. 22. 9. to the end) no wonder therefore, if it
should be said of Saul (whether personally intended of him, or of some such
other) That God gave him to be a King in his anger, and took him away in his
wrath. [Hos. 13. 11.] Which Scripture, some have enlarged against Kings, in
general, and against Kingly Government, as if that had been a form of
Government, not from God, whereas David was a King, given by God: He came in
the name of the Lord, and was given a blessing unto his People. God chose David
his Servant, and took him from the Sheep folds, from following of the ewes
great with young: He brought him to feed Jacob his People and Israel his
inheritance. So he fed them according to the integrity of his heart, and guided
them by the skilfullness of his hands, (Psalm 78. 70. 71. 72.) A good King is
given in mercy; and there is wrath to that People from whom he is kept, or
removed: As on the contrary, it is the mercy of that People, from whom such a
Prince, as Saul, is removed, and to whom a David is given, whereunto, that
spoken in another case, may be applied, Thou profane wicked Prince of Israel,
whose day is come, when iniquity shall have an end. Thus says the Lord God,
remove the Diadem, and take off the crown: this shall not be the same: exalt
him that is low, and abase him that is high. I will overturn, overturn,
overturn it, and it shall be no more, until he come whose it is, and I will
give it him. Ezekiel. 21. 25, 26, 27.)

And great cause had the People to hope well of David, and to promise
themselves a blessing in him, as coming to them in the name of the Lord,
considering

1. In what might have been observed of his great piety, and constant holding
on in the truth of his profession, Notwithstanding many Temptations: This is to
our case, this day, very eminently, and give me leave to change the person a
little, from David, to his sacred Majesty our Sovereign, on whom we look in all
this, more especially. Might not his sufferings have been, in this, his
Temptation? (Many have fallen therein.) Or might not hopes of being restored to
his Kingdoms, by those abroad, have wrought him to a compliance, nothing being
then from his own at home, hopefully visible toward his return? Or was there
not danger in the very abiding among, and converse with Idolaters [which was
necessarily enforced,] besides strong endeavors, purposely used, to withdraw
him, from the truth of his profession? How grievous this was to David, above
any thing beside, of all his sufferings, we may remember, and that there was
nothing whereof he so complained as of this very thing; cursed be they [saith
he] before the Lord: For they have driven me out this day from abiding in the
inheritance of the Lord, saying, go serve other Gods. [1. Sam. 26. 19.] The
driving him into those streights was (as to the Temptation) to say go serve
other Gods. But David did not so; and his Majesty's return is with the same
Spirit, he was not overcome, but confirmed in the truth, by what he had suffered.

2ly. Those, David's sufferings, were a better fitting him for Government. It was
an inducement to the People for receiving Henry the 4th. of France, with hopes
of much good by him, in that he was a Prince of great sufferings. So does God,
by sufferings, fit his, for great things, and for good to themselves, and
others. Thus was David kept back, many years, from what he had been appointed
unto, So Joseph, [Psalm 105. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.] So Jesus Christ also, he
was made perfect through sufferings [Heb. 2. 10.] So also Gods Children, for
whom a Kingdom is preserved, they are to be thereunto fitted and perfected for
it by sufferings.

Nor was the hopes of the People, disappointed in what they might expect of
happiness, in Da^^ds Government, for a Prince he was, of rich endowments, and
in the very entrance of his Government, they had experience of his clemency.
(Clemency is a Princely qualification) David's sufferings, and personal
injuries* were, by him, soon forgiven, and forgotten; and all passed over, as
it were, by general Act of Oblivion, and that given by him not demanded of
him. Thus was it to the generality of his People who had formerly so opposed
him. But particularly, see his clemency to Shimei, who so unworthily behaved
himself to David in his low condition. He cursed David; he cast stones at him
and his followers, he reviled him very falsely, and scandalously, calling him a
man of blood, and charging him with all the blood spilt in his Government: [2.
Sam. 16. 5, 6, 7, 8.] and have not the footsteps of the Lords anointed, his
late Majesty, (and even all his royal family) been so reproached, unto such
there is a Scripture curse, where they may expect from the Lord, [Psa. 89. 50,
51.] but as to David, he passes all that over. For when in his return over
Jordan, Shimei had met him, with the first, and begged pardon for his faults.
It was, easily, and readily, granted, and that, by an Oath, confirmed to him.
[2 Samuel 19. 16, 18, 19, 20.] Of such Shimei's. There have been many; who may
well repose on his Majesty's gracious Declaration; notwithstanding that there
be Sons of Zerviah, who may repine, and interpose, as did Abishai the Son of
Zerviah, who said, shall not Shimei be put to death for this, because he cursed
the Lords anointed? [2 Samuel 19. 21. Such may pick us, and object words, and
actions, so, and, then, said and done against his Majesty, but they may expect
his Majesty's return thereunto, as was David's in that case; (...) have I to do
with you ye Sons of Serviah, that you should this day be Adversaries unto me:
shall there any man be put to death this day in Israel: for do not I kuow that
I am this day a King over Israel [v. 22.] Clemency became him a King, and then
best, when first entering on his Kingdom.

Yet must not mercy shut out Justice, Justice without Clemency is but butchery,
and clemency, without Justice, is very cruelty; Joab, (another of the Sons of
Serviah) had foully murdered Abner and Amasa, this blood, required Justice;
and what David could not do in this, while the Sons of Serviah were too hard
for him [2 Samuel 3. 39.] He after recommends, to his Son Solomon, to see
executed [1 Kings 2. 5.]

I know that David is hardly censured in this. And, some have objected to his
Majesty, that inquisition now made in the entrance into the Kingdom, of the
blood of his royal Father. I find it therefore nccessary, by what I hear of
this, that something be spoken of it. It was no brand, but a commendation, of
Amaziah King of Judah, That, as soon as the Kingdom was confirmed in his hands,
he slew his Servants which had slain the King his Father. It is added, but the
Children of the murderers he slew not, according unto that which was written in
the book of the Law of Moses, wherein the Lord commanded, saying, the Fathers
shall not be put to death for the Children, nor the Children be put to death
for the Fathers, but every one shall be put to death for his own sin. [2 Kings
14. 5, 6.] He did according to the Law of Moses, in sparing the children of the
Murderers, and he did according to the Law of Moses, in not sparing the
Murderers themselves. Ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a Murderer,
which is guilty of death, but he shall be surely put to death, so you shall not
pollute the Land wherein you are, for blood it defiles the Land, and the Land
cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him
that shed it, defile not therefore the Land which ye shall inhabit, wherein I
dwell, for I the Lord dwell among the Children of Israel [Numb. 31. 31, 33,
34.] And in this case of blood, it was provided, that though the murderer
should flee, for refuge, to the very altar, yet should he not find protection
there. [Exod. 21. 14.] So fared it with Joab, he being slain, even at the very
altar [1 Kings 2. 28, 29, 34.] Solomon, concluding in that act of justice, the
washing away the guilt of blood from his Throne, and the settlement of his
house, and of his People in peace, which had not been otherwise, [v. 31. 32,
33.] therefore, this his Majesty's inquisition of blood, and of the murderers
of his royal Father, is his Justice, and what God will require of him, and of
his People, if, in that, Justice be not satisfied, and for which the People
has so long and so much suffered, yet, see his Majesty's Moderation, even in
this; not, as Amaziah, seeking the blood of all who were in that Guilt, but
some of them only; and referring himself, in that also, to his Parliament to
do therein, as to them shall be judged fitting: That as, by a pretended
Parliament, that royal blood was shed, so, by a just Parliament, the blood
should be expiated, and the People, in that justice, cleared by their full
representative.

Hitherto has been spoken of David, in his sufferings, and of the great things,
by the Lord done for him, in bringing him out of all his troubles: also of the
comfort which his people had in him, their King, thus brought home to them: and
of his being, by them, received with Acclamations. Blessed is he that comes in
the name of the Lord.

5. Now follows the conclusion, on the whole: that, all being duly considered,
it must needs be said, that This is the Lords doing: and that it is mavelous
in our eyes.

1. It is the Lords doing, it is intended, David's Vindication: and, therein, is
his innocence cleared, it now appearing, how little he deserved those his
injurious sufferings, seeing God himself, now, and thus, appears for him. This
is the Lords doing.

2. It shows that the work was carried on, by the Lord himself, alone, without
David's interposing, and without outward probable means, and beyond Man's
expectation. David might, indeed, have made use of force, he wanted it not,
having then, with him, a very considerable force [1 Chr. 12. 20, 21, 22.] But
he waves all that, and waits Gods way, and time, and casts himself altogether
upon hls People. I need not in this make application.

But, that this was the Lords doing (I speak it now as to our selves) is very
apparent.

1. In the Lords timeing our work for us; each step in our proceedings here
toward it, was, as if it had been, by a common, and joint correspondence, of
the three Kingdoms. A concurrence, indeed, there was, but (which was the
strangeness of it) without any correspondence, which must conclude it to have
been from God.

2. That all this was carried on, and that throughout, without blood. This
cannot, to any who shall duly consider it, but appear little less then a very
Miracle.

3. Above all, it is an evident demonstration of Gods hand in this work, both
as to David, and as unto us; that the hearts generally, of all, were prepared,
every where, and, as it were, at once, in this great work; surely, this must be
from the Lord, and the doing of it, his alone, in whose hand, only, are the
hearts of the Sons of Men. It is said. That the Kings heart is in the hand of
the Lord, as the rivers of waters, he turns it withersoever he will, [Pro.
21. 1.] No man can command, or change the course of tides, but God can do it,
and who, but he, can order the hearts of men? as he has done it in the King,
so is it from him, that it is done in the People, the hearts of both being, by
him, thus turned to each other. That Reformation by Hezechiah was done in 16.
days. It was soon done, for all hearts were made willing to it: which is
therefore said to be from the Lord. And that God had prepared the People. For
the thing was done suddenly. [1 Chr. 29. 17. 35, 36.] This is our very case
this day: being, in this day of the Lord, made a willing People [Psal. 110.]
So, that we may conclude, concerning it, as here, that this is the Lords doing,
his, and his only.

2. Therefore, it is mavelous in our eyes, which now follows [v, 23.] Who
would have believed that one cast out, so as was David, should in the condition
he then was, be, on a sudden, so raised, and that to the highest pitch of all
Imaginable glory? for, but a little, before he had been in very great
distress, at Zicklag [1 Samuel 30. 6.] at that time also, were the People of
Israel in great confusions, by reason of the Philistines, then prevailing over
them, so was it then with David, and such was the condition, and State of
affairs, at home, when David was brought in: therefore, all things considered,
it could not but have been mavelous in the eyes of all that beheld it.

And, if the confusions, of England, and of the three Kingdoms, be considered,
in this our day* (I dare be bold to say it) the like cannot, in any time, or
history, be ever paralelled. For (to speak nothing of the strange confusions in
the foregoing years since the year 1648.) we find, in this very year, in which
we now are, even, but in the compass of these past twelve months (taking in
this, in which we now are, one of them) we shall find (I say) within these
twelve months, ten Fundamental changes.

1. That violent dissolving of the Parliament, in April. 1659. Called the
Protectors Parliament, 2. An Army-Government thereupon, 3. The Armies
recalling, in May after, that, now called the Rump-Parliament, 4. That
Parliaments laying aside the Protector, in June next after, 5. The breaking up
in October, of that Parliament so lately recalled, 6. The bringing them back
again in December, 7. The again excluding them, soon after, by the coming in of
the secluded Members, 8. The secluded Members dissolving themselves in April,
1660. 9. The meeting of the present Parliament, which may be Justly called the
happy Parliament, 10. The resettlement of the three Kingdoms, on the basis of
their ancient Government in his, sacred Majesty, by whom is all happiness and
peace promised to his People. Who could expect so much good from so much evil?
who could look for order from confusions? and from overturnings of Foundations
one after, and upon another, to find such a settlement, as at this day, it
cannot but be acknowledged, with astonishment, to be The Lords doing, and it is
surely, mavelous in our eyes.

Let therefore the day, of such great things, and of so many, and public
mercies, be precious, and valued of us, as was that day of David's, with his
People, This is the day which the Lord has made: Let us rejoice and be glad in
it. Thus, of these words, as to David, of whom the words have been, in the
Letter, considered.

I shall now look on the words, as they pass from David the Tipe, unto Christ
the Antitipe.

Christ is indeed he who is herein principally concerned, to him are those
words particularly applied, that, He is that stone which the builders refused,
and now made the head stone of the corner, etc. (22. 23.) He himself speaks so
of himself, pointing to this very Scripture, in that parable of the husband
men's, not receiving but refusing, and slaying him, the Son sent by the Lord of
the Vineyard to them. (Math. 21. 42.) Of him, also, is that spoken by the
Apostle Peter (Acts 4. 10. 11. (1 Pet. 2. 6, 7, 8.) and Paul (Ephesians. 2. 20.) the
following words also (v. 26.) Blessed is he that comes in the name of the
Lord, are applied to him, and yet more particularly.

1. That Jesus Ghrist was that stone, refused by builders, is evident: That he
is now made the chief stone of the corner, who knows not? and who could but
stand amazed at that great work, to see one so despised of men, cast off, and
cast out, and to be dead, and three days buried, and yet, after all this,
raised again, and exalted above all, Angels and Men, and all being made subject
unto him, the Emphasis, of all is laid here, that he having been so low, is now
raised, and exalted above all. Him, says, Aplc. being delivered by the
determinate Counsel and foreknowledg of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands
have crucified and slain: Whom God has raised up. [Acts. 2. 23, 24.] This
Jesus has God raised up (v. 32.) That same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, has
God made both Lord and Christ, [v. 36.] We see Jesus who was made a little
lower then the Angels, for the sufferings of death, crowned with glory and
honor. [Heb. 2. 9,] He made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the
form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of Men, and being found in
fashion as a Man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the
death of the Cross: Wherefore God also has highly axalted him, and given him a
name which is above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should
bow, of things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things under the Earth, and
that every tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of
God the Father. [Phil. 2. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.] In all which you see him who was
the stone so refused by the builders, to become now the head stone of the
corner, and that this is the Lords doing, and mavelous in our eyes.

This of Christ's glory, is the day here pointed at, this is the day, etc. Which
his day, strictly taken, is the day of his resurrection, his first step into
glory from his humbled condition, that having been before despised, he was then
exalted above all. Or, this his day may be taken in a greater Latitude, for all
the degrees of his exaltation together; then is this the day, or of his glory
begun in his resurrection, and carried on to the fullness of glory, of which he
is now possessed for evermore, in which is the ground of this joy here
expressed by his People. This is the day which the Lord has made, we will
rejoice and be glad in it.

You have hitherto heard of the Lords making, or the Lords work, in making this
day for his People. You have seen it as to David, and as to Christ, and as to
our selves in the application; that the Lord does make a day wherein he will
do, and give, good unto his People.

2. I now proceed to the next point herein observable; Our work in this day: We
will rejoice and be glad in it. The point being this. Doct.


That those days by the Lord made, and Given to his People, are to be
observed, and improved by them.

I will not spend time in proving it, it needs it not, nor will the time permit
it: I shall rather speak to the manner and practice of our duty herein, and
herein I shall confine my self to the Text, and to what, therein, we are
directed.

Where we find three things proposed to us, in way of duty, in this particular.

1. That we take notice of the Lords work. what it is, that he does for us; So
here (v. 24.) This is the day.

2. That we take notice of Gods work, so done for us, with thankfulness. We
will rejoice and be glad in it.

3. That we farther improve such the Lords mercies to us by Prayer. Save, now I
beseech thee O Lord, etc. (v. 25.)

1. That we are to take notice of Gods work for his People: here is a day for
it, and that day particularly pointed at, This is the day, etc. as to the
manner of it.

1. This is by taking notice of Gods work, in particulars, not in the gross or
bulk of them only. A particular Enumeration and confession of Sins becomes a
day of Humiliation: so are mercies to be particularly remembered in a day of
praise (Psalm. 111. 2. Ps. 103, 1, to 6.)

2. We are not in this, not to pass over the works of God lightly, but to
insist on them, in serious meditation, and in speaking of them again, and
again, as here (v. 15. 16.) but this I shall not dwell upon longer at present.

2. The next part of our duty, is our observing Gods works of good to us, and
that with thankfulness: This is the day, etc. We will rejoice and be glad in
it. Our rejoicing must be in the Lord; and that cannot be, but in a thankful
acknowledgment of his mercies, to the praise of his name: where therefore it is
said, we will rejoice in it (v. 24.) it is after, with praises unto God (v. 27.
28, 29.)

Let us see the practice and ground of this duty, by what may be observed of it
in David's day.

2. By what we find of the Lords goodness to us, in this our day, And 3. the
ground of our joy, and rejoicing in this day, also, of our Lord Jesus Christ.

1. As this day referrs to David, his day required such thankful
acknowledgment, from him, and from his People. You have heard what the Lord has
done for David, and in him, for his People; such mercies required suitable
acknowledgments. See himself in the duty. I will praise thee, for thou bast
heard me, and become my Salvation (v. 21.) Thou art my God, and I will praise
thee, thou art my God, and I will exalt thee (v. 28.) He stirs up others
also in it. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endures
for ever. (v. 1. 29.) and thereunto he calls all the People. Let Israel now
say, that his mercy endures for ever (v. 2.) And the Priests. Let the House of
Aaron now say that his mercy endures for ever, [v. 3.] God is the Lord who
has showed us light; bind the Sacrifice with cords, even unto the Horns of the
Altar [v. 27.] And all this is done in a public manner, even in the Church,
the public place for Gods worship. Open to me the Gates of righteousness, I
will go into them, and I will praise the Lord, this is the gate of the Lord,
into which the righteous shall enter, [v. 19. 20.] public mercies must have
public acknowledgments, as you have seen in David's day.

2. Our day also (this which now we celebrate) commands the like performances
from us, our duty of praises to our God: I am sure no people under the Sun have
more cause for it, then have we in these three Kingdoms, after so many, and so
great, and such continued confusions, to be thus, as at present, settled in
peace, under his sacred Majesty. This surely is the Lords doing, and it is
mavelous in our eyes it is a day which the Lord has made, let us rejoice and
be glad in it.

Nor is the Lord to be praised in his works alone, but in those, also, whom he
makes his Instruments in those his works, the Lord allows them their praise
in this, yet so, as in reference to him in whose hands they are instruments,
and that those praises be not lodged with them, but that they pass from, and
through them, unto him, who employed, and fitted them for the work, and carried
them on in it.

1. Let me therefore (to the glory of God; and to the praise of his great name
this Day) speak unto those, in the first place, who have been chief in this
work; (I confine my self herein, at present, to what is within our selves, in
this Kingdom only) unto you the heads and leaders of the People, I shall say
only, as in Deborahs tryumphant song of praise, My heart is toward the
Governors of Israel that offered themselves willingly among the People, bless ye
the Lord (Judge. 5. 9.) You have herein your praise, and we have cause to bless
you for what have been, by you, done for us; but bless ye the Lord. Let your
praises be returned from you to him, by whom you have been so stirred up, and
owned in this great work.

2. To you of the Army Officers, and Soldiers, is your praise also: I may say
of you, as was said of* Zebulun and Naphtali, in the before mentioned song of
Deborah. Zebulun and Naphtali were a People that Jeoparded their lives unto the
death in the high places of the field (Jud. 5. 18.) Blessed be God that it did
not come, among you, unto that of death, or to the least drop of blood, of any
of you. It is a Miracle that it was so: yet did you put your lives in your
hands in this great cause, and they were by you Jeoparded; nor would you have
drawn back from the utmost of dangers, had it been necessary.

3. As to you of this City (both you in the chief Government and others) you
have your praise also, and that very eminently, as you have been even above
others, eminent in the work of this day, in which also you continue even unto
this very day.

4. Nor ought you of the general Convention of Ireland, to be forgotten, but to
be remembered with the first: for you have, in a time of trouble and great
distractions, risen from your several places, and set your selves here, for
the quiet and settlement of this Kingdom: The happy fruits whereof we this day
gather; by you, have our public wants been supplied, in a time of pressing
necessities, to the great refreshment of the People. You have strengthened our
hands here, and the hands of others elsewhere, who had been engaged in this
cause with you, you have in your forward, and prudent zeal, stirred up
Emulation (I will not say envy) in others, to the quickening and hasting this
work to that perfection in which we see it at this day. And from you, and by
your appointment, have we the day it self, and therein this present opportunity
for blessing the Lord, and rejoicing before him, in the great things, by him,
thus done for his People. Where, therefore, hereafter mention shall be made of
this general convention of Ireland, let this also be remembered concerning you,
to your lasting praise in after Generations.

And let all of us together (as we have common cause) join, in one, in the
praises of the Lord; from whom alone is all this good, this day derived to us.
it is a day which the Lord himself has made, for us; let us Rejoice and be
glad in it.

3. But more especially, and above all, this day of the Lord, Jesus, our Lord,
and our King, the day of his Glory, is, withal joy, to be of his people
remembered for evermore.

The glory of Jesus Christ is the foundation of all our comforts, in his humble
condition, and sufferings he merited, Redemption and happiness for us, he
purchased it for us, in his blood; but, the Application of all, and our real
possession of that our happiness, is from him exalted: he is in his Kingly
office, the Savior, as in his Priesthood; and from him, as our King, and not
otherwise, have we what, as a Priest, he had prepared for us. The God of our
Fathers (said the Apostles) raised up Jesus whom ye slew, and hanged on a tree:
him has God exalted, with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior for to
give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of Sins, (Acts 5. 30, 31.) The
first coming in of a Prince into his power, is with grace, and an act of
oblivion: So in Christ our Prince, thus exalted, is now general pardon held
out, and given, and from him, as so, is repentance of forgivness of Sins to be
expected: In this, is the foundation (as was said) of our joy and rejoicing,
for ever. We declare unto you (says the Apostle) Glad tidings, how that the
promise which was made unto the Fathers, God has fulfilled the same unto us
their Children, in that he has raised up Jesus again. Be it known unto you
therefore Men and Brethren, that through this man is preached unto you the
forgiveness of sins, and by him all that believe, are justified from all things,
from which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses, (Acts 13. 32. 33. 38.)

Thus of Christ's day, and of our duty of praise, in it. And thus of the second
part of our work, in this day, that duty of praise expected from us.

3. The last is prayer, prayer, as praise, is part of the work of this day.
Thanksgiving makes way for Petition and, prayer Improveth praise; as here,
Save, now I beseech thee, O Lord, O Lord, I beseech thee, send now prosperity.
Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord (v. 25, 26.) Where we find.

1. The Kings prayer for the People, as Solomon prayed for the People, (1 Kings
8. 12. etc.) So does David here. Save now I beseech thee, O Lord, O Lord, I
beseech thee, send now prosperity. Kings ought to pray for their People.

2. Here also, ye People pray for the King, and bless him in the name of the
Lord: Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord. We have blessed you
out of the house of the Lord, (v. 26.) It is our duty to pray for the King. I
exhort (says the Apostle) That first of all, Supplications, Prayers,
Intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all men, for Kings, and for
all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all
Godliness, and honesty, for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our
Savior. (1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3.) It is, you see, an Exhortation earnestly pressed,
and that, first of all, and as good and acceptable in the sight of God and,
what he expects from us in dnty, and, what will be well pleasing him; and, what
he will return to us, to our good: he, thereby, giving us, to lead a quiet, and
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. I am persuaded that the contrary
(the not praying for the King, but against him, and the not blessing him, but
cursing rather, has been, in a great measure, the ground of our unquiet and
troublesome days hitherto, wherein also has been so little of Godliness,
(although nothing more pretended) and, so little, even, of very common honesty
amongst professors, as in these our days. Let, therefore the exhortation of
the Apostle prevail withus, for the practice of this duty, in our daily
prayers, for his Majesty. That the Lord would bless him, and make him a
blessing unto his People; as here, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the
Lord. Thus was Jesus Christ received by his People, when he entered Jerusalem.
Hosanna to the Son of David, blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord
[Math. 21. 8, 9, 15.] Then, did Christ enter Jerusalem, as a King, which is
implied, in his being called the Son of David; It being also expressly said,
that this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Propbet,
saying. Tell ye the Daughter of Sion. Behold, thy King comes to thee, meek,
and sitting upon an Ass, and a Colt, the foal of an ass, as it is, on that
occasion, observed by the Evangelist (Mat. 21. 4. 5.) And, where it is in St.
Matthew, blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord; it is thus in S.
Luke, blessed is the King that comes in hte name of the Lord, Luke 19. 38.)
And here is to be noted; that, where it is said in the text, Save now O Lord,
etc. That the word Save is, in the Original, the same with that Hosanna, (that
Acclamations of the People concerning Christ (as if said, God save the King. It
is also to be observed; that, as Jesus Christ was, in his first coming,
received with the Acclamations of the people in those words; Blessed is he that
comes in the name of the Lord: So shall he be again received, even with t he
same words, his second coming; Then he shall, withal joy, be welcomed, and,
that saidof him blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord. You find
this, in our Lords own words speaking of his, then leaving the World, and of
his second coming: Ye shall not (says he) see me henceforth till ye shall say,
blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord. That, till ye shall say
blessed, etc. [as in St. Mathew] is thus rendered by St. Luke, until the time
come when ye shall say, blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord [Luke
13. 35.

3. Here are also prayers for the Church and its prosperity, v. 25. Save now, I
beseech thee, O Lord, O Lord, I beseech thee, send now pros^e^ity. Jesus Christ
our King, needs not our prayers. He is, in his glory, above our prayers;
although Princes, in their greatest glory, have need of them: Concerning them
we may, and ought to say, save now I beseech thee O Lord; But although Christ
needs not [as I said] our prayers, yet does his Church, his Kingdom want them:
and he himself commands our prayers for it. Thy Kingdom come, is one of those
petitions which he has put into our Mouths for his Church [Math. 6. 10.] This
is required of us, for his Church in general, and particularly for Jerusalem:
That the Lord would build up his Church, and enlarge his Kingdom, in the
calling of that his people. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper
that love thee. Peace within thy walls, prosperity within thy Palaces, for my
Brethren and companions sake, I will now say peace be within thee, because of
the house of the Lord our God I will seek thygood [Psal. 122. 6. 7. 8. 9.] And,
such a praying frame of Spirit has the Lord promised to give unto his,
concerning that his People: I have set watchmen upon thy walls O Jerusalem,
which shall never hold their peace, day nor night, Ye that make mention of the
Lord, keep not silence, and give him no rest till he establish, and make
Jerusalem a praise in the Earth (Is. 62. 6, 7.) I much fear we are wanting in
this duty, let it not be so, say concerning Jerusalem, as here. Save now I
beseecb thee O Lord, O Lord I beseech the send now prosperity. Let our prayers,
also, be for the suffering Churches in other Countries: God has made this day
to be, to us, a day of praise and rejoicing; Blessed be his name, but it may be
a day of sadness, with others, elsewhere. Let us, be sensible of their
condition, as of our own, and, in our rejoicing, be mindful of their sorrow:
Say of them, Save now I beseech thee, O Lord, O Lord I beseech the send now
prosperity. As for the Church at home, and among our selves in these Kingdoms:
Let our prayers be for them also. We see already in the work of the day, the
happiness of the State, and we have hope of the happiness of our Church, also,
under his Majesty whose piety has been so eminently evidenced to the comfort
and satisfaction of his people. We well know that much of the evil in the
State, has broaken in upon, and proceeded from, sad divisions and factions in
the Church. Our happiness in the State, will be in union in the Church; and in
the Lords making up the breaches there in: That will be our peace, and not
otherwise. And now, even now, is the very time, even the very time for our
prayers herein. Therefore, for our common happiness in Church and State, in
King, and People, let it be part of our work, in this our day of rejoicing, to
be instant, also, in this duty of prayer, and again, and again, to say. Save
now I beseech thee, O Lord, O Lord I beseech thee, send now prosperity. Blessed
is he that comes in the name of the Lord: We have blessed you out of the house
of the Lord.

FINIS.

