A BRIEF NARRATIVE, OR THE REMONSTRANCE OF JOHN KERSEY, Sometimes Chief Clerk
of the Trinity-House of Deptford-Strond in the County of Kent, with his just
Right to the said Office truly represented.

ALSO, The Cause of his Dismission in the Year 1648, by the Usurped Power then
Governing.

WITH HIS Several Addresses to the Corporation, since His Majesty's Happy
Restoration, but no Readmission.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1677.

A Brief Narrative of the CASE of John Kersey sometimes Chief Clerk of the
Trinity-House of Deptford-Srond in the County of Kent, etc.
INprimis, He the said John Kersey was received in the Year 1636, by Mr Josias
Best, then Clerk of the Trinity-House aforesaid, as his Servant, or
Under-Clerk; and continued in that condition about 5 years.

At the expiration of which Term, Josias Best voluntarily surrenders his place
to the Corporation, recommending John Kersey to their Service to succeed him.

The Trinity-House, in consideration of John Kersey's good Service, Demeanor,
and Ability, elect and choose him their Clerk, without putting any one in
competition with him, and so to continue so long as he shall behave himself as
becomes an honest man* which is generally understood to be during Life.

John Kersey continues eight years longer as chief Clerk of the Trinity-House
with general approbation, till in the year 1648, for promoting the Personal
Treaty with His Late Majesty of Blessed Memory, for that very cause was outed
of the said Employment, and the whole Corporation for Eleven years odd Months
dissolved by the Usurped Tyrannical Power then Governing.

John Kersey makes his Address by Petition the 27th of October 1660, to the
Trinity-House, to be readmitted, finds but part of the Elder Brethren
surviving, which were left in 1648; but the Corporation new modeled,
consisting of 31 persons, according to its pristine condition.

He receives this general Answer, That they could not do the Clerk they found
there, so much wrong to eject him, as to do John Kersey the right to receive
him; and particularly the Corporation had power to choose their own Clerk: a
Clerk they had chosen, and him they would stand by.

The Petition beforementioned was attended by Dr Fuller Bishop of Kerry. Col.
John Price of Hereford, Esquire John Needler of Grayes-Inn, Gent. Tho. Hulbert of
Covent Garden, Gent. Lancelot Burrell of Land. Gent. Humphrey Bean of Land.
Merchant. William Clifton of Covent Garden, Vintner. S^ Christopher Guise of
Gloucester, Knight and Baront. Robert Gardener of London, Merchant.


Which Gentlemen, with some others, I entreated that day to go along with me,
and humbly besought the Corporation to admit to them the hearing of such things
as might be said and offered by me to the Corporation; and also to testify of
my Life and Conversation for the Twelve years last past, and particularly what,
and how I had acted for the Kings Friends in order to His Service; all which
was absolutely denied me: the want of which Testimony has, and does still
hinder the publication of my Vindication.

After the denial of granting the Petition before mentioned, John Kersey
published to some Friends and Members of the Corporation, a Remonstrance
containing the Heads of the aforesaid Petition, in these words:

A Brief Remonstrance of JOHN KERSEY, late Clerk of the Trinity-House.
The Remonstrant shows,
THat after the expiration of about five years Service as an Under-Clerk to his
Predecessor Josias Best, the Remonstrant was by the general liking and
approbation of the whole Corporation (the said Josias Best, for causes and
considerations him thereunto moving, voluntarily resigning his said Office)
elected in his room, and continued principal Clerk therein for the space of
Eight Years more, and by an Order of the said Corporation, Dated the 22th of
May, 1641. Subscribed by all the Corporation then present, enabled so to
continue so long as he should behave himself as should become an honest man,
which is generally understood during Life.

That the Remonstrant promoting the Personal Treaty with the Late King of
Blessed Memory, by all endeavors and interests, which were not small, by reason
of the great influence he had among Seamen of the best quality, and the
particular knowledge he had how most of them stood affected as to Loyalty and
Allegiance; the said Treaty not happily succeeding, the Petitioner was forced
out of his said Employment in 1648, by the Usurped Tyrannical Power then
governing, and also the whole Corporation for Eleven Years odd Months dissolved.

The Remonstrant, when the Personal Treaty was on foot, got an appearance at
several times in the space of ten days, of 468 Masters and Commanders of Ships,
of the most eminent belonging to the Port of London, who cheerfully subscribed
to the Petition for a Personal Treaty; he also took up diverse Letters from
unknown persons, directed to the Trinity-House, and delivered them to the
Corporation in full Court, when no person else would adventure to do it; the
Scope and Tenor of which, was to incite and spur the Corporation to be active
in that juncture of time, and to follow the example of diverse Corporations, who
had already appeared by Petition in this weighty Affair: which was accordingly
done, though the deplored success answered not the Prayers and Hopes of His
Majesty's True and Loyal Subjects.

The Remonstrant by his own Interest with the Searchers at Gravesend, got
passage for the Bishop of Kerry, and Col. John Price, with diverse other
proscribed Gentlemen that were active for His Majesty and His Affairs, who in
safety arrived at diverse Ports beyond the Seas, though to the hazard of the
Remonstrant's Life and Office.

That upon the re-assumption of the Secluded Members of Parliament, the
surviving Wardens and Elder Brethren of the Trinity-House reassumed their
places also, which were but Eight of Thirty and one, and Petitioned the
Parliament, that they might new Model their Corporation; which was granted, and
an Act passed to empower them so to do.

The Remonstrant, according to his Duty, petitioned the Trinity-House the 27th
of October, 1661; but being denied to have any Friend accompany him at the
Hearing, which in reason ought to have been free, they only put him to the
proof of one particular mentioned in the foregoing Petition, viz. So long to
continue as he should behave himself as should become an honest man.

The Remonstrant did it by a Copy of the Original, which by fortune he had
preserved; but their Faith was as in many other matters, of no such long extent
as to believe it, unless I could prove it out of their own Record. This put me
hard to it; for my Successor Edward Keeling, accompting himself as one of the
then Elder Brethren, and sitting among them (by what power I know not) after
some Hums and screwed countenances, as if he had expected a Revelation, the
modern way being not quite out of fashion, affirmed, he had taken more pains
than any man in viewing and searching the Records of the Trinity-House, but
could never find any to that purpose. Here was my Definitive Sentence, and all
my hopes vanished; for I easily perceived that particular interest swayed more
for the present Clerk than for me. But Providence gave me yet a thread to hold
by; Capt. Brian Harrison, one of the former Elder Brethren, sitting then as
Warden, or Deputy-Warden, affirmed in my favor, that such words he well
remembered was in the Order whereby I was made Clerk, and wished me to recollect
what manner of Book it was in, and he would be at the trouble to seek it out,
and did so; I turned readily to it, but with much fear it had been expunged by
those that durst do any thing; but they had mist it, and so had Edward Keeling;
for I found it and read it, which, in my thoughts, made much for me. The
Corporation would not insist much upon Argument, desired me to withdraw, and
upon return, received this Answer as before mentioned, from some of them, That
they found a Clerk at their new Modelling, and conceive they cannot do him that
wrong, as to eject him, and me that right as to receive me; and from the
Chairman, in the name and behalf of those present, That they did conceive they
had power to choose their own Clerk; a Clerk they had chosen, and him they would
stand by.

The case is therefore clear, that John Kersey was outed for promoting the
Personal Treaty, and for no other cause, as by two Certificates, one under the
hands of a great number of the best Masters of Ships belonging to this Port of
London, and another under the hands of diverse of the most eminent Merchants,
and other persons dwelling and residing about this City, may appear; the Copies
whereof shall hereafter be set forth.

That the promoting the Personal Treaty, was a Service to the King, and to all
Loyal Subjects, though it did not happily succeed, and no crime or misdemeanor,
therefore cannot continue outed unless they will own the Power legal that
ejected him.

That the if Will of some few of the Corporation, which sways the rest, joined
with a particular Interest, which may be made out, must be a Law:

It is humbly offered to the whole Corporation, that if it may not be thought
fit that the Remonstrant be continued for the future to officiate in the said
Office of Clerk of the Trinity-House, with all its usual and former Perquisites
and Fees heretofore belonging, or in any wise appertaining to the same:

That then some other experienced and able person of known Loyalty and Fidelity
proper for that employment, may succeed in that place hereafter, that so those
that are, and have been True and Loyal to His Majesty in his greatest
Exigences, may receive and communicate of those happy Benefits which others,
not having the least merited the same, do now most comfortably enjoy: And to
the intent that all memory of that horrid Usurper and Tyrant O. Cromwell may be
expunged and obliterated, the Remonstrant further implores,

That the Branches and Remains of him may be expelled, to make room for such a
person who may wave all private Interest for the Service of His Majesty, and
Advance of the Public, as the Remonstrant has been accustomed to do, and for
which he has this Twelve years continued a patient, though extreme Sufferer.

The aforesaid Remonstrance coming to view (as no question but it did) of some
of the Grandees of Trinity-House, was no whit pleasant, insomuch as it is more
than probable they might be quit with me at the next turn. It fortuned that
Ralph Keeling died in August following; having timely notice thereof, I made a
second Address by Petition again, verily believing no Obstacle; but found such
success as before. The Copy of that Petition likewise follows.

To the Right Worshipful the Master, Wardens, and Assistants, etc.
The Petition of John Kersey,
Shows,
THat in October last the Petitioner made his Address by Petition to this
Eminent Corporation, setting forth the time of his Admission, his Continuance,
and his Exit, and the grounds and causes of either of them.

That there was one clause in the said Petition, viz. (so to continue so long
as he behaved himself as should become an honest man, which was inclusive in
the Order when your Petitioner was constituted Clerk, and Signed by the whole
Corporation then present) was in hard measure to your Petitioner put to proof,
and no acknowledgment of any such Record by the late Clerk, the Petitioners
pretended Successor; but upon strict search of the Register, was found to be
recorded in the same Terms as the Petitioner set forth.

That the Petitioner lost the said Employment, not for any Misdemeanor or
insufficiency, but for promoting the Personal Treaty with the Late King Charles
of Blessed Memory, the unfortunate success whereof, involved not only the
Petitioner, but this whole Corporation in a general Dissolution for Twelve
Years.

That your Petitioner had more than hopes of re-assuming his said Office at the
Restoration of His Sacred Majesty, knowing so many of the Elder Brethren as
were then alive, without any let or disturbance reassume theirs: But when your
Petitioner, as in duty bound, applied himself by Petition, found this Answer
from some of the Corporation, That they could not do a man whom they found in
the Employment, so much wrong to eject him, and right as to receive the
Petitioner: and upon further result of the Corporation, your Petitioner
received a more harsh Answer, which he has had sad cause to remember.

Notwithstanding your Petitioner hopes that upon this second Review of the
Petitioners long suffering, his present necessities, and the loss of
reputation, if not readmitted, this juncture of time also occurring whereby no
room is left for pretenses of injury for, or to any other person;

He prays, That putting in caution for his fair Demeanor and Fidelity, he may
receive the influence of your Worships Favor, by his readmission, or some
moderate and conscionable Satisfaction for his loss of the prime of his time
spent in your Worships Service, and Disbursement of a considerable Sum of Money
(though in his own wrong) to his Predecessor, at the time of his Constitution.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc.
This Second Petition was accompanied with the same persons in the Month of
August following, and I was received with very fair words and seeming respect;
but all were Chimaera's; my Friends denied as before, to hear any thing I might
offer them.

The Court being sat, I was called in among Four others (Suitors for the
place) we were all answered according to custom, That the Corporation would
take our desires into considerrtion; that the Design was laid, the Knight must
always beat the Giant; William Witherington, who had been a Sub-Clerk there for
some years, was chosen to counter-ballance the Petitioner, which else had
carried it from the rest; but the Squib is not yet at the end of the Rope.
Witherington after a formal possession of the place some few days, falls sick,
and although there were fair hopes of Death, recovers; yet however the Design
for Mr Askew must hold, who (to say truth) was better qualified in other
Mysteries than in Clerkship. Here the Remonstrant pleads ignorance by what
Device they pulled in Askew by head and shoulders, and laid aside Witherington,
who is but a Sub-Clerk to this day.

The Copies of Two Certificates, one of Commanders of Ships belonging to this
Port of London; the other of Merchants, and others of eminent Quality, in the
behalf of the Remonstrant, signifying his good Carriage, Behavior and
Conversation.
WE whose Names are here-under written, being Masters and Owners of Shipping,
and related to Marine Affairs, having had long knowledge and experience of the
Bearer hereof, John Kersey, formerly Clerk of the Guild-Fraternity or
Brotherhood of the Trinity-House of Deptford-Strond in the County of Kent, do
hereby Certify and Inform, that the said John Kersey being duly, lawfully and
generally elected and chosen Clerk of the said Fraternity, did exercise the
said Office for many years, to the general liking and approbation of the said
Corporation, and of all such other persons as had occasion to make use of him
in his said Office and Employment, being a well ordered person, courteous and
affable in his Conversation, of good ability in the performance of the
Employment aforesaid; and withal, both ready and willing to give every man
Dispatches according to their several and earnest occasions. And that for so
much as we know, or have ever heard, there was no dislike against him by any of
the said Corporation: And this we are very certain and confident to affirm,
that he was never ejected or dismissed by the said Corporation for any cause of
disability, dislike or misbehaviour; but only upon the same cause and reason
the whole Corporation aforesaid was dissolved; that is to say, for abetting,
aiding, assisting and promoting the Personal Treaty with His Late Majesty of
Blessed Memory. In prosecution whereof, he (according to his continued Loyalty)
was to the utmost of his power and interest, both active, earnest and vigorous.

July 29, 1660. Subscribed by 40 Commanders, as aforesaid; and Another of the
same tenor, Subscribed by 50 Merchants and other persons of eminent quality.


When Mr Peapes entered, I knew not till above a Twelvemonth after; which saved
me the labor of a Third Address, and so there was nothing heard of me: Since
Mr Peapes his Death, I made another Address, but had an ambiguous answer from
Two Members of the Corporation: One affirmed the Business was done already;
that is, there was a new Election; and the other told me, there would be no
Election till fourteen days were past; yet upon Monday following, being an
unusual day for Meeting, there was a Court called, and Mr Gibson chosen; which
prevented my Fourth Address.

The Sight of this Paper to Ingenuous unbyassed persons of the Corporation
aforesaid, that knew me not, Time having worn me out of remembrance, may
perhaps give them a sight of my Sufferings, and so consequently may beget both
Pity and Charity. I shall make further application to them as Time and
Opportunity will direct, not intending willingly to quit my Right in the said
Office till the expiration of my Breath.

JOHN KERSEY.


