ADVERTISMENT.
Courteous Reader,
THese Sermons mentioned in the Title being Preached by Mr. Killiray and given
to me to Publish, these are to inform all persons, that they may not be
deceived with Counterfeit ones, which have not all the Sermons here mentioned
in them. That they are only Printed for William Thackeray at the Angel in
Duck-lane, and have this Picture underneath on them, where you may be furnished
with the Right sort

printer's device of William Thackeray WITH


TEN Sermons, Preached by that Eminent Divine Matthew Killiray B. D.

The Godly Man's Gain, and the Wicked Man's Woe. The Sinners Sobs. The Swearer
and the Drunkard two brethren in iniquity arraigned at the Bar. The ready way
to get Riches or the Poor Man's Counselor. The short and sure way to Grace and
Salvation. The Touchstone of a Christian. The Pathway to Saving knowledge.
Every Man's Duty or the Godly Man's Practice. The way to Heaven made Plain. The
Christians Comfort or the Goodness and Mercy of God unto his Children in their
greatest Misery.
To which are Added excellent Set Forms of Prayer and Graces for Children.

London, Printed for William Thackeray (...) the Angel in Duck-lane, 1675.
Price (...)

The Godly Man's Gain, AND THE Wicked Man's Woe; OR, Good News from Heaven for
the Righteous.

Plainly showing the wonderful manifestation of the love of God to their Souls,
their blessed and happy condition both in this life, and that which is to come.

Likewise, the dreadful condition of the wicked, their dangers by reason of
sin, because the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against the workers of
iniquity.

Lastly, some seasonable warnings, and persuasions, for poor sinners to prepare
for Judgment, that they may be able to stand in the evil day, and avoid those
visible tokens of Gods fury, and their eternal ruin in flames of Fire,
prepared for the wicked, who delight to make void the Law of God.

By MATTHEW KILLIRAY.

Psalm. 9.6 7. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, Fire and Brimstone, and an
horrible tempest, this shall be the portion of their cup.

For the righteous Lord, loves righteousness, his countenance does behold the
upright.

London, Printed for William Thackeray, at the Angel in Duck-lane nere
Smithfield, 1674.

The Godly Man's Gain, AND THE Wicked Man's Woe; OR, Good News from Heaven for
the Righteous.
Isaiah 3.10,11. Say ye to the Righteous, that it shall be well with them, for
they shall eat the fruit of their doings.

Woe unto the wicked, it shall be ill with him for the Reward of his hands
shall be given him.


THese words are the words of the Prophet Isaiah, unto rebellious Judah and
Jerusalem; having showed them in the former verses, the trouble and confusion
which comes by sin; it is the cause of the loss of Temporal and Spiritual
Enjoyments, thence arises disobedience to Parents, as you may read in the 5,
and 6, verses; he comes in these two verses read to you; to show that though it
be a day of public Calamity, when the shows of men's countenances do witness
against them, and shows their sin as Sodom, yet then is there good news from
heaven for the righteous soul, here is glad tidings of peace and safety for
him, It shall be well with him: here is all good things comprehended in this
word, Well: it shall go well with him here, well with him hereafter: this shall
be his comfort, this his joy: He shall eat the fruit of his doings, and be
satisfied. But what shall become of ye wicked? shall it be so with them? read
the next verse, behold their doom, and avoid it if possible: Woe to the wicked,
it shall be ill with him, for the reward of his hands shall be given him.
Better for him he had never bin born, for eternal misery is his portion, he
has done ill, and the fruits of his evil deeds shall he receive: not a word of
mercy to him, not a word of comfort for him* he has had his good things in
this life: and the Children of God their evil things: but now they are
comforted, and he is formented, they have the good spirit, the holy Ghost to
comfort them, but the wicked man the evil spirit to torment him: in a word all
the woes and denunciations of wrath shall be executed against him, which are
written in the Book of God.

The observation that I would note from these words, is this,

Doct. That in the midst of misery, the Lord Jesus Christ has bowels of mercy
for the Righteous person; but in the day of account, he will have nothing but
dregs of fury for the wicked, who study to make void his Law.

Here is good news for you, who have fought the good fight of faith, who have
contended earnestly for the cause of Christ: a Crown of glory is prepared for
them, which shall never fade away: There is mercy for them in the midst of
misery; joy for them in ye midst of sorrow; the smiles of Gods countenance
shall cheer up their hearts: though they may have sorrow for a season, yet joy
comes in ye morning; the sweet and gracious carriage of ye Lord Jesus Christ
shall even ravish their souls. That this is so, That in the midst of misery,
the Lord Jesus Christ has bowels of mercy, see Heb. 13.5. Be content with such
things as you have, for he has said: I will never leave thee nor forsake thee;
As if ye Lord should say to any poor soul in misery, that is ready to dispond
or despair, under the burden of his afflictions; bear my hand patiently, be
content with such as you have, whether it be affliction tribulation, or
persecution in this world, I have prepared a better Kingdom for you; I Will never
leave you in six troubles, or in seven: I Will guide you by my Counsel, and
afterward receive you into Glory, Psalm. 138.3. In the day when I cried thou
answeredst me, and strengthenedst me with strength in my soul. Though the world
frown upon them yet there is a secret support, there is an everlasting arm that
bears them up; his sweet and gracious carriage to the Church, declares that
they are the beloved of his soul, they are his Darlings, see Cant. 4.8,11. Come
with me from Lebanon (my Spouse) from Lebanon, etc. thou have ravished my
heart, my Sister, my Spouse, thou have ravished my heart with one of thine
eyes, with one chain of thy neck, how fair is thy love my Sister, my Spouse,
how much better is thy love than Wine, and the smell of thine Ointments then
all spices? And thus the Lord Jesus goes along, showing forth his love in most
excellent terms, to make the soul more enam^ured of him.

But now to show you why it is so, or how it comes to pass that the Lord is so
full of bowels of mercy toward the Righteous, I shall give a few Reasons for
it.

1. Because they are those whom he has ransomed, whom he has bought at a
(...) rate, even the price of his own blood. These are the persons, (the
Righteous I mean) for whom he was reviled, despised, was in bitter Agonies, and
suffered a cruel death upon the Cress: And think you will he leave these in
misery, and not remember he is a God of mercy? will not he stay these with
Flaggons, and comfort them with Apples, when they are sick of love? The blood
of the Lord Jesus Christ was not shed in vain, but he dyed, that his might
live, he went through sorrows, that his might have joy, he was Crowned with
Thorns, that his might be Crowned with glory. They are those whom he has
called out of darkness into this mavelous light; for these he has procured a
salvation, and an everlasting rest: They shall not be led Captive at the Devils
will, because they are redeemed by the blood of the Lamb. Therefore, shall it
go well with them.

2. Because they are those whom he has chosen, and those whom the Father has
given him: Therefore has the Lord bowels of mercy for them. As he has
accomplished his part on the Cross for them, so will he accomplish his part in
heaven for them; John 6.36. Of all that the Father has given him, he will lose
nothing. They are the fruit of his death and resurrection; to these he will be
a Father in time of trouble: when ye world cast them off, he will receive them
into his protection, he will open his everlasting arms, and receive them into
his embraces. Christ will not lose his interrest, he will not lose those whom
he has chosen, and whom the Father has given him; but the light of his
countenance shall shine upon them, and he will compass them about with mercy,
all the days of their lives.

3. Why has God bowels of mercy for ye Righteous? because God has peculiarly
promised to these, and none but these, that he will be a Father to them, and
they shall be his Children.

Now beloved, has not a Father yerning bowels of affection toward his Child?
does not he love his own, and cherish his own more affectionately then he does
others? if he see them wronged, does not he right them? even so ye Lord Jesus
Christ as a Father, is very pitiful and very loving, and affectionate toward
his Children: Oh how his spirit is grieved to see his grieved, when his
Children are molested, and despised it pierces into his soul, and presently he
is ready to deliver them; he will never leave his comfortless, but he will come
unto them, he will be with them in joy and sorrow, in prosperity and adversity,
in life and death, and at last will lead them into his heavenly habitation,
that they may partake of the glory promised, and receive the reward of their
Righteousness, even the salvation of their precious souls: thus have you heard
why ye Lord Jesus Christ has yerning b^wels of mercy toward the Righteous.
Indeed many more might be given, but these I think are enough to satisfy any
reasonable soul, and n^w let me proceed to make a little improvement of it by
way of use.

1. Use of Exhortation; Let it be to exhort you who are Righteous in the sight
of God, you to whom Jesus Christ has bowels of mercy, to be continually
lifting up Prayers and Praises with your whole heart and soul unto the Lord,
who has translated you out of darkness into his mavelous light, and out of
the Kingdom of Satan unto God, yt he should take pity of you, when you were in
your blood when the Priest and the Levites passed by, that Christ the good
Samaritan should look on you, and heal you. Oh admire this goodness of God! and
be not slothful, but be fervent in spirit, serving the Lord yt has had such
compassion on you, that has washed your souls in his own blood, that has
purged your consciences from dead works: what, will not you serve ye Lord with
fear and trembling? you to whom the Lord has revealed himself in love and
mercy; Oh be exhorted in the fear of God, to live answerable to those
enjoyments you enjoy; and are like to be partakers of.

2. Use of comfort and consolation to poor dejected souls, who go mourning all
the day long, here is good news for you converted sinners, you who have felt
the misery under the burden of sin, and do believe and ende^vour to avoid the
power of Satan and the Wrath of God, and do believe what Christ has done for
your restoration and salvation, and have thankfully accepted of him as your
onl^ Savior and Lord, on the terms that he is offered in the Gospel, as one yt
calls, justifies sanctifies, and brings at last to everlasting Glory. Hold up
your heads poor souls, and open the everlasting gates of your souls, that ye
King of glory may come in in triumph: hitherto you have clouded the bright
rays of his glory, n^w open your eyes and your souls, yt you may behold it:
learn to say with David, Why art thou cast down, O my soul? why art thou
disquieted within me? hope thou in God, who will yet be the light of my
countenance, and my God: Hold up your heads you have cause to rejoice, O ye
Saints and Servants of the most high God, you need not fear what man can do
unto you, it shall be well with you, you shall have joy, when others shall have
sorrow, you shall have peace when others shall have trouble, you shall enjoy
eternal life, when others shall have eternal death and damnation: So let me
leave you in ye bosom of your Father, sucking from ye breasts of his
consolation: and let me speak a little to the wicked, to those who will not
have the Lord of life to reign over them. Something I shall speak, to show them
their danger and desperate condition; and something by way of persuasion, to
persuade them to come into the Lord Jesus Christ, that they might not be the
objects of his fury at the great day. And when I begin to speak of these
things: I confess it seems terrible to me, and makes me almost afraid, people
will run out of their wits, when they hear it, but a little experience showing
us yt many are like a Dog, bred in a Forge or Furnace, yt being used to it, can
sleep, though the hammers are beating, and the fire and hot Irons flaming about
him; when another that had never seen it, would be amazed at ye sight: Lo thus
they who have 10 or 20 years heard talk of the danger of enduring the wrath of
God at the day of Judgment, but see it not, nor feel any hurt, they think it is
but talk, and make nothing of it, and thus they thank God for his patience;
Because his Sentence is not executed speedily, therefore they set themselves to
do evil, Eccles. 8.11. This consideration moded me, and awakened my soul, that
I might unburden my conscience before you, and speak the truth in God, and lie
not. And, Oh that I could teach your hearts; Oh that who^oever reads this
little Book, might fear and ^remble, and that seeing his danger, he may
^ndeavor to avoid those unquenchable flames ^f the fury of Gods Wrath, See 2
Cor. 5.10,11. and tremble when you read it; For ^e must all appear at the
Judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things ^one in his
body, according to that he has ^one, good or bad. Knowing therefore the
^rrours of the Lord, we persuade men: It Is (...) you I am to speak, who have
done ill; Was (...) you, for the reward of your works shall be ^iven you, and
what is that? Nothing but ^ell and horror, nothing but the fury of Gods ^rath,
a sad sentence shall be passed on you, shall make your hearts to tremble then,
though you will not tremble now.

2. Let us enquire wherein this horror con^sts, that is, first in the sentence
of condem^ation it self, which expresses the misery ^hey are judged to.

1. They are cursed, and that denounces a people destinated of and adjudged to
utter un^appiness, and to all kind of miseries without ^emedy: and their
cursedness is described in ^he next Words: Depart from me into ever^sting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels; from whom must they depart? from that
God that made them in his Image, from the Redeemer that bought them with the
price of his blood, and offer's to save them freel^ for all their unworthiness;
and many time entreated them to accept his offer, that the^ souls might live;
from the Holy Ghost the Sanctifier, and Comforter of the faithful, wh^ strove
with their hearts, till they quenche^ and expelled him: O^ sad departing! wh^
would not then choose to depart from all the friends he had in the world, or
from any thin^ imaginable: from his life from himself, (...) it were possible,
then from Christ; Depar^ from what? from the presence of the Iudg^ from all
future hopes of salvation for ^ve^ from all possibility of over being saved,
an^ living in the joyful inheritance of the Righ^eous. And then consider:

2. Whether must they depart? 1. In^ fire. 2. Into yt fire which is prepared
for devil and his Angels. 3. Into everlasting fir^ not into purifying, but into
a tormenting fi^ and thither will thou go without remedy: (...) Christ now to
interceed for thee: in vain no^ to repent, and wish ^o^ had not slighted your
salvation, or sold it for a little pleasu^e for ye fle^ it will be then in vain
to cry, Lord open to us Oh spare us! O pity us! Oh do not cast a^ unto those
hideous flames! Oh do not turn us among devils, do not condemn thy Redeemed
^nes! but all shall be in vain, you cry and call too late, the gates of Heaven
are shut against you, you ^a^t sinned, therefore you shall suffer; ^he coals of
his fury shall always be burning of you, but you shall never be burnt;
considering the company you shall have, none but tormenting devils; this will
aggravate your misery: and the time it shall endure, not a year ^r ten, or a
hundred years, but for ever: you shall be always consuming, but never consumed;
as the blessedness and joy of the godly is perpetual, so shall also the
torments of the wicked. Oh poor sinner! yt read or hear these lines, I
beseech thee in compassion to thy ^oul, consider how fearful the case of ye man
will be, that is newly doomed to the everlasting fire, and is haled to the
execution without ^emedy. The time was, when repentance might have done thee
good, but then all thy re^entings will be in vain: now while thy day of
visitation lasts, had thou but a heart to ^ry and call for mercy in faith
and fervency, thou might be heard, but then praying and crying will do thee
no good; should thou roar out in ^he extremity of thy horror and amazement,
(...) beseech the Lord Jesus but to forgive thee one sin, or to send thee on
earth once more, or try thee once again in the flesh, whether thou would love
him, and lead a godly life, (...) would be all in vain: should thou besee^
him by all the mercifulness of his nature, (...) all his sufferings and bloody
death, by all ye merciful promises of ye Gospel, it would be all (...) vain:
nay, should thou but beg for one day reprieve, or stay one hour before thou
we^ cast into those flames, it would not be hear^ how earnestly did Dives beg
of Abraham, t^ one drop of Water to cool his Tongue? because he was tormented
in ye flames; and whi^ was he the better? he was bid Remember t^ good things he
had in this life, and ye remembrance would torment him more. Christ wi^ not be
entreated by the ungodly, but he wi^ soon stop thy mouth, or leave thee
speechless And say, Remember man, yt I did once se^ thee a message of peace,
and thou would n^ hear it: I did once stoop to beseech thee to return, and
thou would not hear: I besoug^ thee by ye tender mercies of God: I besoug^
thee by all the love that I had showed thee (...) my holy life, my cursed
death, by the riches my grace, by the offers of my glory, and I cou^ not get
thee to forsake the World, to deny the flesh, to leave one beloved fin; for all
this, (...) waited on thee many a day, and year, the would not consider and
return and live, an^ now it is too late, my sentence is past, and cannot be
recalled, away from me get thee hence, thou worker of iniquity, Mat. 7.22,23.
Ah! beloved friends, what a case is then the poor desperate sinner left in? how
can you yt read or hear, once think without trembling, of the condition that
such forlorn wretches will be in, when they look about them, and see God that
has forsaken them, because they forsook him first; and when they look about
them, and see the Saints on ye one hand, whom they despised, now sentenced unto
glory, and the wicked on the other hand, whom they accompanied and imitated,
now judged with them to everlasting misery: When they look below them, and see
the flames that they must abide in, even for evermore, and when ye Devil begins
to hale them to ye execution: Oh poor souls! now what would they give for a
Christ, for a promise, for a time of repentance, for a sermon of mercy, which
once they slept under, or made no account of: How is the case altered now with
them? Who would think yt these are the same men, yt made light of all this on
earth; that so stoutly scorned the reproofs of ye Word, that would be worldly,
and fleshly, and drunk, and proud; let Preachers say what they would, and
perhaps hated them that did give them warning: now they are of another mind,
but all too late: now would they draw back, and lay hold of any thing, rather
then be dragged away into those flames: but there is no resisting: Satan's
temptations might have been resisted, but his exacutions cannot: Gods judgments
might have been prevented by faith and prayer, and a holy life, but they cannot
be resisted when they are not prevented: glad would the miserable sinner be, if
that he might but turn to nothing, or yt he might be any thing rather then a
reasonable creature: but their wishes are all in vain, there is but one time,
and one way for a sinners deliverance: if he fail in yt one, he perishes for
ever, all ye world cannot help him after that, 2 Cor. 6.26. I have heard thee
in a time accepted, and in a day of salvation: behold, now is the day of
salvation, Rev. 3.20. Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my
voice and open the door, I will come in to him, and sup with him and he with
me, but for the time to come hereafter, hear what ye Lord says, Prove 1.24.25
26. Because I have called and you refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no
man regarded, but they have set at naught my counsel and would none of my
reproof, I will also mock at your calamity. I will laugh when your fear comes,
when your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction as a whirlwind, when
distress and anguish comes upon them: then shall they call upon me, but I will
not answer, they shall seek me early, but shall not find me, for that they
hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord. They would none of my
counsels, they despised all my reproofs, therefore shall they eat of the fruit
of their own way, and be filled with their own devices, for the turning away of
the simple shall slay them, and the prosperity of fools shall destroy them; but
who so hearkeneth to me, shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet for fear of
evil. This God himself has plainly told you, and Oh! that you would consider
of it in time; will you thus wilfully sin, and think to escape the wrath of
God? nay, let me tell you, except you likewise repent, ye shall all likewise
perish; all the world shall not, cannot save you, no Act of Indemnity shall be
passed upon you, you have sinned, and you shall suffer. and Gods Name shall be
justified by it, and Ah; that your Consciences would be awakened by a serious
apprehension of the deadly torments, and smoking flames, that shall certainly
one day seize upon your body, and yt the fear of it might move your hearts into
a relenting and repenting frame, and your souls might be affected with ye ways
and truths of God, which are both pleasant and peaceable, and in them you shall
find eternal life.

And now I have in brief shown you the danger of resisting the Lord Jesus
Christ, suffer me to persawde you, and Oh yt you would be persuaded before the
woes and denunciations of Gods Wrath be pronounced against you! Oh that you
would believe yt one day you shall receive ye fruit of your doings: will you
suffer your souls to sink in the last day, for want of care, and
self-preservation? Oh that I could persuade you by the tender mercies of God,
by that precious Blood of the Imaculate Lamb of God, to awake presently, and
resolve to lose no more time, but set upon the work. Oh that there were such a
heart in you as you were truly willing to follow the gracious guidance of the
Lord, and to use those sweet and reasonable means which he has prescribed in
his word, that you may be ready for the day of the Lord, for you will not be
able to make any shift to keep your souls from continual terrors, as long as
you remain in a Carnal and unregenerate condition; let the sudden approach of
death and judgment, continually move you, and the terrible apprehensions of the
falling into those furious flames prapared for the wicked, rouse up your sleepy
souls from sin and security How do you think to escape at the last day, you
that never once trembled at the thoughts of that great day: let me persuade you
to confirm your thoughts in the belief of this, that you shall suddenly appear
at the Bar of Gods Justice, and there shall be brought to answer for thy deeds
done in the flesh, whether good or evil, what then will thou be able to say
before ye great God? then it will be too late to say; Lord be merciful to me a
Sinner, then shall you wish too late, that you had done the good, and the
acceptable will of God; and that you had left the Creature and served the
Creator. Then shall you be ready to cry out: Woe is me, how shall I be able to
bear this dreadful and heavy burden of the Wrath of God: Oh how shall I live
among those scorching and never dying flames? How shall I be able to endure
those fearful shrikes, and sad complaints of those damned souls? and then
beholding the sweet Harmony that is among the glorified Saints, their continual
blessedness shall more amaze thee; then will thou wish thou were received into
their sweet society: Then will thou be ready to say, Lord receive me into thy
Kingdom. But alas thou had thy good things in this life, therefore nothing
but wrath and curse is thy portion, this will be thy condition unless thou in
time consider, and are fully prepared for the coming of the Bride. I would lay
down a few helps and directions, to poor seduced and deluded souls that seeing
their danger, they might also look out for a recovery.

1. Direction. Labor to get your selves established in this belief, yt the
judgment of the great day is at hand, and that you must answer for all your
deeds done in the flesh: Friends s^ut not your eyes against the light. If you
do not believe such a day is at hand, you will never prepare for it, it is the
Word of the God of truth; certainly you dare not give him the lie; John
5.28.29. The hour is coming, in which, all that are in their Graves shall hear
his voice and shall come forth; they that have done good, to the Resurrection
of life, and they that have done evil, to the Resurrection of damnation. Heb.
9.27. It is appointed to all men once to die, and after death to Judgment.
Nothing more true then this, and dare you live without the faith of this?

2. Direction. Make it the business of your lives to be ready for that day. All
other business should depend upon this, what else have you to do, but to
provide for eternity, and to use yt means prescribed in Gods word. Remember
when you awake every morning, you are nearer to eternity, and that the day of
your account is at hand, and when you go to bed, examine your hearts; what you
have done in preparation for the last day are you ready for judgment, or are
you not? Consider a while with your Souls? does not ye Scripture say: Except a
man be born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, John 3.3. And this
is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men love darkness
rather then light, because their deeds are evil. See the case of the unprepared
soul, at the great day, Mat. 25. Cast the unprofitable Servant into utter
darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth. But those mine enemies,
who will not have me to reign over them, bring them hither and slay them before
me, Mat. 22.12,13. Friend, how came thou hither, not having a wedding
Garment? and he was speechless: then said the King to the servants bind him
hand and foot, and take him away, cast him into utter darkness. Labor to be
ready for the great day.

3. Direction. Get Faith and Repentance sown in thy heart, or else thou shall
never be accepted or justified by the blood of Christ: without Faith it is
impossible to please God, and without Repentance no Salvation. Oh make not a
light matter of sin and misery, lest thou be pressed by them into infernal
flames, but Repent from the bottom of thy heart, and be grieved for this, that
thou did not repent sooner: turn to the Lord with thy whole heart, and let
God be in all thy thoughts, then he will pardon and pass by all your
iniquities, and receive you graciously, and prese^ you as pure and spotless
before the Throne (...) his Father, and then you shall be taken into h^
embraces, and have his Banner of love sprea^ over you.

4. Direction. Let it be ye daily care of yo^ souls to mortify fleshly
desires, and overcom^ the world: fleshly desires, and carnal self, wi^draw you
of from God. This therefore mu^ be the earnest work of thy life, to subdue the
flesh and to set light by this world and resist the devil yt would destroy
thee: Live loose from a^ things in this world, if you would be read^ for
another world, you must not live after the flesh, but mortify it by the
spirit; Romans 8.13 If you would be accepted in the last day, and b^ able to give
up your account with joy, the must be the course of your life; then he has
promised to receive you graciously and to tak^ you into his everlasting Rest.

5. Direction. As you renew your Life, s^ daily renew your repentance, and do
all your works, as men that must be judged for them at the last day: O yt you
would remember when temptations are upon you! how careful you should be of your
words and thoughts, i^ you seriously remember you must be judged for what you
have done, and give an account ^or every talent received, certainly you would
^ot be so vain; so carnal, and so dead to the things of God, were you fully
convinced that ^ou must answer for all, were God in all your ^houghts, the
devil would be under foot: Oh that poor miserable souls would, before it be
(...) late, lay to heart these things, and remem^er what they are born for, and
what will (...) the issue of an ungodly, careless, unre^enting life.

6. Direction. Be in this vigilent and obedi^t course, that with confidence you
may rest upon God as a father, and upon the promise of ^cceptance, and
remission, through the merits ^d intercession of Jesus Christ; Look up in ^pe,
to the glory that is set before you: serve ^t droopingly, but with love, and
joy, and filial ^ar; get into communion with the Saints, ^ke heed you be not
excluded by your unwor^y walking, left you be cast out of ye presence (...)
Christ and his Saints for ever. And that I ^ight draw to a conclusion, I would
say to ^or sinners, judgment is near, be prepared, ^st you bewail whent is to
late. O yt ye Lord ^uld open your eyes, and turn you to himself: ^hen ye
judgment day will not be dreadful (...) you: then your Savior whom you have
o^ed, will not condemn you, but if you will (...) obstinate, when ye Lord Jesus
Christ is re^aled from Heaven, with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking
vengeance on the^ who know not God, and obey not the Gospel (...) our Lord
Jesus Christ, you who have resisted his will, shall be punished with
everlasting destruction, from the presence of ye Lord when the day of the
Marriage of the La^ comes, and ye reception of ye Saints into Glor^ then you
who are not prepared for ye Brid^groom; the door shall be shut against you, a^
though you cry: Lord, Lord, open to us, y^ shall be repulsed with a verily I
know you n^ when others long, hope, and wait for comfor^ then shall you fear
and tremble at the r^membrance of it. And oh that the words contained in this
little Book, might move so^ poor soul to a serious view of their lives a^
conversations, whether they are those to wh^ ye Lord will say: Woe to you
wicked, you she receive the fruit of your doings, yt you may (...) time prepare
for judgment, yt when ye time^ your departure is at hand, you may be abl^ look
back on the good fight you have foght^ ye course you have finished, and ye
faith you ha^ kept, and may confidently conclude, ye hen^ forth there is laid
up a crown for you of rig^eousness, which ye Lord Jesus Christ ye Iu^ shall
give you at ye last day, and not to you on^ but to all them who love his
appearing, t^ you may be able to say: even so, Come L^ Jesus come quickly: Amen.

FINIS.
The Sinners Sobs; OR, The Sinners Way to Sions Joy.

Plainly demonstrating the absolute necessity of true godly sorrow for the
Sinners safety.

With many Cogent Reasons and Arguments, and brief exhortations to poor
Sinners, yet in the gall of bitterness, and bond of Iniquity, to return even by
weeping and mourning, to him who delights to show mercy.

As also the terrible condition of such who come not in this way, whom God will
find another way to deal with.

By Matthew Killiray.

Jeremiah 4.14. Oh Jerusalem, wash thy hands from wickedness, how long shall
vain thoughts dwell with thee?

London, Printed for William Thackaray in Duck-Lane. 1673.

The Sinners Sobs; OR, The Sinners Way to Sions Joy.
Plainly demonstrating the absolute necessity of true godly sorrow for sin, and
true confession of Sin.
Acts 2.37. Now when they heard this, they were pricked to their hearts, and
said to Peter, and the other Apostles; Men and Brethren, what shall we do to be
saved?


IN this Chapter you have an account of the effects of the Apostle Peter's
famous Sermon; having told the Jews in the verses before my Text; That they
were the men that had crucified the Lord of Life, and shed the blood of God:
that they had consented to it, and imbrewed their hands in it: thi^ stung their
consciences, and pricked their hearts; the Arrows of the Lord, which the
Apostle had shot secretly into their souls, came home to their hearts an^
consciences, that they could bear no longer, but came to Peter and the rest,
an^ said, What shall we do to be saved?

The Doctrine which I would bries^ speak to, from these words, is this:

Doct. An unfeigned sorrow and co^trition of heart, conceived of Go^
displeasure for Sin, is absolute^ necessary to salvation.

This is that we call the beginning (...) the Work of Grace, even in the
bruisi^ of a sinners heart, under the sense of an^ sin committed.

To prove this to be absolutely n^cessary to salvation, not only Scripture but
reason will tell us: for Scripture see the 1 Corinthians. 7. chap. 10. ver^ Godly
sorrow causes Repentance u^alvation. And as the Prophet Da^ ^n the bitterness
of his spirit, said, Thou keep my eyes waking, and my sin is ever before me.
If the Lord love a sinner, and means to do him good, he will not let ^he sinner
alone in his own sinful courses, ^ut will fret him from his D^n, and ^ruise
him, and beat him as in a Mortar: what caused David's sorrow, but his sin? ^e
had needed no restoring, had he not ^een degraded.

Well then, Is this a work of Grace? ^s this contrition and sorrow for Sin?
(...) beginning of repentance? then it must ^eeds be of great necessity to
salvation: ^or without repentance there is no salva^ion.

Now that something might be hint^d, to put poor sinners in a way to this
^nfeigned Sorrow and Contrition: let me beg you in the bowels of love,
ear^estly desiring your souls eternal wel^are, to meditate seriously on these
three things, which will, if set home by the Spirit of God, help you to the
after work, even Hearty Sorrow, and true Contrition.

1. Look over your life past, and labor ^o see the mercy, goodness, and
patience of God, that has been abused and despised by that unkind dealing of
yours: O^ souls, remember the days of old, and reckon up Gods gracious dealing
with you; were you ever in want, who supplied you? were you ever in weakness,
who strengthened you? in sickness, who cured you? in miseries, who succored
you? in poverty, who relieved you? was it not the Lord? and how can you forget
him, who forgot not you in you^ low estate? will you reward the Lord thus? what
shall I say of you? Hear, oh Heavens, and hearken oh Earth; the Ox knows his
owner, and the As^ his Masters Crib, and will not you acknowledge Gods kindness
and goodness to you? Look into your Houses, go to your Tables, and your Beds,
and say* who gives these, and continues these? does not the Lord: and yet Sin
against this God: certainly my friends, serious meditation on this, must break
the heart, and cause sorrow for Sin: But

2. If the mercy, goodness, and patience of God, will not move or melt you^
Consider it, (God is just too) if mercy cannot prevail, you shall have justice
enough. Take heed, oh hard-hearted and undaunted Sinners, the just law that
has been contemned, and those righteous statutes that have been broken, and
that God that has been provoked by you, and will be revenged of you: Where Is
Nimrod and Nebuchadnezzar, and Pharaoh, and Herod, and all those proud persons
that set their mouths against God, and their hearts against heaven, what is now
become of them? they are now in the bottomless pit of Hell.

As the Apostle says, Our God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.29. And if my fire
be kindled it shall burn to the bottom of Hell. Oh therefore meditate on the
justice of God, provoked, lest thou art called to the Bar too soon, to answer
for thy sins: and certainly a serious Meditation here, must needs provoke an
unfeigned Contrition.

3. Meditate on the cost and the punishment of sin: consider, O stubborn
sinner! what will sin cost you? Namely, those endless torments that cannot be
conceived: has not the God of Heaven and Earth, with all his attributes,
passed before you; to wit, his mercy, his goodness, his power, his
long-suffering; has not all these come to your hearts, and whispered in your
ear, and said, bounty has kept you, patience has born with you,
long-suffering has endured you, mercy has relieved you, the goodness of God
has been great unto you: all these will bid you adieu, and say, Farewell damned
Soul, you must pack hence to Hell: to have fellowship with damned Ghosts, where
you shall have everlasting pain, without one jot of pleasure: continual sorrow,
without one drop of joy.

Conceive in thy soul, the just God cannot but justly be angry with you, and he
will not let Sin go unpunished: and let the consideration of this fetch tears
from thy eyes, and sorrow from thy heart. Meditation upon these things, if
solid and serious, must needs cause a heartbreaking for sin: but to give you
some Reasons, why there must be this piercing and wounding of Soul for Sin.

1. Reason. Because Sin is the greatest evil of the Soul, and the greatest
burden also: that is most grievous, which is most heavy: now as there is no
evil, so properly and directly evil to the soul, as the evil of Sin: so there
is nothing that can properly do good to the Soul, but God: Now while a sinner
comes to see his sin, he cannot sorrow for his Sin: now it is godly sorrow
causes Repentance unto life, as you may see in the 2 Cor. 7.10. And assuredly,
the soul that sees not the evil of sin, shall fall by the evil of punishment.

2. Reason. Why unfeigned sorrow and contrition of heart for sin, is necessary
to Salvation: because by sound sorrow, the Soul is truly prepared and fitted
for the Lord Jesus Christ; as you may see in the 9. of the Prophet Jeremiah,
and the 3. verse, Plow up the fallow ground of your hearts, and sow not among
thorns. What is it else, but to have the heart pierced with the terrors of the
Lord, by a sound, saving sorrow for sin? Plow up the corruptions, which are the
Thorns and Thistles in your hearts, as the Prophet David says, Psalm 51.27.
It Is a broken and a Contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise: the heart
must be broken all to pieces, even to powder, and must be content to be weaned
from all sin, which is the way to be fitted for Jesus Christ.

3. Reason. The soul cannot part with his Sins and Lusts, which are his God,
until he find himself wearied with them, and as gall and wormwood to him, and
now this weariedness and burden of Sin, must needs cause in the soul, a sound
sorrow for it, before the soul sees the venomous and ugly nature of it, he is
not willing to part with it: go to pull away the Adulterers Whores; and the
Drunkards Pots, you had as good go kill them: the reason is, because they find
sweetness in those base courses, and they are all their delight: but now when
the Lord comes to lay a heavy weight upon this man's shoulder, those Sins which
were so sweet before, he finds them now as bitter as gall and wormwood, and
now he lies down in sorrow, and cries out: Oh! is Sin such a deadly killing
evil, as it will certainly destroy body and soul in Hell? and is there no
entering into Heaven with the guilt of these upon my soul? Good Lord, do what
thou will with me, only take my soul and save me, and take away my lusts and
corruptions from me.

Thus have you briefly the reasons of the Point, that this is the way of Gods
working: That sorrow and Contrition of heart for Sin, is the way to conversion
from Sin, and a turning to God.

I proceed to application: The first shall be for instruction. The second for
Reproof and Complaint. The third for Exhortation.


1 Use. Is it so? that this sorrow under the burden and weight of Sin, will
pierce a man's Soul to the quick, and grind him as it were to powder, being run
through by the Arrows of the Almighty, and that is of so great necessity to be
humbled, and soundly sorrowful for Sin: then let this teach brethren how to
carry themselves one toward another, even to such as God has dealt thus
withal. Are their Souls pierced? Oh, do you pity them! Do they lie down in
sorrow, and eat the bread of adversity, and drink the water of affliction? Oh
have compassion on them; See what the Lord says by Moses, Deuteronomy 22.1,2,3.
If a man see his Neighbors Ox, or his Ass fall into distress by the way, the
Lord commands him to ease him, and succor him, nay, to lay aside all
business, and not to hide himself from him: has the Lord commanded mercy to be
shown to the unreasonable creatures, that is wearied with the weight he
carries? has the Lord care of Oxen? and oh! wilt not thou help to ease the
heart of thy Brother, that is thus tired with the wrath of the Almighty? do you
see? and cannot you mourn for them, and pray for them, and speak in the behalf
of distressed souls? See what Job says, Chap. 19. v. 21,22,23. Oh (says he)
that my sorrows were all weighed, they would prove heavier than the sands. As
if he had said, Oh my friends have pity upon me: What, have you no regard of a
man in misery? have you no pity, though he cry in bitterness of soul, help,
help, for the Lords sake: Oh pray for, and pity those wounds and vexations of
spirit, which no man feels but he that is thus wounded: the poor man lies
crying under the burden of Sin, sighing and mourning, and saying. Oh when will
it once be, that God will receive his drooping Soul: certainly it would make
ones heart bleed to hear the swoundings away of such a man, that the sword of
the Almighty has pierced his heart, and he lies breathing out his sorrow, as
though he was going down to Hell: It is a sign that soul is marked out for
destruction himself, who harbors such a desperate disdain against poor
wounded Souls. Oh could you see a Job smitten all over with boils, and lie
miserably forlorn in the eyes of men, and would not you lend him a hand, nor
mouth neither, to help him? can you endure to see them pricked to the heart?
roaring and staring under the heavy yoke and burden of their Sins crying out,
What shall we do to be saved? Oh what shall we do to escape Hell and damnation,
and those unsupportable and unquenchable flames of the wrath of God? can thou
stand still, and say or do nothing, or rather can thou upbraid them? Oh soul!
assuredly the Lord will remember thee in the day of thy death; and as thou have
showed no mercy, so shall thou receive no mercy in that day; such willing and
violent opposers of Gods Grace, the Lord will bring them one day on a B^d of
languishing, and make them roar by force, under the violence of his wrath. Oh
friends! be troubled at others troubles, and mourn in secret, for them that
mourn under the terrible burden of Sin.

2 Use. And here let me take a lamentation, in the Nature of Reproof, against
the secure souls in the generation wherein we live; the Lord be merciful to a
world of men, that live in the bosom of the Church: Oh that we had a fountain
of tears, to bewail this age, in this respect! As Diogenes went about Athens
with a Lanthorn and Candle at noonday, to seek for honest men; so should a
Minister go from Country to Country, and from Shire to Shire: O how few would
he find mourning for their Sins? Sin is so far from being a burden, or poison
to them, that it is their sport and pastime; just Esau like, what did he? when
he had eat and drunk, he rose up to play, Genesis 25. How few are there like
Ephraim who smite upon their thigh, and cry out, What have I done? Men upon
their Ale-benches can swear, and drink, and rail against God, and defy the
holy one of Israel: Oh but how few rail against their sins, and wish the death
and destruction of them? How few cry out, Men and Brethren, what shall we do to
be saved? but on the contrary (and Oh that it were soundly lamented for, and
reproved) many do despite to the Spirit of Grace and Glory, in those things
for which they have cause to be ashamed: Says the vile swearer I swore such a
man out of his house? says the drunkard, I drank such a man under the Table
dead. Oh sinners pray read that place of the Apostle, and there you may see
your doom: I speak to impudent and incorrigible sinners: 2 These. 2.12. That all
they might be damned, which believe not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. Methinks these words should shake a man's heart to think on
them, the Lord in mercy look upon you, and make sin as lothsom and bitter to
you, as ever it has been sweet and pleasant. O sport not your selves with Sin:
Consider Dives for a Drunken feast here, had a dry feast in Hell, and could not
get one drop of water to cool his tongue: so will it be with you, you must
either buckle and mourn for sin, or else burn for ever; what will thou do, O
man, when God shall come to tear thee in pieces, and there be none to help?
when God shall grant the Devil leave to take thee into his accursed mansions,
and there shall thou lie and weep and gnash thy teeth for ever, then thou shall
lie blaspheming, with Gods wrath like a pile of fire upon thy soul, burning
with floods and Seas of tears, which thou may shed, shall never quench it:
which way soever thou look, thou shall see matter and cause of everlasting
grief, look up to Heaven, and there thou shall see (Oh) that God is gone for
ever: Look about thee, and thou shall see Devils about thee, and thou shall see
Devils quaking and cursing God, and thousands, nay, millions of sinful damned
creatures, crying and roaring out with doleful shrieks, Oh the day that ever I
was born! Look within thee, there is a guilty Conscience, continually gnawing
thee; look to the time past, O those golden days of grace, and sweet seasons
of mercy are past and gone: Look to the time to come, and there shall thou
behold devils, troops and swarms of sorrow, woes, and raging waves, and billows
of wrath coming roaring upon thee; fly from it, Oh souls before you feel it,
bewail your selves, be sorry, grieve and mourn, humble your selves in the sight
of the Lord, be pricked to the heart: go tell God you cannot bear your sins,
they are too heavy for you: much more the punishment: complain to him who is
able to ease you: Oh vex not the righteous soul of the godly, from day to day:
neither grieve the holy spirit of God, but be converted that ye may live: Cry
mightily to the Lord, peradventure he may hear, and forget and forgive all your
provocations; weep, that you have lamented no more; and grieve that you have no
more grieved for Sin.

3. Use, Is of exhortation, to exhort and beseech poor sinners that are under
the command of the Prince of the power of the Air, who are strangers to God,
aliens to the Covenant of promise, who have lived all this while without God in
the world, to come in hither; and take the right way, to bring your hearts to a
right pitch of sorrow: Let me tell you, it will never repent you at the last
day, that you have had your heart humbled, it will never repent you that you
have wept, when the Lord comes to wipe away all tears from your eyes: hear what
our blessed Savior says, Mat. 5.4. Blessed are they that mourn, for they
shall be comforted. You had better now be wounded, than be everlastingly
tormented: Oh therefore if you desire ever to see the face of God with comfort,
and to have Christ speak for you, break your hearts with sorrow for Sin
soundly: Oh for the Lords sake, do not cousen your souls, do not cheat your
selves: it is not only the tears of the eye, but the blood of the heart, your
sins must cost, and till you come to this, never think your sorrow is good:
This sorrow consists not in a bare rending of garments, or change of Apparel,
or denying themselves those outward Ornaments, as some people of late days do
foolishly conceive, who had been filled with desperate hypocrisy, having left
off here, and gone no further: but you must break your hearts, wound your
selves here, and be driven into amazement for Sin, or else it will live with
you here, and in hell too: Oh therefore when God begins to work, follow the
blow, and say with the Prophet David, in the 3. Psalm, and the 2. verse, Our
eyes are upon thee, till thou have mercy on us; get your Consciences wounded,
and resolve not to hear the Counsel of carnal friends. Go and lie at Gods
footstool, and confess your Sins before him, for it is he that confesses and
forsakes, shall find mercy: and where there is this true and hearty
confession, there must needs be a godly sorrow for Sin.

To provoke you to it, let me leave you two or three Motives.

1. Consider. It is not a vain thing you are exhorted to, but that, upon which
the life of your souls depend, for without a through sense, and pricking at the
heart for Sin, there is no salvation from Sin; he that would be Christ's
Disciple, must leave all he has, Father and Mother, Wife and Children, all
that is near and dear to him, and take up the Cross and follow Christ. He that
would be a true convert, must both confess and grieve for Sin, as the Prophet
Ezekiel says, they shall remember their ways that were not good, and shall be
ashamed. Oh be persuaded, poor careless Sinners, to mind the check of your
conscience within you, and the clear perspicuous light of the Gospel without
you, and come among the number of mourners, to mourn for Sin: you may weep your
eyes out hereafter to no purpose: better weep here a while, than for ever in
Hell: for our Lord Jesus has said, Blessed are the mourners, for they shall be
comforted. Oh souls, these are not trivial things I press you to, the Lord make
you serious in your sorrow for Sin, that it be such godly sorrow as works
life and peace.

2. Consider. Deep and hearty sorrow for, and true confession of Sin, is a very
honorable thing in the eyes of God, and good men: Oh souls! it will tend to
your everlasting honor and renown in the great day, when God shall acquit you
before all the world, both Angels, Men, and Devils: and say, here, behold the
ingenious confessor, and the true godly mourner! who was not ashamed to say, In
Sin was I conceived, and in Iniquity brought forth. This weeping soul have I
comforted with my Spirit, and he stands justified by my Sons merit: ^le honor
him with a Title that is better than that of Sons and Daughters: Come then, Oh
souls, and be among the mourners in Zion, as ever you desire to be ^omforted,
and as ever you would be so ^ighly honored.

3. Consider. Godly sorrow and confession of Sin, is a safe thing: It is the
^ure and safe way to Heaven and Glory. ^s it safe to contend with God? can
bry^rs and thorns contend with God in battle? Is it safe to fall into the hand
of the living God, with the guilt of all your Sins upon you?

Now if all that I have said concerning this point be true, as I hope it is,
according to the word of God: and if godly sorrow for Sin, be the way to
forsake Sin, then surely it is a very safe way, and dare you leave your eternal
estate at uncertainties: Were you now to die, it would surely exceedingly
startle you, to think you did not know whither you were a going: into which of
the two eternities you are launching, either to eternal perdition, or to an
eternal fruition of the Heavenly Mansions: The way to heaven is the safest way
for your souls ease: and this way I have treated upon, viz. Godly sorrow, and
heartbreaking for Sin, is that which the Saints and Servants of God, have
found in their journey to heaven and Glory.

Consider therefore, what has bee^ said, and the Lord give you understanding
in all things. Amen.

FINIS.
^ooks sold by William Thackaray in Duck-Lane.
A Relation of the fearful estate of Francis Spira. The School of Grace. The
Godly Man's Gain, and the Wick^d Man's Woe. Sips of Sweetness: Or, Consolation
^or weak believers, by J. Durant.
With variety of other small Books.

THE Swearer and the Drunkard, Two Brethren in INIQUITY, Arraigned at the BAR:
OR, A Charge drawn up against those two great Sins of these Nations, Swearing
and Drunkenness.

Wherein is laid open the Heinousness of these sins, by several Agravations:
and the dangerous consequences which will ensue upon the same.

To the end that swearers and Drunkards may be persuaded to repent in time; and
not wilfully destroy their own Souls.

Very seasonable and profitable to Read.

London, Printed for W. Thackeray, at the sign of the Angel in Duck-Lane. 1673.

THE Swearer and the Drunkard, Two Brethren in Iniquity, Arraigned at the Bar.
COnsidering the numberless number of those, who, calling themselves
Protestants, discredit the Proteststant Religion; who, because they have been
Christened, as Simon Magus was, and received the Lords-Super, like Judas, and
for company go to Church also, as Dogs do, are called Christians, as we call
the Heathen Images Gods, yea, and being blinded by the Prince of darkness,
think to be saved by Christ, though the^ take up arms against him: who are so
graceless, that God is not in all their thoughts, unless to Blaspheme him, and
to spend his days in the Devils service; who justify the wicked, and condemn
the just; who call Zeal, Madness; and Religion, Foolishness; who love their
Sins so much above their Souls, that they will mock their admonisher, scoff at
the means to be saved, and make themselves bondslaves for an apple; and like
Esau, sell their birthright of Grace, for a mess of Pottage: who prefer the
pleasing of their Pallats, before the saving of their Souls; who have not only
cast off Religion, which should make them good men, but Reason also, that
should make them men; who wast Virtues faster then Riches, and Riches faster
then any Virtues can get them; who do nothing else but sin, and make others sin
too; who spend their time and Patrimonies in Riot, and upon Dice, Drabs, and
Drunkenness: who place all their felicity in a Tavern, or Alehouse: who desire
not the reputation of Honesty, but of Goodfellowship: who, instead of quenching
their thirst, drown their senses, and had rather leave their Wits, then their
Wine behind them: who place their Paradise in throats, Heaven in their Guts,
and make their belly their God: who being displeased with others, will fly in
their makers face, and tear their Saviors Name in pieces with Oaths, and
Erecrations, as being worse then a mad dog, who flies in his masters face who
keeps him: who swear and curse, even out of custom, as Curs back, and have so
sworn away all Grace, that they will count it a Grace to swear; and being
reproved for swearing, they will swear they swore not: who will do what God
forbids, yet confidently hope to escape what he threatens: who will do the
Devils work, and yet expect Christ's wages, expect that Heaven should meet them
at their last hour, when all their life long they have galloped in the beaten
road toward Hell: who expect to have Christ their Redeemer and Advocate, when
their Consciences tells them, that they seldom remember him, but to Blaspheme
him; and more often name him in their Oaths and Curses, then in their Prayers:
who think their wickedness is unseen, because it is unpunished, and therefore
live like beasts, because they think they shall dye like beasts.

Considering, I say, the swarms, legions, and millions of these persons, and
foreseeing the sad effects which will unavoidably ensue such wicked courses,
if not timely prevented by a serious and speedy repentance. I have therefore
drawn up this charge against Drunkards and Swearers, to the end that they may
be convinced of the odiousness of their practices, and diswaded from those
sinful courses, which if wilfully persisted in, will prove distructive both to
soul and body.

And first to speak of Drunkenness, which is, as I may say, the Queen of sins,
the root of all evil, the rot of all good, a sin which turns a man wholly into
sin, that it were far better, to be a Toad, or a Serpent, then a drunkard; for
the drunkard is like Ahab, who sold himself to work wickedness: he wholly
dedicates, resigns, surrenders himself to serve sin and Satan: his only
employment is to drink, drab, quarrel, swear, curse, scoff, slander, and
seduce, as if sin were his Trade, and he would do nothing else; like the Devil,
who was a sinner from the beginning, and a sinner to the end. These Sons of
Belial are for the belly, for to drink God out of their hearts, health out of
their bodies, wit out of their heads, strength out of their joints, all their
money out of their pockets, wife and children out of doors, the land out of
quiet, plenty out of the Nation, is all their practice: in which their swinish
swillings, they resemble so many Frogs in a puddle, or Water-shakes in a pend,
for their whole exercise, yea, Religion, is to drink: they even drown
themselves on the dry land. And as drunkards have lost the prerogative of their
Creation, being changed with Nebuchadnez^r, Dan. 4.16. from Men into Beasts, so
they turn the Sanctuary of Life, into the Shamble of Death: Yea, thousands,
when they have made up the measure of their wickedness, are taken away in Gods
just Wrath, in their drink, it faring with them, as it did with the Pope, whom
the Devil is said to have slain in the very instant of his Adoltry, and carry
him quick to Hell: some Drunkards being suddenly struck with Death, as if the
Execution were no less intended to the Soul, then to the Body: And no wonder,
for Drunkards are indeed the Devils Captains, at his command, and ready to do
his will, he rules over, and works in them his pleasure, 2 Timothy 2.26. Ephesians. 2.2.
He enters into them, and puts into their hearts what he will have them to do,
John 13.2. Acts 5.3. He opens their mouths, and speaks in, and by them, Gen
1.3,4. He being their Father, their King, and their God, Genesis 3.15. John 12.31.
2 Cor. 4.4. And which is worst of all, Drunkenness not only duls, and dams up
the head and spirits with mud, but it bestiates the heart, and being worse then
the sting of an Aspe, poysoneth the very Soul and Reason of a man: whereby the
faculties and organs of resolution and Repentance, are so corrupted, and
captivated, that it makes men utterly incapable of returning, unless God should
work a greater miracle upon them, then was the Creating of the whole world.
These agents for the Devil [Drunkards] practice nothing but the Art of
Debauching men, for to turn others into beasts: They will make themselves
Devils, wherein they have a notable dexterity; as it is wonderful to see how
they will wind men in, and draw men on, by drinking: first, a health to such a
man, then to such a woman my Mistress, then to every one's Mistress; then to
such a Lord or Lady, their Master, their Captain, Comander, etc. And never
cease till their Brains, their Wits, their Tongues, their Eyes, their Feet,
their Senses, and all their Members fail them: They will drink till they vomit
up their shame again, like a filthy Dog, or lie wallowing in their beastliness,
like a brutish Swine: they think nothing too much to do, or spend, that they
may make a Sober man a Drunkard, or make a Religious man exceed his bounds, at
which they will, and rejoice, as at the devision of a spoil: But what a
Barbarous, Graceless, and Antichristian-like practice is this, to make it their
glory pastime, and delight, to see God dishonored, his Spirit grieved, his
Name blaspheamed, his Creatures abused, themselves and their friends Souls
damned: yet such is their wickedness, and so pernicious are they, that to damn
their own Souls is the least part of their mischief, for they draw vengeance
upon thousands, by seducing some, and giving ill examples to others: so that
one Drunkard makes a multitude, being like the Bramble, Jude 9.15. which first
set it self on fire, and then fired all the wood; or like a malicious man sick
of the Plague, that runs into the throng, to disperse his Infection. And this
shows that they not only partake of the Devils nature, but they are very Devils
in the likeness of men, and that the very wickedness of one that fears God,
is far better then the good entreaty of a Drunkard: yet the Drunkard is so
pleasing a Murderer, that he tickles a man to death, and makes him like
Solomon's Fool, dye laughing: whence it is that many, who hate their other
enemies, yea, and their friends too, embrace this enemy, because he kisseth
when he betrayeth: Hence it is also, that thousands have confessed at the
Gallows, I had never come to this, but for such a Drunkard; for commonly the
Drunkards Progress, is, from Luxury, to Beggary, from Beggary, to Thievery,
from the Tavern to Tiborn, and from the Alehouse, to the Gallows. Thus these
bawds and panders of Vice, breath nothing but infection and study nothing but
their own and other men's destruction. The Drunkard is like Julian the Apostate,
who never did a man a courtesy, but it was to damn his Soul: but little do
they think how they advance their own damnation, when the blood of so many
Souls as they have drawn away, will be required at their hands; for let these
Tempters know that they do not more increase men's wickedness on earth, (whether
by persuasion, or provocation, or example) then their associates wickedness
shall increase their damnation in Hell, Luke 16.27,28.

Now it were endless to repeat the vain babbling, scurrilous jesting, wicked
talking, impious sweating and cursing of the drunken crew when they are got
together in a Tippling house, where they sit all day in troops, doing that in
earnest, which we have seen boys do in sport, stand on their heads, and shake
their heels against heaven: where, even to hear how the Fame of the Lord Jesus
is pierced, and how Gods Fame blaspheamed, would make a sober man to tremble. A
Drunkards tongue is like the sail of a Windmill; for as a great gale of wind
whirleth the sayls about, so abundance of drink whirleth his tongue about, and
keeps it in continual motion: now he rails, now he scoffs, now he lies now he
slanders, now he seduces, talks bawdy swears, bans, foams, and cannot be quiet
till his tongue be wormed: so that from the beginning to the end he beleheth
forth nothing but what is as far from Truth, Piet^, Reason and Modesty, as
Heaven is from the Earth. Oh the beastliness which burns in their unchaste and
impure minds, that smoaks out of their poluted mouths: a man would think that
even the Devil himself should blush to hear his child so task: yea, did any
sober man but hear, and see, and smell, and know what is done in these Taverns
and Alehouses, you would wonder that the earth could bear the houses, or the
Sun endure to look upon them. The Land does every where abound with these
Caterpillars, so that in Country and City thousands may be found, who do in
shear drink, spend all the clothes on their beds and backs, they drink the very
blood of their Wives and Children, who are near famished, to satisfy the
Drunkards throat or gut, wherein they are worse then Infidels or Canibals, 1 Timothy 5.8. Much more might be spoken against the wicked and abominable practices
of Drunkards, for the Drunkard is like some putrid Grave, the deeper you dig,
the fuller you shall find him, both of stench and horror; or like Hercules's
Monster, wherein were fresh heads, still arising one after the cutting off
another. But there needs no more then this last, to make any wise man, or any
that love their own souls to detest, and beware these Bawds and Pandors of
Vice, that breath nothing but infection, and study nothing but their own and
other men's destruction.

Thus I have unmasked their faces, that they may appear odious to themselves
and others: and I have declaimed against Drunkenness, that men may become
sober; for Vices true picture, makes us Vice detest. Oh that I had dehortation
answerable to my detestation of it: And, Oh that every drunkard would take
warning hereby and be persuaded, if not for Gods sake, yet for their souls and
bodies sake, to leave their immoderate drinking, and to live godly,
righteously, and soberly in the World. Consider what I say, and the Lord give
you understanding in all things.

I come now to speak to the profane Swearer, by reason of whose oaths, the
Land mourns, Jer. 23.10. For indeed Swearing is a sin that has so much
overspread the whole Nation, that it is almost grown as customary a thing,
both to young and old, to swear, as to speak; yet of all other sins, this sin
of swearing is most inexcusable.

1. Because it is a Sin, from which of all other Sins, we have most power of
abstinence: for if men were forced to pay ten groats for every oath they swear,
as the Law enjoyneth: or if they were sure to have their tongues cut out, which
is too light a punishment for this Sin, damnation being the due penalty thereof
as the Apostle sets it down, James 5.12. they both could, and would leave it.

2. Because it is a Sin, to which, of all other sins, we have the least
temptation, for all that men can expect by it, is the suspicion of being common
Liars, by being common Swearers: It brings not so much as any apearance of
good, to induce us: For whereas other Sins have their several baits to allure
us, some the bait of profit, some of honor, some of pleasure, this sin is
destitute of them all, and only brings much loss here: namely, of Credit, and a
good Conscience, and the loss of Gods favor, and the Kingdom of Heaven
hereafter; which is of more value then ten thousand Worlds: which shows that
men love this Sin, only, because it is a great Sin, and Swear, out of mere
malice to, and contempt of God; which is most fearful, and (as a man would
think) should make it unpardonable: I am sure the Psalmist has a terrible word
for all such, if they would take notice of it, Psalm. 25.3. Let them be
confounded that transgress without a cause. O that men would seriously repent
of this their sin, and forsake it lest the Lord should deal by them, as he has
threatened, Deuteronomy. 28 58,59. that if we do not fear and dread his Glorious and
Fearful Name, the Lord our God, he will make our plague wonderful, and of a
long continuance, and the plagues of our posterity: but woe is me, m^ take so
little notice of the number of the^ Oaths and Curses, that they will not
acknowledge they did swear or curse at all: yea, thoug^ the^ be taken in the
manner, and told of it, y^ they will not believe it, though all that a^ present
can witness the same, and Satan also who himself will one day be a swift witne^
against swearers, Mal. 3.5. For of all oth^ Sinners the Lord will not hold him
guilty that takes his Name in vain, as the the Commandment tells us, Exodus
20.7. But fares with common Swearers, as with desperate persons, desperately
diseased, whose exer^ments, and filth comes from them at unawares for as by
much labor ye hand is so hardened the it has no sense of labor; so their much
swearing causes such a brawny skin of sencelessness to overspread the heart,
memory, and Conscience, that the Swearer swears unwillingly, and having
sworn, has no remembrance of his oath, much less repentance for his Sin But
some who are a little civilized, will think to excuse themselves by aledging,
that if the^ did swear, it was but faith and troth, by o^ Lady, by this light,
or the like, which they sa^ is no great matter. To whom I answer, though blind
sensualists, that have no other guide, but the flesh, may deem, or dream it to
be but a mite, a mote, a matter of nothing, yet such as have the least
knowledge of the Law of God, or skill in Scripture, well know that God expressly
forbids it, and that upon pain of Damnation, Jam. 12.5. and that Christ
commands us not to swear at all, in our ordinary Communication, saying: that
whatsoever is more then yea, yea, or nay, nay, comes of evil, Mat. 5.34,35. If
the matter be light and vain, we must not swear at all: if so weighty, that we
may lawfully swear, as before a Magistrate, being caled to it, then we must
only use the glorious name of our God, in a holy and religious manner; as you
may see, Deuteronomy. 6.13. Jer. 5.7. Isa. 45.23. Josh. 23.7. Exodus 23.13. And the
reasons thereof are weighty, if we look into them: for in swearing, by Faith,
our Lady, the Light, or any other Creature, you ascribe that unto the said
Creature, which is only proper to God: namely, to know your heart, and to be a
discerner of secret things: Why else should you call the Creature as a witness
unto your Conscience, that you speak the truth, and lie not? which only
belongs to God. And therefore the Lord calls it a forsaking of him: As mark
well what he says, Jer. 5.7. How shall I spare thee, for these thy Children
have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no Gods. And do you make it a
small matter to forsake God, and make a God of the Creature. Will you believe
the Prophet Amos, who speaking of them that swore by the Sin of Samaria, says
that they shall fall and never rise again, Amos 8.14. A terible place to vain
swearers: Yea in swearing by any Creature, we do invocate the Creature, and
ascribe to it divine Worship, a lawful oath being a kind of invocation, and a
part of Gods Worship: Yea, whatsoever we swear by, that we invocate, both as
our Witness, Surety, and Judge, Heb. 6.16. and by consequence Deifie it, by
ascribing, and communicating unto it Gods incomunicable Atributes, as his
Omnipresence, and Omnisciency, of being every where present, and knowing the
secrets, thoughts, and intenteons of the heart: and likewise an Omnipotency, as
being Almighty, in patronizing, protecting, defending, and rewarding us for
speaking the truth, or punishing us if we speak falsely: all which are so
peculiar to God, as that they can no way be comunicated, or ascribed to
another: so that in swearing by an^ of these things, thou comitest a high
degree of gross Idolatry, thou spoylest, and robest God of his Glory, (the most
impious kind of theft) and in a manner dethronest him, and placest an Idol in
his room: neither are we to join any other with God in our oaths, for in so
doing, we make base Idols, and filthy Creatures corrivals in honor, and
competitours in the throne of Justice, with the Lord, who is Creator of heaven
and earth, and the Judge, and sole Monarch of the World: Or, in case we do, our
doom shall be reamidiless: for the Lord threatens by the Prophet Zephany, that
he will cut off them that swear by the Lord, and by Malcham, which Malcham was
their King, or as some think, their Idol, Zeph. 1.4,5. But as if swearing alone
would not press men deep enough into Hell, they add cursing to it, a sin of an
higher Nature, which none use frequently, but such as are desperately wicked,
it being their peculiar brand in Scripture: as how does the Holy Ghost
Stigmatize such a one: His mouth is full of cursing, Psalm. 10.7. and Romans 3.14.
or, he loves cursing, Psalm. 109.17. And indeed, whom can you observe to love
this sin, or to have their mouths full of cursing, but Ruffians, and sons of
Belial, such as have shaken out of their hearts the fear of God, the shame of
men, the love of heaven, the dread of Hell not once caring what is thought or
spoken of them here, or what becomes of them hereafter: yea, observe them well,
and you will find that they are mockers of all that march not under the pay of
the Devil: besides, it is the very depth of sin: roaring and drinking is the
horse-way to hell, whoring and cheating the foot-way, but swearing and cursing
follows Korah, Dathan, and Abiram: and certainly if the infernal Tophet be not
for these men, it can challenge no Guests: For Consider, thou that art used to
curse, thou art a murderer in heart, and in Gods acount, in wishing him that
crosses thee the Pox, Plague, or that he were Hanged, or Damned, nor will it
be any rare thing at the day of Judgment, for Cursers to be indicted of
Murder, for like Shimei or Goliath to David, thou would kill him if thou
durst: I would be loath to trust his hands, that bans me with his tongue. But
let them, then the best of them that use to curse (for I pass over them that
call for a curse upon themselves, saying, God damn me, confound me, the devil
take me, and the like: which would make a rational man even tremble to name,
because I were as good knock at a dead man's Grave, as speak to them,) let them,
I say, take notice what will be the issue: the causeless curse shall not come
where the curser meant it, Prove. 36.2. Yea, though thou cursest, yet God will
bless, Psalm. 109.28. But thy curses shall be sure to rebound back into thine
own breast, Psalm. 7.14,15,16. Prove. 14.30. Cursing mouths are like ill-made
Pieces, which while men discharge at others, recoyl in splinters on their own
faces: their words and wishes be but whirlwinds, which being breathed forth,
return to the same place: as hear how the Holy Ghost delivers it, Psalm. 109. As
he loved cursing, so shall it come unto him, and as he loved not blessing, so
shall it be far from him: as he clothed himself with cursing like a garment,
so shall it came into his bowels like water, and like o^l into his bones: Let
it be unto him as a garment to cover him, and for a girdle wherewith he shall
always be girded, verse 17,18,19. Here this all ye whose tongues run so fast on
the Devils errand, you loved cursing, you shall have it, both upon you, about
you, and in you, and that everlastingly, if you persevere and go on; for Christ
himself at the last day, even he which came to save the world, shall say unto
all such; Depare from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the
devil and his Angels, Mat. 24.41. where they shall do nothing but curse for
evermore. For Consider, whence do these Monsters of the earth, these hellish
Miscreants, these bodily and visible Devils learn this their damnable Cursing
and Swearing? are not their tongues fired and edged from Hell? as St. James
has it, Jam. 3.6. Yea, it is the very language of the damned, as you may see,
Rev. 16.1,21. only they learn it here, before they come thither, and are such
proficients therein, that the devil counts them his best Scholars, and sets
them in his highest form, Psalm. 1.1. and well they deserve it, with whom the
language of Hell is so familiar, that Blasphemy is become their Mother Tongue.
If they be crossed by some one, perhaps their Wife or Child, or Servant, or
else their Horse, the Weather, Dice, Bowls, or some other of the Creatures
displease them, then they fall a Cursing and Blaspheaming, wishing the Plague
of God, or Gods vengeance to light on them, or some such hellish speech falls
from their foul mouth: and so upon every foolish trifle, or every time they are
angry, God must be at their beck, and come down from Heaven in all haste, and
become their Officer, to revenge their quarrel, and serve their malicious
hu^our: Oh monstrous Impiety! Oh shameful Impudence! to be abhorred of all that
hear it; not once taking notice what he commanded in his word, as, Bless them
that curse you, and pray for them that hurt you, Luke 6.28. Bless them that
persecute you: Bless I say, and Curse not, Romans 12.14. Thus with Swearing and
Cursing men do not only wound their own souls worse then the Baalites did their
bodies: but they are so pernicious, that they draw vengeance upon thousands, by
their infection, and damnable example, as how can it be otherwise? they do not
only infect their Companions, but almost all that hear or come near them: yea,
little children in the streets have learned of them to rap out oaths, and belch
forth curses and scoffs almost as frequently as themselves, and through their
accustomary swearing, learned to speak English and Oaths together, and so
blaspheam God almost as soon as he has made them. It were easy to go on in
agravating their sin and wretchedness, and making it out of measure, and the
souls that miscarry through the contagion of their evil example, numerous: For
is not the Gospel and the name of God blaspheamed among the very Turks, Jews,
and Infidels, and an evil scandal raised upon the whole Church, through their
superlative wickedness: yea, does not this keep them off from embracing the
Christian Religion, and cause them to protest against their own conversion,
which makes me wonder that Swearers, Drunkards, and all such wicked and
profane wretches are not (like dirt in the house of God) thrown out into the
street by Excomunication, or as excrements and bad humors in man's body, which
is never at ease till it be thereof disburthened: that they are not marked with
a black coal of infamy, and their company a voided, as by the Apostles order
they ought, Romans 16.17. Ephesians. 5.5,7. 1 Timothy 1.20. That they are not to us, as
Leapers were among the Jews, or as men full of Plaguesores are amongst us. We
well know the good husbandman weeds the fields of hurtful plants, that they may
not spoil the good Corn, and the good Surgeon cuts off a rotten member
betimes, that the sound may not be endangered, nor will the Church of England
ever flourish, or be happy in her reformation until such a course is taken. O
that every profane swearer, who tears Heaven with their blasphemies, and bandy
the dreadful name of God in their impure and poluted mouths, would take warning
hereby, and not still persist in their abominable practice to swear and curse,
as if he that made the ear, could not hear; or as if he were neither to be
feared, nor cared for: who for sin cast the Angels out of Heaven, Adam out of
Paradise, drowned the old World, rained down fire and brimstone upon Sodom,
commanded the earth to open her mouth and swallowed down quick Korah and his
company: he who smote Egypt with so many plagues, overthrew Pharaoh and his
Host in the red sea, destroyed great and mighty Kings, giving their Land for an
inheritance to his people: and can as easily with a word of his mouth, strike
them dead, while they are blaspheaming him, and cast them body and soul into
Hell, for their odious unthankfulness: yea, it is a mercy beyond expression,
that he has spared them so long.

When a Dog flies in his masters face that keeps him, we concludue him mad: are
you then rational men, that being never so little crossed, will fly in your
makers face, and tear your Saviors name in pieces with oaths and execrations,
which is worse then frenzy: no, you are demoniacal, Obsessed, or rather
possesed with a Devil, and more miserable then such a one, because it is a
Devil of your own choosing. O, be persuaded, if you have any spa^k of reason
left, or do in the least love your selves, leave of your damnable and devilish
swearing and cursing: and to that end lay to heart the many and fearful threats
that God has made, and set down in his word, against this horrid sin, and
against all those that so daringly and audatiously provoke him, lest you be
plagued with a witness, and that both here and hereafter: for God who cannot
lie, has threatened that his curse shall never depart from the house of the
Swearer, as it is, Zach. 5.1. And peradventure you are already cursed, though
you know it not: that either he has cursed you in your body, by sending some
foul disease, or in your estate, by suddenly consuming it, or in your name, by
blemishing and blasting it: or in your seed, by not prospering it: or in your
mind, by darkning it: or in your heart, by hardening it: or in your conscience,
by terrifying it: or will in your soul, by everlasting damning it: if you
repent not: wherefore take heed what you do, before it be too late.

The Lord set these considerations home to your hearts, and open your eyes to
behold those things which concern your everlasting peace.

FINIS.
THE Way to Heaven made plain

portrait

LONDON. Printed by P. L. for W. Thackery at the Angel in Duck-lane, 16^.

THE WAY TO Heaven MADE PLAIN:

By answering the Objections, resolving the Doubts, and remov^ ^he
stumbling blocks, which do usually (...) Sinners from seeking after life and
happin^.

Together with serious Exhortations, and earnest persuasions to move sinners to
turn unto the Lord by true Repentance, and accept of mercy whilst the day of
grace Lasts.

Uery useful and profitable for all sorts of PEOPLE.

LONDON. Printed for W. Thackery at the Angel in Duck-lane, 1674.

THE WAY TO HEAVEN Made Plain.
AMongst those many Lets and Impediments whereby the generallity of Men and
Women in the world are hindered from a serious applying of themselves to seek
after life and happiness, I find this one thing to lie as a stumbling block in
the way of a great many: That is to say, The Diversities, which by frequent
controversies and disputings are so resolutely maintained by men professing
godliness, who are of different perswations.

For this very cause, many are apt to reason with themselves after this manner:

There are so many Religions abroad in the World, that a man cannot tell which
to choose; one says this is the true way, another says, that is the true way*
One says: Lo here is Christ; another says, Lo there is Christ.

Some say the Episcopal. man, those which stand for the Common Prayer, and
other Ceremonies, that they are Gods people: Others say, the Presbyterians, are
more likely to be the people of God: a third sort say the Independants way of
worshipping is the right way: a fourth sort say, the Baptists way is most
agreeable to the word of God, a fifth sort say, the Quakers, are the only
People to whom the will of God is known.

Thus so many men' so many minds, and we know not whom to believe, and
therefore we had as good sit still and do nothing as to do something to no
purpose: And hereupon they continue to go on in sinful courses: following the
desires of their own hearts, and never so much as seek after the knowledge of
God, whereby they might come unto his fear, and be happy for ever.

But my friends, let me tell you these things ought not to be: but such
consequences will end in desperate and dangerous conclusions For although it
were greatly to be wished and desired, that all those that fear the Lord were
of one heart, and of one mind, yet fince the Lord in Wisdom is pleased to
suffer his people to be some of one mind, and some of another, concerning
circumstantial and ceremonial things, for in the fundamentals and essentials of
Religion, and in all things that are absolutely necessary for salvation: they
do jointly agree: But seeing I say, God is pleased to permit such as truly fear
him, to be of different persuasions concerning things less considerable, this
should in no wise discourage us from seeking, but rather stir us up with much
more fervency and earnestness to see^ out the true way, and to find out what
the acceptable will of the Lord is that so by doing the same, we may purchase
rest and quietness to our Souls. And that no one may think their labor herein
will be in vain here what the Lord says, ask and ye shall have, seek and ye
shall find. Here is the word of the holy and true God for thy security, he
has faithfully promised, that if thou do seek thou shall find; and again,
Christ says, If any man does the Will of my Father he shall know the Doctrine;
that is, wheresoever God sees a willing mind, and that any poor Creature does
truly desire to fear him, and to keep his Commandments then he will reveal to
that Soul so much of his will as is needful for its present satisfaction and
future happiness.

Now to encourage us farther in the performance of this so necessary and
profitable a duty the Lord has been pleased so far to condescend to our weak
capacities, as that he has set before our eyes all those things which are of
greatest concernment, in such plain and legible Charcters, as he that runs may
read them, and not only so, but he has also graciously promised freely to give
us what he does require of us, and to enable us to perform whatever he commands
us to do: therefore we have no reason to have harsh thoughts concerning God, or
to account him a hard Task-Master, for the ways of God are pleasantness, and
his paths peace. The Yoke of Christ is easy, and his Burden light.

Does God command thee to believe in him? why he will give thee faith whereby
thou shall be able to do it; for faith is the gift of God he is both the
Author, and the finisher thereof: does he bid thee repent? why he will grant
thee repentance unto life, he will turn thee, and thou shall be turned, does he
require a new heart? why he has promised to give a new heart, a soft and
tender heart, such as shall bleed for the least prick of Sin: does he command
thee to love him? why he has said, I will circumcise thy heart, that thou
shall love me with all thy heart, and with all thy strength: does he command
thee to fear him? why it is his promise to put his fear into thy inward parts,
and to write his Law in thy heart, and so in all other things, it is he that
works both to will and to do of his own good pleasure: for we cannot of our
selves or in our own strength do any thing that is good, but our duty is to
wait upon God, for in him we live, move and have our being, he it is that has
created us, it is he that clothes and feeds us, and preserves our lives: from
him alone, we are to expect new supplies of whatsoever is needful for our Being
and Well-being in this world and also in reference to our future happiness
according as the Prophet David said: My fresh springs are in thee: the
wellspring of life flow from God, as Christ says: He that believes on me,
out of his Belly shall flow forth Rivers of Living Water; whereof whosoever
drinks, shall live for ever: God is the fountain of all goodness, whatsoever
our Souls can desire, it is to be found in him, and he communicates out of his
fullness unto the necessities of poor creatures, but it is through Christ, for
he is Gods treasury and storehouse. It has pleased the Father that in him
should all fullness dwell, he receives of his Eather, and gives to us all things
requisite and necessary, both for Soul and Body: he it is that of God is made
unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption; by him we have
access with boldness unto the Throne of Grace, and all the petitions we put up
to the Father in his name, believing on him we shall be heard therein, and our
requests shall be granted: so far as it shall be for Gods glory and our good.
Christ is that new and living way in which God will meet with us and bless us
and cause his face to shine upon us, by the light of whose countenance, our
hearts are made more glad then in the time when Corn and Wine, and Oil
increased: Oh! therefore let every one strive to get an interest in Christ who
alone is worth more then all the world bsiede, he is the true Riches that will
make us happy to all eternity; he has purchased salvation for all that will
forsake their sins, and come and accept of his free tender of Grace for all
that will lay down those weapons, wherewith they have been taking Satan's part,
and fighting against God, if they will now lay hold upon his mercy, and upon
his strength, and are willing to be reconciled to God, they shall be received
into his favor: for whosoever comes unto me, says Christ, shall in no wise
be cast out; for God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believed on him should not perish, but have everlasting life,
John 3.15.19. It was Gods purpose in sending his Son, and Christ's design in
coming into the World, that poor lost sinners should be restored to that estate
of happiness, which they had lost in the fall, and from this free proffer of
grace none are exempted, for God has made an open Proclamation. Ho every one
that thirsts, come to the waters, and ye that have no money, come buy Wine,
and Milk, without money and without price, as in the (...) of Isaiah, So in the
Revelations the Spirit and the Bride said, Come, and whosoever will let him
come and drink of the water of life freely. Here we see that all are invited to
come to Christ, from the highest to the lowest, and if we will not, the fault
is our own* God has done his part in sending Christ to dye for us and in
laying upon him the iniquities of us all: and Christ has done his part in
performing the Law for us, and in undergoing the wrath of God, and the Curse of
the Law, which was due to our sins: and the spirit has revealed the same unto
us, and is often knocking at the Doors of our hearts, and calling us to
repentance, but if notwitstanding all this we will fully persist in evil, and
refuse to hearken to the voice of God, but hearden our hearts, and make light
of Christ, then it will be just with God, to leave us to our selves, and let us
perish in our own doings, which the Lord us unwilling to do, for as the Apostle
Peter, says, He would fain have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge
of the truth; he desires not the death of a sinner, but rather that he would
return from his wickedness and live. But man is of such a perverse and stubborn
disposition, that he will not accept of mercy upon Gods terms although never so
reasonable.

The great Controversy betwixt God and Man, is about the Will, God would have
his Will and Man would have his will: as Christ says: Ye will not come to me
that you might have Life: They will not their will is that which hinders them
of enjoying God and in him life and happiness: And in another place, How would
I have gathered you together as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings
but ye would not.

Men are obstinate, and perverse, and will oppose the Holy and good will of
God, though it prov^es their own Ruin in the end, but the folly and madness,
and desperate wickedness that lodges in the hearts of Sinners that will rather
go to Hell by following the desires of their own wills, then to Heaven by
obeying the will of God which is holy and righteous, and is made known unto us
for our good: God might as well be glorified in our Destruction, as in our
Salvation, but he pitties our condition, and is pleased so far to condescend as
to entreat and beseech us to consider our latter end: and whilst he gives us
life, and means of repentance to come in and be reconciled unto him, it is we
that are enemies to God, God never was an enemy to us yet he first seeks us
before we seek him: O the Depth of Gods love: O the riches of his grace, his
long suffering and kindness toward vile sinful Creatures: Let this goodness of
God lead thee to repentance, for the long suffering of God brings salvation,
as the Apostle Peter says: O therefore rent your hearts and not your garments,
turn to the Lord for he gracious.

Why should any sinner stand off: does the multitude of thy sins affright thee?
why Gods mercies are infinite, he can blot out thy transgressions, though never
so many: he will abundantly pardon this is a faithful saying, says Paul, and
worthy of all acceptance, Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, of
whom I am chief. If thou be the chief of Sinners, thou art but such a one as
Christ came to save, do thou question whether Christ can save thee? why the
Apostle tells thee, He is able to save to the utmost all that come to the
father by him do thou want faith? go and say: Lord I believe, Lord help my
unbelief. Do thou want wisdom? ask of God who gives liberally and upbraideth
not: would thou truly repent thee of thy Sins, and yet find little
strength to do it? say unto the Lord, Turn thou me, and I shall be turned,
create in me a clean heart O God, and renew a right Spirit within me.

Thus in every thing make thy requests known to God, by prayer and
supplication, and he will help thee: Oh my friends the night is far spent, the
day is at hand, let us therefore put off the works of darkness, and put on the
Armor of light, and let every one be exorted even in this day, to work out
their Salvation, with fear and trembling, and to further us therein it is
necessary, that we should wait upon God, in his ordinances. O do not make
slight of using the means which God has appointed for your good, make
conscience of hearing the word preached, for it is the power of God unto
falvation, to every one that believes, let us not then be careless in this so
necessary and profitable a duty, for how shall we escape if we neglect so great
Salvation? Consider what the Lord has said; Hear and your Souls shall live.
Would you have life upon easier terms? Methinks this loving invitation of the
Lords should work upon your spirits to be obedient to his word, O therefore
come and wait upon God in this Ordinance, for it is of Gods appointment, and
while thou art a hearing, thou art in Gods way If the five foolish Virgins had
been in the way, they might have gone into the wedding as well as the other: but
they were out of the way, they were gone to buy when it was too late: If ever
you think or desire to go to Heaven, keep in Gods way: now if thou be at an
Alehouse, or walking in the Fields, or idle at home, or in thy bed, when thou
should be at Church: this out of Gods way: but if thou keep in the way,
and continuest in well doing, thou shall not loose thy labor, but God will
fulfill his promise, for he has said: Ask and ye shall have, seek and ye shall
find, knock and it shall be opened to you.

If thou have not what thou would have at present, yet wait, as the man did
at the Pool of Bethsada: though it was many years, yet at length Christ came to
cure him.

Now that all of us may know how to use this means in a hopeful way of success,
to bring about this new and of glorifieing God ^an save our Souls, let us take
heed:

First, That we do not hear the Word barely out of Custom, as to say: I will
g^ to Church because my Neighbors go, or because I cannot open my shop to day,
and know not how to spend my time otherwise: O let us not do thus, but let us
go to hear the word preached out of conscience, as them that go to seek for
salvation, not making light of it as if it were an indifferent thing, wh^ soul
and eternity are therein concerned, either a Heaven full of joye, or a Hell
full of woe, but let us go out of mere love to the word and wait at wisdoms
gate, seek diligently as for silver and search as for hidden treasure, and that
is the way to attain to it: But then,

Secondly, Pray to God for his power upon the means it is not bear hearing will
do it, we may hare and be little the better if we do not pray to God for his
blessing, we must hear and pray, and pray and hear, how sweet was the word of
God unto David? sweeter then the Honey or the Honey comb, as himself says: The
Commandments of God were of more esteem with him, than all the treasures of
Gold and Silver in the world. And why was that? Because he meditated in the Law
of God day and night, he was continually praying to God, morning and evening,
and at midnight, he rose early to call upon the Lord, and he found the benefit
of it, as is expressed at large in the book of the Psalms, therefore let prayer
and meditation accompany our hearing: But then,

Thirdly, We must yield unto all convictions, when ever the word of God does
convince of sin, when he does Alarm us to come in, let us take heed that we
stand it not out, when it comes to a drunkard, and says: Thou can not go to
Heaven: Then hearken to this and leave thy drunkenness, and when it Alarums the
swearer or proud person, or covetous, or unclean person, or whomsoever, when it
strikes thee upon the heart and says: Thou art the man: O then fall down and
say as Saul did: Lord what will thou have me to do? Whatever the sin be that
God convince thee of, though it be as dear to thee as thy right eye, or thy
right hand, yet pluck it out, or cut it off, and cast it from thee, and that is
the way to procure Gods blessing upon the means, so that it shall accomplish
the end for which it is appointed. But if thou art unwilling to forsake thy
sins and to part with thy lusts, and yet still hopest to find mercy in the end,
and to be saved by Christ: Let me beseech thee to put such thoughts far from
thy heart, and let not the Devil any longer delude thee therewith, lest thou
miserably deceive thy own Soul, for he that hides his sins shall not prosper;
it is only he that confesses and forsakes them who shall find mercy: Christ
did not come to save thee in thy sins, but from thy sins: if he be thy Priest
to save thee, he will also be thy King to rule and govern thee: thou must no
longer live to thy self but to him that dyed for thee, he has bought thee with
a price, he has paid thy ransom, he has shed his precious blood to redeem
thee, and thou art to obey him, and to do whatever he commands thee to do, thou
must part with thy old companions, I mean thy darling sins, and bosom lusts,
which thou have took such pleasure in, and now thou must walk in newness of
life, for if any man be in Christ he is a new Creature old things are passed
away, behold all things are be come new, though heretofore thou walk after
the flesh, yet now thou must mortify the deeds of the flesh, and serve the
Lord with thy spirit and truth, so sin shall not have dominion over thee: but
thou being set at liberty by Christ, shall through his might and power get the
victory over Satan, Sin and Death, and at length reign in glory with God to all
Eternity, which the Lord of his Mercy grant unto us all, for Jesus Christ his
sake.

FINIS
Books Printed for William Thackeray at the Angel in Duck-lane.
THe School of Grace, or a Book of good Nature. Christ's first Sermon. Christ's
last Sermon, Christians best Garment. Christians blessed choice. Heavens glory,
and Hells horror, A warning piece to the sloathful, Idle, and careless drunken
and secure ones of these times. Mr. Fenners Sermons of Repentance. A Sermon on
Dives and Lazarus. The Christians comfort.
These are all very good Books, and are but three pence a piece.

The plain man's pathway is Heaven, The sin of pride arrained and condemned. The
black Book of Conscience. The dreadful character of a drunkard, England's
faithful Physician. The Fathers last blessing to his Children. Doom^ Day at
hand, Peter's Sermon of repentance. The Charitable Christian, Deaths Triumphant.
The godly man's gain, and the wicked man's woe. The sinners Sobs. The Swearer and
the Drunkard: Two brethren in iniquity, arrained at the Bar. A book of Prayer
and graces. The ready way to get riches, or the poor man's Counselor. The short
and sure way to get Grace and Salvation, The touchstone of a Christian. The
pathway to saving knowledge. Every man's duty, and the godly man's practice. The
Christians Guide. The way to Heaven made plain.
Read them over carefully and practice them constantly: and rest assuredly thou will find much comfort in them to thy own Soul: And are but two pence a piece.

FINIS.
THE PATHWAY To Saving Knowledge: OR, A Description of True Wisdom.

Seting forth the great worth and Incomparable Excellency thereof.

WITH Directions how a Man may attain to the same.

And of Foolish and Ignorant, become Wise and Prudent, Even Wise to Salvation.

Very seasonable for these Times.

London, Printed for W. Thackeray, at the sign of the Angel in Duck-lane. 1673.

THE Pathway to Saving KNOWLEDGE: OR, A Description OF TRUE WISDOM.
KNowledge is so Fair a Virgin, that every clear eye is in Love with her; it is
a Pearl despised of none but Swine. Wisdom has ever carried that show of
Excellency with it, that not only the good have highly affected it (as Moses,
who Studied for Wisdom: and Solomon, who prayed for Wisdom: and the Queen of
Sheba, who traveled for Wisdom: and David, who to get Wisdom, made the Word his
Counselor, hated every False way, and was a man after Gods ow^ Heart) but the
very wicked have Labored for it, who are ashamed of other Virtues, they that
care not for one Dram of Goodness, would yet have a full scale of Knowledge,
as O the pleasure that rational Men take in it! Amongst all the Trees in the
Garden, none so pleases them as the Tree of Knowledge, Pro. 2.3. and 10.14.
Phil. 3.8. And as wisdom is excellent above all, so it is affected of all, as
Oil was both of the Wise and Foolish Virgins. It has been a mark that every
Man has shot at ever since. Eve sought to be as Wise as her Maker, but as a
hundred shoot for one that hit the White, so an hundred aim at Wisdom, for one
ye lights upon it, Eccles. 7.28. Because they are mistaken in ye thing, for as
Jacob in ye dark mistook Leah for Rachel, so many a blind soul takes yt to be
Wisdom, which is not like Eve, who thought it wisdom to eat the forbidden
Fruit, and Absalom who thought it Wisdom to lie with his Fathers Concubines in
the fight of all the People, and the false Steward who thought it wisdom to
deceive his Master, and so of Joseph's Brethren, of Pharaoh and his deep
Counselors: of Achitophel, of Herod, of the Pharisees in their project to
destroy Jesus, and many the like; all these thought they did wisely, but they
were mistaken, and their projects proved foolish, and turned to their own
ruin: For indeed the best knowledge is about the best things, and the
perfection of all knowledge to know God and our selves: Knowledge and Learning
says Aristotle consists not so much in the Quantity as in the quality, nor
in the greatness but in the goodness of it. A little Gold we know is more
worth then much Dross, a little Diamond then a rocky Mountain: so one Drop of
Wisdom guided by the fear of God, one spark of Spiritual experimental and
saving Knowledge is more worth then all humane Wisdom, and Learning, yea one
scruple of holiness, one Dram of Faith, one Grain of grace, is more worth than
many pounds of natural parts, and indeed Faith and Holiness are the Nerves and
Sinews, yea the soul of Saving Knowledge: what says Aristotle, No more than
the knowledge of goodness makes one to be named a good man, no more does the
Knowledge of Wisdom alone cause any person properly to be called a Wise man:
Saving Knowledge of the Truth works a love of the Truth Known: yea it is an
uniform consent of Knowledge and Action. He only is wise for his own Soul. He
whose Conscience pulls all, he hears and reads to his Heart, and his Heart to
God, who turns his Knowledge to Faith, his Faith to feeling, and all to walk
worthy of his Redeemer. He that subdues his sensual desires and appetite to the
noble faculties of Reason and Understanding, and makes that understanding of
his to serve him, by whom it is and does understand: he that subdues his Lusts
to his Will, submits his will to reason, his reason to faith, his faith, his
reason, his Will, himself to the Will of God, this is practical experimental
and Saving Knowledge, to which the other is but a bare Name or Title. A
competent estate (we know) well husbanded is better than a vast patrimony
neglected, never any mere Man since the first, knew so much as Solomon, many
that have known less, have had more command of themselves. Alas! they are not
always the wisest that know most, for none more wise and learned in the Worlds
account than the Scribes and Pharisees, yet Christ calls them four times Blind,
and twice Fools in one Chapter, Mat. 23. And the like of Balaam, 2 Pet. 2.16.
Who had such a prophetical knowledge, that scarce any of the Prophets had a
clearer Revelation of the Messiah to come, and the same may be of Judas and
Achitophel, for many yt know a great deal less are far wiser, yea one poor
crucified Thief being converted in an hours time, had more true wisdom and
knowledge infused into him, than had all the Rulers, Scribes and Pharisees: It
is very observeable what the High Priest told the council when they were set to
condemn Christ, ye know nothing at all, he spoke truer than he meant it, for if
we know not the Lord Jesus, our knowledge is either nothing or nothing worth,
rightly a man knows no more than what he practices. It is said of Christ, he
knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5.21. Because he did no sin. In which sense he knows no
good that does no good. These things if ye know, says our Savior, Happy are
ye if ye do them, John. 13.17. And in Deuteronomy. 4.6. Keep the Commandments of God
and do them, for this is your Wisdom and Understanding before God and man,
what is the national sweetness of Honey, to the experimental cast of it, it is
one thing to know what riches are, and another thing to be Master of them, it
is not the knowing but the possessing of them yt makes rich: Many have a depth
of Knowledge, and yet are not Soul-wise, have a library of Divinity in their
Heads, not so much as the least Catechism in their Consciences, full Brains,
empty Hearts: yea you shall hear a flood in the Tongue, when you cannot see one
Drop in the Life, insomuch that in the midst of so much light and means of
Grace, there be few I fear that have the found and saving Knowledge of Jesus
Christ and him Crucified, which was the only care and study of St. Paul, 1
Cor. 2.2. And that I am not mistaken, the effect shows, for if Men knew either
God or Christ they could not but love him, and loving him they would keep his
Commandments, John 14.15. For hereby says St. John, it is manifest that we
know him, if we keep his Commandments, John 2.3. But he that says I know him
and yet keeps not his commandments is a Liar, and there is no Truth in him,
verse. 4. What says our Savior? This is Life Eternal to know thee, the only
true God and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent: But how shall a Man know whether
be has this knowledge? Answer. St. John tells you in these last Words
mentioned, and so plainly that you cannot be deceived unless you desire to
deceive your own Soul. The Knowledge of God that saves us is more than a bare
apprehension of him, it knows his power, and therefore fears him, knows his
justice, and therefore serves him, knows his Mercy and therefore trusts him,
knows his Goodness and therefore Loves him, etc. For he that has the Saving
Knowledge of God and of Christ has every Grace: There is a sweet
correspondence between every one, where there is any one in truth, as in the
Generation the head is not without the body, nor the body without each Member,
nor the Soul without its powers and faculties, so in the Regeneration, where
there is any one Grace in Truth there is every one, 2 Cor. 5.17. If you will
see it in particulars read, Psalm. 9.10. Jer. 9.24. John 4.10. Job 42.5.6. 1
John 4.6,7. Which Scriptures show that as feeling it inseparable to all the
Organs of sense, the Eye sees and feels, the ear hears and feels, the Pallat
tastes and feels, the Nostrils smell and feel, so Knowledge is involved in every
Grace. Faith knows and believes, charity knows and loves, patience knows and
suffers, Temperance knows and abstains, Humility knows and floops, repentance
knows and stoops, obedience knows and does, Confidence knows and rejoices,
Hope knows and expects, Compassion knows and pities. Yea as there is a power of
Water in every thing that grows, it is fatness in the Olive, Sweetness in the
Fig, Cheerfulness in the Grape, Strength in the Oak, Tallnesse in the Cedar,
Redness in the Rose, Whiteness in the Lilly, etc. So Knowledge is in the
Hand, obedience in the Mouth, Benediction in the Knee, Humility in the Eye,
Compassion in the Heart, Charity in the whole Body, and Soul Piety. Alas! if
men had the true Knowledge of Jesus Christ, it would disperse and dispel all
the Black Clouds of their reigning sins in a Moment, as the Sun does no sooner
show his Face but the Darkness vanishes, or as Caesar did no sooner look upon
his Enemies but they were gone: He cannot delight in Sin, nor dote upon this
World that knows Christ savingly: Virtue is ordained a Wife for Knowledge, and
where these two join, their will proceed from them a Noble Progeny, a
Generation of good Works. Again, as the Water engendereth Ice, and the Ice
again engendereth water, so Knowledge begets Righteousness, and Righteousness
again begets Knowledge: When Solomon would acquaint us how to become Wise, he
tells us that the fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom, Prove. 1.7. As
if the first lesson to be Wise were to be Holy: If it be asked why the Natural
Man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God, St. Paul answers he cannot
know them because they are spiritually discernd, how should they discern them,
that have not the Spirit, for though the outward Man receives the Elements and
Rudiments of Religion by Breeding and Education, yet his inward Man receives
them by heavenly Inspiration, 1 Cor. 2.11,12,13. Mat. 16.16,17. Luke 24.45. Jo.
15.15. And this alone is enough to prove that no Wicked Man is a Wise Man, for
if God alone be the giver of it we may be sure that he will reveal his Secrets
to none but such as he knows will improve their Knowledge to his Glory, and the
good of others, even as the Husbandmen will not cast his Seed but into Ground
that will return him a good Harvest, Psalm. 25.14. Mark 4.3,4. 1 John 4.7. Genesis
18.17. A great many Men desire Knowledge, for no other end but to remove their
ignorance, as Pharaoh used Moses but to remove the Plagues, others again study
the Scriptures, and other good Books only to make gain thereof, or to be the
abler to dispute and discourse, as Boys go into the water only to play and
padle there, not to wash and be clean, with Eve they highly desire the Tree of
Knowledge, but regard not the Tree of Life, for if we consider what Fruit or
Effect does the Knowledge of most Men produce in them, except it be to enable
them to dispute and discourse to increase wit, or to increase wealth, or to
increase pride or perhaps to increase Atheism, and to make them the more able
and cunning to argue against the Truth and power of Religion, is not the utmost
of their aim to enrich, dignifie, and please themselves, not once casting the
Eye of their Souls at Gods Glory, their Neighbors good, or their own
Salvation; is it not their Main Drift to purchase a great estate for them and
theirs without either fear of God, regard of Men, or the discharge of their
Duty, and calling, and for the most part of these men, if they may be thought
great Rabies, deep and profound scholars, this is the height of their
ambition, though neither the Church be benefited, nor God be glorified by it;
whereas they ought the contrary: for as the Grace of God is the Fountain from
which our wisdom flows, so the Glory of God should be the Ocean to which it
should run: yea, that God may be honored with and by our wisdom, is the only
end for which he gives us to be wise. Now they that are puffed up with their
knowledge, or do not part with their sins, show that they never sought it for
Gods Glory, and certainly if we seek not Gods Glory, in doing his work, he will
give us no ^ges at the latter end. But for men to do no good with their gifts,
is not all: yea, it were well if that were ye worst, for not a few of them
resemble Achitophel, and Jonadab who employed their wit wickedly, and do
mischief instead of good with their wisdom, like Herod: whom you shall see
turning over the Bible, searching the Scriptures, examining the Prophets, but
to what end and purpose? To know good, but to do evil: yea, ye greatest evil
under ye sun, slay Christ in ye Cradle: with many their Learning and knowledge
is not for God, and for Gideon, but for Antichrist, and for Babylon, and so of
all other gifts: how many are the worse for them? as give Saul a Kingdom, and
he will tirannize, give Nabal plenty, and he will be drunk: give Judas an
Apostleship, and he will sell his Master for Money: let Sarmantus have a good
wit he will exercise it in scoffing at Holiness: Briefly, how often does Wisdom
without grace, prove like a fair estate in ye hands of a Fool, which not seldom
becomes the owners ruin, or Absaloms Hair, which was an Ornament wherewith he
hanged himself: so that wisdom without grace, is but a cuning way of undoing
our selves: at last, when our knowledge makes us prouder, not better: more
rebellious, not more serviceable: as it is in Isa. 47.10. Thy Wisdom and thy
Knowledge, they have caused thee to err, and very often this falls out: that as
the best soil usually yeildeth the worst Air, so without grace there is nothing
more pestilent than a deep wit, no such prey for the Devil as a great wit
unsanctified. Now when it comes to this, yt they fight against God with the
weapon he has given them, when with those the Psalmist speaks of, Psalm. 73.9.
They set their Mouth against Heaven, and are like an unruly Jade that being
full fed kicks at his Master, what course does the Lord take with them? Read
but that parable, Luke 19.24. John 7.17. and it will inform you, for to him
that uses his talent of Knowledge well, he gives more, but to them which use
not their knowledge well; much more if they abuse it, he takes away that which
he had formerly given them: I will turn the wise men backward, and make their
knowledge foolishness, says the Lord, Isa. 44.25. He takes the wise in their
own craftiness, and the counsel of the wicked is made foolish, Job 5.13. and
most just it is, ye they who want grace should want wit too. But further, These
great Knowers, and wise men, are so far from desiring soul-wisdom, and saving
knowledge, to the ends before specified, that they do not at all desire it, for
yt it suits not with their Condition, for natural men desire only humane and
mundane knowledge, spiritual men, ye which is heavenly and supernatural, and
the reason why they desire it not, is for yt they know it not. A man desires
not yt he knows not, neither are unknown evils feared, says Chrisostom;
wherefore ye work of regeneration begins at Illumination, Act. 26.16. Col.
1.13. Now acording as men are wise, they prize and value this wisdom, and
endeavor to obtain it, Prove. 18.15. and so on ye contrary; according as men
are ignorant and blockish, they undervalue and disesteem it, hate it, and are
prejudiced against it, and hereupon carnal men being blinded by ye Prince of
darkness, together with their own wickedness, and being of a reprobate
judgment, do most usually term and esteem this Soul-wisdom, this Divine,
spiritual, experimental, and saving knowledge to be mere foolishness, or
madness, Wisd. 5.3, to 9. and the professors thereof to be fools and madmen;
Elisha was counted no better, 2 King. 9.11. and the rest of ye Prophets, Hos.
9.7. and Paul, Act. 26.20. and all the Apostles, 1 Cor. 4.10. yea, our Savior
Christ himself, with open mouth was pronounced mad by his carnal hearers, Jo.
10.20. Mar. 3.21. to worldly men, Christian wisdom seems folly, says Gregory,
and well it may, for even the wisdom of God is foolishness with ye world, 1
Cor. 1.18. therefore no disparagement to Gods servants, if the wise men, and
politicians of ye world repute them fools: nor any honor to such Sensualists
yt so repute them. However, to give such men their due, we grant yt in some
kind of skill they outstrip the best of Gods people; who if they are put to it,
may answer as Themistocles did, when one invited him to touch a Lute, for as he
said, I cannot fiddle, but I can make a small town, a great state: so ye godly
may say, We cannot give a solid reason in nature, why Nilus should overflow
only in the summer, when waters are at the lowest: why the Loadstone should
draw Iron, or incline to the polestar, why a flash of Lightning should melt the
Sword; without making any impression in the Scabard: kill the Child in the
womb, and never hurt the mother: how the Waters should stand upon a heap, and
yet not overflow the earth: why the clouds above being heavy with water, should
not fall to the earth sudainly, seeing every heavy thing descends, except the
reason which God gives, Genesis 1.6. Job 3.8.8, to 12. Psa 104.9. But we know the
Mystery of the Gospel, and what it is to be born anew, and can give a solid
reason of our faith; we know that God is reconciled to us, the Law satisfied
for us, our sins pardoned, our souls acquitted, and that we are in savor with
God, which many of these with their great Learning, do not know, and thus the
godly are proved wiser then the wisest Humanist that wants Grace.

You have likewise the reasons why these great knowers know nothing, yet as
they might and ought to know.

First, because they are mistaken in the thing, they take speculative knowledge
for soul-wisdom, and soul-saving knowledge to be foolishness and madness: now
if a m^n take his aim amiss, he may shoot long enough ere he hi^ the mark, and
these men are as one that is gone a good part of his journey, but must come
back again, because he has mistaken his way. Secondly, Because they are
unregenerate, and want the Eye of Faith. Thirdly, For that they seek not to God
for it, who is the giver thereof, and without whose spirit there is no
attaining it. Fourthly, Because they are proud, and so seek not after it,
suposing they have it already. Fifthly, Because if they had never so much
knowledge, they would be never the holier or the better for it, but rather the
worse: nor would they employ it to the honor of God, or the good of others.
Sixthly, because they either do or would do mischief, instead of good, with
their knowledge. Sevently, because they will not consult with the word about
it, nor advise with others that have already attained to it: or thus, they read
and hear the Scriptures, but mind not (I mean) the spirituality of the word, or
mind, and understand not, or understand and remember not, or remember and
practice not. No, this they intend not: of the rest: and they that are unwiling
to obey, God thinks unworthy to know. When the Serpent taught knowledge, he
said, if ye eat the forbiden fruit, your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall
know good and evil: but God teaches another lesson, and says, if ye will not
eat the forbiden fruit, your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall know good and
evil, To. 12.12. Ps. 119 97, to 100. or if you do eat, you shall be like Images
that have ears but cannot hear, Romans 11.8. Isa. 6.10. Mat. 13.14.

From all which reasons we may collect that there are but a few amongst us that
are wise indeed, and to purpose, for these seven hindrances are apliable to 77
parts of men in ye Nation.

Besides, if these great knowers know so little, how ignorant are the rude
rabble, that despise all knowledge? nor can it be denied but all Impenitent
persons who prefer their profits and pleasures before pleasing of God are
errant fools, for if they were wise says Bernard, they would foresee the
torments of Hell, and prevent them: and so wise are the godly, for they prefer
Grace and Glory, and Gods favor, before ten thousand worlds.

Now if any be desirous to get this spiritual, and experimental knowledge, this
divine and supernatural wisdom, let them observe these five Rules.

First, let such a soul resolve to practice what he does already know, or shall
hereafter be acquainted with, from the word of God and Christ's faithful
Messengers, for he that will do my Fathers will, says our Savior, shall know
the Doctrine, whether it be of God or no, Joh. 7.17. A good understanding have
all they that keep the Commandments, says Holy David, Psa. 111.10. and proves
it true by his own example and experience. I understood, says he, more then
the Ancient, and become wiser then my Teachers, because I kept thy Precepts,
Psa. 119.97, to 100. To a man that is good in his sight, God gives knowledge
and wisdom, Eccles. 2.26. The spiritual man understands all things, 1 Cor.
2.15. Wicked men understand not judgment, but they that seek the Lord,
understand all things, Prove. 28.5. Admirable encouragements for men to become
godly and conscientious: I mean practical Christians.

Secondly, if thou would get this precious grace of saving knowledge, the way
is to be frequent in hearing the word preached, and to become studious in the
Scriptures, for they, and they alone, make wise to salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. Ye
err, says our Savior, not knowing the Scriptures, Mat. 22.29. We must not in
the search of heavenly matters either do as we see others do, neither must we
follow the blind guide, carnal reason, or the deceitful guide, our corrupt
hearts, but the undeceiveable and infallible guide of Gods word, which is truth
it self; and great need there is, for as we cannot perceive the foulness of our
faces, unless it be told us, or we take a Glass and look our selves therein, so
neither can we see the blemishes of our souls, which is a notable degree of
spiritual wisdom; but either God must make it known to us by his spirit, or we
must collect the same out of the Scripture that celestial glass, though this
also must be done by the spirits help: Therefore,

Thirdly, If thou will be soul-wise and truly profit by studying the
Scriptures, be frequent and fervent in prayer to God who is the only giver of
it for the direction of his holy Spirit, for first humble and faithful prayer
ushered in by meditation is the cure of all obscurity, especially being
accompanied with fervor and fervency: as you may see, Math. 21.22. If any want
wisdom says St. James let him ask of God who gives to all men liberally, and
reproacheth no man, and it shall be given him, Jam. 1.5. Mark the words, it is
said, if any, wherefore let no man deny his soul this comfort, again ask and
have, it cannot come on easier terms, yea God seems to like this suit so well
in Solomon, as if he were beholding to his Creature for wishing well to it
self. And in vain do we e^pect that alms of grace, for which we do not so much
as beg, but in praying for wisdom do not pray for it without putting
difference, desire not so much brain knowledge as to be soul-wise, and then you
will employ your wisdom to the glory of the giver. Let thy hearts desire be to
know God in Christ, Christ in faith, faith in good works, to know Gods will
that thou may do it, and before the knowledge of all other things, desire to
know thy self, and in thy self, not so much thy strength as thy weakness, pray
that thine heart may serve thee as a commentary to help thee, understand such
points of Religion as are most needful and necessary, and that thy life may be
an exposition of thy inward man, that there may be a sweet harmony betwi^t Gods
word, thy Judgment, and whole conversation, that what the natural man knows
by roa^ thou may double by feeling the same in thine heart and affections; as
indeed experimental and saving knowledge is no less felt then known, and I
cannot tell how it comes, rather out of the abundance of the heart, than by
extreme study, or rather is sent by God unto good men, like the R^m that was
brought to Abraham, when he would have Sacrifized his Son Isaac. When Christ
taught in the Temple, they asked, how knows this man the Scriptures, seeing
he never learned them? So it is a wonder what Learning some men have, that have
no learning, like Priscilla and Aquila, poor Tentmakers, who were able to
School Apollos that great Clerk, a man renowned for his Learning. What can we
say to it, for no other reason can be given, but as Christ said, Father, so it
pleases thee. For as Jacob said of his Venison, when his father asked how he
came by it so suddenly, because the Lord thy God brought it suddenly into my
hands; So Holy and Righteous men do more easily understand the words of God,
than the wicked, because God brings the meaning suddenly to their hearts. As
we read, Luk, 24. Prove. 1.23. Psa. 25.14. Dan. 12.10. Luke 8.10. Mar. 3.11.
Again, it is not enough to pray, except also it be in Christ's name, and
according to his will, believing to be heard for his sake, and that it be the
intercession of Gods own Spirit in you, and being truly sensible of your sins
and wants, that you chiefly pray for the pardon of sin, the effusion of grace,
and for the assistance of Gods Spirit, that you may more Firmly believe more
^oundly repent, more zealously do, more pa^iently suffer, and more constantly
persevere in the practice and profession of every duty: but above all you^ must
know that as Sampsons Companions could never have found out his Ridle, if they
had not plowed with his Hefer, so no man can know the Secrets of God, but by
the Revelation of his Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.8. Mat. 16.17. Yea, Suppose a man be
not inferior to Portius or Pithagoras, who kept all things in memory that ever
they had read heard, or seen. To Virgil, of whom it is reported, that if all
Sciences were lost they might be found again in him. To Aben Ezra, of whom it
is said, that if Knowledge had put out her Candle, at his Brain she might light
it again, and that his head was a Throne of wisdom. Or Josephus Scaliger, who
was Skilled in 30 Languages: yet if he want the Spirit of God to be his
Teacher, he is a Dunce to the meanest and most Illiterate Believer. For one
necessary and excellent Prerogative of the Spiritual Man, is this: He has God
for his Teacher, he learns the Councels of God, of tha^ Spirit which only knows
Gods Councels. Luke 21.15. Which is no small privilege, for the Scholar learns
quickly when the Holy Ghost is his Teacher. The eye ^ees distinctly when the
Holy Ghost does enlighten it, with the spirits help, the means can never be too
weak, without, never strong enough, Luke 24.44,45.

Fourthly, Thou must get an humble conceit of thine own wisdom. The First step
to Knowledge, is to know our own ignorance. We must become fools in our own
opinion, before we can be truly wi^e; as the Apostle sets it down, 1 Cor. 3.18.
And indeed the opinion of over-knowing, is one of the greatest causes of our
Knowing so little, for what we presume to have attained, we seek not after;
yea, the very First Lesson of a Christian is Humility; He will teach the humble
his way, Psa. 25.9. Jam. 4.6. And he that has not learned the first lesson, is
not fit to take out a new: Pride is a great let to true wisdom, Jam. 4.6.
Whence it comes to pass, that few proud wits are reformed, Joh. 9.39. And for
this cause also did our Savior propound his woes to the Pharisees his
Doctrines to the people. A heart full of Pride, is like a vessel full of air.
This self opinion must be first blown out of us, before Saving knowledge will
be poured into us, Christ will know none but ye humble, and none but humble
souls truly know Christ: now ye way to become humble is to take a serious view
of our wants. The peacoks pride is much abated when she looks on the blackness
of her legs and feet: now suppose we know never so much, yet ye which we know
is the less th^n yt which we are ignorant of, and the more we know, ye more we
know we want, Pro. 1.5,7. and the less sensible we are of our blindness,
sickness, deformity, etc. the more blind, sick, and deformed we are.

Fifthly, Thou must labor to get a true and lively faith, for as without faith
we cannot please God, so without Faith no man can Know God. Faith most clearly
beholds those things which are hid both from ye eye of sense, and the eye of
reason, Joh. 12.46. Unregenerate men ye want faith, are like Sampson without
his guide, or like Polyphemus, who never had but one eye, and that Ulisses put
out, for so does the pleasure and custom of sin blind ye sensualist: we must
have minds lifted above nature, to see and love things above nature; heavenly
Wisdom, to see heavenly Truth; or else ye Truth which is saving will be to us a
mystery, Mark 4.11. if it seem not foolishness, 1 Cor. 2.7,8. To them yt are
lost the Gospel is hid, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. Whereas the Believer discerns all
things, even the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10. Yea, God gives him a mouth
and wisdom, against which all his Adversaries shall not be able to speak or
resist, Luke 21.15.

These are the Five steps that lead us to the Palace of Wisdom, which all must
ascend by that mean to enter. Therefore consider seriously what has been said,
and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

Finis.
THE TOUCHSTONE OF A CHRISTIAN.

Wherein is plainly demonstrated and clearly discovered the vast difference
between such as have but only the name and profession of Godliness, and such as
practice the same in the power thereof.

Whereby every one may try their own ways, and know whether their present
Estate be either Happy or Miserable.

Very profitable for these times.

LONDON, Printed for W. Thackeray, at the sign of the Angel in Duck-Lane. 1673.

THE TOUCHSTONE OF A CHRISTIAN.
COnsidering that Satan the Prince of Darkness has so blinded the Eyes of most
men and women in the World, that being void of saving Knowledge, they are apt
to put evil for good, and good for evil, having their minds possessed with a
good opinion of themselves, and the safety of their condition, in refference to
Eternity; which notwithstanding, if it be thoroughly tried, will appear to be
far otherwise, and that they do indeed but deceive their own Souls. Therefore,
the all which read or hear this little Boo^ may be exhorted to examine
themselves and to prove their works, whether they a^ such, to whom eternal life
is promised, (...) shall in my following discourse speak (...) such principal
qualifications which are required to be in every true Christian, an^ are of
such absolute necessity to the leading of a godly life, that whosoever is not
(...) some measure endued with the same, c^ not have any reasonable ground from
the Word of God to expect Salvation.

Those necessary Graces, or Qualifications which I shall treat of are these
five Humility, Faith, Repentance, Love; and Obedience.

And first to speak of Humility, which h^ the very first Lesson of a Christian:
for^ it is in Psalm. 25.6. He will teach the humble his way. And Jam. 4.6. God
resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. The first step to saving
Knowledge, is to have an humble conceit of our own wisdom, to know our own
ignorance. Behold, (says God, the high and mighty one that inhabiteth
Eternity) even to this man will I look, who is of an humble spirit, and
trembles at my word. Christ will own none but the humble soul: he himself was
the true pattern of Humility, whose example we are to follow: for he that
expects Salvation by Christ, ought so to walk, even as he walked: Learn of me
(says Christ) for I am meek and humble. And he has pronounced a blessing to
such as imitate him here: as in Mat. 5.5. Blessed are the meek, for they shall
inherit the earth. And again he says, Mat. 23.12. Whosoever exalts himself,
shall be brought low, but whosoever humbles himself, shall be exalted. The
Lord is high, says the Psalmist, yet he beholds the lowly, but the proud he
knows a far off, Psalm. 138.6. The pride of a man shall bring him low, but the
humble in spirit shall enjoy Glory, Prove. 29.23. Thus you see it is only to the
humble soul, that God will have respect, for a proud look, and a proud heart,
are an abomination to the Lord.

Now this Humility does consist in having a mean and low esteem of our selves,
and a deep sense of our unworthiness, by reason of the filthiness and
pollutions wherewith Sin has defiled our Nature, and does stain and pollute
all our Actions. Hereby we come to abhor ou^ selves, to renounce all merit of
our own and all sufficiency in our selves, to any thing that is good,
acknowledging tha^ the least mercy we enjoy, is more the we deserve: this made
David say; I a^ less then the least of all thy mercies: what am I, that thou
should do such great things for me? this made the Centurion say to Christ; I
am not worthy that thou should enter under my roof: and John the Baptist; I
am not worthy to unlose the latchet of his shoes: and Paul, I am less then the
least of Apostles not worthy to be called an Apostle So all Gods Servants were
very caref^ not to think of themselves above wha^ is meet. When Paul had been
speaking how he had been laboring in the Gospel, he presently corrects
himself, and says: Not I, but the Grace of God in me. This is the frame of a
Christians spirit, to give all the Glory to God, and to think every one better
than himself. Therefore whosoever thou art, that art highly conceited of thy
own worth, that seem wise in thy own eyes, that ar^ apt to boast of thy good
parts, and never as yet saw thy self to be a poor, miserable, naked, empty
[nothing] creature, ^void of all goodness, and utterly unworthy to receive any
favor or blessing from the Lord, thou have not yet attained to true Humility,
nor set one step forward toward Heaven.

But Secondly, The second Qualification required in a Christian, is Faith, Mark
16.16. Whosoever believes, and is Baptized, shall be saved; but he that will
not believe, shall be damned, John. 3.15,16. God so loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believed on him, might not perish,
but have everlasting life. He that believes not, is condemned already, because
he has not believed on the only begotten Son of God. But because it is common
for all sorts of persons to think that they do believe, and that therefore they
may lay claim to the promise of eternal life, I will give you the character of
a lively saving Faith, without which it is impossible to please God.

1. True Faith works by love, consumes our Corruptions, and sanctifies the
whole man throughout: so that our Faith to God, is seen in our faithfulness to
men; out invisible belief, by our visible life; Faith and Holiness, are as
inseparable as Life and Motion, the Sun and Light, Fire and Heat, Ice and
Coldness, Honey and Sweetness.

Again, Faith believes the threats of the Words, as well as the promises; and
if such as think they have Faith, did believe the truth of those threatenings
which God has denounced against Swearers, Drunkards, Unclean, Covetous,
Ambitious, Unjust, Envious, Malicous Persons, and such like Sinners, how durst
they then so wallow in these sins? that if God instead of Hell, had promised
Heaven for a reward unto them, they could not do more then they do. Many do
sottishly deceive themselves with an opinion of Faith, who indeed believe not
so much as the Devil does, for he believes the threatenings of the Word, and
trembles for horror; but they go on in sin, eve^ ^ocking at the Menaces, and
in the infidelity of their hearts, even give them the lie, saying, no such
things shall befall them: but what says the Apostle, When they shall say, peace
and safety, then comes on them sudden destruction, 1 These. 5.3.

But Thirdly, True Faith is wrought by the Spirit of God, in the hearing or
reading the Word at the time of a man's conversion, when God enlightens his
mind, to see his lost, undone, and perishing condition, and convinces him of
his unbelief: so that whosoever never saw himself to be without Faith, has as
yet, no Faith: for however many think it an easy matter to believe, yet he
that goes about it, shall find that it is as hard a work to believe in the
Gospel, as to keep the Law; and only God must enable to both: It is easy
indeed for a soul that was never burdened with sin, that was never sensible of
the filthiness thereof, and of Gods wrath due unto it: such a one thinks it a
small matter to believe; but this is a sure rule, that that persuasion only
which follows Humiliation, is Faith, and that which goes before it is
Presumption. Then,

Fourthly, True Faith, as it is wrought by the Spirit of God, ^it brings forth
the fruits of the spirit; mentioned, Gal. 5.22,23. Faith never goes alone, but
has a whole train of other Graces to follow her; as the Apostle says, Add to
your Faith Virtue, and to Virtue Temperance, and to Temperance Patience, and to
Patience Brotherly kindness, and to Brotherly kindness Charity; these and many
more do always accompany a lively Faith. But to proceed.

The third Qualification which I mentioned, is True Repentance; and that is
through change, wrought in the whole man, whereby he becomes a new Creature,
and turns from every sin, to the contrary good; from Pride, to Humility; from
Drunkenness, to Sobriety; from Vain Discourse, to Holy Communion; from
Covetousness, to Liberallity; from Laciviousness, to Chastity: and this not
only for a little while, but even so long as he lives: which repentance is ever
accompanied with a hatred of the sin we turn from, and a love of that good we
turn unto; and is usually procured by the consideration of Gods unspeakable
goodness toward us, according to the Apostle; The goodness of God leads thee
to Repentance. When we come to consider what God has done for us, how he
Created us after his own Image; and when by sinning we had lost the same, and
plunged our selves into misery, he sent his only Son to redeem, and regain our
happiness, how his merits are renewed daily toward us, in preserving,
providing for us, and how ill we repayed the Lord for the same, when instead of
living to his Glory, we have gloried in doing such things as do greatly
dishonor him, being rebellious, stubborn, disobedient to all his Holy Laws and
Commandments, abusing his Merits, slighting his Promises, despising his
Judgments, and turning his Grace into Wantonness, thereby vexing, grieving,
and quenching his Holy Spirit: and yet, notwithstanding this, and much more,
the Lord does still spare us, and let us live, whereas he might justly cut us
off, and cast us into Hell: he does still wait to be gracious, he calls us to
come and accept of free Mercy, and promises to pardon and pass by what is past,
if for the future we will amend our lives. This is that which makes us to loath
our selves, to lie low before the Lord, to be exceedingly sorry that we should
be so vile, and so unworthy, as to offend so gracious a God; this breeds a
displeasure against our selves, and our ways, and a hatred against sin: from
hence arises in our hearts a full pu^pose and resolution to forsake every evil
way, and to walk in newness of life; and this is true repentance, without which
none can be saved: for except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish: and
except a man be born again, he shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven: but whosoever does repent him of his sins, from the bottom of his
heart, so as utterly to forsake them, he shall find mercy: the Lord has
promised it, and it shall surely be performed. But,

Fourthly, The next qualification I am to speak of, is Love, and that is
twofold.

1. To God himself: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with
all thy mind, and with all thy strength.

2. To our Brethren: This is my Commandment, says Christ, that ye love
one-another, even as I have loved you: And that we may know how to express our
Love, he says in another place, If ye love me, keep my Commandments: he that
says he loves God, and yet keeps not his Commandments, is a Liar. If we have
a friend that we love dearly, how careful are we to please him? how unwilling
to do any thing which might procure his anger? we think no labor nor pains too
much, employed in serving him, we spare no cost nor charge, to express our high
esteem of his friendship: but has not God been a greater friend to us then any
man can be? ought we not much much more to love him, who is infinitely worthy
to be beloved for his own sake, if he had never done any thing for us? but now
if we be careless in his service, negligent in performing what he requires of
us, unwilling to part with any thing, that he calls to us for, it seems ^r Love
is very cold: this is not loving God with all our hearts, when we will do more
for an acquaintance, or a relation, then for him. Indeed, God does not stand in
need of what we can do; he is beyond the reach of our good works: our love
cannot add to his Blessedness; as David says; My goodness tends not to thee.
Yet he requires that in testimony of our Love and thankfulness to him, for what
we have received from him, we should show forth the same in all expressions of
Kindness and Charity, to those that may be benefited thereby: and it is a sure
rule, he that loves God, for his own sake, will love his Brother for Gods sake.
A true and pious Christian destres to do something for Christ, who has done
and suffered so much for him, and who is pleased to take that so kindly, which
we do for his sake, that he has promised whosoever shall give but a cup of
cold water in his Fame, he shall not go unrewarded: Therefore if thou bear
any good will to God or Christ, whom it is not in thy power to pleasure, thou will show thy thankfulness to him in his Children, who are bone of his bone,
and flesh of his flesh: it is impossible that he who has Love should be
ungrateful: Mary Magdalen had received much, and this made her love much, and
loving much, she thought nothiog too much to bestow, even upon the most remote
members of Christ, to express her thankfulness. An ingenious disposition cannot
receive favors without thoughts of return: Behold thou have been careful for
us, says Elisha to the Shunamite: with all this care, now what is to be done
for thee? so says the true Christian: Behold O Lord, thou have been exceeding
gracious, thou have conferred great benefits upon me, now how can I
sufficiently express my thankfulness unto thee, for the same. What shall I
render to the Lord for all his mercies? says David. Indeed all that we can do
is too little, but God does not look for such Love and Service from us, as he
is worthy to receive, but as we are able to give: and it is for our own good
that he would be served and magnified by us, that so he may reward our labor
of Love, with everlasting bliss and happiness.

Now the best way to make it appear that the Love of God is shed abroad in our
hearts, is to be fruitful in the Works of Piety and Charity, Pure Religeon, and
undefiled before God, says St. James, Is to visit the fatherless and widows in
their adversity, and to keep himself unspotted from the World. Love is the
fulfiling of the Law, Romans 13.10. We ought so to love our Neighbor as our
selves. But how do we so, if we take not care for them, as we do for our
selves? Do thou see any one in affliction, or want comfort? consider, if thou
were in such a condition, as God knows how soon thou may, would not thou in
thy need be relieved? Why then surely it is reason thou should do to others,
as thou would have them do to thee; and for our encouragement to this duty of
Love or Charity. Consider that Christ accounts that which is done to his poor
members here on earth, as done to himself; as appears by many express
Testimonies of Scripture. When I was an hungered, ye fed me; when I was naked,
ye clothed me; when I was in prison, ye visited me; for in as much as ye did
it to one of these little ones, that believed in me, ye did it unto me, Mat.
25.34, etc. He that gives to the poor, lends to the Lord, Prove. 19.17. To do
good and to distribute, forget not, for with such Sacrifice God is
well-pleased: look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the
things of other men: let the same mind be in you, which was even in Christ
Jesus, Phil. 2.4,5,6. He that is endued with this Grace of Love will open his
hands to such as are in want: and so far as his ability extends, will lend or
give to them sufficient for their need: as God commands, Deuteronomy. 15.8. It will
make a man of Jobs Spirit, who would not eat his morsels alone, but invited the
fatherless to eat with him, Job 31.17. It will make a man love his enemies, and
do good to them that do hurt to him, Luke. 6.35. Yea more, it will make a man
lay down his life for the brethren, 1 John. 3.16. These are the properties of
Christian Love, which will appear more or less in the life of every true
believer: but he that has this worlds good, and sees his Brother in want, and
yet has no compassion of him, how dwells the love of God in that man?

But in the Fifth and last place, Obedience to Gods will and Commandments is
the main Duty of every Christian, Heb. 5.9. Christ is said to be the Author of
eternal Salvation unto all that obey him: not unto them which continue in their
rebellious wickedness, and never submit to be ruled by the Scepter of his word:
Christ's blood was shed for ablution, as well as absolution: as well to cleanse
from the soil and filth of sin, as to clear and free from the guilt of sin,
Romans 6.5,6. God has chosen us in Christ from the Creation of the World, that
we should be holy, and without blame before him in Love, Ephesians. 1.4. They
therefore that never come to be Holy, never were chosen. We are said to be
Created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before ordained, that
we should walk in them: Christ came not to save us in our Sins, but from our
sins: to redeem unto himself a peculiar people, Zealous of good works: and it
i^ his Commandment: Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your
good works and glorify your Father which is in Heaven. Yea, the Lord has
bound it with an Oath: that whomsoever he redeemeth out of the hands of their
spiritual enemies, they shall worship him in Holiness and Righteousness all the
days of their life, Luke 1.73, etc. This is that obedience which is better then
Sacrifice, and without which let none expect to be saved: for God has said,
Without Holiness no man shall see the Lord: be ye therefore holy, even as God
is holy. There are many wicked men, who go on in a continual course of sin, and
make no conscience of obeying Gods Word, or of walking in his ways: yet they
think themselves good Christians, and doubt not of their Salvation: every
drunken beast and blaspheamer thinks to go to Heaven, though none shall come
there, nor once see God without Holiness, which they abhor.

One minds nothing but his Cups: another nothing but his Coin: a third only his
Curtizan: yet all these appoint to meet in heaven, but this is not the way
thither, 1 John 2.16. The Lust of the Eye, and the pride of Life is a broad way
indeed, but not to Heaven: Or, Know ye not, says the Apostle, the unrighteous
shall not enter into the Kingdom of God: be not deceived, neither Fornicators,
nor Adulterers, nor Unclean persons, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Swearers,
nor Liars, can claim any interest in the promise of eternal life, by Christ
Jesus: For that grace of God which brings salvation, teaches us to deny all
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live god^y, righteously, and soberly in
this present world, Tit. 2.12. If Christ be not our King to govern us, be will
neither be our Prophet to forewar^, nor our Priest to expiate. Except we
forsake our sins, God will never forgive them: it cannot consist with his
Justice to pardon such as continue in an evil course of life, if Christ has
freed us from the damnation of sin, he has also freed us from the dominion of
sin: if with his blood he has quenched the fire of Hell for us, he has also
quenched the fire of Lust in us: Christ's Justifying blood, is given by his
Sanctifying Spirit. Therefore such as have no government of their Passions, no
conscience of their Actions, no care of their lives: whatever they think or
pretend, they have no portion nor share in the promises of the Gospel. How many
that would be accounted Christians, and think to go to heaven, yet in sundry
particulars fall short of many wicked reprobates recorded in Scripture, who
never had the hearts, upon the hearing the threatenings of the Word, to relent,
and humble themselves with Ahab, to confess their sins, and desire the people
of God to pray for them: with Pharaoh to be affected with joy in hearing the
Word, and practice many things: with Herod to be zealous against sin: with
Jehu, willing to part with a good part of their goods: with Ananias, to forsake
the world and all their hopes in it, to follow Christ as Demas and others, to
venture their lives with Alexander the Copper-smith, in cleaving to the truth.
Yea, it is said of Judas himself, that he repented: there is Contrition: he
says, I have sinned: there is Confession: and he restored the money again:
there is Satisfaction, which is all the Papists repentance: and yet he is Judas
the Son of perdition still. Now examine thy self, and try whether thou do not
come short of these: if so, it is but madness for thee to please thy self in a
false conceit of thine own Happiness. Ungodly men think God is all mercy, yet
the Word tells us he is a consuming fire, and a jealous God: and how can they
expect he should be merciful to them, who are ^nmerciful and cruel to him, to
his, and to their own souls? Indeed the Lord is very gracious and ready to
forgive such as are humble and penitent sinners, who are willing to be cleansed
from their sins, and to put away the evil of their doings, and abhor themselves
because of their iniquities: he is exceeding merciful, and full of compassion
to such: but to those that wilfully go on in wickedness following the lusts and
desires of their own hearts, he will not speak peace to them, but if they
repent not, he will come in flames of Fire to take vengeance upon them.

Therefore consider this, all ye that forget God, least he tear you in pieces,
and there be none to deliver. Yea, consider well all you that read or hear this
Book, wha^ great difference there is betwixt a Christian in name, and a
Christian indeed: examine your hearts thoroughly, and try your selves by this
Touchstone, and see whether you were ever as yet truly humbled under the sight
and sense of your Original Corruption, and Actual Transgression: whether sin
has ever been a burden unto you, and your greatest grief: whether you were
ever savingly enlightened to discern the hidden mysteries of the Gospel, and
enabled in same measure to lay how upon Christ by a lively Faith, such as
purifieth your hearts, and makes you prize Christ more then all things in the
world? whether you did ever with hatred of your (...), turn from them, and
return unto God (...) true repentance, and are become new Creatures, to what
once you were: whether you love God with all your hearts, being careful to
please him, fearful to offend him, willing to part with any thing that is near
or dear unto you, when he calls for it: whether you are obedient to his will,
in keeping his Commandments, in sanctifying his Saboths, in walking in his
ways, in observing his Statutes to do them, in leading a Godly, Righteous and
Sober Life, in doing good to all, where it lies in your power, in loving your
enemies, and rendering good for evil, in honoring God with your substance, and
living holily, righteously, and unblamably in this present World: if not, then
all your confidence is but presumption, and Christ will say unto you in the
last day, Depart from me, I know you not.

O that God would open your eyes, and let you see those things which concern
your everlasting peace, before you go from hence and be no more seen.

FINIS.
Every Man's Duty, AND The Godly Man's Practice: OR, Exhortations to Love God.

Drawn from the Consideration of his great goodness toward us, and the many
mercies, favors, and benefits, which we daily receive at his hands.

Which may stir up every one to the greatest measure of thankfulness, and
persuade us all to live unto Gods Glory.

Very profitable for these times wherein Iniquity does abound, and the Love of
many waketh Cold.

London, Printed for W. Thackeray, at the the Angel in Duck-Lane. 1673.

Every Man's Duty, AND The Godly Man's Prastice: OR, Exhortations to Love GOD.
AS great favors bestowed upon a Person of an Ingenious disposition, are as so
many Cords to draw his Affections toward the Benefactour, so the consideration
of those unspeakale Mercies and Benefits which we have received from God is the
strongest Matide to stir up our hearts unto thankfulness, and to knit our
hearts unto the Lord in the inseparable bands of Love. Now to the end that all
which read or hear this Book, may know how much they stand engaged unto God, I
shall give you a taste of his goodness, and let you see what he has done for
us, as in the first place he gave us our selves, and all the Creatures to be
our servants, yea be created us after his own Image, in Righteousness and
Holiness, and in perfect knowledge of the Truth, with a power to stand, and for
ever to continue in a most blessed and happy condition, and this deserves all
possible thankfulness, but this was nothing in comparison, for when we were in
a sad condition, when we had forfeited all this and our selves, when by sin we
had turned the Image of God into the Image of Satan, and wilfully plunged our
Souls and Bodies into eternal Torments, when we were become his enemies,
mortally hating him, and to our utmost, fighting against him, and taking part
with his enemies Sin and Satan, not having the least thought or desire of
reconcilement, but a perverse and obstinate will to resist all means thereunto,
he did redeem us, not only without asking, but even against our wills, so
making of us (his cursed Enemies) servants of servants, Sons of Sons, Heirs
and Coheirs with Christ, here was a fathomless depth, a wonder beyond all
wonders. But that we may the better consider what an alms or Boon God gave us
when he gave us his Son, observe that when neither Heaven nor Earth could have
yielded any satisfactory thing besides Christ; that could have satisfied Gods
justice, and merited heaven for us, then God in his infinite wisdom and
goodness did not only find out a way to satisfy his justice and the Law, but
gave us his Son, his only beloved Son out of his bosom, and his Son gave
himself to dye the most Shameful, Painful, and Cursed death of the Cross to
redeem us: That whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting Life, John 3.16. The very thought of which death when he came to
it, together with the Weight and burden of our sins, put him into such an
Agony in the Garden, that it made him to sweat even Drops of Blood, a mercy
bestowed, and a way found out, may astonish all the Sons of Men, and Angels in
Heaven, wherefore wonder at this ye that wonder at nothing, that the Lord
should come with such a price to redeem our worse then lost souls, and to bring
Salvation unto us, even against our Wills. The Lord Jesus being rich for our
sakes became poor, that we through his poverty might be made rich. 2 Cor. 8.9.
Even the eternal God would die that we might not Dye Eternally, and that which
is further considerable, it cost God more to redeem the World then to make it.
In the creation he gave us our selves, but in the redemption he gives us
himself, the creation of all things cost him but six days to finish it, the
Redemption of Man cost him three and thirty years: in the creation of the
world, he did but only speak the word. In the Redemption of Man, he both Spoke,
and Wept, and Swet, and Bled, and dyed; yea the saving of one Sold is more and
greater then the making of the whole world, but further to illustrate this
Love, consider that Salvation stands in two things. First, In Freedom and
Deliverance from Hell. Secondly, In the possession of Heaven and eternal life.


Christ by his Death merits the First for us. And by his Obedience, fulfilling
the Law, Merits the Second.
O! who can express how great a Mercy it is to be delivered from Hell, where we
should for ever have lain in fire and Brimstone, kept in the highest Flame, by
the Unquenchable Wrath of God, where there is nothing but Darkness and Horror,
wailing and wringing of hands, desperate yellings and gnashing of Teeth. There
shall be Punishment without pity; Misery, without any mercy; sorrow, without
succor; crying without Comfort, Malice without Measure, Torment without ease,
where the wrath of God shall seize men's souls and bodies, as the flames of fire
does in the Lump of Pitch and brimstone, in which flame they shall ever be
burning and never consumed, ever dying, and never dead, ever roaring in the
pangs of death, and never rid of those pangs, so yt after they have endured
them, so many thousand years, as there are blades of Grass on the Earth, or
sands in the Sea, they shall be no nearer the end of their Torments then they
were the very first day that they were cast into them, yea so far are they from
ending, that they are ever beginning. It were Misery enough to have the Headache
Toothach Chollick Gout, burning in the fire, or if there be any thing more
grievous, yet should all these and many more meet together in one man at one
instant, they would come infinitely short of the pains of Hell, yea they would
be but as stinging of Ants to the Lashes of those Scorpions, but as drops to
those Vials of Wrath, as Sparks to that flame, the Furnace of Babel was but a
flea biting to this tormenting Tophet prepared of old, so that it were happy
for reprobate Spirits if they were no worse then Toads or Serpents, as consider
if a dark dungeon here be so loathsome, what is that Dungeon of eternal, of
utter Darkness? if natural fire be so terrible, what is Hell fire where both
Soul and Body shall fry in everlasting flames, and continually be tormented by
infernal Fiends, whose society alone would be sufficiently frightful? These
things deeply weighed, O! how would it heighten our love to God and to Christ,
who might have left us in our wretched estate to have undergone much more then
is here spoken of. But blessed be his Name who has delivered our Souls from
the pit of destruction, and not only so but has reinstated us again into Gods
favor, and prepared Mansions of Glory for us in the Kingdom of Heaven, where
we shall see the Blessed Face of God, which is the Glory of all sights; the
sight of all glory: there shall all tears be wiped from our Eyes, there shall
be no pain nor complaint, no Hunger, Thirst, Wearisomness, or Templation to
disquiet us, there is no death nor dearth, no misery nor sickness, but joys and
pleasures; never ebbing, but ever flowing to all contentment. There, O there,
one day is better then a thousand, their is rest from our labors, peace from
our enemies, freedom from our Sins, what pleasure shall we take in the company
of Saints and Angels, in whom there is nothing, but what is amiable,
comfortable, and delectable? There is all things that we can desire, Beauty,
Riches, Honor, Pleasure, long life, or whatever else can be named, no place so
glorious by creation, so beautiful with delectation so rich in possession, so
comfortable for Habitation, nor so durable for lasting, there are no estates,
but inheritances, no inheritances but kingdom, no Houses but palaces, no Meals
but feasts, no noise but Music no Rods but Scepters, no Garments but Robes, no
Seats but Thrones, no Coverings for the Head but Crowns: there we shall rejoice
for the pleasantness of the place we possess, for the glory of our Souls and
Bodies, which we have put on for ye World, which we have overcome, for Hell
which we have escaped, for the joys of heaven which we have attained unto, we
shall have joy above us, by the Beatifical Vision and sight of God, joy within
us by the peace of Conscience, even the joy of the Holy Ghost, and joy round
about us by the blessed Company and Fellowship of our Associates the Holy
Saints and Angels: Oh! the multitude and fullness of these joys, so many that
only God can number them, so great that he only can estimate them, of such
rarity and perfection, that this World has nothing comparable unto them: Oh!
the Transcendency of that Paradise of Pleasure, where is joy without
Heaviness, Blessedness without Misery, light without darkness, health without
Sickness, Abundance without Want, Ease without Labor, Liberty without
Restraint, Security without Fear, Eyes without Tears, hearts without sorrow,
Souls without Sin; where shall be no evil heard of to affright us, nor good
wanting to cheer us, for we shall have what we can desire, and we shall desire
nothing but what is good. Here we have knowledge mixed with Ignorance, faith
mixed with doubting, peace with Trouble, but then we shall know God, even as we
our selves are known of him, then shall faith be swallowed up in fruition, and
then shall we have peace, even full without want, pure without mixture, and
perpetual without all fear of forgoing.

What shall I say? God of his goodness has bestowed so many, and so great
mercies upon us, that it is not possible to express his bounty therein, for if
we look inward we find our creatours merits, if we look upwards, his Mercy
reaches up into the Heavens, if Downwards, the Earth is full of his goodness,
and so is the broad Sea, if we look about us, what is it that he has not given
us? Air to breath in, fire to warm us, water to cleanse and cool us, Clothes to
cover us, Food to nourish us, Fruits to refresh us, yea delicates to please us,
Beasts to serve us, Angels to attend us, Heaven to receive us, and which is
above all, himself, and his own Son to be enjoyed of us, so that whithersoever
we turn our Eyes, we cannot look besides his Bounty, yea we can scarce think of
any thing more to pray for, but that he would continue those Blessings which he
has bestowed on us already, yet, we covet still as though we had nothing, and
live as if we knew nothing of his Beneficience, we are bound to praise him
above any Nation whatsoever, for what Nation under Heaven enjoys so much light,
and so many Blessings as we? God might have said before we were formed, let
them be Loads, Monsters, Infidels, Beggars, Bondslaves, Idiots, or Madmen, so
long as they live, and after that, cast aways for ever and ever. But he has
made us to the best likeness, and nursed us in the best Religion, and placed
us in the best Land, and appointed us to the best and only Inheritance, even to
remain with him in Bliss for ever: Yea thousands would think themselves happy
if they had but a piece of our Happiness, for whereas some Bleed, we sleep in
safety, others Beg, we abound, others starve, we are full fed, others grope in
the dark, our Sun still shines, we have Eyes, Ears, Tongues, Feet, Hands,
Health, Liberty, Reason, others are Blind, Deaf, Dumb, Sick, Maimed,
Imprisoned, Distr^cted, and the like, yea God has removed so many evils from
us, and conferred so many good things upon us that they are beyond thought and
imagination, for if all the World were turned into a book, and all the Angels
deputed writers therein, they could not set down all the good which Gods Love
in Christ has done us. For those millions of mercies which we have received
since we were born, either for Soul or Body, even to the least bit of Bread, or
shall to eternity (of which we could not well want any one.) Christ has
purchased of his Father for us, and yet God the Father also has of his free
grace and mercy given us, in giving us his son. Yea God is many times Working
our good, when we least think upon him, as he was creating for Adam an
help-meet for him, when he was fast asleep, and as much do we owe God for the
Dangers from which he delivers us, as for the great Wealth and Dignities
whereunto he has always raised us.

Now what shall we render unto the Lord our God, so good and Gracious in way of
Thankfulness, for all these his Merits. The Contribution of Blessings require
Retribution of Thanks, or will bring distribution of Plagues, neither could we
possibly be unthankful, if we seriously thought upon what God gives, and what
he forgives, for in Reason has he contrived so many ways to save us, and
should not we take all occasions to glorify him? has he done so much for us,
and shall we deny him any thing that he requires of us? though it were our
lives, yea our Souls, much more our Lusts: we have exceeding hard hearts, if
the Blood of the Lamb cannot soften them; stony Bowels, if so many Mercies
cannot melt them, was Christ Crucified for our Sins, and should we by our sins
crucify him again? Oh let the meditation of what God and Christ has one for
us, make us do what we are able for him again; for did Christ do all this for
us, and shall we do nothing for him? like favors require like gratitude. Mary
Magdalen was a great Sinner, and she had much forgiven her, therefore she loved
much, so should every one of us do likewise, wherefore if we have any ingenuity
in us, it will make us direct all our thoughts speeches and actions to Gods
glory, as he has directed our Eternal Salvation thereunto.

But to help and further you herein, if you be willing so to do, take these few
directions.

First, Let these things be never out of the Minds, memories, and Mouths of
those whom Christ has done thus for, let every one of us, say with Holy
Bernard: Lord if I owed my whole self unto thee, forgiving me my self in my
Creation, what have I left to pay for giving thy self for me to so cruel a
Death, to procure my Redemption? which was not so cheap as my creation, great
was the Benefit that thou would Create me of nothing, but what tongue can
sufficiently express the greatness of the grace that thou did redeem me with
so dear a price when I was worse then nothing, we are full of thy goodness: O!
let our Hearts run over with Thankfulness: and let us say with David; O Lord
what is Man that thou art so mindful of him? What shall I render unto thee O
Lord for all these thy Benefits, but Love thee my Creator and Redeemer and
become a new Creature. How can any Rational Man meditate on such unbottomed a
Love, and not study and strive for an answerably, thankful, demeanor? if a
friend had given us but the thousandth part of what he has, we should heartily
love him all our lives, and think no thanks sufficient: what price then should
we set upon Jesus Christ, who is the life of our lives, and the Soul of our
Souls: Surely this should at least make us part with our nearest, dearest, and
sweetest darling Sins to serve him in Righteousness, and Holiness, every Day,
every Hour, all the Days of our Lives, what a Brutish and Barbarous
unthankfulness and shame, were it that God should part with his Son, and his
Son with his own precious blood for us, and we not part with our sinful Lusts
and Delights for him.

But Secondly, Has Christ done all this for us his Servants? so much, and so
many ways obliged to him, then let us do what we are able for him again.

1. Let us be zealous for his Glory, and take his part when we see or hear him
dishonored, for as Augustine says, There can be no Love where there is no
Zeal. Well Born Children are touched to the Quick with the Injuries of their
Parents. And it is a base Vile and unjust Ingratitude that can endure the
disgrace of them under whose shelter they live.

2. Let us seek to draw others after us from Satan unto him.

3. Do we all we can to promote his Worship and Service.

4. Take all good occasions to publish to others how good God is, and what he
has done for us.

5. Let us wholly ascribe all the good we have, or do to free Grace, and give
him the Glory of his Gifts, employing them to our Masters best advantage.

6. Let us (that we may express our Thankfulness unto him) show kindness to
his Children and poor Members, who are Bone of his Bone, and Flesh of his Flesh.

7. Abhor we our selves, for our former unthankfulness, and our wonderful
provoking of him.

8. Hearken we unto Christ's Voice in all that he says unto us, and express
our Thankfulness by our Obedience: Yea all this let us do, if we do it but
for our own Sakes, for what should we have if we did thus serve Christ who has
done all these things for his Enemies, neglecting and dishonouring him. It Is
true we cannot properly be said to do any thing for him, that have all we have
from him, or if we could give him our Bodies and Souls, they would be saved by
it, but he were never the better for them, yet we may do these and the like
things, which he accounts and rewards as done to himself.

Now these things we ought to do, thus thankful we ought to be to God, for his
inestimable and unspeakable Benefits toward us. But do we thus requite the
Lord? or do we what we are able for him again. O that I could say we did, yea I
would we were but so thankful to Christ for all his Mercies (the least whereof
is greater then all the Courtesies of Men) as we are to a friend for some one
good turn. But Woe worth us a people not worthy the Crumbs of Christ, and our
Masters least Mercy, yea well worthy of more Plagues, then either Tire or
Sidon; Sodom or Gomarah, or any People since the Creation, for as if all that
Christ has done for us, were nothing to move us, we are so far from being
thankful, from loving, and serving him, that did we seriously think of Christ's
love, and our odious unthankfullnesse, and compare Gods goodness with our
ingratitude, rightly, weighing how we have from time to time abused his Mercy,
and those many means of grace which he in his long-suffering has afforded for
our reclaiming, it would even make us Speechless like him in the Gospel, as
neither expecting pardon, nor daring to ask it; yea it is the unspeakable Mercy
of the Lord, that our Land has not long since Spued us out, and that we are
not at this present frying in Hell, for whereas God has removed so many evils
Spiritual and Corporal; Temporal and Eternal from us, and conferred so many
good things upon us that they are beyond Thought and Imagination, we have
striven to multiply offenses against him, and to make them as infinite in
Number as his Blessings, we have done nothing from our Infancy, but added Sin
for Sin, as he has added Mercy to Mercy, whereby our Sins are become for
Number as the Sands of the Sea, and as the Stars of Heaven, may not God justly
another day call heaven and earth to witness against us, that he would have
saved us, yea, did woe us to accept of Salvation, saying: Turn ye, turn ye, for
why will you Dye O People of England: But we would not be Converted nor Saved,
for whereas God has offered us a Pardon (in rendering Christ unto us upon the
Condition of Faith and Repentance) even his own Son, to be a means of our
Reconciliation, we are so far from accepting it thankfully, that we not only
Refuse and Contemn it, but in a manner derided the offer of it our selves,
appose the Gospel of glad Tidings, and persecute Christ in his Members, either
with Hand or Tongue, or both, we are (most of us) so far from being Holy our
selves, that we hate Holiness in others, for if any become Religious and
Conscientious, and will not for Company grievously Sin against God, Wrong their
Bodies, destroy their own Souls, and Wilfully leap into Hell Fire with us? we
Envy, Hate, Censure, Scoff at, Nickname, Rail on and slander them, that we may
Discourage them in the Way to Heaven, baffle them out and make them ashamed of
their Holy profession, and Religious Conversation, and so consequently pull
them back to the World, that so we may have their Company here in Sin, and
hereafter in Torment: Oh foolish People and unwise thus to requite the Lord:
Our horrid Sins are grown up unto Heaven, in regard whereof we may justly be
confounded and ashamed to lift up our Eyes to him who is a Lord, so great and
terrible, of such Glorious Majesty and Infinite Purity, what then shall we say
to these things. Is there any Hope left for such Vile Creatures as we are, yea
surely for God does still afford us time to Repent, and the Gospel of glad
tidings does still continue amongst us; the Ministry of Reconciliation is
Preached unto us, and if we will at last come in with humble submission, and
yield to be governed by the Lord Jesus Christ, and live the rest of our days to
his will, in beleiving in him in Loving, Honoring, and obeying him, there is
no question but God will freely forgive what is past, and receive us again into
his favor; which the Lord of his Mercy grant for Jesus Christ his sake.

FINIS.
The Ready Way TO GET RICHES: OR, THE Poor Man's Counselor.

Teaching them How of Poor and Miserable, They may Become Wealthy and Happy.

Very seasonable for these Times, wherein all are Poor, or not pleased; or both
when they need be neither.

London, Printed for W. Thackeray, at the Angel in Ducklane. 1673.

THE Ready way to get Riches: OR, THE Poor man's Counselor.
HOw to become wealthy and happy is a thing so generally desired that it seems
to be a principal naturally rooted in the Heart of every man, as who and where
is the man yt desires not to be rich and happy, I dare say if the great Chain
who is said to have a Tree full of Pearls hanging by clusters should but make
Proclamation that whosoever would ^pair to him should have plenty of Gold, he
might drive such a trade as would soon make him a Bankrupt, for as ye Prophet
observes, every one from the greatest unto the least is given unto
Covetousness, Jer. 6.13 All gape after Gain, and how to get is each Man's
thought from Sun to Sun. Now to answer every man's desire, and to acquaint them
how of poor melancholy and miserable they may become rich, happy, and
cheerful, is my present purpose, and the task I have taken in ^and, the which I
shall do from the Word of God. Nor need it seem strange, that for the improving
of Men's outward estates, I prescribe them rules and directions from thence, for
would we be instructed in any necessary Truth, whether it be concerning private
families our selves, or be it touching God, the Church, the Comon-wealth, our
Neighbors, and Friends, our Temporal, Civil, Spiritual, Eternal Estate, or in
reference to our souls, bodies, names, estates, posterities. We need but have
recourse to the written Word, for that alone is a Magazine of all needful
provisian, a Storehouse of all needful Instruction, and let a man study
Machiavel and all the Machiavilians, and State-politians that ever wrote, he
can add nothing, or nothing of worth, to what may be collected thence touching
this subject, wherefore if any of poor would become rich, let him use ye means
which tend thereunto, observe and follow those Rules and directions which God
has prescribed and appointed in his word which are principally fix, for as the
Throne of Solomon was mounted unto by six stares, so is this Palace of plenty
and riches ascended unto by six steps, set upon this ground already laid, for I
find in the word six Infallible ways to become rich, or six sorts of men whom
God has promised to bless with riches and outward prosperity, yt is to say,
1. The Godly, 2. the Liberal. 3. the Thankful. 4. the Humble, 5. the
Industrious. 6. the Frugal. These of all other men in ye world are sure never
to want. And these are the Main Heads unto which I shall draw all I shall say
upon this subject.

First, If any of poor would become rich, let him become religious, for
godliness has the promises of this life, as well as of the life to come, yea
all temporal blessings that can be named are promised to ye godly, and to their
seed, and to them only, as both the old and new Testament do plainly and
plentfully prove, as for instance, in Duteronomy ye 28. God has promised that
if we will hearken diligently unto his voice, observe and do all his
Commandments, and walk in his ways, we shall be blessed in the City, and be
blessed in the Field, blessed in our going forth, and in our coming home,
blessed in the fruit of our bodies, and in the fruit of our ground, and in the
Fruit of our Cattle, the increase of of our Kine, and the Flocks of our Sheep,
yt he will bless us in our Store-house^ and in all that we set our hands unto,
and make us plentiful in all good things, and that we shall have where with to
lend unto many, and not to borrow, Verse. the 1, to 15, and Chap. 7. verse. 11,
to 19. To which is added many the like places, as blessed is the man that
fears the Lord, and delights greatly in his Commandments, wealth and riches
shall be in his House, Psalm. 112. verse. 1, to 4. Wait on the Lord and keep his
way, and he will exalt thee to inherit the Land, Psalm. 37.34. The Lord will
withhold no good thing from them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84.11. Delight thy
self in the Lord, he shall give thee thine hearts desire, Psalm. 37.3. Fear ye
the Lord ye his Saints, for nothing wants to them that fear him, the Lions do
lack and suffer Hunger, but they that seek the Lord shall want nothing that is
good, Psalm. 34.9,10. Whatsoever we ask we receive of him, because we keep his
Commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight, 1 John 3.12.
What rare and precious promises are these? ^o which I might add many of the
like nature, all which David had the experience of, who tells us that he
greatly rejoiced in the Strength and Salvation of the Lord, and the Lord gave
him his hearts desire and did not withold the request of his lips, yea he
prevented him with ye blessings of goodness, and set a Crown of Gold upon his
head, Psalm 2.1,2,3,4. And the like of Abraham and Lot and Job and Solomon. Let
us first seek the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all other things
shall be Ministered unto us, or come in as it were upon the Bargain, as our
Savior has assured us, Mat. 6.33. Neither are these promises made only to
the obedient themselves, but riches and all Earthly Blessings are entayled upon
their seed also, Psalm. 112.2,3. His seed shall be mighty upon the earth, the
Generation of the Righteous shall be blessed. Nor is riches and outward
prosperity promised to the Godly and their seed, as others usually enjoy them,
that is, singly and barely, but they have a promise of them, with a supply of all
other good things to be added thereunto, which may make them every way happy, as
that their prosperity shall be durable and lasting. That with riches they shall
have credit, honor, and promotion, with long life added, that they shall be
happy, and prosper in all they have or do, as having God their protector, who
with Mercy is said to compass them about on every side, Psalm 32.10. That they
shall be freed from all fears and dangers, and obtain victory over al their
enemies, together with Death, Hell, and the Devil, that they shall be freed
from the Law, and likewise from sin, and the penalty thereof, that they shall
have peace external, internal, eternal, and joy, even the joy of the Holy
Ghost, which is both glorious and unspeakable. That they shall not only
persevere, but also grow in grace and true Wisdom, that all things whatsoever
shall make for their good, that both their persons and performances shall be
good and acceptable, which before were vile and abominable. That by the prayer
of Faith they shall obtain of God whatsoever they shall ask in Christ's Name, and
according to his Word: and in fine, all other good things that can be named,
whether Temporal, or Spiritual, or Eternal, are by the promise of God entayled
upon them that love him and keep his Commandments, nor need we wonder at this,
or once question the same, for if he spared not his own Son; but delivered him
to death for us, how shall he not with him freely give us all things also, Romans
8.31,32. It is the Apostles argument; great, yea too great things for us to
receive, but not too great, for the great and good God of Heaven and Earth to
give, all the fear is on our part, whether we be such to whom the promise is
made, for all Gods promises are conditional, and though of these outward good
things he has promised abundance, yet it is upon the condition of faith and
obedience, as appears by the before mentioned places, so that if we be not
wanting in our duty and obedience to God, God would not be wanting in any good
thing to us, nor can we lock that God should make good his promises, if we make
them void by not observing the condition, if we will not dare to trust God upon
his promise so confidently, as we would a Friend or some great Man that is able
and honest: Besides the Lord has promised that there shall be no want to them
yt fear him, and no good thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly,
Psalm. 34.9, and 84,11. Where observe two things, there shall be no want to
such, and such shall want no good thing, so that he must be such a one to whom
the promise is made, and he must also be sure that it is good for him which is
promised; but oftentimes it is not good for a man to abound with earthly
Blessings, as strong Drink is not good for weak Brains, yea if any thing be
wanting to a good man, he may be sure it is not good for him, and then better
that he does want it, than that he did enjoy it. And what wise man will
complain of the want of yt which if he had, would prove more hurtful than
gainful to him, as a Sword to a Madman, a knife to a Child, drink to them that
have a Feavor or the Drop^e. No good thing will God withold, etc. And
therefore not wants themselves, which to many are also good, yea very good
things, as I could reckon up many want, sanctified is a notable means to bring
to repentance to work in us amendment of Life, it stirs up to prayer, it weans
from the love of the World, it keeps us always prepared for the spiritual
Combat, discovers whether we be true believers or Hypocrites, prevents greater
evils of sin and punishments to come, it makes us humble, comfortable to Christ
our head, increases our faith, our joy, our thankfulness our spiritual
wisdom, and likewise our patience, as I have shown at large in another Book
called the Christians Comfort. To conclude, all good things were created for the
good, and therefore they are called goods because the good created them, for
good men to do good withal. Therefore as Jacob got the blessing, so he got yt
inheritance also, to show that as the faithful have ye inward blessing, so they
have the outward blessing too; when they will do them good, and cause them to
do good, yea in this case even as the sheafs fell before Ruth, so the Kiches
shall fall in our way, as they did to Abraham and Lot, and Jacob, and Job, and
Joseph, upon whom riches were cast, they knew not how, but as if God had only
said, be rich, and they were Rich straight, but that this is the true and only
way to Wealth and Happiness needs no more proof then that which is recorded of
Solomon, 1 Kings 3. 2 Chronicles. 1. Where the Lord appearing to him in a dream
said, ^k what I shall give thee, and he asking only an understanding Heart to
discern between good and evil, that he might the better Discharge that great
place whereunto God had called him, wherein Gods glory and the peoples good
were his Principal Aim and end: hear what the Lords Answer is: Because this was
in thine heart, and thou have not asked Riches, Wealth, or Honor; nor the life
of thine enemies neither, yet have asked long life but have asked Wisdom and
Knowledge for thy self, that thou might judge my people, over whom I have
made thee King, Wisdom and Knowledge is Granted unto thee, and I will give
thee Riches, and Wealth, and Honor, such as none of the Kings have had that
have been before thee: neither shall there any after thee have the like. Yea he
was so surpassing rich that he gave Silver in Jerusalem as stones, 1 Kings
10.27. Lo the true way to Wealth, Honor, and Happiness is to desire Grace
that we may glorify God, and do good: For clearing whereof I Will give you a
Similitude. A Man spies a fair Apple on a Tree, has a longing desire unto it,
whereupon he falls a shaking the Tree with all his might, at length it not
only comes down but many other come down to him together with it, and so much
to prove that the way to become rich is first to become Godly.

Secondly, He that would be a Rich Man let him be a merciful Man, and do good
with what God has already given him, be it never so little, for there is not a
more sure and Infallible way to Increase and Multiply a man's outward estate,
then in being charitable to ye poor, if we will believe Gods word, as what
says our Savior, Give and it shall be given unto you, Good Measure pressed
down and shaken together and running over shall men give into your Bosom, Luke
6.38. Mat. 7.2. Mark 4.14. And to this accord that place in the Proverbs. There
is ye scatters and is more increased, but he that spares more then is right,
shall surely come to poverty. The liberal person shall have plenty, and he that
waters shall also have rain, Pro. 11.24,25. And ye like in ye Psalms; Wealth
and Riches shall be in the house of him that has compassion of and gives to
the poor, Psalm. 112.3, to 10. See here how bounty is the best and surest way to
Plenty. But notable to this purpose is that, Pro. 28.37. He that gives to the
poor shall not lack, a rare and incomparable privilege never to want, and yet
this is a bargain of Gods own making, plenty shall furnish the table where
Charity takes away and gives to the Poor. He has dispersed abroad says the
Psalmist and given to the poor, his Benevolence remains for ever, Psalm.
112.9. He has always to give that has a free and bountiful Heart to give,
says St. Bernard, and of this the Prophet Isaiah does assure us. The liberal
man says he devises liberal things, and by liberality he shall stand, Isa.
32.8. A man would think he should rather fall by being so liberal and
bountiful, but this is the best course to thrive and hold out. Nor was it ever
known that God suffered a merciful and a bountiful man to want, ordering his
affairs with discretion, Psalm. 112.5. But you have not heard a Tith of these
promises, for the Scriptures no less abound in them, than silver did in the
days of Solomon, of which only a few more, is what says the wise man, Pro. 3.
Honor the Lord with thy substance, and with the first fruits of all thine
increase, so shall thy barns be filled with abundance, and thy presses shall
burst with new Wine, in which regard that which is this way expended, may be
likened to those loves and fishes in the Gospel, for as they did increase and
multiply, even while they were distributing, so does our Riches, and indeed all
other gifts, even out o^ which the Hand reaches to, the Mouth it self is
nourished, and thus you see that either Old or New Testament be true, not
getting but giving is the true and ready way to abundance, that to give in this
case is the way to have, and that we are the richer for disoursting, which
makes Chrisostom say: That the gainfulest art is Alms giving, and hence it is
that the Scripture compares it to sowing of Seed, 2 Cor. 9.6. He yt sows
sparingly shall reap sparingly, but he that sows bountifully shall also reap
bountifully, the Apostle compares giving to sowing, to note unto us the great
gain and advantage that comes thereby, and the Scriptures likewise compares
it to lending or putting money to interest, Pro. 19.17. He that has pity on
the poor lends unto the Lord, and that which he has given will he pay him
again. The Lord is content to acknowledge himself the charitable Man's debtor,
yea by our liberality to the poor, our most gracious redeemer acknowledges his
self gratified and engaged, Math. 25.35,36, etc. And for as much as ye did it
to the least of these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me, the poor man's Hand
is Christ's Treasury or Bank; and by putting thereinto a man becomes a Creditour
to his Savior, neither will he pay or recompense us as we do our Creditours,
for as Augustine well notes, what we receive by way of return, is not ten for
an hundred, nor an hundred for ten, but an hundred for one, yea a thousand
thousand for one, an hundred for one here in this World, and in the World to
come, Life everlasting, together with a Kingdom, even an immortal, eternal
Kingdom of Glory and Happiness in Heaven, which is not to be valued with ten
Thousand Worlds, and why all this but in recompense of feeding, clothing, and
visiting his poor Brethren and Members when they were destitute, where note but
the incomparable and infinite difference between the receipt and the return, as
O the unmeasurable measure of our Saviors Bounty; How happy is that man that
may become a Creditour to his Savior, heaven and earth shall be empty before
he shall want a Royal payment; wherefore hearken to this all you self-lovers yt
are only for your own ends, do you indeed love your selves and your souls,
would you be rich indeed, and that both here and hereafter, then be charitable
to the poor, even to the utmost of your Ability; for this giving is not only
an act of Charity, but of Christian policy, since we shall not only receive
our own again, but the same also with great increase, which made St. Augustine
say: That the Charitable man is the greatest Usurer in the World: This is the
Second means which God has appointed for the Improvement of our outward
estates, or the second step to riches and all outward prosperity: Viz. Bounty
and Liberality to the poor.

The Third and Fourth are thankfulness and humility, which are no way
inferior to the former.

Thankfulness and Humility are the only means to enrich us with Gods
blessings, but Pride and Unthankfulness is the only way to make God withdraw,
and take from us both himself and his Blessings: Because the King of Assyria
said: By the power of mine arm have I done it, and by my Wisdom, for I am
prudent. Therefore says the Lord I have removed the Borders of the people, and
have spoiled their treasures, and have pulled down ye inhabitants like a
valiant man; Isa. 10.13. Even so does God deal with all proud ungrateful
persons. There is nothing more pleasing to God, nor profitable to us, for the
procuring the good we want, or continuing the good we have, then humility and
thankfulness, God will sow their, and their only, plenty of his blessings,
where he is sure to reap plenty of Thanks and service, ingratitude forfeits
mercies, as Merchants do all to ye King, by not paying of custom; because
Pharaoh says: The River is mine own, therefore God says, I will dry up the
River, Ezekiel. 29.3. Isa. 19.5,6. When the People sought themselves only, and
how to have their houses scited and sumptuous, neglecting the house of God and
his honor, thus it fa^ed with them, yea have sown much and have reaped little,
and he that earneth wages, earneth wages to put it into a bag with holes, ye
looked for much and lo it came to little, and ye brought it home, I did blow
upon it, I called for a drought upon the Land, and upon all that it brings
forth, and upon all the labor of ye hands, etc. Again when they saught Gods
glory, and were thankful, mark the difference, even from this very day will I
bless you says the Lord, Hag. 1.4,5,6, etc. He yt is unthankful for a little
is worthy of nothing, whereas thanks for one good turn is the best introduction
to another, holy David was a man after Gods own Heart, and therefore he ever
mixeth with his prayers, praises. Bless the Lord O my Soul says he, and forget
not all his Benefits, Psalm. 103.2. And being of a public spirit he discovers
the secrets of his skill, let the people praise thee O God, yea let all the
People praise thee; the^ shall the earth bring forth her increase, and God even
our God shall give us his blessing, Psalm. 67.5,6,7. Wherefore be not like the
Swine that feed upon the acorns, without ever looking to the Oak from whence
they fall, or the Horse yt drinks of the Brook and never thinks of the spring,
yea since God is the fountain from which al our enjoyments flow, let this be
our continual determination. He has given us all the Grace, good, and
happiness we have, and we will give him all the possible Thanks and Honor we
can: yea, Teach us O Lord to receive the Benefit of thy merciful favor, and to
return thee the thanks and the Glory, and the like of Humility. Blessed are the
meek says our Savior for they shall inherit the earth, Math. 5.5. The reward
of Humility and the fear of God is riches, and honor, and life, Pro. 22.4. If
there be a hollow in a Valley lower than another thither the waters gather, and
the more lowly we are in our own Eyes ye more lovely we are in Gods. The more
despicable in our selves, the more acceptable in him, as is seen in the example
of the Publican, Luke 18.13,14. And the Prodigal, Luke 15.18,19. Nor can any
thing make us more acceptable to God then the Conscience of our own
unworthiness, when with Jacob we can say: O Lord I am not worthy of the least
of all thy mercies which thou have showed unto thy servant, for with my staff
I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two bands, Genesis 32.10. This is
ye way to obtain what we would have at the hands of God, who resists the
proud and gives grace to the humble, ^am. 4.6. Unto him will I look says the
Lord, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and that trembles at
my words, Isa. 57.15. He has filled the Hungry with good things, but ye rich
he has sent empty away, Luke 1.52. So ye if thou expectest to have God bless
and prosper thee, then beware thou forgetest not at whose cost thou live:
beware least when thou have eaten and art full, and when thy herds and thy
flocks multiply, and thy Silver and gold is increased, and all yt thou have be
enlarged, thine heart be lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God, and thou
say in thine heart, My power and the might of my hand has got me this
wealth: but on the contrary remember that it is the Lord thy God ye has given
thee power to get wealth, and that it is only his blessing which makes rich,
this is Gods counsel, set home with (...) very strict charge to all yt have not
a mind to perish, Deuteronomy. 28.10,11,12, etc. Many are the examples I might give
you of such as have been undone by their pride, when Saul was little in his own
eyes, God made him head over the Twelve Tribes of Israel, and gave him
abundance, but when out of his greatness he abused his place and gifts, God
took them all away again, and so it had like to fared with Hezekiah, when he
but began to be puffed up with the wealth and precious things that God had
given him, 2 Kings 20.12, to 19. But most remarkable is the example of
Nebuchadnezzar, who when be ascribed all to himself, saying: Is not this great
Babel which I have built with the might of my power, and for the Glory of my
Majesty, was presently deprived of his Kingdom, and all that he had, and sent
to grass with the Beasts, but when he was humbled to ye very ground,
acknowledged the Author, and ascribed all to the God of Heaven. He had his
Kingdom and all else restored unto him, Dan. 4. The way to obtain any benefit
is to acknowledge the Author, and devote it in our hearts to the glory of that
God, of whom we receive all, for by this means shall God both pleasure his
Servants, and honor himself, and indeed that he may be honored by our
wisdom, riches, graces, is the only end for which he gives us to be wise,
rich, and gracious, and who has more interest in the Grape then he that
planted the Vine, who more right to the Crop than he that owes the ground and
sows the seed? Therefore let not the wise man glory in his Wisdom, nor the
strong man in his strength, nor the rich man in his riches, Jer. 9.23. For we
have not only received our Talents from God, but the improvement also is his
mere bounty, of him and through him and for him be all things, to whom be glory
for ever, Amen.

Fifthly, The next means which God in his Word has appointed for this end is
Labor and Industy in some lawful calling, for it is the beating of the Brain
and sweating of the Brow, not the bare talk of the lips, or desire of the Heart
that makes rich, according to the common Proverb, wishers and woulders are
seldom or never good Householders, the idle person says Solomon shall be
clothed with rags, and the sluggards poverty comes upon him as an armed man,
but ye hand of the diligent makes rich, Prove. 10.4. and Chap. 12.17. The
Greeks have a saying that plentifulnesse follows painfullnesse, and that all
things are made servants to care and industry: Cajus Furius by his painful
dexterity and unwearied labor, got more means out of one small field then his
Neighbors out of many great ones, whereupon he was accused to ye Magistrate,
as if by Witchcraft he had conveyed ye Corn of other men's ground into his own,
but he came with all his goodly rustical Instruments, with his strong and lusty
Daughter, and his well fed Oxen, and spoke thus to the judges, See my Lords,
these be my Witchrafts and Sorceries, which being done and spoke, he was
presently absolved by the sentence of al, whence the Apostle exhorts ye
Ephesians to labor in their several callings, if they would have sufficient for
themselves, and wherewith to help others, and this makes Solomon in praising
the virtuous Woman for her bounty, note that she works diligently with her
hands, and that her candle was not put out by night. Prove. 31.10, etc. And St.
Luke the like of Dorcas her pains and industry, in making coats and garments,
Acts 9.36,37, etc. And what but idleness makes so many Beggars, and base
persons, it is the most corrupting fly that can blow in any humane mind. We
learn to do ill by doing what is next it, nothing: whence, it is that vice so
fructifies in our Gentry and Serving-men, who have nothing to employ themselves
in, for they only At to eat and drink, lie down to sleep, and rise up to play,
this is all their Business, and this brings Thousands of them to Beggary, or
worse. Be therefore painful and industrious in thy calling, and God will
undoutedly prosper, and replenish thee with the good things of this life. This
is another step.

Sixthly, If thou would grow rich, then be frugul and thrifty in spending, for
Thrift which is a due saving from needless and sinful expenses, and a wary
husbanding of what we get, has made as many Rich Men as painful getting. It is
our Saviors rule so to dispose of that plenty which God in his goodness
bestowed upon us, that nothing be lost, John 6.12. And it is a rule which all
good men will be sure to observe, for he who gets what he has justly pays what
he owes duly; requites favors, received thankfully, considers the case of the
poor cordially; will not, yea dare not spend wastfully, let means come in never
so plentifully, and yet he of all men is sure of a lasting Competency, Prove.
28.27. Frugality says Justine is the Mother of Virtues, but an expensive Man
whatsoever his getting be by wasting and overlashing of his estate, is sure not
to thrive as it fared with that Captain in Tully, who was not a penny the
richer for ye huge sum of Money given him, because he had done with it as a
naked man would do with the nuts, he gathers, carry them all away in his belly,
for lack of pockets: to want and wast differ: but in time a poor man has
riches, a prodigal shall have none, the vessel that runs out unduly, will be
empty when men come to draw out of it, so will the state be if we let it leak
like a Cracked Vessel. But what the difference is betwixt a wise and prudent
frugality, and a vain expense of Gods benefits, we may learn from, Genesis 42.
etc. Where notwithstanding the 7 years of Famine, Egypt had Corn enough when
all other Countries were without, and the people ready to Famish, which needed
not have been if they had been more sparing in the 7 plentiful years, for those
years of plenty were not confined to Egypt, other Countries adjoined were no
less fruitful, as the learned aver. But that prodigality brings many rich men
to poverty, and poor men to Beggary, daily experience do abundantly Testify.
Therefore if thou would be rich wast not any part of thy substance in vain
needless superfluous expenses, but beg of God wisdom yt thou may improve
his blessings to the best advantage yt so he may be glorified, and thy store
increased. Then shall thou live happily and contentedly all thy days. And so
much of the means how of poor to become rich. Consider what has been said, and
the Lord give you understanding in all things.

Finis.
A Short and Sure WAY TO Grace and Salvation: OR, Proper Means to expel Gross
Ignorance.

Being a Necessary and Profitable Tract, upon Three Fundamental Principles of
Christian Religion, which few do indeed know; and yet he who knows them not,
cannot be saved: viz.

How Man was first Created. He is now Corrupted. He may be again restored.


Together with the Conditions of the Covenant of Grace, and to whom the
Promises of the Gospel belong.

The which well Learned, would keep Millions out of Hell, that blindly throng
thither.

LONDON, Printed for W. Thackeray, at the Sign of the Angel in Duck-Lane, 1674.

A Short and Sure Way TO Grace and Salvation: OR, Proper means to Expel Gross
IGNORANCE.
AS when God created the World, the first thing he made was light, Genesis 1.3. So
when he makes us new creatures, he first Creates light in the understanding,
whereby the poor soul may see his spiritual misery and wretchedness, which
before by reason of that Vail or Curtain, which is drawn over every natural
man's heart, 2 Cor. 3.14,15,16. he is so far from descerning, that with
Laodicea, he thinks himself rich, and to want nothing, when yet he is wretched,
and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked of all spiritual endowments, Rev.
3.17. Now this being the case of many Millions in this Land, how can we other
than conclude that even few shall be saved? for without Knowledge, the mind
cannot be good, as wise Solomon affirms, Prove. 19.2. A man may know the Will of
God, and yet not do it, but he cannot do it, except he know it, neither can he
be born of God, that knows him not, 1 John 4.7. nor can he love God, verse 8.
whence that terrible Text, Jer. 19.25. Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen, that
know thee not, Psalm. 79.6. And that more terrible. The Lord shall be revealed
from Heaven in flaming fire, to take vengeance on them that know not God; which
being so, I hold my self bound to acquaint them what every one must of
necessity know, or they cannot be saved: the which I will do in a few lines,
that all who will, may have the benefit hereof; wherefore let all such if they
have ears, hear what I shall say unto them out of God's Word, in laying open
these three Fundamental Principles of Religion: Viz. How man was at first
Created. 2. How he is now Corrupted. 3. How he may be again Restored.


Touching the Bounty and Goodness of God in Man's Creation, these things would
be known. 1. That God in the beginning made men in Paradise after all his
Works, that he might come as to a sumptuous Palace ready furnished. 2. That he
was made a Compendium, and Abridgement of all the other Creatures, as being a
little world of himself, and contains in him more Generality then the Angels,
having being, life, reason, as they have, and sense which they have not. 3.
That as he was made Lord of, and had dominion over all, so he did excel all
other visible Creatures. 1. In that he had a reasonable Soul. 2. In that he had
a speaking tongue. 3. In that he was made upright, with his face lifted up to
Heaven. 4. In that all things were made subject to him. 5. In that he was made
after the Image of God. 6. In that his Soul is Immortal. 7. In that he was
ordained to eternal Glory.



More especially we are to know, that as God made all things else for Man's use
and service, so he Created Man, Male and Female, more immediately for his own
Honor, and Service, and did accordingly adorn him with Gifts and Abilities
above all other visible Creatures, for God made us, had not we unmade our
selves, after his own Image, endowing us with perfection of all true Wisdom,
Holiness, and Righteousness, writing his Law in our hearts, and giving us
ability to obey and fulfill the same in every point, and withal, a power to
stand, and for ever to continue in a most blessed, and happy condition, free
from all misery, and to enjoy a sweet and blessed Communion, with his Creator,
so that man was created very good, did clearly and perfectly know the whole
Will and Works of his Maker, was able out of the integrity of his Soul, and
fitness of all the powers, fully, willingly, and cheerfully, to love, observe,
and obey his Maker in every tittle and circumstance he required, and to love
his Neighbor as himself; so that neither the mind did conceive, nor the heart
desire, nor the body put in execution any thing, but that which was acceptable,
and well-pleasing unto God, as these ensuing Scriptures does plainly prove,
Genesis 1.26,27,30. Eccles. 7.29. Romans 2.14,15.

In the second place, to show you how man came to be corrupted.

God at first entered into Covenant with our first Parents, as public Persons,
both in behalf of themselves, and all that should proceed out of their Loins,
and so that whatsoever Gifts, Privileges, and Endowments they had bestowed
upon them, should be continued to them and theirs, only upon condition of
their Loyalty and personal Obedience (of which the tree of life was a pledge)
and they should have, and enjoy them, or lose, and be deprived of them, as well
for their offspring, as for themselves; as they should keep or transgress his
Royal Law. But see how unworthily they demeaned themselves toward their
Bountiful Maker and Benefactor, for whereas God placed them in Paradise, and
gave them free liberty to eat of the fruit of every tree of the Garden, save
only of the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, prohibiting them that alone,
even upon pain of eternal death to them and theirs, they most persidiously
contemned and brake this Law, which (as sundry circumstances that do agravate
it, show) was a most execrable and damnable Sin; as observe the several
circumstances set down by Moses to amplify the foulness of their fall: As,

First, That they despised and made light of the promise of God, whereby they
were commanded to hope for everlasting life, so long as they continued their
Loyalty and Obedience.

Secondly, There was in it an unsufferable pride and ambition, in that he could
not content himself with being Lord of the whole Universe, but he must be equal
unto God, and every way like his Maker.

Thirdly, What greater unbelief could there be? when he gave more credit to the
Serpent, in saying he should not dye, then to God, who immediately before tells
him, that if he did eat the forbidden fruit, he should surely dye.

Fourthly, In this sin was not only unkindness, not to be paralel'd, but
withal, Murder of himself and all his posterity, who he knew were to stand or
fall with him.

Fifthly, Herein was foul Apostasy from God, to the Devil, to whom (in effect)
charging God with Lying, Envy, Malice, etc. He revolted and adheared, rather
then stick to his Maker. And to these might be added many the like
circumstances, which exceedingly agravated the Sin of our first Parents, and
make it so deadly in effect; for hereby it is we not only lost our blessed
Communion with God, that the Image of God after which they were created, was
forthwith abolished, and blotted out, but that many grievous Miseries, and
Punishments came in the room of it; so that in the place of Wisdom, Power,
Holiness, Truth, Righteousness, and the like: Ornaments wherewith we had been
clothed, there has succeeded these, and the like. This their Sin has filled
our whole man with Corruption; it has made us become Vassals unto Sin, and
Satan, it has disabled us from understanding the Will, and observing the
Commandments of the Lord, it caused us to lose our right unto, and Sovereignty
over the Creatures, it makes our persons and actions unacceptable to God, it
has cast us out of God's favor, and made us liable, and subject to all the
plagues and miseries of this life, and to endless, easeless, and remediless
Torments in the World to come. And the reason is, our first Parents, being the
Root of all Mankind, and instead of all their posterity before they had Issue;
and the Covenant being made with them as public persons, not for themselves
only, but for their posterity, who were to stand or fall with them, they being
left to the freedom of their own Wills, in Transgressing the Commandment of
God, by eating the Forbidden-Fruit, through the Temptation of Satan, have made
us and all Mankind descending from them by ordinary Generation, as guilty of
their Sin, as any Heir is liable to Fathers Debt, their act being ours, as the
act of a Knight or Burgess in the Parliament House, is the act of the whole
County, in whose name and room they sit, and whom they represent, by which
means our Nature is so corrupted, that we are utterly indisposed, and made
oposite to all that is spiritually good, and wholly inclined to all evil, and
that continually, and have also lost our Communion with God, incurred his
displeasure and Curse, so as we are justly liable to all punishments both in
this life, and that which is to come, for the confirmation of this point, these
following Scriptures, amongst many others, are the most pregnant: I will only
name them, because I will be brief, Jer. 31.29. Romans 5.12, to 21. Job 14.4.
Isa. 64.6. Romans 3.20,21,22,23. Genesis 6.5,6. Mat. ^5.19. Gal. 5.19,20,21. James
4.1. Tit. ^.15. Romans 7.14, to 25. Ephesians. 2.2,3. Gal. ^.10.

Our first Parents were the Root, we are ^he Branches, if the Root be bitter,
we cannot ^e better; they were the Fountain, we are the Springs, if the
Fountain be filthy, so must the ^prings: whence it is that Holy David cries
^ut; Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in ^n did my Mother conceive me,
Psalm. 51.5. ^s in the little and tender bud is infolded the ^eaf, the Blossom,
and the Fruit, so even in the ^eart of a young Child, there is a Bundle and
Pack of Folly laid up, as Solomon affirms, Pro. 22.15. And as Moses speaks, The
thoughts of Man's Heart are evil, even from his Child^ood, Genesis 6.5. and Genesis
8.21. As a Furnace ^ontinually sparkles, as the raging Sea forms, and casts up
mire and dirt, and as a filthy ^ung-hill does continually reak forth and
eva^uate odious odours, so do our hearts Naturally stream forth unsavory
erutations, unholy ^usts and Motions, even continually, and as ^he healthiest
Body is subject to the mortalest Disease; so there is no Sin so odious, unt^
which of our selves we are not sufficiently inclinable: for Original Sin, in
which we are a^ born and bred, contains in it self the seed (...) all Sins,
and never was there any villainy committed by any forlorn Miscreant, whereunto
we have not a disposition in our selves. Ther^ is no part, power, function, or
faculty, either (...) our Souls or Bodies, which is not become ready Instrument
to dishour God, our heart are a root of all corruption, a seed-plat of all si^
our Eyes are Eyes of Vanity, our Ears are Ears of Folly, our Mouths are Mouths
(...) Deceit, our Hands are Hands of Iniquity, an^ every part does strive to
dishonor God; for Sin like a spreading Leprosy is so grown ove^ us, that from
the Crown of our Heads, to the Sole of our Feet, there is nothing whol^
therein, but wounds, and swellings, and sores full of Corruption. And so much
of Original Sin, which is the pravity, naughtiness, and corruption of our
Nature, Psalm. 51.5. Now o^ actual Sin, which is the transgression of God's Law,
1 John 3.4. When evil thoughts ar^ consented unto and performed in outwar^
deeds, Jam. 1.15. Touching which we are t^ know and take notice that the Law of
God i^ Spiritual, and therefore requires not only outward obedience in Word
and Deed, bu^ also inward, in mind and heart, and that chiefly; neither does it
forbid only the committing ^f outward Sins in Word and Deed, but also all the
secret Corruptions and Heart, Romans 7.^3,14,15. Mat. 5.21,22,27,28. 1 John 3.15.
^gain, where any Duty is commanded, there ^e means which tend thereunto is
enjoined, and where any vice is forbidden, there the Occasions, Provocations,
and Allurements, ^nding thereto, are also forbidden. Again, it (...) not enough
to do that which is good for sub^ance, except we do it well also in regard of
^f Circumstances; as namely, that it flows from (...) pious and good Heart,
Sanctified by the Holy Ghost, and be done in Faith, Obedience (...) the Word,
Humility, Saving-Knowledge, and sincere love to God, zeal of his Glory, and
(...) desire to edify and win others, for Love is ^e Fountain of Obedience,
and all eternal Obedience to God, without inward love, is Hypocrisy, whereas
Christ commends to his Disciples, the care of keeping his Commandments aright,
as the utmost Testimony of their love unto him: which being so, how ^ft, and
how many ways do we all offend? for ^f we but narrowly look into our hearts,
and ^ves, we shall easily perceive that there is ^ot one of those Righteous
Precepts set down, Exodus 20, Which we have not broken ten thousand times; yea,
if we do but watch ove^ our own hearts narrowly one day, we shall fin^ an Army
of unclean thoughts and desire^ there perpetually, fighting against our Souls
whereby we are continually tempted, draw^ away, and enticed through our own
Concupiscence: as, how many Temptations com^ in by those sinck-ports, the
Senses. How many more by Satan's injections, presenting t^ the affections things
absent from the Senses but most of all by Lust it self, a thing not created,
yet as quick as thought, tumbling ove^ a thousand desires in one hour, to
engende^ ^ew Sins, which is the reason our Sins accounted amongst those things
that are infinit^ as the Hairs of our Head, the Sands of the Sea, the Stars of
Heaven, our very Righteousness is as a menstruous cloth, what the is our
sinfulness, as bring we our Lives t^ the Rule, look how many sins are cherished
so many false Gods there are chosen; look how many Creatures thou inordinately
love fear, trustest, rejoycest in, so many new God have thou Coined, and
will thou not then plea guilty, when the first and second Commandment
arraigneth thee? thou can not awa^ with Swearing, but do thou reprove other
for their Swearing, did thou never hea^ Sermon unpreparedly, irreverently?
etc. Do^ thy Heart upon a Sabath-day, rest from Worldly thoughts, much more thy
Tongue, ^om Worldly Speeches? Have thou not mur^ered thy Neighbors Soul, by
thy Negli^ence, Persuasion, Evil-example? etc. There (...) Murder of the
Heart, which is Hatred and Malice. Thou have not Stolen, but have thou ^o^
Coveted, have thou been liberal to those ^t are owners of a part of thy Goods?
have ^ou not robbed thy Brother of his good name, which is above Silver and
Gold, have thou ^ot robbed God of his Worship, of his Sabath, ^f his Tithes?
etc. Have thou not born false wit^ess, by Lying, Flattering, Detracting,
List^ing to Tales: yea, by not defending thy ^rothers good name? have thou kept
the tenth Commandment, which condemns the very first ^otions of Sins, springing
out of our hearts, ^ough presently rejected, and a thousand the ^ke? and yet
for every drop of Wickedness that is in the life, there is a Sea in the heart
that feeds it. True, if thou look on thy Sins (...) Satan's false Glass, that
will make them ^eem light, and contemptible; but behold them in the clear and
perfect Glass of God's ^aw, and they will appear abominable; which makes our
Savior call, Hatred, Murder, (...) wanton Eye, Adultery, etc. Yea, consider
^hy Sins rightly, and they will appear as the Judasses that betrayed the
Soldiers tha^ apprehended, bound, smote, and wounded thy Savior, as the Gall
and Vinegar in his Mouth, the Spittle on his Face, Thorns o^ his Head, Nails in
his hands, Sp^ar in his side. This is the way to know ^hy self sinful, and as
thus to know thy self, is the bes^ Divinity; so thus to agravate thy Sins in
thine own sight, is the only way to have them extenuated in the sight of God,
whence it is, that the more holy a Child of God is, the more sensible he is of
his own unholiness, thinking none so vile as himself, as it fared with Holy
Job, Job 40.4. and 42.6. And with Isaiah in the 6 Chap. 5. Verse. And with St.
Paul, 1 Timothy 1.15. Romans 7.14, to 25. And with holy David who almost in every
Psalm, so much bewails his Sins, Original and Actual, of Omision and
Commission. And so having given you a short Survey of our Wretchedness, by
reason of Original Corruption, and Actual Transgression, by which we must
confess to have deserved double damnation. I come now to declare the means,
which God of his infinite goodness has found out, both for satisfying of his
Justice, and also freeing us the Guilt and punishment of either, and that with
as much brevity as may be.

First, In general we must undoubtedly know that the sole perfection of a
Christian is the im^itation of Christ's righteousness, and the nor^putation of
his own righteousness, as appears (...) the whole current of Scripture: of
which a ^w, 1 Cor. 15.21,22. As in Adam all dyed, so (...) Christ shall all be
made alive, Romans 5.18,19. ^s by one man's disobedience, many were made ^inners,
so by the obedience of one, shall many (...) made righteous: as by the offense
of one, ^dgment came upon all men to condemnation, ^hen so by the righteousness
of one, the free gift ^me upon all men to justification of life, 2 Cor. ^ 21.
He has made him to be sin for us, who ^ew no sin, that we might be made the
righte^sness of God in him, Romans 4.25. He was de^ered to death for our Sins,
and is risen again (...) our Justification, 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his ^on self bear
our sins in his own body on the ^ree, by whose stripes we are healed, Isa.
53.5. ^e was Wounded for our Transgressions, (...) was broken for our
Iniquities, the cha^sement of our peace was upon him, and ^ith his stripes we
are healed; see further in ^cts 4.12. Romans 6.23. John 11.25. Ephesians. ^ 1 John
4.16. John 1.29. Acts 13.39. Col. ^ 14. Gal. 3.22. Heb. 9.28. 1 Pet.
1.18,19,20. ^s Christ was a Sinner only by the Impu^tion of our sins, so we
are just, only by the ^mputation of his Righteousness: our good Works, be they
never so many and rare, cannot justify us, or deserve any thing at God's
hands, it is only in Christ that they are accepted, and only in Christ that
they are rewarded; yea, the opinion of thine own righteousness makes thy
condition far worse than the wickedest man alive; for Christ that came to save
all weary and heavy laden Sinners, be they never so wicked, neither came to
save or once to call thee that have no sin, but art righteous enough without
him. Therefore unti^ with St. Paul thou renounceth thine own righteousness, and
see thy self the greatest of siners, art able to discern sin in every thing
thou can think, speak, or do; and that thy very righteousness is no beter
then menstruous cloth, thou can have no part in Christ, and until Christ
shall become thine by regeneration and a lively faith, thou art bound to keep
the whole Law actually and spiritually, with thy whole man, thy whole life, or
else suffer eternal death and destruction of soul and body in hell, for not
keeping it. But this being a main fundamental point, which every man is bound
to know, I will more particularly, and fully explain it, as thus. Man being in
a most miserable and undone condition, by reason of Original and Actual Sin,
and of the Curse due to both, being liable to all miseries in this life, and
adjudged to suffer Eternal Torments in Hell after Death, having no possibility
to escape the fierce Wrath of Almighty God, who had already pronounced Sentence
upon him, when neither Heaven nor Earth could have yielded any satisfactory
thing besides Christ, that could have satisfied God's justice, and merited
Heaven for us.

Then, O then, God of his infinite Wisdom and Goodness, did not only find out a
way to satisfy his Justice, and the Law, but even gave us his own Son out of
his bosom, and his Son gave himself to dye, even the most shameful, painful,
and cursed death of the Cross, to redeem us, that whosoever believes in him
should not perish, but have everlasting Life. Which Salvation stands in two
things. First, in freeing and delivering us from Hell. Secondly, in the
possession of Heaven and eternal Life. Christ by his death merits the first for
us, and by his obedience fulfilling the Law, merits the second. Hear this all
you that care to be saved, God will pardon all your Sins, he will give you an
eternal Crown of Glory in Heaven, if you unfeignedly repent, and wholly rely
upon Christ for your Salvation, by a lively Faith, and that because he is just,
for although the Lord cannot in justice let sin go unpunished, for the wages of
sin is eternal death, Romans 6.23. Death in the person, if not in the surety, yet
Christ has sufficiently satisfied for all the sins of the faithful, and paid
their debt even to the utmost farthing, as is evident by, Isa. 53.4,5. 2 Cor.
5.21. Heb. 9.29. 1 Pet. 2.24. Romans 3.25,26. And sundry other places: as we are
bound to perform perfect obedience to the Law: Christ performed it for us: were
we for disobedience subject to the sentence of condemation, the curse of the
Law, and death of body and soul? he was condemned for us, and bore the curse of
the Law, he dyed in our stead an ignominious death: did he deserve the anger of
God? he endured his fathers wrathful displeasure, that he might reconcile us to
his Father, and set us at liberty; therefore was the Son of God made the Son of
Man, that the Sons of Men might be made the Sons of God.

And so much for explication of the 3 Principles mentioned in the beginning.
But now comes the hardest part of my Work to be performed; for admit the
natural man be convinced of the truth of these three fundamental Principles
never so clearly, yet he will draw such a conclusion from the promises, that he
will never be the better for what has been told him, yea, he will deceit all,
even the mercy and goodness of God into poison, for what will such a one
suggest to himself, the Devil helping forward? Let it be granted, will he say
that I were every way wretched and miserable, a great sinner, both originally
and actually, and likewise liable to all the plagues of this life, and of that
to come, yet I I thank God I am well enough, so long as Christ has paid my
ransom, and freed me from all, by a new Covenant, the Tenure whereof is,
Believe and Live; whereas at first it was, Do this and Live: To which I answer,
although Christ in the Gospel has many large and precious promises, yet there
are none so general, which are not limited with the condition of faith, and the
fruit thereof, unfeigned repentance, and each of them are so entailed, that
none can lay claim to them but true believers, which repent and turn from all
their sins to serve him in Holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord,
Heb. 12.24. ^sa. 59.20. As for instance, our Savior has made public
proclamation, Mark 16.16. That whosoever shall believe and be baptized; but
mark what withal is added, he that will not believe shall be damned. Again,
John 3.15,16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begoten Son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life; and
that ^one may deceive themselves, he adds, he that believes not is condemned
already, because he has not believed on the only begoten Son of God. Again,
Heb. 5.19. He is said to ^t the Author of eternal Salvation, to them that ^hey
him, not unto them which continue in their ^ebellious wickedness, and never
submit themselves to be ruled by the Scepter of his Word: Christ's blood was
shed, as well for ablation, as ^solution; as well to cleanse from the soil and
filth of sin, as to clear and assoil from the guilt of sin, Romans 6.5,6. God
has chosen us in Christ, before the foundation of the World, that we should be
holy and without blame before him in love, Ephesians. 1.4. They therefore that
never come to be holy were never chosen. He is said to have given himself for
us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purge us to be a peculiar
people unto himself, zealous of good Works, Tit. 2.14. Luke 1.74,75. Yea, the
Lord binds it with an Oath, that whosoever he redeemeth out of the hands of
their spiritual enemies, they shall worship him in holiness and righteousness
all the days of their life. And the Grace of God which brings salvation,
teaches us, that we should deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that we
should live soberly, righteously, and Godly in this present World, Tit. 2.12.
By all which is plain, that as Christ's Blood is a Chartar of Pardon, so withal
it is a Covenant of Direction, and he that refuses to live, as the Covenant
prescribes, may perish as a Malefactor, that is hanged with a Pardon about his
Neck. But alas, say what can be said, carnal men who love their sins, better
the^ their Souls will answer all, yea, confute what soever can be alleged,
with God is Merciful^ or in case that will not serve, yet they have another
shift, the Devil blinds them, and makes the^ believe they have a strong faith,
good hearts, an^ mean well, they repent of their Sins, have as good wishes and
desires as can be, are Elected, hope to go to Heaven as well as the best. But
to every of these I will answer: First, True faith purifieth the heart, and
works by Love, consumes our corruptions, and sanctifies the whole man
throughout, so that our faith to God, is seen by our faithfulness to men; our
invisible belief, by our visible life; Faith and Holiness are as inseparable as
Life and Motion, the Sun and Light, Fire and Heat, Honey and Sweetness. Again,
Faith believes the threats of the Word, as well as the promises. Now thou who
pretendest Faith in the promises, show me thy belief in the Threatenings; for
did thou believe the truth of these Menaces which God has denounced against
Unclean, Covetous, Ambitious, Unjust, Envious, Malicious Persons, and such like
Sinners; how durst thou then wa^low in these Sins, that if God instead of Hell,
had promised Heaven as a reward, thou could not do more then thou do, why
should thou deceive thy self with an opinion of Faith, when indeed thou
believe not so much as the Devil does, for he believes, namely the
threatenings of the Word, and trembles for horror, Jam. 2.19. Again, Faith is
wrought by God's Spirit, and where it is wrought, it brings forth the fruits of
the Spirit, mentioned Gal. 5.22,23. Whereas presumption, as it is of the flesh,
so it brings forth the fruits of the Flesh, v. 19,20,21. Now this is a sure
Rule, the persuasion only which follows sound Humiliation, is Faith; that
which goes before it, is Presumption; for no man can repent of Sin, but he that
believes the pardon of Sin; for none can believe his Sins are pardoned, except
he has repented.

Secondly, As for their good hearts, and intentions, they may think what they
will, but every wise man knows that the outward actions, declare the inward
intentions. A good Conversion is proved by a good Conversation; and in case the
hearts of such men could be seen by others, as their works and words are, their
hearts would appear worst of all; as they do to God, who sees them: nor is any
evil in the mouth or hand, which was not in the heart first of all; as the
stream in the Fountain; the heart of Man is deceitful above all things, and
whilst they think there is no deceit in it, even in that they are most of all
deceived.

Thirdly, Touching their Repentance, my Answer is: True Repentance for Sin, is
a turning from every Sin, to the contrary Good. True Repentance is a change
both in the Judgment, from Error, to Truth, and in the Will, from Evil, to
Good, and in the Affections, from loving Evil, and hateing Good, to love Good,
and hate Evil, in the whole man, from Darkness, to Light, and from the power of
Satan to God, without which change, no repentance, no being saved.

Fourthly, As for their assurance of Salvation, it is upon as good ground as
all the rest, for they slumber, and suppose themselves good Christians, their
Faith is but a dream, their hope but a dream, their charity but a dream, their
obedience but a dream, their whole Religion but a dream, and so their assurance
of salvation is but a dream, they have regeneration in conceit, repentance and
righteousness in conceit, they serve God well in conceit, do the works of
justice and ^iety in conceit, and they shall go to heaven only (...) conceit,
or in a dream, and never wake till they feel themselves in the flames of hell;
every ^unken beast and unclean person, and prophain swearer, and covetous
muck-worm, thinks to go (...) heaven, though none shall come there without
^oliness, which they abhor. But let every wicked ^an and formal professor know
that if Christ ^th freed them from the damnation of Sin, he ^ath also freed
them from the dominion of Sin. Christ's justifying blood, is given us by his
sancti^ying spirit. He being consecrated, was made the ^uthor of eternal
salvation, to them, and only ^em that obey him, Heb. 5.9. But vicious men ^nk
God is all mercy, when the Word tells us ^t he is a consuming fire, and a
jealous God, Deuteronomy. 4.24. Heb. 12.29. And then we may find in Deuteronomy. 28. thrice
as many cursings, as blessings; do thou expect to have him merciful to thee,
that art bloody, cruel, and unmerciful to him, to his, and ^o thine ow^ soul?
none that have eyes in their heads, and open, can be so sottish; but Sin is
like the juice of Poppy, which if the quantity exceed, brings the patient
into a deep steep, that he never awakneth; Sinners dream they are awake, but
indeed they are fast asleep; yea, with Sardis they are dead, while they think
they are alive. But in the last place, touching their election, this is an
infallible truth, whomsoever God has appointed to salvation, to them he has
appointed the means also, which is holiness. Indeed a man may be so hold of his
predestination, as to forget his conversation: so he may dream himself in
heaven, and awaken from the dream in hell: God's purpose toward the end,
includes the means. Though God had promised Paul that his company should not be
drowned, yet he told the Mariners, that unless they kept the ship, they should
be drowned, Acts 27.22.23. As if their safety should not be without means;
R^bekah had God's Oracle for Jacob's life, yet she sent him away out of Esaus
reach. It was impossible for Herod to kill the Child Jesus, yet he must fly
into Egypt. And so I have shown in the last place, what are the conditions of
the New Covenant, and to whom the promises belong. Consider what has been
said, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

FINIS.
THE Christians Comfort: OR, The Goodness and Mercy of God unto his Children in
their Greatest Misery.

SHOWING, The Benefit of Afflicton, And how to Husband it so, that the weakest
Christian with Blessing from Above, may be able to support himself in his most
miserable Exigents.

Very full of Heavenly Consolation.

London, Printed for W. Thackeray, at the sign of the Angel in Duck-lane. 1673.

THE Christians Comfort: OR, The Goodness and Mercy of God unto his Children in
their Greatest Misery.
It is good for me that I was afflicted.

THe point of Doctrine which I shall observe from these Words, is this.

It Is for the Benefit and Advantage, for the Spiritual and Everlasting good of
Gods Children that they are afflicted: for the proof hereof to make the same
more clear, I shall give you a demonstration of several particular advantages,
which the people of God gain by their Afflictions.

In the first place, they are a notable ^eans to rouse them out of careless
security, and bring them to Repentance, Job 33.16,17. God opens the Ears of
Men even by their Corrections, that he might cause man to turn away from his
enterprise, and that he might keep back his Soul from the Pit. Our afflictions
are as Benhadads Counselors, that sent him with a Cord about his Neck to the
merciful King of Israel. The Church of God under the Cross is brought to a
serious Consideration of her estate, and says: Let us search and try our ways,
and turn again to the Lord, Lam. 3.40. Affliction is the Hammer which breaks
our Rocky Hearts, adversity has whipped many a Soul to Heaven, which otherwise
Prosperity had couched to Hell: was not the Prodigal riding post thither till
he was soundly lasht home again to his fathers house by those hard hearted and
pitilesse Naballs which refused to fill his Belly with the Husks of the Swine:
and indeed seldom is any Man awakened from the sleep of Sin but by Affliction:
for as Aloes kills worms in the stomach, or as Frost and Cold destroys Vermin,
so does bitter Afflictions crawling Lusts in the Heart: my wants says one
kills my Wantonness, my Poverty checks my Pride, my being slighted quells my
Ambition and vain Glory, and as for Sickness it cuts the Throat of Vices; yea
how many will confess that one Affliction has done more good upon them, then
many Sermons that they have Learned, more good in one Days or Weeks misery,
than many years Prosperity could teach them: Repentance seldom meets a man in
jollity, but in affliction the Heart is made pliable and ready for all good
Impressions. True, if Gentleness would serve, we should not smart, for God
like a good Surgeon first strokes the Arm before he opens the Vein. He sends
for us by his Ambassadors the Ministry, yet we come not. Let him fire our
field, as Absalom did by Joab, we come presently: when singing will not still
the Child, the Rod must: hard knots, must have hard wedges, strong affections,
strong afflictions, great corruptions, great Calamities to cure them.
Affliction is but the Shepherds Dog to fetch us into Christ's Fold, perhaps by
Barking only, and then we are more scared then hurt, perhaps in his Mouth, and
the poor Sheep thinks surely he will worry it, but he is taught to fetch only,
and therefore gripes not, but only carrys it, and delivers it to his Master,
when Children have done a fault Mothers use to fright them with Bull beggars,
the Child thinks surely they will have him, but the Mother has a double
policy: Viz. To make them hate the fault and love them the better, for they
run to the Lay to bide them, and then will she make her own Conditions, and so
the very end which God aims at in setting those Adders upon thee, is that thou
should turn thine Eyes inward, that thou may see, for what thou suffer,
pry narrowly into thine own fore^ast actions, which if thou do, a hundred to
one thou will find sin, it may be this very sin the cause of thy present
affliction, and until thou do ^ft and ^ry thine own heart, and find out which
is thy beloved sin look for no release, wherefore let this Correction bring
forth Conversion, cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purify your hearts ye
double minded, Jam. 4.8. Not your Hands only with Pilate, but your Hearts with
David, yea and your Eyes too with Mary Magdalen, if it be possible, though dry
Sorrow may be as good as wet, whose Eyes were a Laver, and Hair a Towel to wash
and wipe the feet of Christ, humble thy self like the Ninevites, Jonah 3.6. Who
put sackcloath upon their Loins, and Ashes upon their Heads, as those that
deserved to be as far under ground as they were now above it. An Humble
submission is the only way to disarm Gods indignation, and be rid of his Rod.
1 Pet. 5.6. Sin brings judgment, and only judgment preventeth it, thy Sin
has kindled the fire of Gods Wrath, and only Repentance is as Water to quench
this fire. King Edward the first Riding furiously after a Servant of his that
had displeased him, with a drawn Sword in his hand, as purposing to kill him,
seeing him submit, and upon bending Knee sue for his Life, not only spared
him, but received him again into favor. Go thou and do the like, be thou but
thoroughly sorroy for thy sin, my Soul for thine, God will be thoroughly
satisfied, yea grow thou better by it, and God will love thee better for it,
for as Lovers are best Friends after falling out, so when God and we are
reconciled by repentance, his affections are stronger to us then before: the
repenting Prodigal received such tokens of Favor, as his Elder Brother who
never brake out into riot never did: and whom did Christ Honor wi^h his first
appearance, but Mary Magdalen? and the Angel, but Peter? Go says he and tell
his Disciples, and tell Peter that he will go before you into Gallilee, Mark
16.7. Though Peter had Sined above the rest, yet r^penting he is named above ye
rest.

Secondly, Afflictions serve to work in us amendment of Life, every Affliction
Sanct^fied Rubs off some Rust, melts off some Dress, strains out some
Corruption, etc. Which done we rise ou^ of trouble as Christ rose out of the
Grave, for when the Gold is fined, the ^re shall hold it no longer. The outward
cold of Affliction does greatly increase the inward heat and fe^vour of the
Graces of God in us: indeed no Chastisement says Saint Paul for the present
seems to be joyous, but grievous. But afterward it brings the quiet fruits
of Righteousness to them that are thereby exercised, Heb. 12.11. God beats us
that he may better us, he hedgeth us about with Thorns that he may keep us
within Compass, lest we break over into Satan's Pasture, which indeed would but
fat us for the slaughter. God strips the Body of pleasure to cloth the Soul
with Righteousness, and oftentimes strengthen our state of Grace by
Impoverishing our Temporal estate, for commonly the more Prosperity the less
Piety. The Poor says Christ receive the Gospel, though the Rich are more
bound. Few men can digest great felicity, many a Man has been a looser by his
gains, and that that which multiplied his outward estate has abated his
inward, and so on the contrary David was never so tender as when he was hunted
like a patridge, 1 Samuel 26.20. Jonah was at best in the Whales Belly: Stevens
face never shone so fair as when he stood before the Council, Acts 6.15. Now if
the Winter of the one is found to be the spring of the other, and the
Corruption of Prosperity the Generation of Piety, who will esteem those things
good which make us worse, or that evil which brings such gain and sweetness?
Before I was afflicted, says David, I went astray, but now I keep thy
Commandment, Psalm. 119.67. These evils do press us, but it is to God and
holiness, yea how much lower our Afflictions weigh us down on Earth, so much
the more earnestly our affections mount up to Heaven. Devotion like fire in
frosty weather burns hotest in Affliction. When the Waters of the flood came
upon the face of the Earth, down went stately Turrets and Towers, but as the
waters rose, the Ark rose still higher and higher, in like sort when the waters
of affliction arise, down goes the Pride of Life, the Lust of the Eyes: in a
word, all the vanities of the world, but the Ark of the Soul arises as these
waters rise, and that higher even nearer and nearer toward Heaven. Oh!
admirable use of Afflictions, Health from a wound, cure from a disease, out of
grief joy, gain out of loss, out of Infirmity strength, out of sin, Holiness:
out of death Life, yea we shall redeem something of Gods dishonor by sin, if
we shall thence grow more Holy: But,

Thirdly, They serve to quicken our Devotion, and make us pray unto God with
more fervency: Lord says Isaiah, in trouble they will visit thee, they poured
out prayers when thy chastning was upon them, Isa. 26.16. In their affliction
says Hosea they will seek thee diligently, Hos. 5.15. That we never pray so
feelingly, fervently, forcibly as in time of affliction, may be seen in the
examples of the Children of Israel, Judges 3.9,15. Elisha, 2 Kings 6.18.
Hezekiah, 2 Kings 19.15,16.

And Lastly, Jehosophat, who being told that there was a great multitude coming
against him from beyond ye Sea, out of Aram: it follows ye Jehosophat feared,
and set himself to fear the Lord, and proclaimed a fast throughout all Judea,
yea they came out of all parts and joined with him to enquire of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 20.3,4. Neither does it make us alone, which suffer, earnest in Prayer,
but it makes others also labor in prayer to God for us, 2 Cor. 1.10,11. Again,
Crosses are the files and whetstones that set an edge on our devotions, without
which they grow dull, and ineffectual: Jonah sleeps in the ship, but prays hard
in the Whales belly: Prayer is the wing of the Soul, wherewith it flies to
Heaven, as meditation is the Eye wherewith we see God, but our Hearts are like
flint-stones which must be smitten e're they will send forth these sparks of
Devotion: Christ never heard of the Canaanitish Woman until her daughter was
miserably vexed with a Devil, but then she comes to him and does not speak but
cry, need and desire have raised her voice to an importunate Clamor. The God
of Mercy is light of hearing, yet he loves a loud and vehement solicitation,
not to make himself inclinable to grant, but to make us Capable to receive
Blessings, and indeed the very purpose of affliction is to make us Importunate.
He that hears the secret murmures of our grief, yet will not seem to hear us
till our cries be loud and strong: as Demosthenes would not plead for his Clyent
till he cried to him, but then answered his sorrow, now I feel thy cause. The
child have escaped many a stripe by his loud crying, ye very unjust judge
cannot endure the widows Clamor: so unto fervent prayer God will deny
nothing. Need will make us both humble and eloquent* if the case be woeful it
will be expressed accordingly, the despair of all other helps sends us
importunately to the God of power, but while money can buy Physic, or friends
procure enlargement, the great Physician and helper is not ^ought unto, nor
thoroughly trusted ^n. It is written of the Children of Israel, that so soon as
they cried unto ye Lord he delivered them from their servitude under Eglon King
of Moab, yet it is plain they were eighteen years under this Bondage
undelivered, Judges 3.14,15. Doubtless they were not so unsensible of their
Misery, as not to complain sooner then the end of eighteen years, the first
hour they sighed for themselves, but now they cried unto God, they are words
and not prayers that fall from careless lips, if we would prevail with God we
must wrestle, and if we would wrestle happily with God, we must Wrestle first
with our own dullness, yea if we felt our wants or wanted not desire, we could
speak to God in no tune but cries, and nothing but cries can pierce Heaven:
affliction to ye soul is as plummets to a clock, and wind to a ship, holy and
faithful, prayer as Oars to a Boat, and ill goes the Boat without Oars, or the
ship without wind, or the clock without plummets. Now are some afflicted in
reputation, as Susanna was, others in Children, as Ely, some by enemies, as
David, others by friends, as Joseph, some in body as Lazarus, others in goods
as Job, others in liberty as John. In all extremities let us send this
Messenger to Christ for ease: faithful and fervent prayer, if this can but
carry the burden to him he will carry it for us, and from us for ever.

Fourthly, Our sufferings we an us from the love of the world, yea make us
loath and contemn it, and contrariwise fix upon Heaven, with a desire to be
dissolved: St. Peter at Christ's Tranfiguration enjoying but a glimpse of
happiness, he was so ravished and transported with the love of his present
estate that he breaks out into these words: It is good for us to be here, he
would fain have made it his dwelling place, and being loath to depart, Christ
must make 3 Tabernacles, Mat. 17.4. The love of this world so makes us forget
the world to come, that like the Israelites, we desire rather to live in the
troubles of Egypt, then in the Land of Promise: whereas S. Paul having spoken
of his Bonds in Christ, and of the spiritual Combat, concludes: I desire to
be dissolved and to be with Christ which is best of all, Phil. 1.22,23. Yea it
transported him to heaven before he came thither, as Mary was not where she was
but where her desire was, and that was with Christ, prosperity makes us drunk
with the love of the world, like the Gadarrens who preferred their swine before
their Souls, or him in the Parable that would go to see his Farm and loose
Heaven, and thousands more, who if they have but something to leave behind
them, it is no matter whether they have any thing to carry with them. But as
sleep composeth drunkenness, so the Cross will bring a Man to himself again,
for when the staff we nourish to bear us becomes a Cudgel to beat us, when we
find the world to serve us as the Jews did Christ, carry us up to the top of a
Hill and then strive to throw us down headlong, Luke 4.29. When ye mind is so
invested with cares, molested with grief, vexed with pain that which way so
ever we cast our Eyes we find cause of Complaint, we more loathed the World
than ever we loved it, when no man would harbor ye unthrift son in ye Gospel,
he returned back again to his Father, but never before: when Satan is let loose
upon us to show us our sins, and the danger we are in, then farewell profit,
farewell pleasure, treasure and all, rather then I will endure such a rack, such
a hell in my conscience, whereas if we should only hear of Misery, or read
what is threatened in ye Word, though it might a little fright us, it would
never amend us. A delicious life when every thing about us is resplendent and
contentful makes us that we have no desire to go to heaven, wherefore as a
loving mother when she would wean her Child from the Dugg, makes it bitter with
Wormwood or Aloes, so deals ye Lord with us, he makes this life bitter unto
us by suffering our enemies to persecute and oppress us, to the end we may
contemn the world, and transport our hopes from earth to heaven, he makes us
weep in this ve^l of misery, that we may the more eagerly long for that place
of felicity, where all tears shall be wiped from our Eyes. And this is no small
abatement to the bitterness of adversities, that they teach us the way to
heaven, for the less comfort we find on earth the more we seek above, and the
more we esteem the best things: and we are very ungrateful if we do not thank
God for yt which so overcomes us, as that it overcomes the love of the world in
us. Nothing feeds Pride nor keeps off repentance so much as prosperous
advantage. It Is a wonder to see a favorite study for ought but addition to his
greatness, God shall have much a do to make him know himself. Many shall one
day repent yt they were happy too soon, many a Man cries out: O that I were so
rich, so healthful, so quiet, so happy, etc. Alas though thou had thy wish
for the present, thou should perhaps be a looser in the sequel. A good man
finding himself hated, persecuted, afflicted, and tormented by enemies of all
sorts he can as willingly leave the world, as others can forgo ye Court, yea as
willingly ^is as dine, yea no servant so desires ye end of his years, no
stranger so longs to be at home as he expects the promise of Christ's coming, it
is ye strength of his hope, ye sweet object of his faith, in ye midst of all
sorrows the comfort of his heart, ye heart of all his comforts, the
encouragement of his wearied spirits, the common Clausulce, the continual
Period and shutting up of his prayers, come Lord Jesus come quickly.

Fifthly, The Lord permits his people to be often afflicted and assailed, to
the end they may be always prepared for tribulation, as wise Marriers in a Calm
make all their tackling sure and strong, that they may be provided against the
next storm, which they cannot look to be long without, or as experienced
Soldiers in time of peace, prepare for the day of Battle, and so much the
rather, when they look every day for the aproach of the enemy, the way to be
safe is never to be secure, we are often times set upon, to ye end that we may
continually buckle unto us the whole Armor of God prescribed by Paul, Ephesians.
6.13, to 19. That we may be always ready for the Battle by Walking
surcumspectly, not as Fools but as Wise, Ephesians. 5.15. For as those that have no
enemies to encounter them, cast their Armor aside and let it rust, because
they are secure from danger, but when their enemies are at hand, and sound the
Alarm they both wake and sleep in their Armor, because they would be ready for
the assault, so if we were not often in skirmish with our enemies, we would lay
aside our spiritual Armor, but when we have continual use of it, we still keep
it fast buckled unto us, that being armed at all points we may be able to make
resistance, that we be not be surprised at unawares, neither would it be good
for us at present if we had not these enemies to stand in awe and fear of, but
more inconvenient in diverse respects, as wise Scipio that mirror of wisdom
told some, who with no small joy avouched yt the common wealth of Rome was now
in safe estate, seeing they had vanquished the Carthaginians, and conquered the
Inhabitants of Pontus, neither would he for that only reason have Carthage
destroyed because it should hinder Rome from sleeping, yea God himself would
have the Hitites, Gargesites, Amorites, Canaanites, Peresites, Hivites, and
Jebusites; strong and warlike Nations to be in ye midst of Israel, lest Israel
should sleep in sin and want matter for exercise, fight and conquest here, may
be felicity with security never with safety.

The time when the envious man did sow his seed was whilst Men were in bed, no
Servants more orderly use their Masters Talent, then those that ever fear their
masters sudden return, no householder more safe then he who at every watch
suspects ye Thiefs entering, Sampson could not be bound till he was first got
asleep, would thou not be overcome be not secure fly from the works of
darkness at a great distance, and consider as well the bitterness of what
will follow, as ye sweetness of a momentary pleasure, an assaulted City must
keep a careful watch or it will not long hold out, yea the provident Fenman
mends his Banks in Summer left his Ground be drowned in the winter, and we must
so take our leaves of all afflictions, that we reserve a lodging for them and
expect their return, and so much the rather because what has been long
expected falls the easier, and evils precogitated strike but weakly.

Sixthly, Afflictions discovers what we are, it make us experimentally know our
selves, and be known of others, whether we be true believers or Hypocrites.

First, Our selves, diverse play Alexander on the Stage, but few or none in the
field, many can suffer Martyrdom in speculation, who being put to it cannot
concort a foul Word, we are all Valiant Soldiers till we come to fight,
excellent Philosophers, till we come to dispute; good Christians, till we come
to master our own Lusts, but it is opposition that gives the trial, when
corruptions fight against the graces, many while wealth last are very honest
men and square dealers, at least seem so, yea they will maintain that all
hardness is to be endured rather then conscience violated or God offended, but
fall they into Poverty, and then yt they may maintain themselves, they will
lie, deceive, steal, prostitute their Chastity, sell their Consciences, and
what not, then Hazael before he met with an opportunity could say, What is thy
Servant a Dog? and Balaam could brag; though thou would give me thine house
full of Gold, I would not, etc. Yet when it came to the trial, he did as bad
for little or nothing, but a man is indeed what he is in trial, if our souls
shall like of Christ for a Suitor when we find no other jointure but the Cross
we are sure we are Christians.

Secondly, That others may know us, a Soldier is best known in the front of
(...) battle, a Pilot in a storm, a nin^ble activ^ man in a Race, and a
Champion in t^ Lists. How well the strings of an Instr^ment are tuned and set,
is best known when they are touched by the hand of a skilful Musician: There
must be differences amongst you, says S. Paul, yt the approved may be known, 1
Cor. 11.19. For as thrashing seperates the straw, and winnowing ye Chafe from
the Corn, so persecution seperates the Hypocrite from the Company of Believers,
Luke 22.31. When a serving-man follows two men walking together, we cannot tell
which is his Master till they part, so when the Gospel and outward prosperity
go together it is hard to judge which is most respected. We all call our selves
Christians. Why it is an honorable thing to be so accounted, but who are such
is known only where the power of Godliness is in contempt. Oh how wicked men
manifest their hatred and enmity against God and his people, so soon us
persecution arises because of ye word. There is no trial of friendship but in
adversity, he yt is not ashamed of my Bonds nor daunted with my Checks, nor
alienated with my disgrace is a friend for me, one dram of ye man's love is
worth a world of Inconstant formality, but the friend is false hearted, who
observes me only for his own ends, affliction tries whether a man has grace
in his heart or no, set an empty Pitcher (the resemblance a wicked man) to ye
fire it crack presently, whereas the full (which resembles the Child of God)
will abide boiling afflictions, are the waters where our Gideon will try whether
we are fit Soldiers to fight the Battle of faith. A faithful wife said
Bradford is never tried so to be until she be assaulted, nor a faithful
Christian so approved till proved by affliction. None but a regenerate heart
can choose rather to suffer affliction with the People of God, rather then to
enjoy the pleasures of Sin for a season. A little entreaty will serve to move
Nature to be good to it self: but to persist, in actions of goodness, though
Tyranny torment death and hell stood in our way, this is that which shall be
Crowned with Glory: finally; affliction and persecution is both a whetstone and
touchstone to each particular Grace, it humbles the spirits of the repentant,
tries the faith and patience of the sincere Christian, but hardens the
hearts of the ungodly, for wicked men grow worse after affliction as water
grows cold after any heat, yea like some beasts they are mad with Baiting, if
crosses of losses rush in upon them they fall to the Language of Job's Wife,
Curse God and dye; or to that of the King of Isreal's Messenger, Why should I
serve God any longer, 2 Kings 6.33.

Seventhly, The Lord by this evil of Chastisement for sins past, preventeth the
evils of sin, and greater punishments for the time to come, we are chastened of
the Lord says the Holy Ghost that we might not be condemned in the world, 1
Cor. 11.32. If we be not chastened here we shall be condemned hereafter, erring
souls be Corrected that they may be Converted, not confounded. If Paul had not
been buffeted by Satan and wicked men* he had been exalted out of measure, 2
Cor. 12.7. Pride is so dangerous a poison, that of another poison there was
confected a counter-poison to preserve him from it, God would rather suffer
this choson vessel to fail into some infirmity, then to be proud of his
singular privileges. Lest I should be exalted above measure, through the
abundance, through the abundance of Revelations (there was ye poison of Pride
inst^uating it self) I had a Thorn in the flesh, the Messenger of Satan to
buffet me, there was the Counter-poyson or Antidote which did at once make him
both sick and whole, yea we gain strength by every new fall, from hence issues
deeper Humiliation, stronger hatred of sin, fresh indignation against our
selves, more experience of ye deceitfulness of our hearts, renewed
resolutions, until sin be brought under, but my purpose is to speak chiefly of
affliction, not sin: Bodily sickness, says St. Gregory cleanses away sins
committed, and hinders those that in health might have been committed, the
flesh indeed is nourished by softness, but ye spirit by hardness, that is fed
by delights and pleasures, this grows by Bitterness, and hereupon when a
religious man pray^d, John the Anchorite to free him of a cer^ain Ague, he
answered him, truly thou de^rest to have a very necessary Companion ^ast out of
doors, for says he, as Clothes are ^ash'd with soap, so is the mind purified
by ^iseases, and the same may be avered of all ^inds of crosses, for is it not
commonly seen (...) the pleasures of the Body are the poisons ^f the Soul: heap
riches and honors upon (...) evil man, you do but Minister wine (...) him that
has a fever: says Aristotle, ^oney to one oppressed with Cheller, and ^eat
to one troubled with Morbus Co^aliacus, which increases ye disease, says
^utarch: for as Noah was drunk with his ^on wine, so the cup of prosperity has
in^ricated many a soul, and God has no worse ^eants in our Land then they,
that can ^e of their Lands, and care for nothing else, ^monly where is no want
is much wan^nnesse, and as we grow rich in temporals, (...) grow poor in
spirituals. Nabal cannot ^und but he must surfeit. Tertulus cannot (...)
Eloquent, but he must turn the edge of (...) wit against the Gospel. Many
cannot ^e beauty but they must love their faces ^ore then their souls. The
enjoyment of ye ^orlds peace might add to my content, but it will endanger my
soul. How often does the recovery of the body, state or mind, occasion a relapse
in the Soul. All the life of Solomon was full of prosperity, and therefore we
find yt Solomon did much forget God, but ye whole life of David had many
enemies and much adversity, and therefore we see by his penitential Psalms, and
others, that David did much remember God, and indeed if God did not often visit
us we should serve him as ye women of Tartary do their husbands, who Marry if
they be absent but Twenty days: but the fire of correction eats out the rust of
corruption, many are able to say they have learned to stand by falling, got
strength by weakness, burnt child dreads the fire, and a broken bone well set
is faster ever after, like Trees we take deeper root by shaking, and like
Torches we flame the Brighter for brusting and knocking, God suffered Satan to
spoil Job of his substance, rob him of his Children, punish him in the body;
yet mark but the sequel well and you shall find that he was crossed with a
blessing, as the Physician in making of Treacle or Mithridate for his patient,
uses serpents adders and such like poison, that he may drive out one poison
with another, even so our spiritual Physician is pleased to use the Malice of
Satan and wicked men, when he tempereth us the Cup of affliction, that hereby
he may expel one evil with another: yea two evils with one: namely, the evil of
sin, and the evil of punishment, and that both Temporal and Eternal, God
suffers us to be afflicted because he will not suffer us to be damned, such is
the goodness of our heavenly Father to us, that even his anger proceeds from
Mercy, he scourges the flesh that the spirit may be saved in the day of Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 5.5. Yea Joseph was therefore abased in the Dungeon that his
advancement might be the greater. It is true in our thoughts, we often speak
for the flesh, as Abraham did for Ishmael: Oh! ye Ishmael might live in thy
sight: No, God takes away Ishmael and gives Isaac, he withdraws the pleasure of
the flesh, and gives delight to ye Soul, crossing us in our wills, that he may
advance our Benifit. A Man is sick of Pleuriste, the Physician lets him Blood,
he is content with it, the arm shall smart to ease the heart. The Covetous man
has a Pleuriste of Riches, God lets him blood by poverty, let him be patient,
it is a course to save his soul. Though affliction he hard of Digestion to the
natural man, yet the sheep of Christ know that to feed upon this salt Marsh is
the only preservative against the rot, ye experienced Christian know that it
is good for the soul, yt the body is sometimes sick, and therefore to have his
inward man cured, he is content his outward man should be diseased, and cares
not so the sin of his soul may be lessened, though the sores of his flesh be
increased, it is better says S. Hierom to have a sick stomach then a grieved
mind, yea be desires with Saint Augustine ye God will send him any plague
rather then the plague of ye Heart, and why is it not so with thee? I hope thou
desire thy souls safety ^bove all, and thou know the stomach that is
purged must be content to part with some good nourishment, yt it may deliver it
self of more evil humor. Of what kind soever sufferings be, it is doubtless
the fittest for thy souls recovery, or else God the only wise Physician would
not apoint it; now who would not be willing to Bleed, when by ye means an
inveterate sickness may be prevented? yea it is a happy bloodlett^ng which
saves the life, which made S. Augustine say unto God: Let my Body be Crucified,
or Burnt, or do with it what thou will, so thou save my soul. And another, Let
me swim through a River of Boiling Brimstone to live eternally happy, rather
then dwell in a Paradise of pleasure to be damned after death.

Eighthly, That we may have an humble conceit of our selves, and wholly depend
upon God. We received the sentence of death in our selves says the Apostle,
because we should not trust in our selves, but in God ye ^iseth us up from ye
dead, 2 Cor. 1.9. When Babes are afraid, they cast themselves into ye Arms and
Bosom of their Mother. A Hen ^eading her Chickens into the sun, they fall
(...) playing with ye Dust, she may cluck them to her long enough they will not
come, but when they see the Kite, then they come without calling, and so it
fares with Gods Children, till affliction comes the prodigal ^ever thought of
his Father till he wanted Husks, the Widow yt is left alone trusts in God,
says ye Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.5. Who when she had an Husband leaned too much upon
him, the poor man depends not upon the relief of others till he finds nothing
at home, till our means is spent we are apt to trust in uncertain riches, but
after in ye name of the Lord, Zeph. 3.12. Asa bore himself hold upon his
forces, as being five hundred and fourscore thousand strong, till he was
overmatch'd with an Army of a thousand thousand Ethiopians, this made him cry:
Help us O Lord our God for we rest on thee, 2 Chronicles. 14. I thought in my
prosperity, says David, I shall never be moved but thou did hide thy face
and I was troubled, then cried I unto thee: It is high time to humble them that
do not find themselves to stand in need of God, who so nourishes his Servant
daintily from his Childhood, shall after find him stubborn in prosperity; We
are apt to think our selves men good enough, we see not our need of God, but
let him send the Cross it confutes us presently of our nothingnesse: even St.
Paul was sick of this disease, he began to be puffed up until the Messenger of
Satan was sent to take him down, 2 Cor. 12.7. And St. Peter, Math. 26.33.
Though all men should forsake thee yet I will never forsake thee, bravely
promised, but Peter ye same night swear I know not the man, cowardly answered;
It is one thing to suffer in speculation and another in practice. It is common
for men to brag and crack of what they can do, yea one that has but a wooden
head and leaden heart, how will he help it out with a brazen face, and a golden
hand: for being as great in Pride as he is small in desert, he Will keep a do
in an audactous Masterlynesse, as if with Simon Magus he would beat down all
with large proffers, but this cannot be so pleasing to Nature as it is hateful
to God, neither can there be a worse sign of ensuing evil, than for a man in a
Carnal presumption to vaunt out his own abilities: how justly does God suffer
ye man to be foiled purposely that he may be ashamed of his own vain self
confidence. At has been profitable for proud men says St. Augustine to fall
into some gross offense, for they have not lost so much by their fall as they
have got by being down, it is better to be humble under sin then to ^e proud of
grace, of ye two to be a Pharisee is worse than to be a Publican, to be proud
of good endowments is worse than to have neither pride nor good endowments, yea
in this case ye party is not only bettered, but others learn humility thereby,
for who can ^o other than yearn and fear to see so rich and goodly a vessel
split as David or Solomon was.

Again it makes us pitiful and compassionate to others, they (said Sophocles)
are usually the most compassionate to others, who have suffered miseries
themselves, and what says the Tyrian Queen: Evils have taught me to bemoan all
that affliction makes to groan.

And Lastly, The Devil hereby is the ated, who if he cannot beat us down with
sin, will blow us up with pride. He will undermine us if he cannot overthrow us.
And nothing does more advantage Satan than pride: For first, a man shall never
be a proficient that thinks himself already sufficient. Secondly, When he can
poison our good works with Pharisaism, he makes us by overvaluing them to loose
them, confidence in God does only support us, without him we are like Vines
unpropt, which on the earth do crawl, if we escape temptation it is his mercy,
if our wills consent not, it is his mercy, if we consent and the act be hindered
it is his mercy, if we fall and rise again by repentance, all is his mercy,
neither are we sufficient of our selves to think much less to speak, lest of
all to do yt which is good, 2 Cor. 3.5. We have no good, we do no good, but we
may we must thank grace for it, which is al in all, yea can bear no fruit faith
our Savior except ye abide in me, John 15.4. Ye more expressly, without me, ye
can do nothing, ver. 5. So that we cannot put too much trust in him nor too
little in our selves: So proud are we by nature yt before we come to the Trial
we think yt we can repel the strongest assault, and overcom all enemies by our
own power, but when we feel our selves vanquished and foiled by every small
temptation, we learn to have a more humble conceit of our own ability, and to
depend wholly on the Lord, God will not give his over til he has made them kiss
ye Rod which the wicked bite, and when he has brought us to this, the greater
submission the more grace, if there be one hollow in the Valley lower then
another thither the waters gather, and the more lowly we are in Gods eyes, the
more lovely we are, the more despicable in our selves, the more acceptable in
him.

Ninthly, That we may be conformable to Christ our Head, and like our elder
Brother who was consecrated through afflictions, reviled, buffeted, spit upon,
Crucified, what not, for ye Scribes were against him, the Pharisees against
him, ye rulers banded themselves against him, ye Atheists against him, Herod
and all ye spiteful and envious Jews against him, whose birth was mean, whose
life was contemptible, and whose death was ignominious, yea his palace was a
stable, his Courtiers Beasts, his chase of state a Manger, his royal Robes a
few rags, no Bells Ring, no Bone-fires proclaim his ^th through the populous
streets, no great Ladys came to visit his mother, and answerable to his
ingresse into the world, was hi^ progress in it, and his Egresse out of it.
And we must suffer with him that we may be also glorified with him, Rom 8.17.
When the Jews offered Jesus Gall and Vinegar he tasted and would not drink, he
left the rest for his Church and they must pledge him, whosoever says our
Savior bears no^ his Cross and comes after me cannot be my Disciple, Luke
14.27. For hereunto are ye called says St. Peter, for Christ also suffered for
us, leaving us an example ye w^ should follow after his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21. Y^
S. Paul made this the most certain Testimony and seal of his adoption here and
glory afterward, having delivered that the spirit of God bears witness with
our spirits that we are the Children of God, an^ having added, if we be
Children we are also Heirs, even Heirs of God, and joint heir^ with Christ,
then he uses these words, If so be that we suffer with him that we also may be
glorified with him, making suffering as a principal condition annexed, which is
as if he had said: It is impossible we should be Glorified with him, except we
first suffer with him, Romans 8.16,17. Whereupon having reckoned up all
privileges which might Minister unto him, occasion of boasting h^ concludes
yt what things were gain unto him, those he accounted loss for Christ, yt he
might know ye fellowship of his sufferings, and ^e made conformable to his
death, Phil. 3.^0. so yt as he bare his Cross before he wore his crown, and
began to us in ye cup of his fathers displesure, so we must pledge him our
part, and fill up yt which is behind of his sufferings, Col. ^ 14. Suffering is
the way to reigning, through many Tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven, Acts 14.22. And indeed who would not be ambitious of the fame
entertainment that Christ himself had, yet our sufferings as they are nothing
to what our sins have deserved, so they are nothing to what our Savior has
suffered, for he endured many a little Death all his life long for our sakes
and at length ye painful and cursed death of the Cross, to say nothing of the
soul of his sufferings, which his Soul then suffered when he sweat clots of
blood in the garden, now why must we pledge our Savior and fill up the measure
of his sufferings, not that Christ's sufferings are incomplete nor to satisfy
Gods justice for sin, for yt is done already once for all by him who bare our
sins in his body on the tree, neither does God afflict his Church for any
delight he takes in their trouble, for he afflicts not willingly, Lam 3.33.
Jer. 31.20. Isa. 63.9. Nor yet to show his sovereignty, Isa. 45.9. Nor is it
merely for his own glory, without any other respect, but out of pure necessity
and abundant love to us, as the reasons both before and after show, wherefore
let us be exhorted in the words of St. Peter, to rejoice in suffering,
forasmuch as we with all the saints are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that
when his Glory shall appear we may be glad and rejoice, 1 Pet. 4.13. And what
greater promotion can flesh and blood be capable of, than a conformity to the
Lord of glory. Christ wore a Crown of Thorns for me, and shall I grudge to wear
this paper cap for him, said John Huss, when they put a cap upon him that had
ugly devils painted on it, with the title of Heresy. Never did neck-kerchief
become me so well as this Chain, said Alice Drivers, when they fastened her to
ye stake to be burnt, and what said a French Martyr when a rope was put about
his fellows neck? give me that Gold Chain, and dub me a Knight. of that noble order.

Tenthly, Afflictions serve to increase our faith for the time to come, when we
consider how the Lord has delivered us formerly: as when Saul tells David thou
art not able to go against this great Philistine to fight with him, for thou
art a Boy, and he a man of War from his youth, what says David? thy servant
kept his fathers Sheep and there came a Lion, and likewise a Bear, and took a
Sheep out of the flock, and I went out after him and smote him, and took it out
of his mouth, and when he rose against me I caught him by the Beard, and smote
him and slew him; so thy servant slew both the Lion and the Bear. Therefore
(mark the Inferrence) this uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them,
yea (says he) the Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the Lion, and out
of the paw of the Bear, he will deliver me out of ye hands of this Philistine, 1 Samuel 17.33, to 37. Observe how confidently he speaks: God has delivered me
says Paul out of the mouth of ye Lion (meaning Nero) and he will deliver me
from every Evil Work, and will preserve me unto his Heavenly Kingdom, 2 Timothy
4.17,18. That tree is deepest rooted in the Earth which is most shaken with the
Winds, and they weak usually that are planted in pleasant Valleys, so the tree
of says, the more it is ^haken with the violent storms of trouble, the faster
it becomes rooted by Patience, ^e can never be a good Soldier that never has
felt the toil of a Battle: the more deliverances David had the greater was his
faith, for after ye Lord had delivered him often out of extreme exigents, namly
from this great Goliath, ye cruelty of Saul, ye unnatural insurrection of
Absalom, and the unjust curses of Shimei, he was able to say: I trust in God,
neither will I fear what man can do unto me, Psalm. 56.4. and in Ps. 3. I will
not be afraid for ten thousand of the people that should beset me round, and in
Ps. 18.29. By thee I have broken through an Host, and in thy name have I leaped
over a Wall: we men indeed therefore shut our hands because we have opened
them, making our former Kindness arguments of sparing afterward, but
contrariwise, God therefore gives because he has given, making his former
favors arguments for more: that we may live by faith and not by sense, he
first strips us of all our earthly confidence, and then gives us Victory, and
not before; lest he should be a looser in our gain, his help uses to show it
self in extremity, Daniel is not delivered at the beginning of his trouble, he
must first be in the lions den, and then he finds it, those three servants,
Dan. 3.26. are not rescued at the Ovens mouth in the Furnace they are, that is
a gracious and well tried faith, that is able to hold out with confidence to
the last, like Abraham, who is said to hope against Hope, Romans 14.18. Which
with God is a thing much set by, yea, such he acounts his Champions and
worthies, whence it is many are trained up in trouble all their days, as it
fared with David, for as a Bear came to David after a Lion, and a Giant after a
Bear, and a King after a Giant, and Philistines after a King, and all to make
him more hardy and confident in his God: so when they that are intended for
Christ's Champions, have fought with the Devil and their own Lusts, they shall
fight with Envy, when they have fought with Envy, they shall fight with
Poverty, when they have fought with Poverty they shall fight with Infamy, when
they have fought with Infamy, they shall fight with sickness, when they have
fought with sickness, they shall fight with death like a Labourer yt is never
out of Work, and this not only proves but mightily improves their faith: and
indeed till we have been delivered out of a less trouble, we cannot trust God
in a greater. As the Prophet could say: Out of the depths have I cried unto
thee, Instantly follows (and not till then) the Lord heard me, the Lord saw him
sinking all the while, but lets him alone till he was at the bottom.

In the Elevrnth place: Our manifold sufferings, and Gods often delivering us,
does increase our joy and thankfulness, yea, make after blessings more sweet,
by this we have new songs put into our Mouths, and new occasions offered to
praise the Author of our deliverance, when the Lord brought again the
Captivity of Sion (says David in the person of Israel) we were like them that
dream) (meaning the Happiness seemed too good to be true) then were our Mouths
filled with laughter (says he) and our tongues with joy, the Lord has done
great things for us, whereof we rejoice, Psalm. 136.1,2,3,4. Is any one
afflicted, I will say to him as that harbinger answered a Noble man,
complaining that he was lodged in so homely a Room, you will take pleasure in
it when we are out of it, for the more grievous our exigent, the more glorious
our advancement. A desire accomplished delights the soul, Prove. 13.19. We
read how that lamentable and sad decree of Ahashuerus through the goodness of
God was an occasion exceedingly to increase the Jews joy and thankfulness,
insomuch that as the Text says: The days that were appointed for their death
and ruin were turned into days of feasting and joy, and wherein they sent
presents every man to his neighbor, and gifts to the poor, Esth. 9.17, to 28.
And this joy and thankfulness was so lasting yt the Jews cease not to
celebrate the same unto this day: Gods dealing with us is often harsh in ye
beginning, hard in the proceeding, but the Conclusion is always comfortable; the
joy of Peter and the rest of the Church was greater after he was delivered out
of prison by the Angel, Acts 12. And the joy of Judith and the rest of Bethalia
when she returned with Holoferness head, then if they had never been in
distress, Judith 13. The Lord deprives us of good things for a time because
they never appear in their full Beauty till they turn their backs and be going
away: Again he defers his aid on purpose to increase our desires before it
comes, and our joy and thankfulness when it is come to inflame our desires, for
things easily come by are little set by to increase our joy for that which has
been long detained, is at last more sweetly obtained, what (think we) did he
that was born blind think when his eyes were first given him, how did he wonder
at heaven and earth, the strange and goodly varieties of all the Creatures, and
cheerfulness of the light, every thing did not more please then astonish him,
as Mothers love their Children more tenderly then Fathers, because they stood
them in more, so we prize the comforts and joys of Gods favor more by having
for a season been deprived of them through afflictions and descretions. The
benefit that comes soon and with ease is easily contemned long and eager
pursuit endears any favor. The wise men rejoiced exceedingly to find the star,
the woman to find her piece of silver, the Virgin Mary to find the Lord Jesus,
who always returns with increase of joy. He may absent himself for a time,
but he intends it only as a preparation to make us relish that sweet food, the
better he may keep us fasting, but it is on purpose that our trial may be
perfect, our deliverance welcome, our Repentance glorious, we never know the
worth of a Benefit so well as by the want of it, want teaches us the worth of
things most truly. Oh! how sweet a thing is peace to them that have been long
troubled with wars and tedious contentions: how sweet is liberty to one that
has been long immured within a case of Walls? How dear a jewel is health to
him that tumbles in distempered blood for then only we begin to prize it when
we have lost it: Let a man but fast a Meal or two, O how sweet is brown bread,
though it would not down before, we are never so glad of our friends company,
as when he returns after long absence, or a Tedious Voyage. The Nights darkness
makes the light of ye Sun more desirable, and a Calm is best welcome after a
tempest. And thus we see that good things then appear of most worth, when they
are known in their wants. And as when we would have some fires flame, ye more
we sprinkle water upon them. Even so when the Lord will increase our joy and
thankfulness he allayeth it with the tears of affliction, misery sweetneth joy,
yea the sorrows of this life shall like a dark veil give a luster to the glory
of the next, when the Lord shall turn this water of our earthly affliction into
ye wine of gladness, wherewith our souls shall be satiate for ever, well then
art thou vexed, persecuted, and afflicted by some cruel and malicious Saul, and
is it grievous to thee for the present, why that which has been hard to suffer
is sweet to remember, at last our songs shall be louder then our cries.

In the Twelfth place: Our sufferings make us teachable, and increase in us
spiritual wisdom, Job 36.15. He delivers ye poor in time of affliction, and
opens their ear in trouble, and again, Job 33.16. He opens the ears of men
even by their corrections, we are best instructed when we are most afflicted,
Paul's outward blindness took away his inward blindness, and made him see more
into the wa^ of life then could all his learning at the feet of Gamaliel, and
what says Neoman upon the cleansing of his Leproste, now I know there is no
God in all the earth but in Israel: O happy Sirian yt was at once cured of his
Leproste, and his misprisson of God: the prodigal son regarded not his fathers
admonition so long as he enjoyed prosperity, when we smart not we believe not,
and God is not feared till felt, but that which makes the Body smart makes the
Soul wise, even to loose is some ways profitable, it makes a Man wary. Algerius
the Martyr could say by experience he found more light in the dungeon then
without in all the world: The Scottish King Prisoner in Mortimers hole learnt
more of Christ then in his Palace. Luther between a divine in outward pomp and
a divine under the Cross, neither could he understand some Psalms till he was
in affliction: The Christ's cresse is no letter, yet it taught him more
understanding then all the letters in the row, ye cross opens men's eyes as the
tasting of Honey did Jonathans, yea what will not afflictions teach us? when
even the Savagest beasts are made quiet and docible with abating their food and
rest, or by adding of stripes, even as the clay with water, and the Iron with
fire, are made pliable and apt to receive impression from the workman, even so
when we are soaked in the floods of sorrow and softened in the fire of
affliction, we are aptest to receive the impression of Gods law into our
hearts, when he speaks to us by his Ministers: If ye Lord breaks us in pieces
with the plow of his Justice, then let the seeds men his Ministers sow ye seed
of his word, we shall receive it through the furrows of our ears into the
Ground of our hearts, and grow up in wisdom and saving Knowledge, we hear and
read much of the corruption of our natures odiousness, of our sins necessity,
of a Saviors sweetness, of Gods love in Christ, etc. But we never fully
aprehend these things, nor taste how good ye Lord is, till some sharp affliction
comes: thus Gods corrections are our instructions, his lashes our lessons, his
scourges our schoolmasters, his chastisements our advertisements, and commonly
ye soul waxes as the body waiueth, and is wisest to prescribe when ye bone and
sinews are weakest, to execute, neither do we hereby become wise for our own
souls good only, but afflictions make us wise, and able to do others good also
yt are in any the like affliction. Blessed be God says St. Paul who comfort
us in all our afflictions, yt we may be able to comfort them yt are in any
affliction, by ye comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God, 2 Cor.
1.4. Yea ye whole Church and every particular Member thereof have their wisdom
and knowledge improved even by their greatest Enemies. He rest makes men
sharpen their wits yt bet^e^ to confute it, as wormwood though it b^ bitter to
ye taste, yet it is good to clear the eyes, yea the very storms of persecution
makes us look to our Tackling patience, and to our Anchor hope, and to our Helm
faith, and to our Cord ye word of God, and to our Captain Christ, whereas
security like a Ca^ makes us forget both our danger and deliverer, so that to
be altogether exempt from misery is a most miserable thing.

Lastly, Our troubles and afflictions make for ye increase of our patience, we
rejoyes in tribulation says S. Paul, knowing that tribulation works
patience, Romans 5.3. M^ Brethren says St. James, count it exceeding say when ye
fall into diverse temptations knowing that ye trial of your faith works
patience, Jam. 1.2.3. Thus the malice of our enemies does both prove and
improve our patience, see it exemplified in Job and David, whose practice does
most excellently confirm this point, you know Job was not so miserable in his
afflictions, as happy in his patience, Job 31.35,36. And David after he had bin
so many years trained up in ye school of affliction, and exercised with
continual sufferings, from innumerable enemies of all sorts, became a wonder of
patience to all succeeding Ages, as take but notice of his carriage toward
Shimei, and you will say so when this his impudent subject cursed and cast
stones at him, and all his men of War called him Murderer, wicked man, etc. He
was so far from revenging it, when he might so easily, or suffering others, yt
you shall hear him make ye an argument of his patience, which was ye exercise
of it, behold my son, says he, which came forth of my bowels seeks my life,
how much more now may this Benjamite do it, ye wickedness of an Absalom may rob
his father of Comfort, but shall help to add to his Fathers goodness, what a
lead of injuries can some Christians digest that have been frequent in
suffering, and long exercised in the School of Affliction.

Now if it be so as you have heard, that affliction by a divine and supreme
providence does make so much for our advantage and benefit here and hereafter,
as namely that it opens our eyes, no less than peace and prosperity had
formerly shut them, that nothing does so powerfully call home the Conscience,
and that we need no other memory for sin besides Misery, if commonly we are at
Varience with God, Men were at peace with our enemies and that it is both hard
and happy, not to be the worse with Liberty. If God the alwise Physician knows
this the fittest Medicine for our Souls sickness, and that we cannot otherwise
be cured, if Pride causes God to let us fall by temptation, that we may see
our own frailty and weakness, and grow more Humble, if Affliction will above
all things make us pray to God with heat and fervency, if true and Saving Joy
be only the Daughter of sorrow, if it weans us from the love of earthly
things, if it discovers unto us the truth of our Graces, and prevents greater
evils of sin and punishment to come, if it makes us humble and conformable to
Christ our Head, if it increases our says, our joy and thankfulness, our
spiritual wisdom and patience, if by smarting in our Bodies States or Names, we
are saved from smarting in our Souls: Then as Solomon advises: Refuse not the
Chastning of the Lord, neither be grieved with his Correction, Pro. 3.11. But
let us all willingly submit to Gods afflicting hand, and suffer cheerfully what
is laid upon us, admiring at the infinite wisdom, power, and goodness of our
gracious God, who turns all our Poisons into Cordials, who does change our
terrors into pleasures, and makes the greatest Evils Beneficial unto us.
Consider what has been said, and the Lord give you understanding in all
things: Amen.

FINIS.
A New BOOK Containing sundry SET-FORMS OF PRAYERS, THANKSGIVINGS, and GRACES.

^omposed chiefly for the Benefit of CHILDREN and YOUTH: ^t may be useful to
all such as are destitute of better Helps, to further them in their Godly
Practices.

The First Edition.

LONDON, Printed for William Thackaray, in Duck-Lane near Smithfield. 1673.

A Prayer for the Morning.
ALmighty God, who of thine infinite goodnes^ have brought me into this world,
and have preserved me ever since I was born from those (...) dangers into which
I should daily have fallen, ha^ thou not upheld me with thy strong Hand. I
desir^ from the bottom of my heart to return thee innumerable thanks for all
thy great favors bestowed upon me, and more particularly, for that thou have
added to all those benefits hitherto poured upon my Sou^ and Body, this further
blessing in preserving m^ this night past from all evils Spiritual and
Corporal; I beseech thee, as thou have let me see the light of the day, so lift
up the light of thy countenance upon me, and be merciful unto me in the pardon
and forgiveness of all my Sins, which I have this night or at any time
heretofore committed against thee, giving me grace to repent and amend my
sinful life, that I may this following day and for ever after live, not as I
will but as thou will. Let me daily more and more lament my former sinful life,
trusting faithfully in thy rich mercies, through the merits of Jesus Christ,
for the pardon of all my sins; and let all my thoughts words and deeds
henceforward be such as may tend to the praise of thy holy Name, and good
example of others: Grant this, O Lord, for his sake who has ^urchased my
Redemption with no less price than ^is dearest Blood, even for the sake of
Jesus Christ; ^n whose Name and Words I further call upon thee, ^aying as he
himself has taught me, O holy Father, etc.

A Prayer for the Evening.
BLessed be thy Name, O Lord God, for all thy favors, benefits, and blessings
which thou have vouchsafed out of thy rich mercy and free goodness ^o bestow
upon me, and more especially the blessings of this day past. Thou, O Lord, have
clothed and fed me with thy good Creatures, and afforded me abundance of
comfort by thy liberal contribution of all things necessary both for my soul
and body. What shall I render unto thee for all thy mercies? Lord, I have
nothing but what is thine, thou have freely given me whatsoever I enjoy, I
desire therefore to give up my self wholly unto thee, desiring thee to accept
o^ me, in Jesus Christ, for thy Child, restoring unto me that Image of God
which I lost in the fall of my first Parents, and make me like unto the Lord
jesus Christ, enabling so me to walk, even as he walked; fill my heart with an
utter loathing and detesting of all sin, and with a fervent longing after thy
grace, that I may hunger and thirst after righteousness, and never be satisfied
till thou have filled my mouth with thy good things. And, O Lord, I beseech
thee keep me this night following, let me lie down in peace, and rest in peace;
guard me with thy holy Angels, and let not the Devil, that roaring Lion who go
about day and night seeking whom he may devour have any advantage over me, but
when I shall through thy goodness be refreshed with sleep, gran^ that in the
morning I may again praise thee, and endeavor to walk in thy ways, and keep
thy Commandments all the days of my life. These things O Lord, and what else
thou know best for me, beg at thy hands for Jesus Christ his sake, in whos^
Name and Words I further call, etc.

Another Prayer for the Morning.
I Desire to return unto thee, O most gracious Lord God, all possible praise
and thanksgiving, for that thou have continued thine accustomed goodness unto
me, in keeping me this night past from all those hurts and dangers both of Soul
and Body, unto which by reason of my heinous sins and provocations I am liable
every moment; Blessed be thy Name for the quiet rest and sweet sleep which thou
have afforded me: Grant, O Lord, that I begin this new day to lead a new life;
as thou have clothed my Body with Garments, so put upon me the robes of
Christ's Righteousness; that my Soul may not appear naked in thy sight, but
having on the Wedding Garment, I may sit down at the great Marriage Supper of
the Lamb whenever thou shall be pleased to call me; and forasmuch as thou
know, O Lord, what deadly enemies I have to encounter whilst I continue in
this life; I therefore beseech thee to Arm me with the whole Armor of God,
that in the strength of Jesus Christ, and through the assistance of thy holy
Spirit, I may vanquish and overcome them all: so shall thy Name be Glorified,
the Lord Jesus Christ exalted, and my poor soul saved in the day of Jesus
Christ; for whose sake my soul desires eternally to bless thee, and in whose
most holy Name and blessed Words, I desire to conclude these my weak and
imperfect prayers, saying as he has taught me, O holy Father, etc.

Another Prayer for the Evening.
O Most gracious God and loving Father in Jesus Christ, I poor miserable
Creature desire to humble my Soul before thee this Evening, to implore thy
Divine Majesty, to be merciful unto me, for I have most grievously offended
thee by my manifold sins and transgressions; so that if thou should enter
into judgment with me, I cannot be able to stand up before thee, for mine
iniquities are gone over my head, and my sins reach up to Heaven, where they
daily cry unto thee for vengeance against me. But thou, O God, art full of Pity
and Compassion, flow to Anger, and of much Mercy, who desire not the death of
a sinner, but would have all to come to the knowledge of the Truth and be
saved; unto thee, O Lord, I come, beseeching thee for thy Names sake, for thy
Mercies sake, for thy Son Jesus Christ his sake, to remove my sins as far out
of thy sight, as the East is from the West; let them never any more come into
thy remembrance, but assure me by thy Spirit, that thou have freely Pardoned
the same, and in token thereof give me, I beseech thee, a new heart, that I may
henceforth truly love, honor, and obey thee, in the whole course of my life:
and let my mouth be filled with thy praises; for great is thy loving kindness
to the children of men. Thou, O Lord, have poured forth thy blessings upon me,
and I have tasted of thy goodness in an abundant measure; For ever blessed be
thy Name for all thy favors and benefits: and in particular for such comforts
as thou have this day vouchsafed unto me, in giving health, strength, food,
raiment, and all things richly to enjoy. Oh! let me never be unmindful to
return thee thanks for the same, and I beseech thee, O Lord, continue thy
goodness still unto me, and as thou have preserved me this day, so keep me this
night following from all those evils, which by my sins I have justly deserved
to undergo, and grant that whether I sleep or wake, live or die, I may be found
of thee, not in my own Righte-of Jesus Christ; for whom my soul desires
eternally to bless thee, to whom with thee and thy blessed Spirit, be rendered
as is most due, all Honor, Praise, Thanksgiving, and Adoration now and for
evermore. Amen.

A Prayer to be said at all times.
O Lord and heavenly Father, whose power is infinite, whose wisdom is
unsearchable, and of whose goodness and mercy there is no end. Look down I
beseech thee from heaven, the place of thy holy Habitation, and with an eye
full of pity and compassion, behold me thy poor Creature, who do most humbly
prostrate my self before thee, acknowledging and confessing my manifold sins
and transgressions, whereby I have grievously offended thy justice, and am
worthy of eternal condemnation; if thou be not exceeding gracious unto me in
the free pardon and forgiveness of all my sins. Therefore, O Lord, hearken to
the voice of my supplication. Let not my sins cry louder in thine ears for
vengeance against me, than the Blood of Jesus Christ for mercy and forgiveness.
O remember not, Lord, what I have done but what the Lord Christ has Suffered;
though I by my sins have deserved death, yet he by his death has purchased
life for all that unfeignedly believe in him. Give me, O gracious God, a lively
faith in his Blood; enable me to lay hold upon eternal life, which thou have
promised by him to the worst of sinners; in the number whereof I stand: and I
beseech thee, manifest thy unspeakable goodness, not only in the pardoning my
sins, but in cleansing me from all my filthiness and wickedness. O let not sin
any longer have dominion over me; suffer me not to yield my members as servants
of unrighteousness unto uncleanness: but do thou so change my heart and renew
my will, that I may ever hereafter pursue the things that are good,
endeavoring by my future diligence, to redeem the Time which I have wasted in
vanity and unprofitableness. Let thy holy Spirit work mightily in me, beating
down all my strong lusts and corruptions, and whatsoever would withdraw my
heart from thee. Let thy Word be a light unto my feet, and a lanthorn to my
paths, and guide me in that way wherein thou would have me walk, that so I
may with cheerfulness run the race that thou have set before me, and having
fought a good fight, finished my Course, and kept the Faith, I may receive a
Crown of Glory, which thou have laid up for them that love the appearing of the
Lord Jesus Christ: For whose sake I beg all these things at thy hands, and in
whose Name and Words I further call upon thee, saying as he himself has taught
me, O holy Father, etc.

A Prayer to be said at all times.
O Most holy Lord God, I desire to return thee all possible praise and
thanksgiving, for those unspeakable benefits which thou vouchsafest to bestow
upon me from day to day. Lord, what am I that thou should be mindful of me,
that thou should so much as look upon me, unless it were in Anger, for I have
done nothing but sinned against thee all my life long; what thou have commanded
me to do, that have I left undone; and what thou have forbidden me to do, that
have I done. My mind has been in a continual Rebellion against thee, and
though I have abundantly tasted of thy goodness, yet have I rewarded thee evil
for good; those members which thou have given me to honor and serve thee
withal, I have made instruments of wickedness and uncleanness, thereby to
provoke thee to wrath and indignation against me; yet since thou art pleased
out o^ thy great pity and compassion, to spare me, and give me time of
Repentance; I humbly beseech thee to work in my soul a godly sorrow for all
those heinous sins which I have committed against thee: And do thou, O Lord,
for thine infinite mercies sake, pardon all mine offenses past, and enable me
for the time to come, to lead a new life; send down thy Spirit into my heart,
even the Spirit of Adoption, whereby I may be enabled to cry, Abba Father; and
let the same Spirit work in me a sincere love unto thee, a perfect hatred of
sin, and an universal Obedience to all thy holy Commandments; keeping me from
all evil ways, and teaching me to choose the way of truth, purifying my heart
from all filthiness of sin, and evil concupisence, so that I may become a new
creature, and be made in every respect conformable to the Image of Jesus
Christ; for whose sake I beg these things, and what ever else thou in thy
wisdom know to be most expedient for me: To him, with thy self, and blessed
Spirit, enable me, O Lord, to render as is most due all Honor, Praise,
Thanksgiving, and Adoration, now and for evermore. Amen.

A Confession of Sins, and Prayer for pardon.
O Gracious God, when I consider the infinite holiness and purity which is in
thee; I am even ashamed and almost afraid to lift up mine eyes unto Heaven, the
place of thy glorious habitation, for my sins are ascended up into thy sight.
Against thee, O Lord, against thee have I sinned, and done evil before thee. My
Iniquity is great, I have been an sender against thee, even from my Mothers
Womb; (...) that I have great cause to admire thy wonderful ^tience, and long
suffering toward me; that thou ^st not long ere this cast me into Hell: surely
it is ^cause thy compassions fail not. O for ever blessed (...) thy Name, that
thou still sparest me, and give ^e time of Repentance. Lord, I beseech thee
work (...) my heart a true sight, and sense of my sins, that ^eing the ugliness
thereof, and considering how ^ghly I have displeased thee by them, I may ever
^ereafter hate and detest them. Let my heart be ^l'd with sorrow, that I have
offended so good and ^atious a God, and work in me a settled resolution, (...)
forsake every evil way, to shun all occasions of sin, and earnestly to
endeavor to walk before thee in ^ew obedience all the days of my life. Thou,
O Lord, that have promised to give thy holy Spirit to them that ask thee; I
humbly beseech thee send down ^hy holy Spirit into my heart, to enlighten my
mind (...) the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and guide me into ^he paths of thy
Commandments, that so I may ob^in pardon of all my sins, and be made partaker
of ^verlasting felicity, through the merits and mediati^n of Jesus Christ; To
whom with thee, O holy Father, and thy blessed Spirit, enable me to ascribe as
(...) most due all Honor, Praise, Thanksgiving, and ^doration, now and for
evermore. Amen.

A Prayer for pardon of Sins, and grace to Amen^
O Gracious God who art the maker and Crea^ of all creatures, who governest and
rulest the all by thy Power and Wisdom, who preservest the by thy Providence
and goodness, and hear (...) cries of all those people that call upon thee
in the Necessities; thou have been graciously pleased (...) manifest thy
abundant mercy toward poor wor^less creatures, in promising that whosoever
come unto thee, thou will in no wise cast out: By t^ consideration of which thy
unspeakable goodne^ I thy poor servant am encouraged in all Humilit^ to come
before thee, not in my own name, or in (...) own righteousness, but in the Name
and Righteou^ness of Jesus Christ, beseeching thee for his sake (...) lend a
gracious ear to the voice of my supplication Vouchsafe, O Lord, to pardon and
forgive all (...) sins, as well Original as Actual; sins against the Law, and
sins against thy Gospel, wherewith m^ Soul and Body are stained and polluted
against the O Lord, I have sinned and done evil in thy sight, an^ if thou
should be extreme in marking and punishing what I have done amiss, I should
not be able t^ stand before thee; but with thee there is mercy tha^ thou may
be feared. O manifest thy goodness unt^ my poor Soul, and let me thereby be led
unto Repentance; Take away this rocky stony heart, and giv^ me such a heart as
thou would have me to have (...) enlighten my understanding, renew my will,
refor^ my judgment, sanctify me throughout both in Sou^ ^d Body, and let thy
blessing be upon all my law^ endeavors; let it be my intention and drift to
(...) thy will, to walk in thy ways, and to keep thy ^mmandments; let thy
blessed Spirit dwell in my ^l; let the power of sin be weakened in me, and
^ngthen and confirm me in thy grace, granting (...) to persevere therein unto
the end, that being ^ded by thy counsel to obey thee in this life, I may (...)
made a partaker of thy glory in the world to ^ne: which I beseech thee grant
for Jesus Christ (...) sake, for whom I bless thee: In whom I desire (...) ever
to be found of thee; to whom with thee (...) thy holy Spirit, be ascribed as is
most due, all ^nour, Praise, thanksgiving, and Adoration, both ^w and for
evermore. Amen.

Another of the same.
O Lord, who art the Father of Jesus Christ, and in him the Father of all
Mercies, and God of Consolation; I thy poor unworthy servant, do up^ the bended
knees of my soul, in all humility, pre^t my petitions before thee, beseeching
thee to ^nt me an Assurance of thine especial grace to^ds my soul, in the
pardon and forgiveness of all (...) sins, wherewith I have so highly displeased
thy ^jesty, by breaking all thy holy Laws and Com^ndments in thought word and
deed; I confess, Lord, that should thou deal with me according my deserts, I
could expect nothing but thy se^est wrath and curse, which is due unto me for
my (...): but thou, O Lord, have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, Mercy
best pleases thee; O the^fore show unto me the light of thy Coun^tenan^ and
say, unto my soul, Thou art my Salvation Write thy Laws in my heart, put thy
fear into (...) inward parts, elighten my mind in the knowled^ of thy Truth:
and so establish me in thy Grace, the I may never again depart from thee; wash
me a^ make me clean from all my filthiness; Mortify me whatsoever is carnal;
enable me through t^ assistance of thy Spirit to crucify the flesh, with t^
lusts and affections thereof: let not sin get the u^per hand of me, neither let
Satan approach too n^ to hurt me, but do thou continually guide, dire^ and
assist me in the ways of Righteousness, so the whatsoever I shall do, my
special care and purpo^ may be to serve and honor thee, that I may ta^ nothing
in hand which shall not be agreeable to t^ most blessed Will. O let it please
thee to present and defend me from all the Temptations of Satan deliver me from
all Perils and Dangers whatsoev^ so that I may henceforth pass the time of my
(...) journing here in Rest and Quietness, and finally li^ with thee for ever
in thy Kingdom: All which beg of thee for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

A Prayer for Sanctifying Grace.
ALmighty God, who art the Alpha and Omeg^ the beginning and the end; in whom
all cre^tures live, move and have their Being; upon the tr^ knowledge of whom
depends my eternal salva^on: I do most humbly beseech thee to enlight^ my
mind in the knowledge of thy truth; let the light of thy glorious Gospel shine
into my heart, that I may see the evil of sin, the vanity and emptiness of all
worldly enjoyments, the fullness and unsearchable Riches of Jesus Christ. O let
me no longer live in my self, but fill thou my soul with a Hungering and
Thirsting desire after Jesus Christ: And as the Heart pants after the water
Brooks, so let my soul pant after thee, O God: and forasmuch as thou have said,
without holiness no man shall see thy face; Purge, cleanse, and purify me, O
Lord, I beseech thee from all the Pollutions, Spots and Defilements of sin, and
make me holy as thou art holy, give unto me such a portion of thy blessed
Spirit, as may make me in all things conformable to thy blessed Will, and let
my conversation be such as becomes the Gospel of Jesus Christ. For whose sake
I beseech thee grant me such things as thou in thy abundant Wisdom, know to
be most expedient for me, for whom my soul desires to bless thy great and
glorious Name; to whom with thee holy Father, and thy sweet Spirit of Love, be
rendered and ascribed as is most due all Honor, Praise, Thansgiving and
Adoration now and for evermore. Amen.

A Prayer for Pardoning and Sanctifying Grace.
ALmighty Lord God, who have the Heaven for thy Throne, and the Earth for thy
Footstool, before whom all the World is as nothing; what am I poor sinful dus^
^d Ashes, that I should presume to take thy sacred Name into into my mouth, or
so much as cast up my Eyes toward Heaven; for thou art a holy God, thou can
not behold iniquity, and I am a sinful polluted creature, having stained and
defiled both Soul and Body, with filthy and unclean Actions, so that thou may
justly loath me and cast me out of thy presence into the bottomless pit of
Hell, but deal not thou with me, O Lord, according to my deserts, neither
reward me according to mine iniquities, which have been multiplied before thee;
but out of thy free grace and rich mercy, pardon and forgive all my sins, and
accept of me in Jesus Christ, who is worthy though I am unworthy; I have
sinned, O Lord, but he has suffered for sin, giving his Life a Ransom for
many, and is able to save to the uttermost, all that come unto God by him: O
therefore I beseech thee let that heavy burden of sin, which is ready to weigh
me down to Hell, be laid upon him who is able to bear it, and let his
righteousness be imputed unto me, cloth me therewith, that I may thereby
become righteous in thy sight. And gracious God, I beseech thee, give me a new
heart, a heart to fear, love and obey thee; let thy blessed Spirit be poured
plentifully upon me, and purify my heart by Faith, purge my conscience from
dead works to serve thee the living God; let nothing be so odious unto me as
sin, nothing so desirable as grace and holiness of living, whereby thou may
be glorified, and in all my thoughts words and actions, let my care be to
imitate the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the great pattern of perfection, and
example for all thy people to follow. In whose Name and for whose sake, I beg
at thy hands all things needful both for Soul and Body, to whom with thee, O
Father, and the ever blessed Spirit, three persons and one God be ascribed as
is most due all Honor, Praise, Thanksgiving, and Adoration now and for
evermore. Amen.

A general Confession of Sins, and Prayer for forgiveness.
O Gracious Lord God and loving Father in Jesus Christ, look down I beseech
thee in much mercy upon me the most unworthy of all thy Creatures, and give ear
to the Prayers and supplications which I make before thee. I confess, O Lord,
that I was conceived in sin and brought forth in Iniquity, I was by nature a
filthy loathsome Creature. Thou might justly have thrown me into Hell the same
hour I was born, and have done me no wrong, but thou have in much mercy spared
me hitherto, and been very gracious unto me, notwithstanding I have added to
that Original sin which I brought into the world with me, many actual sins and
transgressions, whereby I have daily provoked thee to wrath and indignation
against me; yet seeing, O Lord, that thou delightest in mercy, and do wait to
be gracious, because thou art unwilling that any should perish, but that all
should come to the knowledge of the Truth and be saved: I am thereby encouraged
to come unto thee, in the Name of Jesus Christ, beseeching thee for his sake to
pardon all my sins, and blot out of the Book of thy remembrance all my
transgressions; Forgive, O Lord, whatsoever Iniquities and offenses I have
committed against thee, in thought, in word, or deed; let not my unworthiness
hinder thy mercy from descending upon me, for I come not unto thee in my own
Name, but in the Name of Jesus Christ who is worthy, and though I be poor yet
he is Rich; though I am a sinner, yet he is Righteous; though I be filthy and
impure, yet he is pure and Holy: For his sake therefore be merciful unto me
unto me, wash me from all the pollutions and defilements of sin. Cleanse me
from my filthiness forgive mine offenses forget my iniquities, pour out thy
Holy Spirit upon me, write thy Law in my heart, let thy word be a light unto my
feet, and a lanthorn to my paths, and grant that I may so live in thy fear,
that I may die in thy favor and be made a partaker of that everlasting
happiness which was purchased by the merits of the Lord Jesus Christ, for whom
my soul desires eternally to bless thee, in whose Name and Words, I conclude
these my weak and imperfect Prayers, saying as he himself has taught me. O
holy Father, etc.

A Prayer for a Family.
O Most gracious God and merciful Father, who have commanded us by Prayer to
crave of thee all things necessary for soul and body, and have promised
graciously to hear, and merciful to grant the needful requests and petitions of
those which call upon thee. We thy poor servants do in the Name of Jesus
Christ, and for his sake humbly beseech thy fatherly goodness, to grant us all
things for this body and transitory Life, as shall be most agreeable to thy
good will and pleasure; and give us we beseech thee true repentance, that we
may unfeignedly turn from all our sins, and so indue us with thy heavenly
grace, and assist us with thy holy Spirit, that we may be enabled to mortify
all our carnal Lusts and filthy Affections. Pardon, O Lord, all our offenses
past, and grant that for the time to come we may lead a holy conversation, in
all godliness, to the glory of thy holy name, the good of others, and the
salvation of our precious souls in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ: To whom
with thee, O holy Father, and thy blessed Spirit be ascribed all Honor, and
Praise for evermore. Amen.

O Most merciful Lord God, who art great and great and glorious in thy self,
and good and gracious in thy Son; we thy poor unworthy creatures, desire from
the bottom of our hearts to render thee praise and thanksgiving for all those
undeserved savours and benefits, which thou have from time to time bestowed
upon us in giving us health, strength, liberty, food, raiment, and abundance of
all things that are needful for our comfortable subsistence in this miserable
world; O continue, we beseech thee, the same still unto us, and grant that we
may make such a holy use of thy blessings, and so improve them to thy glory,
that thou may never repent thee of the good which thou have showed unto us.
We bless thee, O Lord, that thou have preserved us all our life time hitherto
from all death, danger, and other mischief; vouchsafe we beseech thee this day
and ever hereafter to have a merciful eye over us, support and sustain us, bear
us up and save us that we fall not into danger, nor run into Temptation; suffer
us not to break thy Commandments, but give us grace to walk worthily amongst
the snares of our mortal enemies, the Devil, the World, and the Flesh; let all
our thoughts, words, and works be such as may tend to the glory of thy great
Name, to the edifying of our souls in Virtue and Piety, and to the profit of
our Brethren. These things, O Lord, and what ever else thou know to be
needful for us, we beg at thy hands for Jesus Christ his sake, in whose Name
and Words we further call upon thee saying, Our Father, etc.

O Most holy Lord God, who art infinite in greatness, and infinite in goodness,
whose Throne is in the highest Heavens, and yet art pleased so far to
condescend as to look down with pity and compassion upon us poor miserable
creatures here below, and have promised that if we call upon thee thou will
hear, if we ask we shall have, if we seek we shall find, and if we knock it
shall be opened unto us; We beseech thee, O Lord, fulfill thy gracious promise
unto us the unworthiest of thy Servants, who do here in all Humility put up our
petitions unto thee, craving thy holy Spirit, desiring to see ^hy face and
knocking at the gates of thy mercy. O let thy blessed Spirit seal unto us the
pardon and forgiveness of all our sins; show unto us the light of ^hy
countenance, and with the everlasting Arms of thy Love embrace us; sanctify
us, O Lord, both in soul and Body, cleanse us from all filthiness both of Flesh
and Spirit; teach, direct, and enable us to walk humbly before thee; confirm
and establish us in thy truth, let us daily grow in grace and therein persevere
unto the end, that so when this frail life is ended, we may Live with thee for
ever in that Kingdom which was purchased for us by thy dear Son and our blessed
Savior Jesus Christ. For whom we bless thee, and in whose Name and Words we
further call upon thee, saying, Our Father, etc.

Grace before Meat.
GOod Lord bless us and these thy good Creatures which thou have provided for
us, give them, O Lord, strength to nourish us, and give us grace faithfully to
serve thee through Jesus Christ our Lord.

A Thansgiving after Meat.
HVmble and hearty thanks be rendered unto thee most gracious God for all thy
mercies, for these comfortable refreshings which thou have now vouchsafed unto
us; Lord we pray thee feed our Souls with thy Heavenly Manna the food of
eternal Life through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Grace before Meat.
GOod Lord Pardon and forgive us all our sins which make us unworthy of the
least of thy mercies, bless these thy Creatures to the use of our Bodies, and
bless our Bodies to the use of our Souls; and bless both Body and Soul to thy
service through Jesus Christ our Lord.

A Thanksgiving after Meat.
BLessed and Praised be thy Name, O Lord, for those good Creatures wherewith
thou have plentifully fed us, we beseech thee give us thankful hearts for these
and all other thy benefits bestowed upon us through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Grace before Meat.
LET thy blessing, O Lord, be upon these thy good Creatures, which through
thine abundant goodness, we are at this time about to receive at thy hands,
make them healthful to our Bodies, and nourish thou our Souls with the Bread of
Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

A Thansgiving after Meat.
WE desire to render thanks unto thee, O gracious God, for thy great mercies
daily continued unto us; and in particular for these blessings whereof we have
now been partakers; we beseech thee as thou fillest our Bellies with thy good
Creatures, so fill our hearts and mouths with Praises unto thy Name, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Grace before Meat.
BE pleased, O gracious God, to sanctify unto our uses these thy blessings
which thou have here set before us, and give us Grace to make such a sober use
thereof that we may not be hindered from performing our Duties, but strengthened
to do thee service, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

A Thanksgiving after Meat.
WE return unto thy Majesty, O blessed God, innumerable thanks for thy
undeserved benefits which thou daily pourest upon us; blessed be thy Name for
feeding us at this time with thy good Creatures. O Lord, we pray thee give us
grace faithfully and thankfully to serve thee through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Grace before Meat.
GRacious God, who of thine bountiful goodness have prepared Meat and Drink for
our necessity, and daily feedest us therewith, whereby our frail Bodies are
nourished, strengthened, and refreshed; we beseech thee replenish our hearts
with Joy and Gladness, and make as fruitful in good works, to the glory of thy
holy Name. Amen.

A Thanksgiving after Meat.
Honor and Praise be given unto thee, O holy God, who out of thy tender care
over us, have provided all things for us richly to enjoy; grant, O Lord, that
both our Eating and Drinking, Speaking, and living may redound to the glory of
thy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

FINIS.

