THE Declaration and Profession OF THE REVEREND Mr. John Kettlewell, (Who
Departed this Life, April 12. 1695.) Made by him at the Receiving the Holy
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. March 23, 1694-95.
LOoking upon my self under my present Weakness, as having but little time to
continue in this World, and waiting patiently for my Change sooner or later, as
it shall please Almighty God, in whose hands my times are, and I desire they
should be, to send it; I think fit to make, and leave behind me, this
DECLARATION and PROFESSION following.

I profess firmly and steadfastly, to Believe the Creed whereinto I was
Baptized, the Holy Catholic Faith, in the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. In which
Blessed Godhead, I humbly believe, and Religiously adore, both the Unity in
Trinity, and also the Trinity in Unity.

I Profess to Continue Firm and steadfast, in the Unity and Communion of
Christ's Holy Catholic Church. Being freely and heartily ready, to join with
all sound Members in the Communion thereof, in all Holy and Divine Offices, as
the Providence of God should bring them to me, or me to them; to demean my self
toward them in all things as my Brethren; and to be affected with what befalls
them, as one Member ought to be with the Joy or Grief of another. And as for
those who are broken off from the True and Saving Faith, Worship or Unity of
this Body; I heartily pity them, and Pray for their Recovery and Reunion.

And having been not only made a Member, but, by my Blessed Master Jesus
Christ's inestimable Vouchsafement, called to be a Minister of His in the
Church of England; I do Profess and Declare, That as I have Lived and Ministered
hitherto, So I do still Continue Firm, in its Faith, Worship, and Communion.

And as for my Deprivation of my Living since this late Revolution, in Company
with many other Excellent and Pious Persons, for not taking the New Oath of
Allegiance to those who Claimed the same; As I did, so I still do firmly
believe, That it was on many Great and dreadful Acounts, my Bonnden Duty
absolutely to refuse the same: And that such Refusal was, and is, a most
righteous and rewardable Cause of Suffering I bless my God, who was pleased to
Call me, and Enable me thereby to give a Proof of the Sincerity of my Love, and
Preference of him before this World, by Willingly, and Gladly Quitting a
worldly Livelihood for his sake. And as upon this Righteous Account, I parted
with my Living, with much more Satisfaction and Pleasure of Mind, than I at
first received it with; So, Blessed be God's Holy Name, I take the same Comfort
and Satisfaction therein still.

And as for the most unhappy and lamentable Breach of Church-Unity and
Communion among Us, By setting up Bishop against Bishop on account of this
New-Oath of Allegiance, and for the Continuance and Confirmation of the matter
thereof in the Public and Daily Offices and Ministrations of Religion; making
both Oaths, and Holy Offices, as much as may be in all Points subservient to
this New-Allegiance: In this most sorrowful Breach of Church-Society; I
profess, That as I have done hitherto, so I do still heartily and firmly
Embrace and Continue in the Communion of those Orthodox and Rightful Bishops,
and the Clergy and People Adhereing unto them, who have Suffered, as I belleve
for their Steadfastness to the Rules of Righteousness in the Refusal of this
New-Oath, and who keep their Divine Offices and Ministrations Free from all
those things, which my Conscience sticks at in the same; being now about to
Receive the Benefit of Absolution, and the Blessed Eucharist, from the hands of
One of them. I heartily and earnestly Pray for the Cure, of this most Great and
Grievous Breach. And whenever the time of Healing shall come, The Lord, who
purchased his Church with his own Blood, put the work of Healing and Reunion
into wise and good Hands, who, without Passion, or Personal Prejudices, or any
regard to past Wrongs, or private Interests, shall faithfully, and unbyassedly
pursue the Blessed work of Christian-Union, and be willing and Glad to see
those Truths which make for Unity, and will have nothing else in their Eyes,
but how to Re-Settle this poor Broken Church in Truth, Purity, Unity, and Peace.

The Books which He means are Entitled, as follows. Of Christian Prudence,
or Religious Wisdom, not degenerating into irreligious Craftiness in TRYING
TIMES. London, 1691.

Christianity a Doctrine of the Cross, or Passive Obedience under any pretended
Invasion of Legal Rights and Liberties.

The Duty of Allegiance settled upon its true grounds, according to Scripture,
Reason, and the Opinion of the Church in Answer to a late Book of Dr. William
Sherlock, Entitled, The Case of Allegiance due to Sovereign Powers.

A Companion for the PERSECUTED, Or an Office for those who Suffer for
Righteousness. London, 1694. To which may be added, His Companion for the
Penitent, and for Persons Troubled in Mind. Also, His Book Entitled, Death
made Comfortable, Or, The way to Die well. 1695. Of CHRISTIAN COMMUNION to be
held in the Unity of Christ's Church, and among the Professors of Truth and
Holiness. 1693.


As for the Books which I have writ since this Revolution, to keep up among my
Christian Brethren, a Sense of truly Apostolical and Primitive Morals at a time
when most seemed bent to Start, or take up with any Shifts or Salvo's to set
the same aside; for their worldly Safety: Or, to direct them about their Civil
Obedience, and Comfort, and Support them under any worldly Dangers or
Sufferings for the same; Or to guide them in their way of Worship, that they
may perform the same with Purity, and in the Unity and Communion of Christ's
Holy Church: I bless God, my sincere design in Writing, and Publishing them,
was with much Pains, and some Hazard, to serve my Blessed Master; and as I
thought, the Great and Pressing Needs of his Church and People amongst us. And
as I truly, and sincerely believed all the Points I have Taught, and Delivered
therein, when I Wrote and Published them: So I do now Profess, That after all
the time I have had to Consider them since; and after all that I have heard or
met with in opposition to any Matters contained therein, which I think I have
duly weighed and looked through, I do truly and sincerely believe them all to
be true still.

And all this, I have here Solemnly Professed and Declared, for the Benefit and
Satisfaction of those, who shall be desirous to know, whether I continued in
the Belief and Practice of the same things at my Death, which I Professed,
Taught, and Practiced in my Life.

And to this Profession and Declaration, I set my Hand, this 23 of March,
1694-95. JOHN KETTLEWELL.
(...)

