THE Sufferers LEGACY to Surviving Sinners OR, Edmund Kirk's Dying Advice to
Young Men, VVrote by his own Hand in Newgate, and delivered to his Friend with
a desire the same might be Published, on Friday the 11th of June, 1684. Being
the day on which he was Executed at Tyburn, for Murdering his Wife.
Dear Country Men,
I Cannot but be very sensible under the condition into which my Crimes have
justly involved me, how little I deserve your pity. But yet as I am now come to
the last period of my Life, and going before another Tribunal to answer for
what I have here don amiss, before the great Judge of Heaven and Earth, I hope
you will so far lay by your just animosities against me, as to give me a hearing,
nor can I think of any way so proper to improve the few Minutes I have yet by
the mercy of the Almighty spared me, as in setting down the steps and degrees
by which iniquity has taken hold of me: that the sad fate I am now to suffer,
as the due and regular Consequence thereof, may be a warning to others; not
only, to avoid such gross and heinous Crimes, for which I now stand Condemned,
but also those lesser and more remote Evils which were the forerunners hereunto.

Let him that stands take heed least he Falls, the best do need this Caution,
and had I not thought my self two secure and trusted to my own strength, more
then the grace and assistance of the Almighty, this Condition had never been
mine. I thank God I was born of good Parents, whose kind instructions and Pious
Counsel I rebelliously neglected: Which neglect, as I am in the first place
humbly to beg God and their Pardons for, so must I acknowledge that I firmly
believe the same, to have a great influence on my present fate; for as the
Command has said Honor thy Father and Mother that thy days may be long in the
Land which the Lord thy God has given thee. So, I cannot but Judge that the
shortning of mine, has been in some Degree or Measure for this my Crime, nor
is it less than the greatest aggravation of what I am to suffer, next to that
of offending my God, that in this scandalous and Ignominious Death, I am justly
Condemned unto, I have brought shame upon my Family and doubled the pains on my
Mother that bore me; this tho it was the Sin of my Youth, yet where I began to
Transgress, I thought fit to Confess. Therefore Young Men Young Men! as ye love
your Immortal Souls, and expect to live happily here, and enjoy Everlasting
Bliss hereafter, be not Disobedient to your Parents, but learn by my Example to
avoid this Crime; which was the beginning of those many, I have been since
Guilty of.

In the next place, I would use the advice of Solomon, in the 12th. of Eccle.
and the 11th. Verse, remember now thy ^^eator in the Days of thy Youth, while
the Evil Days come ^ot, nor the Years draw nigh; wherein thou shall say I have
no Pleasure in them.

With me alas! the now is almost past over; wherein I ought to have remembered
my Creator, and the hours are upon me, in which I have no Pleasure, no Comfort
or Content, in the revolution of my former mispence of those Seasons, and
Opportunities that God gave me, but a sad and Doleful remembrance how often I
have refused the offers of Grace; and despitefully rejected the motions of
God's Holy Spirit, which Day by Day was as a Remembrancer under my Pillow, to
rouse and stir me up from a Careless and Sleepy Security in the state of
Wickedness and Sensuality which I then lay. But all in vain: Sin had Possession
of me; and with her inticeing Dalliances and Bewitching Allurements, (which
were then as a sweet and grateful Morsel in my Mouth, but now as bitter as the
pangs of Death it Self) Betrayed me, and Hurried me from one Degree of Bad to
another, till I had accomplished the last course of Iniquity, for which I now
Groan.

But tho God's just Judgment has deprived me of my Opportunity to Serve him as
I ought; and left me but a few Minutes to make my Peace with his offended
Majesty: yet to you that survive a Day, and Time is offered, if you improve it,
Your now, is at present: but how long it may last, before the Night comes upon
you, wherein you can do no Work; is in the Breast alone of God Almighty, who
will not be Delayed or put off, when the World and the Devil has had the first
and best of your Youth and Strength, with the Lees and remainders of old Age
and Impotence. It is not enough to give over Sin, when old Years incapacitate
thee for commission thereof: this thou owe to thy Imbecility and Weakness,
and can not discern whether it is thy will or want of Power that makes thee
then leave off: it is in the midst of thy Youth, when thy Blood Boyls, and thy
Jovial Spirits are in Fermentation; that thou must put a stop to thy Carieres
of Sin and Vanity, and seek and serve thy Creator.

Had I taken this Advice, I had never left my God; and consequently had never
been left by him: but so it is, that the great Deceiver of Souls, if he can but
make us put off, or quench our Young Desires to the Things of God and our own
Souls; in which there is only true and lasting Pleasure to be obtained: he lays
before us, in all her Gaudy Embellishments, and enticeing Braveries, the Lust
and Vanities of this naither World: with which we are as it were Spirited and
Stolen away from the Land of true Enjoyment, to drudge in the Mines of Slavery
and Infelicity: and yet as if there were no better Life, we go on Contentedly,
and like Born Bondslaves sing at the Oar, and think our selves Happy.

But dear Countrymen, look to it be times, and let my Fate be your Example.
Time was when I had as great a delight in Vanity, as the most Debauched amongst
you The Day was lost in my apprehension, in which I met no Jovial Companion to
Drink or Carouse away my Hours; the Night misspent, that was not Improved in
the Embraces and Dalliances of some Dalilah. The Sentence came dully and
insipidly from my Lips that was not Graced with an Oath; and I looked on my
self with shame when I let slip an Injury without a Revenge. But could you
stand in my Place; and feel the Pangs that I bare; or hear the Rebukes that my
Conscience gives me: You would say as I do, that if I had ten Thousand Worlds
at my disposal, I would give them all for a quiet Conscience, and a sight of
Forgiveness with God Almighty, through the Blood of my dear Redeemer Christ
Jesus. You would then say that the Pleasures of Sin were as Thorns and Briers
in your Sides: the Debauches and Excess of Company, the worst of all Pains and
Trouble: the Embraces of your Beloved and Endeared Harlots Vanity and Vexation
of Spirit: your Oaths and Excesses a Fighting a against the Almighty, and
Contending with Omnipotence, and the love of Revenge: the seeds of Murder.
think of this at present, and shun my Fate:

For had it been formerly told me, I should ever have come to this End, or have
done that crying Sin of Murder; for which I justly stand Condemned: I should
certainly have answered in the Words of Hazael, to the Prophet Elisha, when he
inquired of him the reason of his Weeping, Because says the Prophet, I know
the Evil that thou shall do unto the Children of Israel: for their strong
Cities shall thou set on Fire; and their Young Men shall thou slay with the
Sword; and shall dash their Infants against the Stones; and rent in Pieces
their Women with-Child. To which Hazael replied, what is thy Servant a Dog,
that I should do this great Thing: yet all this, was afterward Accomplished by
him; and in like manner, giving way to the beginnings of Vice, have I run this
Course, till my guilty Hands were all over Imbrued in Innocent Blood: And
justly therefore may I cry out and exclaim against my self, that I am now worse
than the Brute that Perishes; and I have nothing of Cleanliness or Humanity
about me. But Oh! Lord my God look down upon me, and Rebuke me not in thy
Anger; neither Chastise in thy Wrath: for thine Arrows have light upon me, and
thy Hand lies upon me; there is nothing Sound in my Flesh, because of thy
great anger; neither is there Rest in my Bones, because of my Sin; for mine
Iniquities are gone over my Head: and as a weighty Burden they are too heavy
for me. My Bones are Putrified and Corrupt because of my Foolishness. My Eyes
are full of Burning, I roar for very Grief of my Heart. But O Lord I power mine
whole desire before thee; and my sighing is not Hid from thee. It may be now
expected that I should give some account what were the Reasons and Motives that
Instigated me to this Crime. But alas! when I consider the slender Inducements
I had thereunto, I must only clap my Hand upon my Breast, and confess it was
the Evil Counselor within me, my own vile and Corrupted Heart, that agreed
with the Seducements of Satan, to bring this Tragedy to an Accomplishment.

What was the first chief cause that was the occasion of my Disagreement with
my Wife, was her Humor, (which I could now wish I had complied with; it being
as I really believe for my Good) to follow me from place to place, and hinder
my associating my self with Lewd and Debauched Company: which Disagreement, tho
at first it was no more than as a small Spark, yet by degrees, the same was
blown up to so great a Flame of Dissension, that the Devil told me, no less
than her Innocent Blood, could give me a proper Satisfaction for: and upon
this, it was that I contrived and perpetrated this Horrid and abominable Fact,
for which I now Suffer a greater load of Grief than if Rocks or Mountains
overwhelmed me: and had not God of his Mercy, cast in some Beams of his Favor
upon me, to support me in this my Doleful Imprisonment; I had long ere this
sunk under the weight thereof. Nor can I but observe how just the Almighty has
been in my Punnishment, in leaving me to commit this cruel and unnatural Sin,
on that very Day which I had so often abused; not only in the neglect of those
Ordinances and Assemblies which I ought to have followed and frequented; but in
the Commissions of those Excesses, which at other times my Business and
Employment in the World, never afforded me so great a leisure for. Whence I
would beg and entreat in the Words of a Dying Man, who stands within the
prospect of Eternity, all those that are my Acquaintance, and others that value
their own Souls, that they would remember to keep Holy the Sabath Day: for God
has commanded it, and he is both a Jealous and a good God: and as he visits
the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children unto the third and fourth
Generation of them that hate him; so he shows Mercy unto thousands, of them
that love him, and keep his Commandments. And believe me dear Friends, what
ever the Devil may Suggest unto you at present, hele change his note, (as he
has done with me) when you come so near Death as I am: those Sins which he
once told me were scarce to be observed, he now aggravates with the greatest
loads of Aspersion: insomuch, that were it not for the sight of my Savior, who
Dyed and Sussered for me; I should wish that a Millstone were hung about my
Neck, and the Seas Bottom was my Eternal Grave: but in him is my Trust, in him
is my Hope, and through him I am willing to taste the bitter Cup prepared for me.
In which Faith the Lord preserve me, Amen.

From NEWGATE July, 11th. 1684. Edmund Kirk.

His PRAYER.
MOST Gracious Merciful and Eternal Lord God, thy poor Sinful and Condemned
Creature is here approached the Throne of thy Mercy, Confessing, that as I have
been a great and Heinous Sinner before thee, so nothing less than the Infinite
Mercy of thy Almightiness it Self can ever Pardon me. But thou, O Lord, art a
God of Mercy, a God of Love and free Grace; and when Sinners approach unto
thee, tho their Crimes be as Scarlet, thou can make them as white as Snow,
and have promised so to do: Therefore Good and Gracious Lord, under the Comfort
and sense of that Promise, I cast my self down before thee, Beseeching that
thou would wash and Cleanse my blotted and Leprous Soul, in the Blood of my
Savior and Redeemer Christ Jesus; O Lord I am Defiled; But he is Clean, I am a
Sinner, a great and crying Sinner; But in him was no Guile found. I have
offended thee; But he Sufferr'd for me. I have been a Murderer; But he was
Murdered for the sake of Sinners, amongst whom I am Chief. Lay therefore the
burden of my Sins upon the Cross of my Savior, and let them not rise up in
Judgment against me, at such time as I approach thy Tribunal: It is but a short
time, and the Day will be here, a few Minutes that I have to Live; the Sands of
my Life are near Wasted, and I must take a farewell of this World, in the midst
of Health and Strength, and this through my own Crimes; so that I may charge my
own as well as her Blood, which I wickedly and Murtherously shed, at my own
Door. For which Crime, as I am justly made an Example to all the World, in a
shameful and Ignominious Death. So, O Lord, let this my Fate, deter and warn
others from those Courses that lead thereunto, that no other Person may ever
fall into that Snare that I am Entangled in, but that my Sufferings may be as a
Sea-Mark to others to avoid those Shelves and Sands I am now Sunk into. But, do
thou, O Lord, Forgive me, do thou, O Lord, receive me to thy Self, when my Soul
and Body shake Hands each of the other, that I may dwell Eternally with thee in
Everlasting Bliss. All which I humbly beg for the Sake and through the
Mediation of Christ Jesus. To whom, with thee and thy Holy Spirit be ascribed
all Honor, Power and Glory, now and for evermore

Amen.
London, Printed by Geo. Croom, in Thames Street over against Baynard's Castle.
1684.


