THE OBSERVATOR OBSERVED: OR, ANIMADVERSIONS UPON THE OBSERVATIONS on the
HISTORY OF KING CHARLES. WHEREIN That HISTORY is Vindicated, partly
Illustrated, And several other things tending to the Rectification of some
public mistakes, are inserted. To which is added, at the latter end, the
OBSERVATORS Rejoinder.

(...). (...). JAMES Chap. 3. v. 8. But the Tongue can no man tame. LONDON,
Printed by T. C. for Edw. Dod, and are to be sold at the Gunne in Ivy-lane.
1656.

To the READER.
Gentle Reader,
DID I not tell thee so? That some [Oblique descants would come traverse upon
my honest Narrative.] Those Oblique descents are the Oservations mentioned in
the Title leaf, being descants oblique enough, not only upon my Narative, but
upon or rather against King Charles; so that the Title of his Pamphlet might
rather have been formed into the Observations against King Charles, then
Observations upon his History. These Observations are Vsher'd in with an
address to the worthily esteemed, my self. In this Address I read my Charge,
and it is this, [Either my Intelligence or my diligence has failed me, or my
judgment is not well informed, or I have been biased from the Mark of Truth
by the excess and transport of mine own affections.] Having thus bespattered
me, he seems desirous to wash me clean again with a little of his holy water,
saying [he has my parts and person in an high esteem] but in very truth the
mystery of the business is, to make the world believe I am worthy the
overcomming. If in this I mistake, and the man be real, yet I heartily wish he
would hereafter spare that cost of complyment, which is but cast away on me,
who value his bits as little as his knocks: And this is all I shall say to his
Epistle. Next he should come to open the evidence of his Accusation; but he is
staid, see how.

Page. 1.
Observator. I thought it fit to prepare the way by offering some
considerations at the Authors Style, which by reason of many lofty words, no
English reader can climb over.

Answer. Style, unknown, lofty, and climb over! Here Is a wooden conceit made
by as wooden an Observator, who, had not his head (all but the face) been made
of blocks, or had he consulted ancient Authors, he might have known that the
word style used by writers, was not made of wood, as this observator supposes,
but of metal; the very same with his own face, one end whereof was serviceable
as a pen, the other as a knife to race or scrape out what was amiss. As to
those lofty words, I declare to all the world, this, not uningenuous
acknowledgment, that having conversed with Authors of the Noblest and chief
Remarque in several languages, not only their nations, but their very words,
especially being of the most elegant import, became at length so familiar with
me, as when I applied my self to that present work, I found it very difficult
to renounce my former acquaintance with them; but as they freely offered
themselves, so I entertained them upon these considerations. First, I was
confident that amongst learned men they needed no other pass then their own
extraction. And for those who were mere English readers I saw no reason they
should wonder at them, considering that for their satisfaction, I had sent
along with every forreigner his interpreter to serve instead of a Dictionary.

Then I had observed that our language had of late already admitted very near
all of them into so frequent use in ordinary discourse, as almost amounted to a
Naturalization of them amongst us.

Lastly, I was persuaded, so long as my Narrative was evenly carried, and
tolerably true, a canded Reader would have pardoned that blemish of my Style,
especially such an one as takes notice that two Historians Livy and Salust lie
under the same censure; the first for his Patavinity, as Asinius called it, the
other for his obsolete words extracted from Cato de Originibus, as Augustus
said; yet notwithstanding are by some thought to carry away the Garland from
all their fellows.

The premises considered, I shall demand of the Observator in the words of his
own Horace, de art Poetica.

Ego cur acquirere, pauca
Si possum invideor, cum lingua Catonis and Enni
Sermonem patrium ditaverit, and nova rerum
Nomina protulerit. i.e.
If I a word or two new forge, what then?
So did old Cato and elder Ennius, Men
Who on old things imposing names new-coyn'd,
Rendered the Roman language more refined.
Page. 7.
Fol. 2. To whom the Prince returned answer that he would empower the Earl of
Bristow to give his Majesty all satisfaction in that particular] That is to say
(for so it must be understood in the words foregoing) that he would make a
Proxy to the Earl of Bristow to celebrate (in his name) the marriage with the
Lady Infanta. But there was no such Proxy made to the Earl of Bristow, that
being a power and trust thought worthy of the Catholic King and Don. Charles
his Brother, as appears plainly, etc.

Answer. What a do is here about nothing? Had the Observator well considered
and advised with the next page (the third) he might have found there, that I no
less then twice spoke of the Earls delivering up the Proxy, clearly importing
it was only in his custody to consign to another, and that was indeed to the
King of Spain only, not to him and Don Charles, as the Observator says, of
whom I would gladly learn, who that Don Charles was, he being the first Don
Charles; I, or I think, any else ever heard of. So that here the Observator was
out himself, I take it.

Page. 9.
Fol. 5. England ever found the Spaniard a worse friend then enemy] for this I
think you have no reason; the amity and correspondence between those Nations
having continued firm for many ages and never broke (if not now of late) but by
the English or on these occasions. First by the invasion of Spain by the Black
Prince, etc.

Answer. What I spoke here of England, any faire-manner'd Interpreter will
judge to be meant of England in the quality she then and now is, that is, in
the state of Reformation, of which I hope there is no doubt, and the Observator
seems to confess it.

Page. 10.
Ibid. Who perceiving upon the whole sum that the sly Spaniard practiced to
make an aftergame of the Palatinate] King James was not to be told that, now
reserved as an aftergame, but yet intended to be played by the Spanish Court to
the more honor and advantage of the English; for thus I find it in a letter
from the Earl of Bristow, Oct. 28. For the business of the Palatinate etc.
These words give me no small assurance of the integrity and good meaning of the
Court of Spain.

Answer. Whither or not King James was to be told this, now I do not determine;
sure I am, told he was of it. And whereas the Observator is become a stout
advocate for the Spanish faith, in the point both of the match and the
Pallatinate, had he perused the letter of King Philip the third to the Conde of
Olivares extant in the last Cabala, and recited in Parliament, he might there
have found that neither was sincerely intended, but merely delays sought for
by the Spaniard to accomplish his perfidious ends. And as for Bristowes letter
insisted upon by the Observator, it signifies nothing to the vindication of
the Spanish faith; that Earl being articled against in Parliament for abusing
both the King and Prince with a false persuasion of Spains sincerity.

Page. 12.
Fol. 4. Which being new, and the business propounded, it was entertained with
an unanimous consent and a motion made that an Ambassador should be sent over
to negotiate that Treaty] I somewhat doubt of your intelligence, the marriage
of the Prince containing such a branch of the Royal Prerogative as King James
was not likely to communicate with his Houses of Parliament. For when he was
Petitioned by both Houses not long before, that for the avoiding of some
dangers which did seem to threaten the whole Kingdom, he would marry the Prince
to a Lady of the Protestant Religion, he entertained the motion with no small
disdain.

Answer. The Logic of the Observator! The King was angry when the Parliament
moved him concerning the marriage of the Prince. Ergo (which is in English
therefore) he would not communicate with them in one of his own liking. Again,
it was no more lessening of his Prerogative to communicate with them in the
entrance into, then in the breach of a Treaty of that nature, as he did in that
of Spain, which was the main business debated in the Parliament, 21. Jac.

Page. 13.
Ibid. In the style of the Court he went for Great Britains Solomon] That he
was Great Solomon, that is to say, either the wisest man or wisest King of the
British Nation, I am not Courtier enough to defend or say. It is true indeed
that he much pleased himself with boasting of his King-Craft; but I have heard
many wise men say that they could never find what that King-Craft was.

Answer. The Observator here falls foul upon King James, inveighing against and
withal detracting from his King-Craft: Pity it is his Observations came so
tarde into the world, that Squire Sanderson took no notice of them in this
particular, who would else have taught him either more wit or manners.

Page. 14.
Fol. 5. A stout adversary he was to the Arminians, and Semipelagians whom he
called, as Prosper before him, the enemies of Gods grace] In this short
Sentence, there are many things to be considered. 1. What these Arminians were
which our Author speaks of. 2. Whether they were the enemies of Gods grace, or
not. 3. What the Reason was, why King James showed himself so great an
adversary to them.

Answer. In the persuance of these three particulars, the Observator spends not
less then 10. pages, wherein though I am very little concerned, yet I shall
take the liberty to observe these few things. First, he says St. Augustines
zeal against the Pelagian heresy, transported him into inconvenient
expressions. It were a very proper work, for this Observator, to instance to us
those inconvenient expressions, and to undertake the confutation of him, as he
is presented to the world by Jansenius. Secondly, he imputes to them of
Calvin's way, this opinion that a man is forcibly drawn and irresistibly with
the cords of grace, in the work of conversion. Let him produce the men who, and
where they say it. They take away indeed an actual resistance of the will, as
inconsistent, simul and semel, with efficacious grace, but none I think, assert
this irresistibility the Observator mentions; Nor is this all, but they hold
also, says he, that man contributeth nothing to his own eternity. A thing I am
confident never declared in terminis by any; but seeing the man seems to
account it as one of their errors, I would gladly learn, and have the
Observator explain this Metaphysical whimwham, how Eternity (for so he says,
not Salvation) can recipere majus and minus, receive either augmentation, or
diminution from man. Lastly, he endeavors to show that King James was much
governed by Doctor Mountague, Bishop of Winchester, who being of a contrary
persuasion, put him upon many harsh and severe expressions against those poor
men. But this Mountague being dead, he began to show himself more favorable
unto those opinions, especially upon the coming out of a book, of another
Mountague then Prebend of Windsor; whose judgment in those points he liked very
well. A thing most unlikely; for in Theological controversies, it is well known
King James was able enough to go alone, and needed not like a child, be led up
and down by the hanging sleeves from one opinion to the other, by either the
one or the other. And whereas Mr. Mountague is made the man who first reformed
King James his judgment, I offer it to consideration, how probably it is
asserted, when An. 1628. this Mr. Mountague then Bishop, together with Dr. Neal
Bishop of Winchester, being Remonstrated to the King, as abetters of those
Tenets, and the King declaring dislike of those Novelties, both he and the
other Bishop; with tears in their eyes, protesting, they hated those opinions,
and before his Majesty and his Council on their knees, renounced them. So Sr.
Humphrey Mildmay averred in open Parliament 30 Careli nomine contradicente, See
the Additions.
No one near the Chair contradicting. *

Page. 25.
Fill. 6. The Kings Corpse on the 4th. of May was conveyed to Westminster, and
there inhumed etc.] Our Author tells us in the end of his Preface, what a
special care he has of his temporalitie; and yet he fails us here in the
first beginning. For neither was the body of the King interred on the 4th. of
May, not the letters of procuration kept undelivered until the 8th. nor the
Marriage Celebrated after the Funeral of the King. For upon Sunday, May the
first, etc.

Answer. That the 4th. of May was put for the 7th. is confessed to be a mistake;
and it must be either in the Printer, or, a mere clip of my pen, for that I
intended it so; I have these reasons to persuade the contrary. First, all my
informations, not one (and four they were) dissenting fixed, the Kings interment
on the 7th. and I were a mad Historian, to vary in so impertinent a matter,
from those informations. Secondly, my mentioning that that solemnity would be
past May the 8th. may probably imply, I intended to assign the 7th. for it, for
else the 5th. day had been more proper. But this is not all, I am mistaken also
in the celebration of the marriage; which though at first designed to be on the
8th. as I am able in fallibly to demonstrate, was as I am now informed, on the
first of May as we account. So that two errors are in point of temporality
here acknowledged.

Page. 27.
Fol. 7. From Canterbury his Majesty took Coach for Whitehall where the third
day after his arival] If our Author means by this, that their Majesty's went
in Coach but some part of the way only, he should then have said so, their
Majesty's passing no further then Graves end, and from thence went by water in
their Royal Barges, etc.

Answer. What I meant here any ordinary capacity may know, which is able to
discern the difference between the taking Coach to, and for Whitehal.

Page. 28.
Fol. 8. For as a man is without a female consort, so to a King without his
supreme council an half-form'd steril thing] Our Author in these words, and the
rest that follow, maintains a Paradox most dangerous to supreme Authority, in
making Parliaments so necessary to all Acts of State, as if Kings could do
nothing without their consent.

Answer. I hope no man of any ingenuity, will interpret me here or elsewhere,
an enemy to Monarchy; or does so much as question but that my Politic
Descondants imply Statute-laws, which I am of opinion, no King of England has
power to make without common consent in Parliament.

Page. 36.
Fol. 17. And who (i. e. Sr. Robert Mansel) had an unquestionable right to the
chief conduct of this enterprise upon the Dukes default] I believe not so.

Answer. The Observators contrary belief is no evidence, who was never made an
Arbitrator in the business; nor is it to others so strange a thing; many men
of wisdom, and long experience, still holding it for a Rule, not only in this
particular, but in all such as have vicariam potestatem, a vicegerency.

Page. 37.
Fol. 20. And the first thing resolved upon was his solemn Initiation into
Regality etc.] Observator. As solemn as the King esteemed it, yet our Author as
it seems, thinks more poorly of it; for he censureth it for a vanity, and
thinks that kings are idle in it. Are not all Christian Kings concerned in
this? etc.

Answer. Why I call this Inauguration a serious vanity, I declare the Reason;
because it conferreth no one dram of solid grandeur to the Throne, Kings being
perfect Kings, and qualifyed fully to all intents of Royality without it. Will
the Observator deny this? if so, let him consult the Lord Chancellor Egertons
Postnati, where he shall find the same asserted: Yet lest some such Cavillers
should quarrel at my inclination, I added serious to it, importing there was
somewhat in it of solid signification. Nor are all Christian Kings concerned in
this. His Catholic Majesty of Spain, is not so much as touched, who is not
Crowned at all.

Page. 39.
Fol. Ibid. The Lord Keeper Williams was displaced, and his place disposed of
to Sr. Thomas Coventry] Observator. Our Author is here out again in his
Temporalities; for the great Seal was taken from him in October, three months
before. The like mistake he proves in his Temporalities, touching Bishop Laud
whom he make Bishop of Bath and Wells; who was then Bishop of St. David's.

Answer. The fall of Lord Keeper Williams, I never said or intended to be in
that moment of time, to which that Paragraph relates; but principally purposing
to deliver therein his and others exclusion from the Parliament, I mentioned
also his fall as a thing preceding, and no way concurring with the other. So I
was not out in this Temporality; but if I was not, I am afraid I know who is,
in affirming [the great Seal was taken from him in October] whereas he parted
with it in August, as Mr. Howel in his familiar letters, Sect. 4. l. 23.
relates. But in making Dr. Laud Bishop of Bath and Wells at that time, I
confess I was mistaken, and this is grande nefas, an horrid crime no doubt.
But, this is not all; for rather then he will not find another, the Observator
fetches a running leap to Fol. 96. where speaking of the Articles of Lambeth,
it is said [they were first sent to the Synod of Dort, and after that to the
Convocation of Ireland; a very strange Hysteron Proteron, Setting the
Convocation of Ireland after the Synod of Dort, which preceded it three years;
and this is somewhat more then superannuating in his Temporalities] Answer. I
write the History of the Reign of King Charles, and then what I said of that
superannuating, was by me intended (nor can it be rationally interpreted
otherways) of such things and actions as have reference to the sixteen years
whereof I treat in that History, not of such things as antecedently occurred,
and are taken in by the By: for I have often occasion to mention things of
preceding date, as in the case of the Scottish Presbytery, wherein though I am
guided by the best informers I had, yet will I not, nor did ever so mean, to
warrant the truth thereof, as to every particular year. So it fares in this
error, in point of precedence between a Convocation and a Synod; whereof to
raise a question is only to strive de Lana Caprina, and is at worst (...), but
a mere laps of memory; a thing as obvious, so withal excusable in the best
Authors in point of circumstance; in such an one especially as this, wherein
(as being extravagant, and out of the bounds of the Principal Narrative)
curiosity was less concerned. And this is I hope enough to keep this error
within the bounds of my confidence of not superannuating, were the error
infallibly mine own. But if now* after all this ranting triumph, upon a melius
inquirendum, and better search, the error should prove none of mine, would not
the Observator, think you Reader, be wondrous blank at his Ridiculus Mus.
Resort to, and Review the place; then tell me, whither or not in your unbyast
sense, That Paragraph with the former, and three subsequent to it, do not, or
were not so intended, to complete the report of the Committee for Religion. If
so, then my information has wronged me, or I my information. Now for my
wronging my information (for I must walk circumspectly, so many snares being
laid to entrap me) take this ingenuous account. As for this report, it being
very long, I thought fit to contract it into a narrow scantling, not minding
the words, so I secured the substance. And if I have failed in this, if I have
delivered any thing material, which those Journals will not own, let me suffer;
and to speak here to the purpose, I appeal to Mr. Pym his speech Jan. the 27.
in those Journals, where my Copy (though erroneously I grant) presents these
Articles sent to Dort, before Ireland; so much in defense of my not
superannuating in this particular. Now I come to relieve my Preface out of the
Observators Purgatory, which has tortured it sufficiently, by saying I am
confident I stand secure, not only from substantial falsehoods, but from
circumstantial also; whereas this is his Preface, not mine; for male dum
recitat, the property is altered says the Epigrammatist, my words being
expressly these, Confident I am, I stand secure against any substantial
falsehoods; and I hope (now that it is no more then I hope) against
circumstantial also. (...), Phy impudent Observator, relish it as you please;
for cum dixeris quod vis, audies quod non vis, if you will take upon you thus,
garrire per angulos and de mundo far sententiam, to sneak behind noon, and
there give judgment upon all the world, you must look when you fail and forge
so foully, to be told of it to your teeth.

Page. 41.
Fol. 21. Who loved the Bishop if fame belies her not, better then was fit]
Observator. I think our Author with more prudence might have spared this note,
especially having Fame only for the ground thereof, which is so infamous an
Historian.

Answer. True it is, Fame is not always an infallible informer, some Rumors
being begot by Malice, and nursed up by Credulity: But yet true it is, that she
is sometimes a Public Testimony: and the wise Tacitus, though he erects no
Historical structures upon her bare affidavit, yet does present her in the like
concernments, for an Author of a second Admission. How far she stands guilty of
the crime of Defamation in reference to that Lady, I list not to enquire. Sure
I am Mr. Wilsons Eunuchus ab utero was a clearer acquitance of that Ladies
Innocence, then any Argument by the Observator produced; and I must tell him it
seems not at all ridiculous to any one who had a more inward knowledge of
that Prelates condition. Mr. Wilson went indeed too far in the extraction of
Bishop Williams his impotency which was not ab Utero from the womb, but
contracted after when he was a boy by falling upon a stake; whereof the
Observator may be further assured, please he to enquire.

Page. 48.
Fol. 45. For the Lords found an ancient Order, that no Lords sedente
Parliamento, should have voice during that Session etc. whereupon their
suffrage was excluded] Observator. I somewhat doubt our Authors intelligence in
this particular.

Answer. Matters of fact must not be born down with I believe, or I conceive;
if the Observator can from the records themselves demonstrate my error, I
recant.

Page. 51.
Fol. 64. But all would not smooth the aspirity of this illegal Tax]
Observator. The money which was then required of the Subject, was not imposed
in the way of Tax, but a Loan.

Answer. Tax in common speech is taken for a Compulsory Tribute, imposed upon
the Subject, at a certain rate; and such a Tax this Loan was, it being so
cumpulsory, as the refusers were by special instructions bound over to the
Councel-board and imprisoned.

Page. 55.
Fol. 71. And a Commission granted by the King to five Bishops, B. Laud being
of the Quorum, to execute Archi-Episcopal Jurisdiction. The cause impulsive to
it was a supposed irregularity etc.] Observator. In this and the rest which
follows, our Author runs himself into many errors. First, Bishop Laud was
not of the Quorum, no more then any of the other. Secondly, the irregularity
supposed, was not touched upon in the Commission. Thirdly, it was not his
keeper but the Lord Zouches he killed in Bramhil Park, etc:

Answer. What four errors at a clap? that is ill luck; yet it was well they
proved no more, for he that made them four, might have made them by the same
art of juggling his words into my Text, four hundred. Let him keep his own
suppositicious foystings at home, my errors will not multiply so fast. Now
first, where did I say Bishop Laud was of the Quorum more then any other? of
the Quorum, I said he was, meaning that of the five he was one. Secondly, where
did I say that the Irregularity was expressed in the Commission, as the
impulsive to it? I said it was the declared impulsive to the Commission, and if
it was not, or these had been any other, the Observator should have done well
to have discovered. See the Additions.
Lastly, whereas I said the Archbishop killed his Keeper, Mr. Prynn in his
Brevians of Archbishop Lauds life, p. 11. and Aulives Coquinariae, p. 130.
expressly say it was his Keeper. My last error is the vouching Bishop Andrews
for a vindicator of the Archbishops Regularity. The Observator yields [he did
the Archbishop great service in this business, but not for any opinion which
he had, that no irregularity was incurred by that misadventure.] Really Bishop
Andrews is beholding to the Observator for this note, the whole scope of that
Commission was to inquire into the matter of fact, and to resolve whither the
Archbishop (notwithstanding that mischance) was Regular or not Regular. This
Bishop with Sir Henry Martin, positively maintained that he was Regular still;
now if acting as a Commissioner from the King, he would positively maintain one
thing, and in his own judgment adhere to the contrary, as the Observator
positively says he did, I say the more too blame he, and the much more too
blame the Observator if he does in this particular belie him, as it is an
hundred to one he does. But if the Bishop pronounced the Archbishop Regular,
though he thought otherways, what was then the plot? the Observator tells us
it was to keep out Dr. Williams then Bishop of Lincoln, and Lord Keeper, etc.
who would have stepped into that See. So then it seems the question was not
whither Regular or Irregular, but who, Abbot or Williams, would make the best
Archbishop. This is fine stuff, pity it is, there is no more of the remnant.

Page. 58.
Fol. 73. They who lately were confind as Prisoners, are now not only free, but
Petty Lords, and Masters, yea and Petty Kings.] Observator. I cannot chose but
marvail what enduced our Author unto this expression of making the Gentlemen
assembled in the house of Commons, not only petty Lords, but Petty Kings; I
have heard that King James once said in a time of Parliament (but whither in
way of jeer, or otherways, I am not able to say) that there were now five
hundred Kings, beside himself.

Answer. King James having said the like before, it is no great marvail that a
poor Subject should use the same expression, considering what the Observators
Court-Historian (as he, and Dr. Heilen usually styles him) says, Non ibi
consistant exempla, unde (so it is not ubi, by his favor) caeperunt] Examples
are not restrained to their first Originals. Nor did that expression import
what these Gentlemen were de jure, but what in reputation, and what de facto,
and of this experience has taught us, they lately were not Petty Lords, but
Lords Paramount; not Petty Kings, but Superiors to Kings themselves.

Page. 59.
Fol. 75. Their Estates modestly estimated were able to buy the house of Peers,
the King excepted, though an hundred and eighteen thrice over] Observator.
Assuredly the Basonage were brought very low when the Gentlemen assembled in
the house of Commons could buy them thrice over, there being not above 500 of
the one, and thrice one hundred and 18, that is to say, three hundred and fifty
of the other, by which account every Gentleman must be able to buy his two
Lords and an half one with another. But why does our Author leave out the
Bishops, etc. It was ill done of him to exclude them, and not well done of him
that should have kept them in, to exclude them afterward, etc.

Answer. All that I can make out of this account is, that it will take two such
Observators and an half to make up one good Arithmetician. The Computation is
not so over-difficult but any one of slender skill may sum up, and proportion
it. The number of Peers being 118 allow to every Peer 3000 l. per annum, the
total is 354000 l. multiply this by 3, there arises 1062000 l. The Commoners
the Observator grants to be five hundred; allow to every Commoner 2124 l. per
annum, the product will be 1062000 l, so then every Peer considered at 3000 l.
and every Commoner at 2124 l. per annum, no such stupendous business, if it
be withal taken for granted, that for estates they were the gallantest assembly
that ever those walls immured; then I say the Commons were able to buy the
house of Peers thrice over. Now for omitting the Bishops, I demand what were
they? members of the house of Peers, or are they not? if the first, then these
words are turn-key enough to let them in; if the Observator say not, their
exclusion is his own manufacture. Next to come to the man, who did so ill when
he should have kept them in, to exclude them: This man is King Charles, the
very same I assure you, sed dicere mussat, would he speak out, and exclude
them; true it is he did [out of a firm persuasion of their contentedness to
suffer a present diminution in their Rights and Honor for his sake] so are his
very words. And I dare answer for almost all (for all I dare not; non omnes
Episcopi Episcopi sunt) they were for his sake well contented; and if so, the
greater indignity it is for this Canis Palatinus this Court-curre, a fellow so
unconcerned therein, now his Royal back is turned, to be snarling at his heels
for it. But of such men this Nation has enough, and to spare. I well remember
being once at Table, our number being about a dozen, at that time when somebody
was in a flourishing condition in Scotland, several discourses passing in
reference to his affairs, amongst other things a report was mentioned, that in
order to his establishment he promised the Covenanters a settlement of the
Presbyerian government, whereto one Replied [If he complie with the
Presbyterians, it is not this bit of bread to me whither he sink or swim] so
strong an influence had Episcopacy upon his Spirit, and possibly not Episcopacy
neither; for it is shrewdly to be suspected that some stand not so much upon
that Hierarchy, in reference to the Churches splendour, as to their private
Ambition. Fac me Episcopum Romae, and ero protenus Christianus, Make me Bishop
of Rome, and then I will turn Christian, said a flouting Pagan to Damasus. And
if Fac me Episcopum, make me a Bishop, be not the terminus ad quem, the main
scope of some Prelatical Regalists, they are honester men then I take them to
be.

Page. 64.
Fol. 90. He stitched a paper in the lining of his hat wherein he declared
etc.] Observator. I think he is somewhat out in short, there being nothing
found in his hat or elsewhere about him; a few loose papers such as might
become those men who make God the Author of sin.

Answer. My informer is Captain Harvey (one of those to whose custody by order
of the Lord Carlton, Felton was first committed) who in a letter that very 23
of August, wherein beside other things formerly observed, he has also this
passage, that Pelton told him he was to be prayed for the next day (being
Sunday) at London in a Church (meaning St. Brides) at Fleetstreet Conduit, and
in the end concludes his letter (having formerly related, his Motive to the
fact, was, the Remonstrance of the House of Parliament) thus; He sewed a
writing into his hat, within the lining, to show the cause why he put this
cruel act in execution. The writing was thus even for a syllable.

I would have no man commend me for doing it, but rather discommend themselves;
for if God had not taken away their hearts for their sins, he had not gone so
long unpunished.

John Felton.


The man is cowardly base in mine opinion, and deserves neither the name of a
Gentleman or Soldier, that is unwilling to sacrifice his life, for the honor
of God, his King, and Country.

John Felton.


Page. 68.
Fol. 94. The body was from thence conveyed to Portsmouth, and there hung in
chains, but by some stole and conveyed away, Gibbet and all.] Observator. Our
Author is deceived in this; for I both saw the Gibbet standing, and some part
of the body hanging on it about three years after.

Answer. That it was confidently so reported (though erroneously, as I am since
informed by the Observators betters) I have good Authority to prove, and that
will be sufficient for me; nor is it any great wonder, when we consider how
ready and disposed Fame is to unwarantable superfaetation.

Page. 70.
Observator. The calling in of Mr. Mountagues book, and the advancing of Dr.
Barnaby Potter (a through-paced Calvinian) unto the Bishopric of Carlisle,
could not get him any love in the hearts of his People.

Answer. This must necessarily signify something of abominable quality in
either the Person, or Doctrine of Dr. Potter, or both; to be so efficacious to
obstruct and impede the affection of his people. As for the man, know it is his
eminent Relation to his Majesty; might rather create a wonder why he was
advanced so late, then why so soon; and to imagine any thing tending to scandal
in his life, considering his place of so near admission to the King person,
will at the first sight, look so like a Calumny, as deserves no answer. So then
the horrid thing in him is, and must be his Opinion, and being a throughpaced
Calvinian; and that indeed is blemish enough now a days; he that is so, be he
the greatest Scholar in the Land, he doteth; Be he the most pious, he is an
hypocrite; be he the most conscientious in all his Actions, a very knave; with
all these titles of honor, I have known the gallantest men in this Nation
dubbed; and what is this but to make a faction of an opinion, and to contend
for victory with the loss of charity? Ephesians. 4. 15. (...).
The institution of Cyrus makes (...) speaking truth, one of the three
accomplishments of a complete man; Christiany goes further; and therefore the
Apostles rule is, we must search for truth and speak it, but in love, that is,
keeping the unity of the spirit in the bond of Peace. This unity of love, must
be preserved even where there is not an unity of faith in things not
fundamental, which I take not one of those controversies to be; and if they be
not so, it is a most sad thing for the Church of God to be torn and rent in the
entire cloth with diversities of such opinions, whose truths will neither carry
us to Heaven, nor errors to hell; what the uncharitable animosities on both
sides may produce I tremble to think. It was St. Augustines opinion, Augustine
Epist. 162.
and I wish it entertained by our whole Church in such Polemick questions as
these, Laudandi sunt qui pro bono veritatis tolerant, quod bono veritatis
oderunt. [they are to be commended who for Christian verities sake patiently
endure what they would else dislike for the avail of Truth.] To proceed.

Page. 70.
Fol. 96. For Arminianism informations were very pregnant, that notwithstanding
the Resolution of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and other Reverend Bishops and
Divines assembled Anno. 1595. etc.] Observator. Why man, the Articles of
Lambeth were never looked upon as the Doctrine of the Church of England, nor
intended to be so looked upon by them that made them.

Answer. Why Man, who said they were? not I; it was Mr. Pym, and the Committee
for Religion said so. I do but recite what that Committee declared as the
product of their inquiries: and with this answer legible enough to any who can
read, I might easily avoid no less then 25 pages of the Observator. So that I
might justly have this Man in the Moon, like Mithridates his soldiers, sighting
by Moonshine with his own shadow; Had he not scattered my particulars in my
way which detain me.

First, Stating the occasion of making the Lambeth Articles, he says, page.
74. That the Compilers of the book of Articles, and the book of Homiles, the
public Monuments of our Church in point of Doctrine differed from Calvines
since, in the point of Predestination and its subordinates.] Answer. This is
very probable; for it is very rare for two ever of the same party to agree
exactly in all parcels of these controversies. But if they did in some things
vary in opinion, I am still to demand, Quorsum hoc, what then?

Secondly, Page. 74. He says of Petrus Baro, at the end of his three first
years, he relinquished the Professorship, and retired not long after into
France.] Answer. Three errors in not full so many lines. First, Petrus Baro
relinquisht not his Professorship at the end of his first three years. He was
Professor Anno. 1574. his Lectures upon Jonas tells us so. And the Observator
will have him Professor about the time of the Lambeth Articles, which were in
1595. So then he relinquisht his place not at the end of his first three years.
Secondly, his first three years are manifestly mistaken for two. For by the
Statutes of the Lady Margaret, Foundresse of that Professorship, every
Professor is eligible at the expiration of two, not of three years. The precise
words are, Et volumus insuper quod de caetero quolibet Bienmio, ultimo die
cessationis cujuslibet termini ante magnam vacationem universitatis praedictae,
una habilis, apta and idonea persona in lectorem lecturae praedictae, pro uno
Biennio integro, viz. a festo nativitatis B. Mariae Virginis tunc proxime
sequente duntaxat duraturo eligatur. Fol. 105. in nigro codice. This I thought
fit to insert for the information of very many of a contrary belief. Thirdly,
Peter Baron never went or retired into France after the Resignation of his
Professorship, but went up to London, to Crutched Friars; there he lived, there
he dyed, and was buried in St. Olaves Church, at whose Interrment the Bishop of
London Ordered all the most eminent Divines, Ministers in that City, to be
present. Of this I hope I am credibly informed from his own Son still alive.

Thirdly, the Observator labors to discredit the Articles of Lambeth; by
telling us a story, perhaps a tale, of the Queen, the Lord Burly, and
Archbishop Whi^gift in reference to those Articles. To which I answer, first,
This story was never heard of till the year and the reputed father thereof, is
one Aurelius (not Aurelius Augustinus, nor Petrus Aurelius to be sure) a
Kentish-man, who was unborn when those Articles were framed. Secondly, admit
his relation true; that Assembly was neither the first, nor the Greatest that
have incurred a Praemunire.

Fol. 96. By the prevalency of the Bishops of London and Winchester, the
Orthodox party were depressed, and the truth they served was scarce able to
protect them to impunity.] Observator. A very heavy charge, which has no truth
in it; for I am very confident that neither of these Bishops, did ever draw any
man within the danger of punishment in relation only to their Tenets in the
present Controversies, if they managed them with that prudence and moderation
which became men studiously addicted to the Gospel of Peace.

Answer. I fear then the fault will be in their Prudence; for that some were
snibb'd for matters of like nature, and restrained from speaking their
consciences, the same journals relate, Sir Daniel Norton and Sir Robert
Phillips informing the House, the one of Dr. Moor, the other of Dr. Marshall,
who both testified they were chid by that B. of Winchester for preaching
against Popery, and commanded to do so no more.

Page. 80.
Ibid. By the uncontrouled Preaching of several points tending and warping
toward Popery by Mountague, Goodman, Cozens and others.] Observator. How again
our Author is I think mistaken; for neither Mountague nor Cozens were
questioned for preaching any thing warping toward Popery, etc.

Answer. All the error the Observator can here pick out, is in the word
Preaching, which I confess should have been Publishing, though both are
sometime of the same, never of a much differing import; And though I shall
agree with the Observator, that in Dr. Cozens his Horary there is no direct
Popery; yet might it raise jealousies of his tendency that way, considering the
time wherein he published it. But seeing that Doctor has appeared of late a
stout advocate for the Reformed Church, as I was first informed by my Reverend
friend Mr. Lionel Gatford, and am now further assured by others. I wish all men
would indulge him a favorable construction of that his right hand Error.
Charity to himself as Christian, and to the unity of this distracted Church,
requires no less.

Page. 85.
Observator. That Adoration toward the Altar or Eastern part of the Church,
was generally used by the best and most religious Christians in the Primitive
Times, Our Author, (if he be the man he is said to be) being well versed in the
Monuments of most pure Antiquity cannot choose but know.

Answer. Because the Observator appeals here to my knowledge, though I boast not
of any great knowledge of or acquaintance with the Monuments of most pure
Antiquity, yet will I render both my science and conscience, and these apart
from what I deliver as the Report of this Committee, who are of age to answer
for themselves. True it is that bodily Adoration, and worshipping toward the
East, was an ancient custom of the Primitive Church; evidence thereof there is
enough in Ecclesiastical writers. As it was ancient, so can I not say it was
illaudable in them, and might be tolerable in us, as I conceive, were all men
satisfied in the decorum of it, or a liberty left to those who are still
dubious of the lawfulness thereof to forbear it. But for dopping or cringing
to, or toward the Altar or holy Table, as often as they approached to, or
retreated from it, (which is I take the bowing meant by the Committee, and was
often practiced by some indiscreet pretenders to conformity with the Primitive
Church) I profess seriously I find not the least trace thereof in any genuine
Author of the first 500 years; and suppose I did, yet would not that be
exemplary enough to me to imitate their practice. The Primitive Fathers never
intended their usages or expressions should be leading Charts, or Directories
to all posterity; they knew well enough that ceremonies, phrases and modes of
speech, must comply with, and humor the temper of their respective times,
places, and other like circumstances. Their Priests, Altars, Sacrifices were at
first words of an innocent import, and pious intendment; but became afterward,
in process of time, the main turn-keys to the superstitious Sacrifice of the
Mass, and the supporters of Transubstantiation; and though Great Scholars who
know most properly how to apply them, may sometime take the same liberty the
Fathers used, yet seeing the Idolatry of worse times has imposed upon those
words a sense differing from their primitive reception, reason good in common
speech they should be forborne. Ne propter ambiguitatem vocabuli quam non
d^scernit quotidiana locutio, illud profiteri videatur, quod est immicum nom
ini Christiano. Least by reason of the ambiguity of a word not so easily
discerned in ordinary discourse, something may seem to be intended not
consonant to Christian faith] as Augustine excellently in another, Epist. 200.
Asellio.
though not unlike, case: So that the Primitive practice is in my opinion no
general rule to go by. I proceed to the next ceremony faulted by the
Committee, the standing up at Gloria Patri. Concerning this the Observator
says first [It was never obtruded I am sure] Answer, what never? Let him not
be too confident, for really I fear there will prove a flaw in his assurance,
who so ever was of his Council. For in Bishop Wren's Articles frame'd for the
Diocese of Norwich, sure I am, cap. 4th. there are these words [Do they (i.e.
the People) at the end of every Psalm stand up and say, Glory be to the Father,
etc.] Now I think things inquired after in Diocesan visitations may be said to
be urged and obtruded. But if it was not obtruded by the Bishops, the more
negligent, the more too blame they; for the Observator tells us Secondly, [The
Rubrique of the Church requiring us to stand up at the Creed, obliges us by
the same reason to stand up at the Gospels and Gloria Patri, the Gospels being
the foundation of the Creed, as Gloria Patri is the Epitome and abstract of it]
Now say I, if the Rubrique obliged us to use this ceremony, it did also oblige
the Bishops to enforce conformity to it: and the Observators excuse is their
accusation. But this Theologaster saying that Gloria Patri is an Epitome of the
Creed, tells us news indeed. For of what Creed I demand? of that (the
Apostles) at which the Rubrique enjoined us to stand up? surely no such thing.
It is in truth as Mr. Hooker quoteth out of St. Basil, (...), the evidence of a
right sense in the doctrine of the Trinity; and not in all concernments of that
Doctrine neither, but only in the particular of Coequality of the three
Persons. Now there are in the Creed other points besides relating to the
Trinity, and some Articles not at all belonging to that Doctrine. So that this
Doxology must be stretched beyond all reason to comprehend them.

Thirdly, he says that [Many a thing may be retained in a Reformed Church,
without special Rubriques to direct them, ex vi Catholicae consuetudinis,
especially where there is no rule to the Contrary.] Been, Been, sed quo istud
tam been? much truth, but to little purpose. For will the Observator say; we
have no Rule to the contrary? If he does, he must be transmitted to the Act for
uniformity prefixed to our Leiturgy, where there is a vae, a woe to him who
[shall wilfully use any other Rite or Ceremony, etc. then is set forth in the
book of Common-Prayer] expressly binding all men to a strict conformity to the
very letter of it.

Fourthly, He says [there is no more Authority for standing up at the Gospel,
then at Gloria Patri] Answer. Reason there is more I am certain, and I believe
more Authority. As for Reason, Standing is the most proper posture of
attention; and if any part of Scripture requires attention, the Gospel does it
in a most eminent degree, Chrysostom. in Isai. Hom. 2.
the reading whereof is (...), the setting of Heaven gates wide open, not with
the Psalmist for the King of Glory to come in, but for the King of Glory to
come forth. Now as standing is not improper, so is it not a posture peculiar to
the action of Doxology, and glorifying of God, as is evident by our Church,
which sometimes (as in our Communion service) requires it from our knees. Next
I come to Authority, which I say did positively enjoin me and all men of my
mind to stand up at the Gospel, not so at Gloria Patri. For by the Canons, it
is required of every man [when in the time of Divine Service the Lord [I think
it should be, word or name, as in the Queens Injunctions] Jesus shall be
mentioned] due and lowly reverence shall be done, as has been accustomed; now
how it has been accustomed, the Queens Injunctions tell us expressly, it was
[by lowness of courtesy, and uncovering of the head] By uncovering my head
this reverence I cannot perform; for Pileum being insigne libertatis receptae,
the cognizance of liberty, I think it becomes me not to have it on when my
Lord and Master speaks to me. So that my Reverence I must do by Genuflection
and bowing of the knee, which cannot be done but in a Stationary posture. And
note further, that this Reverence is not only required by our Church, when the
Gospel, but also when the secondlesson, yea when the Epistle (or Apostle as the
ancients called it) was read.

Page. 98.
Fol. 110. There was an old skulking statute long since out of use, though not
out of force, etc.] Observator. This statute was made in the first year of
Edward the second. But whereas our Author tells us that the persons mentioned
in that statute were not required to be made Knights, as was vulgarly supposed,
but ad arma gerenda, to bear arms, and thereupon tells us a story of a Sword
and Surcoate, I shall rather believe the plain words of the Statute, then his
interpretation.]

Answer. I find by Sr. Edward Coke, Inst. part second, that by the Common Law
all persons who hold a Knights Fee (which was of uncertain value, sometimes 15,
sometimes 20, sometimes (as in this present case) 40 l. per annum) might be
compelled to be made Knights. That the Kings of England had this power before
the Stat. 1. Ed. 2. it is evident by Matthew Paris, page 897. who relates that
H. 3. came into the Exchequer, and there fined all the Sheriffs of England five
marks a man, for not distraining Quemlibet habentem, etc. [Every one having
^5. pounds per annum, to be made Knights as he commanded by his writs directed
to those Sheriffs.] And the like precept was sent out by Edward 1. as is to be
seen by Matthew Westminster, Flor. Hist. p. 223. As to my story of the Belt and
Surcoate, the Author thereof (an eminent Antiquary) being long since dead, and
not in being to make his defense, I shall offer something out of my reading,
tending that way in confirmation of that note. First, for the time, that it was
regularly to be at the Coronation, is inferrible from the instrucions sent down
this year, with the Kings Commission, whereby [Al such Baronets as were not
Knights at his Coronation, and all Knights who have received that honor since
that time] are declared liable to make fine. As for the Belt and Surcoate,
Matthew Westminster tells us, K. Ed. 1. sent forth a Proclamation, that all
such persons, Qui haber ent unde militarent adessent apud Westmonaster. etc.
Who had possessions valued at a Knights fee should appear at Westminster, etc.
What to do? he tells you presently, admissuri singuli ornatum militatem ex
regia garderoba, to receive military accoutrements out of the Kings Wardrobe.
But I said, these men summoned were not to be made Knights, as was vulgarly
supposed, which words having reference to the present case, are no other in
substance then what Sr. Edward Coke said before me, who in the place
forerecited speaks clearly thus. [Now, tempora mutantur, the times are changed
and many a yeoman purchases lands in Knights service, and yet (non debet)
ought not, for want of Gentry, to be a Knight] and a little after, the fine to
the Mark which is chiefly aimed at.

Page. 103.
Fol. 124. For many had no fancy to the work, merely because he was the
promoter of it] Observator. It was plainly contrary, his case in promoting it,
being one great reason why so many had a fancy to it most of the Clergy
contributing largely unto it; the like did most of the Nobility and Gentry.

Answer. The Observator says most of the Clergy, and most of the Nobility and
Gentry contributed largely to the repairing of St. Paul's. Many, and most, may
sure be consistent; there may be many opposite to the major vote.

Page. 106.
Fol. 126. But the entertainment most of all August and Royal, was that of the
Earl of Newcastle at Welbech, which was estimated to cost the Earl not less
then 6000 l.] Observator. I have showed our Author some mistakes in his
Temporalities, and now I shall show him one or two in his localities, besides
his misplacing of the battle of Tissique spoken of before. The entertainment
so much talked of, which cost the Earl 6000 l. was not made 1633. in the time
of the King's going into Scotland, but July the last in the next year; nor was
it made at Welbech, but at Belsover Castle. The like mistake in matter of
locality, occureth Fol. 129. etc.

Answer. The Observator here mentions a battle of Tissique, spoken of
before; but where I know not; only conjecture that he had a good will to take
me to task for misplacing a battle, I suppose at Rostoch; but upon better
consideration he found the error was his own, not mine; and therefore cut out
the leaf containing the 101 and 102 pages wherein his mistake lay, leaving that
Paragraph tied head and heels together.

Now I come to my two errors in Locality. The first is my misplacing of the
Earl of Newcastles entertainment of the King. Which he will have at Belsover
Castle in Darby-shire, not at Welbech: and not 1633. but the next year after;
and why so? because [that was the entertainment which cost the Earl 6000 l.] I
answer, mentioning the entertainment given the King by the Earl, I delivered
these particulars. First, that it was in his progress into Scotland. Secondly,
that it was the most August of all. Thirdly, that it was at Welbech. Lastly,
that it was estimated (not positively that it did so) to cost the Earl 6000 l.
The three first are granted for truth by the very Observator himself; and for
the last, as I said barely, it was so estimated, so I must tell him it was so
estimated to my self at York at that very time of the Kings Progress, and a
full year before the next entertainment was given or perhaps thought of.

The next mistake in Locality, is, Fol. 129. where I relate that both their
Majesty's, with their train of Court-Grandees and Gentlemen Revellers, were
solemnly invited to a most sumptuous banquet at Guild Hall.] Whereas the
entertainment which at that time the City gave the King was at Alderman
Freman's house. Herein I confess my error; Parce precor falso.

Page. 110.
Fol. 127. A very Learned man he was, his Erudition of the old stamp stiffly
disciplined in the doctrine of St. Augustine, which they who understand it not
call Calvinisme.] Observator. Whereas Our Author makes the Doctrine of St.
Augustine and Calvinisme to be all One, I think he is very much out in that.
St. Augustine was a great maintainer of Episcopacy, which the Calvinians have
rejected, etc.

Answer. Good Reader, judge thou if I make the Doctrine of St. Augustine and
Calvinisme to be in all concernments all one; in opposition to the Massilian
and Arminian Tenets they are I both said then, and dare say again, the very
same or very near. In some other points know I do they differ. The Observator
instanceth in that of Episcopacy; how true that, I determine not; but in that
of the Sabath or Lords day which is the next thing offers it self to our
consideration, sure I am they do.

Page* 112.
Fol. 128. This Declaration then caused so many impetuous clamours against it,
as it was soon called in.] Observator. In this I am sure our Author is
extremely Out; that Book being never called in, though the execution was soon
descontinued.

Answer. Out I may be, but sure not extremely out, the discontinuance of the
Execution of it being a tacit suppressing and calling of it in.

Page. 114.
Fol. 129. The Divinity of the Lords day being new Divinity at Court.]
Observator. And so it was by its favor in the Country too, not known in
England till the year 1595. So new it is that it cannot prescribe to 60 years;
for if it could, we should have found some mention of it in our Articles, or
Our Book of Homilies, in which we find nothing at all touching the keeping of
that day.

Answer. By this and some other passages in the Observator, we may suspect the
man to be Petrifi'd (there is an hard word, as hard as a stone) and very
conversant with Peter Hielen a Dr. of Cosmography, a work very proper for him;
for none fitter to describe the world then he, who all his life has loved the
world; none like him; but of that Dr. more anon. Next to the Observator, if
that Dr. and he be two; First, he says that [the Divinity of the Lords day was
not known in England till the year 1595.] If so, I demand of the Observator,
what did Archbishop Whitgift mean in his defense of the Answer to the
Admonition, p. 553. where speaking in the present tense, he says the Sabbath
is superstitiously used by some? did he mean the Jewish Sabbath? that cannot
be; for he subjoynes, so is the Church, the Creed, the Lords Prayer; importing
it to be a lawful thing, abused by superstitious people; and soon after he
speaks of a Sabbath then commanded by the 4th. Precept, which could not be the
Jewish; and if not that, must of necessity be the Lords day. Now this
Archbishop published his Defense, Anno. 1574. Next for the book of Homiles,
surely he spoke much without book; for certainly there was not any thing more
especially taught in those Homiles, then the divinity of the Lords day: they
saying [God in that Precept (speaking of the fourth) commands the observation
of the Sabbath, which is our Sunday] What can positively be rendered clearer?
Here Is the Sabbath interpreted by the Lords day, and that commands to be
observed in the 4th. Precept by God himself. So that by the Observators leave,
the Divinity of the Lords day may be found in our book of Homilies.

Page. 115.
Fol. Ibid. Which seemed the greater prodigy, that men who so eagerly cried up
their own Order and Revenues for Divine, should so much deny the Lords day from
being such when they had no other Existence then in Relation to this.]
Observator. Here Is a Prodigy indeed, and a Paradox too; that neither the Order
nor Revenues of the Evangelical Priesthood, have any existence but in Relation
to the Divinity of the Lords day. If our Author be not out in this, I am much
mistaken.

Answer. Where has this Observator been brought up, that this Tenet of mine,
of mine said I? yea of all learned men should be so wondered at to be called a
Prodigy? Good Reader when thou see him next, tell him from me, there is
scarce a man of note who treats of the fourth Commandment, that owneth not
this Prodigious opinion. I shall content my self with only one at present, but
one who I hope will be instar omnium with the Observator, as being free from
Puritanism. Catechist. Doct. p. 259.
The learned Bishop of Winchester, who expounding the fourth Commandment, says
first, [because men should not be left at liberty when to perform Religious
duties, God has appointed a Day whereon to do them, and that more solemnly in
a public meeting or assembly] this Day, he calls the Lords Day. Secondly
[Now whereas the solemn duties of this Day, cannot be performed in a public
manner, without a Place set a part, and Persons enabled to perform such sacred
actions. Therefore both Places and Persons sanctified to those purposes, and
Maintenance also for those Persons, are included in this Precept] so here are
both the sacred Orders and Revenues constituted in relation to the Lords Day,
and the duties thereof; and emergent both from the fourth Commandment, and so I
hope the Prodigy is at an end.

Page. 116.
Fol. Ibid. But of this elsewhere.] Observator. And indeed of this there has
enough been said elsewhere to satisfy all learned and ingenuous men both in
the meaning of the law and in point of practice.

Answer. Never any thing more truly spoken. And all I shall superadde is this,
that whereas I said, But of this elsewhere, my meaning was, that of the
Doctrine of the Sabbath or Divinity of the Lords day I had treated elsewhere,
in a book extant of that Argument, Anno. 1640. never as yet answered by any. To
that Treatise I refer all men who shall desire my Judgment in that Subject.
Only from thence I shall (having so fit an opportunity) be bold to re-mind
Doctor Heilen of an od mistake (to say no worse) committed by him, in
vindication whereof he never attempted any thing as yet; The mistake this. The
main question concerning that Day was (and I am sorry to find it is) whither or
not it be of Divine institution; That Doctor with his leaders and followers,
said nay; and (because it would signify the same thing, should it be evinced
to be Apostolical) the man sweats, toils, and somewhat worse, to evade it. For
Part 2. c. 6. S. 7. of his History of the Sabbath, he cites out of Pareus his
Com. in Genesis 2. treating of the change of the Sabbath into the Lords Day, these
words; Quomodo autem facta sit haec mutatio in sacris literis non apparet. And
to make it apparent, he was industrious in it, because Quomodo alone he thought
non vult fac, would not do the deed without his Paraphrase; he descants on it
thus. How? that is by, what Authority this change was made, appears not in
sacred Scripture, whereas in very truth, Pareus his word, in two several
Editions, one 4o. the other folio, is Quando (not Quomodo) and for the
Authority, he in that very place ascribes it Apostolicae Ecclesiae, to the
Apostolic Church; and in Comment upon 1 Cor. 16. v. 2. and upon the
Revelation, fixes it positively upon Apostolical Authority. Now what it is for
a Doctor of Divinity, for so great a champion of Antiquity against Novelty, not
in an idle circumstance, but in the grand concernment of a controversy, to
forge and falsifye a Record so boldly, I dare not say so impudently, I submit
to the judgment of all the world. This I write partly to provoke an answer from
that Doctor, and partly, to vindicate him from the groundless supposition,
which renders him the Author of these Observations; who, as he has professedly
disavowed it, so is it scarce credible that he of all men, durst be so bold
with me, as this Observator is, knowing how readily I might have returned --
Quis tulerit Gracchos --

Page. 117.
Fol. Ibid. And was after styled Duke of York] Observator. Our Author here
accomodates his style to the present times, when the weekly Pamphlets gave the
Prince no other Title then the Titulary Duke of York. It is true indeed the
second son of England is not born to the Dukedom of York, but receives that
Title by creation, etc.

Answer. How is it possible to escape the Observators lash? Had I said he was
then styled Duke of York, I had been out in my Temporalities, he being not
created Duke of York till afterward: to avoy'd which Scylla, I inserted after,
and fell upon the Charybdis of complying with weekly Pamphlets; what shall an
honest Historian do in such a case?

Page. 122.
Fol. 131. The King presently issued out writs to all the Counties within the
Realm.] Observator. Our Author is deceived in this, as in many things else; For
in the first year of the Payments of Shipmoney the writs were not issued to all
the Counties of England, but only to the maritine Counties, etc.

Answer. This mistake I acknowledge also. But did it deserve so much favor as
for the Observator to give me two for one? for first he says, in the first
year of Shipmoney the writs were issued to the Maritine Counties] No such
matter, it was to the maritine, to the Port-townes only. Secondly, he says
that in the next year, and not before, the like writs were issued out to the
Counties in England, which is an undoubted truth; but whereas he gives us some
more certain note of that year to be 1636. he is much out; for those general
writs were issued in the year 1635. as a consequent of the opinion of the
Judges in that November; and this is an undoubted truth also.

Page 125.
Fol. 132. But in regard he came without Credential letters from the Queen of
Sweaden, he denied him audience, whereupon he returned in some disgust]
Observator. In this short passage there are more mistakes then lines. For
first, it is not likely that young Oxonstern came without Credential letters.
Secondly, I am sure he had public audience, my curiosity carrying me to the
Court that day, not so much to see the formalities of such receptions, as to
behold the Son of so wise a Father, etc.

Answer. Never was any man's hand so out as mine in this Narration; what? more
mistakes then lines? that is sad, if not somewhat hyperbolical, as is evident
because there are many lines, and but two mistakes, taking the Observators
information for current. But be there more mistakes then lines, I have a Father
for them all. The History of the Wars of Christendom, Page 245.
The Author whereof, though he be an Italian, and therefore not so competent a
Judge of our affairs; yet the Earl of Monmouth, who translated him, was of
our Nation, and a person of so much honor and knowledge in this business, as
he would have given us some Marginal caveat, had it been so wide of truth as
the Observator would make it.

Page 130.
Fol. 137. The King committing the staff of that office to Dr. Juxon Lord
Bishop of London; who, though he was none of the greatest Scholars, yet was
withal none of the worst Bishops.] Observator. I would fain learn of our Author
in what particular parts of either divine or humane learning he reckons this
Bishop defective.]

Answer. That this Bishop was none of the greatest Scholars, I saw then no
reason but that I might safely say, without disparagement to his Function,
Schollarship, or my Prudence; a Bishop may be (...), able to instruct, and
Scholar sufficient for his Placo, though he be none of the greatest magnitude.
Nor is it requisite that a Bishop be much more learned then a Presbyter: That
he be more prudent, requisite it is, being a quality more pertinent to
Government; and in this particular, I hope I have made him an amends in the
latter part of his Character. Adv. Pelagian. l. 1.
I shall conclude with Hierome, Nullus aut rarus est qui omnia habeat, quae
habere debet Episcopus. No Bishop, or rarely any has all virtues belonging to
a Bishop; and he who wants two or three, and has all the rest, is more
commendable for what he has, then to be blamed for what he wants: If this be
not satisfaction enough, I hope that is, that I have ordered a deleatur upon
it, being loath to abide a misconstruction; and finding the Historians note
verified, Vivorum ut magna admiratio, ita censura difficilis est.

Page 133.
Fol. 138. As the Archbishop, whilst he so vehemently pursued Order, did a
little outrun Authority, etc.] Observator. The King gave Authority and
Approbation to it (a year before this Metropolitical Visitation) in the case of
St. Gregory's in London, being heard before him sitting in the Privy Council.
Anno 1633.

Answer. The Archbishops out-running Authority I intended not in placing the
Communion Table Altar-wise, at the East End of the Chancel; but by enjoining a
wooden traverse of rails to be set before it, by commanding all Communicants
thither to resort for the Blessed Sacrament: These I commend as decent in
themselves, but account as Innovations. I will give you now my reason, not
quarrelling with Dr. Coal, whom the Bishop of Lincoln carbonado'd, nor yet with
Peter Heylin; plainly and sincerely the 82 Canon enjoyneth, that the
Communion Table, when the holy Communion is to be administered [shall be placed
in so good sort within the Church or Chancel, as thereby the Minister may be
more conveniently heard of the Communicants, and the Communicants also in more
number may communicate with the said Minister. Now the Communicants may both
best hear, and in most number communicate, when the Table is in the body of the
Church, or of the Chancel. Again, it is clear from the word saving, mentioned
in this Canon, that the Table was to stand in one place when there was no
Communion, and in another when there was one. And this is most clearly made out
by the Queens Injunctions 1559. from whence this Canon in this particular is
almost verbatim taken; for after order taken where it shall stand, in
Communion-time, it is further said in those injunctions [And after the
Communion done, from time to time the same holy Table to be placed where it
stood before.] Infallibly implying, that though it stood Altar-wise before, yet
at Communion-time it was to be removed, and consequently not to be raild in.

But behold how he defends this from Innovation, [the King gave Authority and
Approbation for it a year before the Metropolitical Visitation I speak of]
Where Is that? [in deciding the controversy about the Communion Table in the
case of St. Gregory's 1633.) This Metropolitical Visitation, say I, was 1635.
His Majesty's Declaration, says the Observator, was 1633. a year before; sure
the man means London measure. But what? did the King declare any thing in that
case, concerning the setting of railes before the Holy Table, or that it should
stand there immovable, so as the Communicants were to resort up to those
railes to receive? Sure I am that Declaration speaks no such matter, not a
syllable tending that way: Oportet esse memorem. When these words fell from me,
it seems I forgot what I said before of the remiss government of Archbishop
Abbot [which made the future reduction of tender-conscienced men so long
discontinued obedience, interpreted an innovation.] No such matter, I well
remembered those words, and withal that I never meant they should relate to the
setting Railes before the Holy Table, so as it might not be removed at the time
of celebrating the Blessed Sacrament.

Page 139.
Fol. 138. They were not blameless in their lives, some being vicious unto
scandal.] Observator. Vicious even to scandal! That goes high indeed, and it
had well become the Author to have named the men. Or were there such, it had
been fitter for our Author to have played the part of Sem and Japhet, in hiding
the nakedness of their Spiritual Father, then to act the part of Cham, in
making Proclamation of it unto all the world, etc.

Answer. Ad Ruffin.
A true saying it is of St. Hierome: Quando sine nomine contra vitia scribitur,
qui irascitur, accusator sui est. When vices are declam'd against, and no
persons named, he who is angry, accuses himself: So that here the Observator
may seem to save part of my labor, and names himself for one. And wish I do,
from my very soul, I were not able to add another; for the Observator himself
cannot more cordially rejoice in the conviction of me here for untruth, then I
would my self, so much do I prefer the honor of the Clergy before mine own
reputation.

But were there such, it had been fitter, says the Observator, for our Author
to have played the part of Sem and Japhet, in hiding, then of Cham, in making
Proclamation of it to all the world. Certainly no fitter for me then it was for
Chrysostom, the Greek of whose golden mouth was, in relation to the vices of
his times, as broad as is my English in reference to those. No fitter for me
then for Gildas, surnamed the wise, the most Ancient of our British Writers
extant, to say, Sacerdotes habet Britannia, sed insipientes; quam plurimos
Ministros, sed impudentes; clericos, sed raptores subdolos, etc. Great Britain
has Priests indeed, but silly ones; Ministers of Gods word very many, but
impudent; a Clergy, but given up to greedy rapine, etc.

No one of us all acting Cham's part, that is, making sport with the failings
of those we should reverence; but rather sadly bewailing the Churches
condition, in being burdened with such unsanctify'd persons; and for my self,
acting the part not of Cham, but of an Historian, History being not only
(...), the Repositorie of the virtues of Heroic Spirits, but (...), the
testimony of the vices of Bad men, I thought I could do no less then take
some notice of this exorbitancy of some of the Clergy; and that (as this
Observators Court-Historian says) non ut arguerem, Patercl. l. 2.
sed ne arguerer, not so much that I might accuse them, as fearing lest I
should be accused my self for omitting them.

Page 141.
Fol. Ibid. He was bold to say, he hoped to live to see the day when a Minister
should be as good a Man as any Jack-Gentleman in England.] Observator. Our
Author telling us this Man was an high Flyer, he gives us some conjecture at
the Man he drives at. A Man of an undaunted spirit, and strong resolutions, but
not so intemperate in his Words, or unwise in his Actions, as to speak so
contemptuously of our English Gentry.

Answer. The Observator has, I believe, a probable conjecture at this
high-Flyer; but as to his vindication of him from such distemper in his words
or actions, I fear his word will scarce be taken. The truth is, it seems my
information was not then so good as since; therefore I have now corrected that
expression according to that Authors own copy, adding upstart to
Jack-Gentleman; which argues, I think, not much of the temper or wisdom the
Observator cries up in him.

Page 143.
Fol. 147. Very little differing, as the King was unhappily persuaded by them,
from the English.] Observator. The Alterations being made, and showed to the
King, he approved well of them; in regard that coming nearer to the first
Liturgy of King Edward the sixth in the Administration of the Lord Supper, it
might be a means to gain the Papists to the Church, who liked far better of
the first, then second Liturgy.

Answer. Though the King was showed the Alterations of the Scottish Liturgy;
yet might he so apprehend, or be persuaded that the differences were small; and
yet might they be great for all that, and perhaps not discovered by him: They
are not the multitude of words that create the greatness of a difference; it
was but one word, yea, but one vowel of that one word, about which the Orthodox
Church and heretical Synagogue of Arius contested. But behold the reason why
the King (as the Observator says) approved of the Scotch Liturgy. It came near
to the first Liturgy of King Edward the sixth in the Administration of the
Lords Supper, and so might be a means to gain the Papists to the Church, who
liked far better of the first, then second Liturgy. That the Papists liked King
Edwards first Liturgy (and consequently the Scot'sh) better then the second is
without all dispute; the very words of distribution of the Elements in both,
being so framed, as they may consist with Transubstantiation. And yet a slender
means to gain them to our Church. The gaining Papists to our Church, was indeed
the great pretended project of 40 years continuance; and yet in all that time
not so much as one taken with that bait. How many true Protestants have been
lost thereby, I grieve to think.

Page 144.
Observator. Our Author here does very well describe the two Tumults at
Edinburgh, upon the reading of the Book of Common Prayer; but he omits the
great over-sights committed by the King and the Lords of that Council, in the
conduct and carriage of that business.

Answer. Here the Observator (being between Hawk and Buzzard) flies at the
whole Covy, taxing not only the King (for that is nothing with him) but him
and the Lords of the Scot'sh Council with oversights, great oversights: Sure
things will be gallantly ordered, when our Observator comes to be of a Council
of State.

Page 151.
Fol. 151. Because it was the Bishops War.] Observator. I am sorry to see this
passage have our Authors pen, whom I should willingly have accounted a true Son
of the Church, were it not for this, and some other passages, which savor more
of the Covenanter.

Answer. A Covenanter? yes no doubt of that, a throughpaced Covenanter; but why
so? Because I call it the Bishops War, and so did they. True, they did; and
besides them many an English Protestant: Elenchus Mat.
why might they not? Was it not a War undertaken at first in defense of their
Hierarchy? Nay, one of no mean esteem makes one of that Order the main cause of
that War, by introducing the Liturgy amongst them, Sc. spe quidem laudabili,
eventu vero pessimo; with a good intent, but exceeding ill success: why so?
Hinc siquidem, etc. For from hence proceeded Tragedies, Tumults, War, and
Invasion. Now that War which an Archbishop occasioned, and which was entered
into for maintaining that Hierarchy, may, I hope, without offense be called the
Bishops War. But here I am cut off; the Observator telling us that [Religion
was but the vizard to disguise that business which covetousness and
sacrilege had the greatest had in] which he confirms by this ensuing
Narrative. [The King being engaged into a War with Spain, and deserted by those
who engaged him in it, amongst other ways of assistance, was minded of a
purpose his Father had of Revoking all Grants of Abbey Lands, etc. which being
vested in the Crown, were by his Protectors in his Minority, conferred on many
of the Nobility and Gentry, etc. Being resolved upon the same course, he
intends a Parliament in that Kingdom, appoints the Earl of Nidderdale to
preside therein, and arms him with instructions for passing of an Act of
Revocation accordingly: who being on his way as far as Barwick, was there
informed that all was in Tumult at Edinburgh; that a rich coach which he had
sent before to Dalkeith was cut in pieces, the poor horses killed, the people
seeming only sorry that they could not do the like to the Earl himself.
Things being brought to this stand, and the Parliament put off with a sine Die,
the King was put to a necessity of second Councels, etc.]

Answer. That many had other then Religious designs, there is little doubt,
they hoping to obtain that honor or wealth in a troubled State, which they
were consident they should never arrive at in a calm. Now, as concerning this
Relation, the Observator being a person to whom I am so much obliged, I cannot
but as part of requital of his own labors, add something for illustration of
his Story, and rectifying some mistakes thereof. Know then, Reader, that this
Earl of Nidderdale, of whom the Observator speaks, was then no Earl, but the
Lord Maxwell, no more but so; and the very Man, or I am deceived, mentioned in
Habernfield Discovery. For, a rank Papist he was, and Anno 1624. went to Rome
to receive the Popes extraordinary Benediction; which the Council of Scotland
hearing of, they set out a Bar, or Prescription against him for departing the
Kingdom without leave: Soon after, King James dying, he came over into
England, and by the Dukes favor, whose Kinswoman he had married, was, Anno
1625. joined in Commission with the Earl of Anandale (Murrey) for summoning a
Parliament (not for Revoking of Church, and other lands formerly invested in
the Crown) but for contribution of moneys and ships against the Dunkirkers; and
was designed to preside there, with power to place and displace what Officers
he pleased. In Order and Pomp suitable to so great a Trust, the Lord buys him a
Coach most radiant and richly gilded; this he sends before him to Dalkeith. The
Council of Scotland having early notice of this, conspire to adhere and stick
close together, and to oppose his commission: And the surer to frustrate the
Lords design, they send to all the chief Towns informing them what was
coming, desiring they would send in the money with all expedition. The Towns
conformed instantly, and all was done; yea the very undoing and destruction of
his glorious Coach, before the Lord Maxwell came to Barwich, and further he
durst not go, being informed his person so generally hated, might be in great
danger there, but posted a main to the Court of England, where finding the King
cool in the business (having had an account from the Council of Scotland of al
their proceedings, and advertised by them how displeasing a President that Lord
was like to prove, in respect of his Religion) andh the Duke gone to the Hague,
after him he goes, and returns with him into England. The Duke and this Lord
being come to Court, possess the King with strange insolences and affronts
committed by the Council of Scotland against his Regal power. His Majesty in
some indignation thereupon sends for them to come forthwith, and answer what he
had to object against them: up they come to court, and being by his Majesty
chidden for their miscarriages, they defying this Lord openly in his Majesty's
presence, spoke withal bug words, not very loyal it is confessed; whereat his
Majesty told them then, and not before, he would make them restore all to the
Crown, which they had taken from it in his Fathers Minority. This and somewhat
more, my information from a credible hand, and of a date agreeable to the
story, what succeeded hereupon the Observator tells you.

Page. 163.
Fol. 161. The King first named eight Bishops, then those eight Bishops those
eight Noble men, those Noble men chose so many Barons, and those the like
number of Burgesses, etc. Observator. Not altogether so as our Author has it,
for the Bishops and Noble men together chose eight Commissioners for the
Sheriffdomes and as many for the Corporations.

Answer. My informer being a Person of such eminency of that Nation, and so
versed in the affairs of that Kingdom; is, I think, more credible in this
particular then a forreigner.

Page 171.
Fol. 182. True it is he had too much and too long favored the Romish Faction,
but as upon what account he favored it is uncertain, etc.] Our Author here
acquits the Archbishop from the Popish faith, but leaves him under a suspicion
of favoring the Popish faction; which in a man who cannot tell upon what
account he favored it, may be thought uncharitable. But both King James and
King Charles in several Declarations give this Reason for it, etc.

Answer. It is I think, no uncharitable act to censure any man for what is
professedly true, no matter upon what account; to condemn a man for what is but
a bare surmise may be uncharitable. And that the Archbishop favored the Popish
faction, our Observator does not only grant, but endeavors to show upon what
account it was; saying [Both King James and King Charles in several
Declarations, and in their several Answers to Parliament Petitions give this
reason for it] for it? for what? for the Archbishops favoring the Popish
faction? did ever any such thing ever enter into their thoughts, as to declare
what moved the Archbishop to favor the Romish faction? I will not dwell upon
this reason which the Observator would persuade us he had for it, that is,
therefore to obtain like favors for such Protestants as lived in the Dominions
of Popish Princes; nor on what he might have had, of keeping the balance even
between them and the Puritans. But deliver what, having heard formerly, but
upon dubious report, I am I think, certainly informed was the true cause
thereof. For being told by one, that he had many an ill look from the Commons
upon that very account, True, said he, I believe it, but something must be done
to please the Queen.

Page 172.
Fol. Ibid. He tampered indeed to introduce some ceremonies bordering upon
Superstition, disused by us and abused by them; from whence the Romanists
collected such a disposition in him to their Tenets, as they began to cry him
up for their proselyte.] Observator. In this Passage many things are to be
considered. First, these Ceremonies are not here said to be superstitious, but
only to border upon superstition. Secondly, they are said to be dis-used; which
shows they were still in force. Thirdly, that these ceremonies had been abused
by them of the Church of Rome, and therefore might lawfully be restored; for
abusus non tollit usum.

Answer. The first is confessed. The second is really a very dumb show; the word
disused does not at all imply that those ceremonies were in force, but only
that the Reformers of our Church, observing how much they had been abused by
the Church of Rome, thought fit not to retain but lay aside the use of them;
Thirdly, things abused may be lawfully restored to their Primitive use, but
then it must be by lawful Authority, and in a lawful manner. And the
lawfulness of their restoration, does not import an expediency, the Apostle
putting such a difference between these two.

Page 176.
Fol. 184. This Archbishops Predecessor penultine and last but one.]
Observator. He was not Dr. Whitgift, but Dr. Bancroft. Answer. Confessed, as I
said before, a lapse of memory.

Ibid.
Fol. Ibid. That is, as a witty Gentleman said well, a new Synod, made of an
old Convocation.] Observator. This witty Gentleman here meant was Sr. Edward
Deering.

Answer. Here the Observator is woefully out; for the witty Gentleman here meant
was not Sr. Edward Deering; no such words to be found in all his speeches, but
it was the Lord Digby his speech Nov. 12. 1640. and consequently this learned
descant upon Sr. Edward is out of doors.

Page 179.
Fol. Ibid. By a new Commission from the King.] No such matter verily; the new
Commission which he speaks of, gave them no such power; The writ by which they
were first called and made to be a Convocation, gave them power to sit, and by
that writ they were to sit as a Convocation, til by another writ proceeding
from the same Authority they were dissolved.

Answer. I shall here deliver the true state of this business, and then submit
to the judgment of standers by. Feb. the 20th. 1639. the Convocation writs
went forth to the several Archbishops of Canterbury and York for the Election
of Clerks to the Convocation; in which writs though there were these words ad
tractandum, consentiendum, and concludendum, etc. Yet could not the Convocation
Treat, consent, or conclude any thing without a special Commission enabling
them thereto. This Commission therefore was issued out April the 15. two days
after the Parliament sat and empowered the Houses of Convocation [to alter,
amend and change the old Canons, and to make new during the Parliament.] So
that the Parliament being dissolved May the 5. by consequence this Commission
expired by the Observators own concession; but though the Commission was
nulled, it was a question still whither the Convocation was so also: In the
ensuing Parliament it was agreed that it was; and if it was not, yet was it
beheld to have so little life in it, as the King thought fit to re-animate it
with a new Commission, bearing date May 12, Authorizing it to make Canons, etc.
And to continue during his Majesty's pleasure. Notwithstanding this Commission,
the Observator tells us [That the King for satisfation of some scrupulous
members of the lower house, propounded the Question to some eminent Lawyers,
who resolved under their hands [That the Convocation being called by the Kings
writ, was to continue until it were dissolved by the Kings writ,
notwithstanding the dissolution of the Parliament.] All which is very true, but
not all the truth; for the light-fingerd Observator has pocketed up the
break-neck of the business, suppressing what those Lawyers sent along with
their opinions, viz. that notwithstanding them, they would advise the
Convocation in making of Canons to be very sparing, as I am informed by a
member of that Convocation, and one (no matter who) as knowing and credible a
person as that assembly had any.

Page 182.
Fol. Ibid. Bishops and Presbyters in Scripture Phrase being of equivalent
import, and denoting the self same persons without the least distinction.]
Observator. When our Author plays the Historian in relating of such things as
are built upon good intelligence, he does it very well, few better; but when he
comes to show his opinion in matters of controversy, he does it very ill, none
worse. For first, I do not believe our Author can easily prove Bishops and
Presbyters to be of equivalent import.

Answer. Out upon this Observator who is so grossly out in both; for really
there are many better Historians then my self, and some worse disputants; the
Observator for one; but a very much worse Observator, I am certain; for had he
not been an ill-looking-fellow, he might with half an eye have discerned, that
I do not at all deliver mine own opinion in this particular, but what many did
then assert; those are the very words; and that many did so assert, is without
all dispute: but since the Observator will needs have it to be mine own
judgment, it shall be so for once, and he have his saying. And what I pray
does he oppose against it? but [first, want of Logic, to infer an identity
or samenesse in the thing, from a Community of names, and proves it by St.
Peter, who calls our Savior Christ 1 Pet. 2. 25. the Bishop of our souls, and
himself 1 Pet. verse 1. a Presbyter or Priest (as most unhandsomely our English
reads it) an Elder, concluding from thence, that it were sorry Logic to make
Christ, and every ordinary Bishop, and the Prince of the Apostles, and a simple
Presbyter all one. I shall first take leave to observe his Parenthesis, before
I pass further. Herein he has a fling at our Translators, for rendering the
word Presbyter, Elder; where is the unhandsomenesse of it? All Latin
Expositors, and Greek Lexicons, translate (...) senior; and I believe it will
puzzle the Observator, to find any one who ever interpreted senior by Priest;
and why, I would gladly know, is it more unhandsome in our Translators, then it
was in Dr. Heilen (from whom the Observator differs vastly in this particular)
who tells us, Autidot. Lincoln. Edit. 2. p. 157.
that the ancient Fathers called the Minister of the Sacrament of the Altar
sometimes Presbyter, Elder, and sometimes Sacerdos, Priest: a thing so
universally received amongst us, as you shall very rarely find the word
Presbyter turned into Priest, and never Sacerdos into Elder; now it being so
rare to find Presbyter otherwise rendered then by Elder, a vulgar translation
should be accommodated to vulgar apprehensions; for a modern Poet, and a wit
every inch of him, gives us this golden Rule, Return old virtues, but forbear
New words not fitted to the Ear.


But now ad rem, and to the man's arguments, which is nothing ad rem, and clear
besides the cushion, a mere shift and no more; for does any man doubt that the
thesis is limited to Gospel-persons initiated into sacred orders, beneath the
Apostles, and above Deacons? Let him or any men else, tell me where such
persons in Holy Text are really distinguished, that is, where Presbyters import
not Bishops, and Bishops Presbyters, and then he shall be confessed to speak to
purpose, to much better purpose then the Observator, who produces the order of
the late Church of England in the ordaining of Bishops, when we talk of those
whom Holy Text calls Bishops, not what they were in succeeding times, or are in
our Church. And thus I have knocked down Episcopacy, says the Observator, with
a painted club: Dead as a door nail no doubt, yet really not so much as touched
I dare say for it; I am sure Episcopacy, I mean Episcopacy by Divine Right, may
live many a fair day after it, notwithstanding that assertion, the other 1300.
years, as it has done already (for so long it is since St. Hieromes time,
whose opinion all men know it was in terminis) and yet for all that, by the
leave of Smectymnuus, he as great a friend to Episcopacy as any other Father;
and not more then my self. That there was in the Apostolic Church, a Prelacy,
a Superiority instituted, of some one (no matter how denominated) over other
Presbyters, within some certain walks and precincts; that this Superiority was
appointed by the very Apostles, to be exemplary, and to give law to succeeding
times, I do as little doubt, and think it as demonstrable out of Scripture as
any thing whatsoever not fundamental. That the persons selected for so high a
function, should be men of the most eminent quality for piety and learning,
there is all the reason in the world; and if such a choice be once made, as de
facto in some it now is, judge others what they please, I shall account them
meriting the greatest Reverence and honor (taken in the most Advantageous
sense, either for dignity or maintenance, that any subjects are capable of.
Souls of the most noble size must have elbow-room, they cannot exercise their
activity in an angust and narrow Sphere. The internal Grandour of the mind, may
perhaps exist; visible, conspicuous it cannot be, without external Grandour of
Estate. Again, the entries and advenues to advancement, are free and open to
Professions under-graduates to the Sacred; why then shall this be excluded? If
Merit be all-sufficient to entitle it possessor to Preferment; what Merit
greater then what is resident in persons of Holy Orders? To defraud others of
their due Rewards, can at worst be but injustice; to rob these differs
nothing from Sacrilege. This is my sense of Episcopacy; enough, I hope, to
satisfy spirits of the most modest and sober temper; and for others, they are
beneath my consideration. This done, I shall jog on to attend the Observators
next motion.

Page 186.
Fol. Ibid. Such a prejudice there was against them, and the truth contended
for lay then so deep as few had perspicacity enough to discern it.] Observator.
Though some men blind with prejudice, had not the perspicacity of discerning
Truth, yet some others had; yet for the opening of the eyes, as well of men
willing to be informed, as wilfully blinded, no sooner had the Smectymnuans
revived the Controversy, but presently the Divine Right of Episcopacy was
maintained and published by Dr. Hall, then Bishop of Exeter, etc.

Answ. Though these observations little touch my Freehold; yet I shall take a
superficicial view of his Authors. D. Hall, the most Reverend and Holy Bp. of
Exeter, leads the Van; next comes Churchman, but whether Goodman, Worshipful,
right Worshipful, Honorable, right Honorable, right Reverend Churchman, he tells
us not: There is indeed such an Author extant, but what is in him? really,
nothing but what he has stolen from Archb. Whitgi ft. Ep. Bilson, Bp. Hall,
and others, and is worn as thredbare as this Observators coat: Then he goes on
to Dr. Tailor, and Dr. Hammond, these all of a cloth, and but Churchman, good
men and true. Next, he proceeds to Lay-Champions, Sir Thomas Aston, Mr. Their,
the Lord Falkland, and in the fag-end of all, would you think it? learned Mr.
Seldom, not totally against Bishops. But verily the man did not consult Mr.
Seldom when he wrote this; for certain I am, that in his de Synedris page 423.
he seems clear of another mind, extolling Salmasius, and Walo-Messalinus, a
note above Ela, for their pains in the Argument of Ecclesiastical Order;
though I profess I see little solid in either. Before I leave the Observator,
I cannot but take notice, that I miss amongst his Assertors for Episcopacy,
one, who though he is Nobody with the Observator, is Somebody with all men
else, and that is King Charles, the Chief (...) of that Cause; who did not only
take up the Bucklers in good earnest, but the pen also defend it; and by the
last did so gallantly acquit himself of his opponents, so solidly, so
perspicuously refute them, as Smectymnuus, and qui smectymnuuntur ab illis, and
all their adherents will never be able to make head against it again.

Page 189.
Fol. Ibid. It was of so mysterious import, as the very Imposers, much less
the Jurors, could not decipher what it meant, etc.] Observator. I find by this
that our Author has spoken with very few of the Convocation.

Answer. Were not malice (...), such a brutish and an ill-reasoning thing, (as
Gregory Nazianzen call it) sure the Observator might have easily discovered,
that these faults imputed to the Canon, are not delivered as of mine own
suggestion, but contrived by others: If any doubt of this, he may consult the
Lord Dygbies Speech November. 12. 1640. the Exceptions taken against this oath by
the Counties of Northamptonshire, of Kent, more especially those of Devonshire,
framed at the Summer Assizes there 1640. formed by the Earl of Bath, and most
of the Gentry and Clergy; and September. the 16. presented with a Petition to the
Lords of the Privy Council; in every one of which he shall find almost every
objection here mentioned, and in all many more.

Page. 191.
Fol. Ibid. To exact an Oath of dissent from Civil Establishments in such
things of indifferency, was an affront to the very fundamentals of Government.]
Observator. Our Author taking it for granted, that the Government of the Church
by Bishops is a thing of indifferency, is much aggrieved that the Clergy should
bind themselves by Oath not to consent to any alteration of it.

Answer. Quousque abuteris patientia nostra? How does this Observator provoke
us? Verily Reader, we must be at the charge of a Remembrancer for him. He is at
his Author again, when his Author quoteth others words: And what says his
Author? That the Government of the Church by Bishops is a thing of
indifferency; Really this Senior Sophister has no aim in his hand, be the
Author who he will, certainly he declares no such matter; his words are, Some
things were expressly to be sworn to which were never thought, to have any show
or color of Sacred Right, but were conceived arbitrary and things of
indifferency, etc. Now these some things do not signanter and expressly point
out Episcopacy, but clearly exclude it; for they are said to be such things as
never had any show or color of sacred Right; but Episcopacy, in the very
account of its adversaries, has some color and show of it. And to put the
matter out of all dispute, this Objection was the Lord Digbyes, who was a firm
friend of Episcopacy, as my History renders him. So then these some things
mentioned in the Objection, will be soon deciphered by Archbishops,
Archdeacons, Deans, etc. as the Northamptonshire and Kent Exceptions say
expressly.

Page. 196.
Fol. 186. No Convocation having power to grant any Subsidies or aid without
consent of the Parliament.] Observator. I must let our Author (and all who
shall read him) know that never was any rule more false, nor more weakly
grounded.

Answer. Spoken Magisterially enough. What, never any rule more false? How
comes it then to pass, that so many Wise and Learned Men in this Parliament
should be transported into a different Judgment? Nor is the Rule more false
then weakly grounded, if we believe the Observator; truly by his leave there is
ground enough to bear that Rule, or wiser men then either he, or I, are
mistaken* For, does not the Convocation constantly most humbly pray and desire
their Grants and Subsidies may be confirmed and ratified by the High Court of
Parliament? Are not their Subsidies always in the Statute-books assigned a
particular chapter beginning thus, A Confirmation of a Subsidy, etc. granted by
the Clergy? Now I would gladly learn of the Observator, if the Convocation be
all-sufficient of it self to grant Subsidies, why is the Parliaments
Ratification sought for, which must signify either all or nothing?

Page. 215.
Fol. 202. And on the 18th he was voted guilty of High Treason.] Observator.
Our Author may please to know, that on Wednesday, December the 16. a Committee
was appointed to draw up against him (the Archbishop) and the same day, not on
the 17th. he was named an Incendiary by the Scots, no complaint coming from
them on the Thursday.

Answer. The Observator may be displeased to know that in this particular he is
as arrant an Errant as ever was. The Journals, had he searched them, would have
told him, that [on Thursday December. the 17th. there was a conference between
the two Houses: At that meeting the Lord Paget read the Scotch Charge against
the Lieutenant of Ireland and the Archbishop. It was many sheets of paper close
written, and in folio, etc.] So that here is a complaint from the Scots against
the Archbishop, and in this charge the Archbishop was named an Incendiary.

Page 217.
Observator. I remember that congratulating him (the Bishop of Lincoln) for the
high esteem which he had in both Houses of Parliament, etc.

Answer. By this, and what follows, I perceive this Observator had some
Intimacy with this Bishop at this time. Now, gentle Reader, if thou love me,
beg his resolution in this one Question; if I do not wrong those credible
persons who informed me, to call it a Question. I have been told that Doctor
Heylin (I will not say a party to these premises) who all the world knows most
insolently trampled and insulted upon this Bishop when he was down; no sooner
heard of his enlargement, but instantly he came creeping, and cringing, and
crawling, and crowching to him so servilely, as made his Lordship merry at the
uncouth sight; and all this to stand his friend, or at least not appear his foe
at that time, when that Doctor was in a most sorry plight. Now I would gladly
know of this Observator, was it so, or no?

Page 221.
Observator. I have some reason to believe that the Clergy of that Convocation
did not appear there by their Council learned, sufficiently authorized and
instructed to advocate for them.

Answer. How their Council were instructed I will not determine; sure I am by
their Council they did appear, first, by Mr. Chadwel of Lincolnes Inn,
November the 26th. then again by Mr. Holborn this 15th. of December. who argued
two hours in defense of them.

Page 224.
Fol. 219. The Bishops were excluded by ancient Canon-Laws of the Council of
Toledo to be assistant in cause of Blood or Death.] Observator. That they were
disabled from being assistant in such Cases, I believe our Author cannot prove.

Answer. Let the fourth Canon speak for me and it self in this point. [Si quis
Sacerdotum discursor in alienis periculis extiterit, apud Ecclesiam proprium
perdat Gradum.] If any Priest shall intermeddle in cases endangering the life
of others, let him be degraded.

Page 235.
Fol. 256. They pasted upon the gate of Westminster a Catalogue of all such
whose suffrages were for the Earls acquittal, under the style of
Straffordians.] Observator. This paper was not pasted upon the gate of
Westminster, but on the corner of the wall of Sir William Brunkards house.

Answer. Several and various are the Reports concerning this paper; some
agreeing with the Observator; some relating it to be pasted on the head of an
hogshead. What I conceived most probable, and was most generally received, I
fixed upon, not undertaking to warrant the circumstance, but the thing.

Page 238.
Fol. Ibid. The Protestation formed, was the next day read in the lower House,
and generally taken by all the Members.] Observator. Our Author is here out, as
in that before; the Protestation not being taken the next day after, but on the
very same day it was framed.

Answer. If his Author was no more out in that before, then in this, he is in
still I dare warrant him. For the Protestation being debated on the third of
May, the ordering and framing thereof kept the House all that day till late at
night. So the Journals of that week, which also present us with the reading,
and taking thereof the next day by the whole House.

Page 240.
Fol. 257. In this perplexity of thoughts he consults with four Bishops.]
Observator. Not sent for by himself, but sent to him by the Houses of
Parliament. The Persons sent on this employment, were the Primate of Armagh,
the Bishops of Lincoln, Durham, and Carlisle. Of which, the two last being men
unskilled in politic Affairs, depended wholly on the judgment of the other
two; and those carried a sharp tooth against the Lord Lieutenant upon former
grudges. The displeasure which the Primate had conceived against him, was for
the abrogating of the Articles of Religion established in the Church of
Ireland, and settling in their place the Articles of the Church of England,
Anno 1633.

Answer. Was ever man so shamefully out, as this Observator is here? out of the
Story beyond all measure, and out of charity beyond all Religion. First these
Bishops were not sent by the Parliament to the King, but sent for by Him.
Secondly, they were five, not four. Thirdly, if any of them depended upon the
judgment of the others, it was the Bishop of London, who at the last meeting
and consultation spoke not one syllable. As for the Bishops of Durham and
Carlisle, they spoke as freely as any other, insomuch as the King faulted one of
their Syllogismes, because it had in it four terms. Fourthly, the Lord Primate
had no sharp tooth against the Lieutenant, as the Observator or Malice it self
suggests; a calumny so absurd, as nothing but the sin thereof can defend it
from being ridiculous, not a syllable relating to it being true; for, First the
Articles of Religion established in the Church of Ireland were never abrogated,
as is evidenced by this Certificate.

We who were present at, and Members of the Convocation holden at Dublin Anno
Domini 1634. do hereby certify, that upon the proposal of the first Canon,
wherein, for the manifestation of our agreement with the Church of England in
the confession of the same Christian faith, and doctrine of the Sacraments (as
was then expressed) we did receive and approve the Book of Articles of Religion
agreed upon in the Convocation holden at London in the year 1562. One of the
Assembly stood up and desired that the other Book of Articles agreed upon in
the Convocation holden at Dublin in the year 1615. should be joined therewith:
Unto whom it was then answered, that this addition was altogether needless,
that Book having Been already sufficiently ratified by the Decree of the former
Synod. But that the least motion was then or there made for the suppressing of
those Articles of Ireland, has no truth all in it; And therefore the
Observator, and whosoever else has, or does averr that the said Articles
either were abolished, or any motion made for the suppressing or abolishing of
them, are grossly mistaken, and have abused the said Convocation, in delivering
so manifest an untruth.

March 18. 1655. Will. Bernard. Samuel Pullein.


Now the Foundation failing, the superstructed grudge must needs fall also.
Again, that there was not between the Lord Primate and the Earl any the least
umbrage of discontent; that all was most amicable, most friendly between them,
is further so likely, as it is almost demonstrable. For before his final
Sentence, the Lieutenant did from time to time, both at the Black-Red, and in
the Tower, advise with the Primate concerning his Answer to his Charge. For
after Sentence, he desired and obtained of the Parliament, that the Primate
might be sent to him to serve him with his Ministerial Office in his last and
fatal extremity; he cheerfully entertained his spiritual instructions, he
prayed with him, sent Messages to the King by him, took him by the hand and led
him along with him to the Scaffold: All which sure he would never have done,
had he taken notice, or but suspected such a grudge levant and couchant in the
Primates breast. Fifthly, whereas this Trifler deriveth this forged grudge from
this occasion [because, says he, Dr. Bramhil, once the Lieutenants Chaplain,
and then Bishop of Derry, had appeared most in Abrogation of those Articles] I
must tell the man that there was never any controversy in that Synod between
the Lord Primate and that Bishop concerning those Articles: About the Reception
of the English Ecclesiastical Canons, some disagreement there was indeed, the
Bishop of Derry moving they might be there admitted entirely, which the Lord
Primate opposed as prejudicial to the liberty of the Irish Church, and
prevailed that only some selected Canons of the English Church should be
received with the addition of others of that Synods framing, which was done
accordingly. Sixthly, whereas the Observator places the Synod of Ireland in
Anno 1633. his alter idem Dr. Heylins History of the Sabbath, part 2d. page
259. could have told him it was in 1634. Lastly, whereas this Observator
demands an account of our thoughts whether [the King was likely to be well
informed in his Conscience, when men so interessed were designed to the
managing and preparing of it?] I can assure him that the Bishops only sent him
to the resolution of his own judgment for matter of fact, and to the opinions
of the Judges for matter of Law; and that the restless and insatiable scruple
which so discomposed his Majesty's Conscience was this; That notwithstanding he
most earnestly pressed the Judges to declare the particular Article of the
Earls charge, which (if proved) was Treason by an express Law of the Land, he
could not extort from them one single instance, nor any thing else, but that
the Earl was guilty upon the whole matter, which he thought was too confused a
general, upon which to shed the blood of one of the basest, much more of the
Noblest Orb.

Thus have I finished my Animadversions upon the Observators Matter. I should
next proceed to his Alphabetical Table, or Vocabulary of my uncouth words,
which really is the Comical part of his Tragedies against me, and it were pity
to lose so much mirth. I shall therefore in liew of that Alphabet present thee
Reader with a Catalogue, first of mine own, and then of his mistakes, with some
things of remark resulting from them both; and first for mine own.

Fol. 6. In King James his interment, May the 4th. is put for the 7th.

Ibid. Concerning the Marriage of the Queen, May the 8th for the first.

Fol. 20. Dr. Laud Bishop of Bath and Wells, for Bishop of St. David's.

Fol. 71. Archbishop Abbot his Keeper for the Lord Zouch his.

Fol. 129. Guild Hall for Alderman Freemans house.

Fol. 131. All Counties for all Port Towns within the Realm.

Fol. 136. Earl of Norhumberland for the Earl of Lindsey.

Fol. 184. Archbishop Whitgift mistaken one remove.

Other things as errors there are, I confess, charged upon me by the
Observator; but some are dubious, and no constat they are errors. Some are
infallibly demonstrated to be no errors, and the rest that are errors are none
of mine. Of mine, these are a true and perfect account; and how far these
comply for quality and number with what I pretend to in my Preface, I shall now
examine. My words in that Preface are [Confident I am I stand secure against
substantial falshoods] Dares the Observator (though he as daring as another)
say any one of these falsehoods are substantial, so as their rectification will
destroy the frame of the Narrative to which they relate? I presume he will not.
Circumstantial they are every one; and against circumstantial, though I durst
not assume confidence, yet I hoped I stood secure also. And now how that hope
has failed me, shall be my next enquiry. The total of my lapses and slips
amount to eight; no more, if I have faithfully collected them, as I hope I
have, and did really so intend; but lest one or two should be casually omitted,
I allow them to be 10. And being so, I appeal to thy ingenuous candor, gentle
Reader, first, whether in describing of at least a thousand circumstances, it
be not a greater miracle that I mistook in but 10, then that I erred so many.
Secondly, whether 10. errors in such circumstances, wherein the fame of no one
man, the interest of no one cause, is either damnify'd, or advantaged, be
ground sufficient for so much clamor, so loud outcry, as would gladly raise
the Country, yea the whole Nation against me. Lastly, whether it would not have
represented the Observator to be a man of more Christian, yea Moral Principles,
had he viva voce, by conference, or by letters hinted to me these mistakes, as
fit considerations for a second impression. Indeed the last is needless, he
having so fair and frequent opport unities of doing the first: True it is,
acquaintance there is none between us, if acquaintance be taken for
familiarity; but acquainted with my person he is, and I with his, so well, as
he knows me perfectly without a Nomenclator.

How can it be otherwise conjectured? when the truth is, we have met in London
at the same shop, I may safely say near an hundred times; and to speak more
close to the point, not less then ten times, not only after the publication of
my History; but after he had, to my knowledge, perused it, and before he had
entered one line of his Observations into the Press. All which do evidently
declare, that it was not my information, but a dear and precious quarrel he
desired.

Having given you this particular of mine own failings, I proceed to those of
the Observator himself, which I have not only said, but proved to be Errors.

Page 64. Denying the paper found in Feltons hat.

Page 7. Concerning Peter Baro, and the Margarets Professorship. 3.

Page 86. Saying, Standing at Gloria Patri was never obtruded.

Page 114. Concerning the Sabbath 2.

Page: 122. Concerning the setting forth of the Ships. 2.

Page 176. Sir Edward Dering for the Lord Digby.

Page 215. Archbishop of Canterbury voted an Incendiary December. the 16th. for
the 17.

Page 238 Concerning the taking of the Protestation.

Page 240. Concerning the Bishops sent to the King, the Primate, and the Irish
Articles. 6.

The total whereof is 18. in 17 printed sheets, almost two for one escaped from
me in 70. which yet were dispensable in any man, were they but circumstantiall,
as mine, but when one of them tends to the very destruction of sacred worship,
as that of the Sabbath; and another to the defamation of one of the most
glorious Lights of our Church: These are unpardonable faults, were not both the
snfferers thereby above his obloquy. In this Catalogue I have forborne such
mistakes as relate imediately to my self. I have not minded him of his most
notorous corrupting and falsifying my Preface; nor of his wilful mistaking
other words for mine, which cost him a sixth part of his Pamphlet; nor yet his
detorting and wrestling mine own words to his fancy, against their natural
mind and inclination, Things counter to the ingenuity he so pretends to in his
Epistle made to me, to the ancient mode of simplicity, to which I wish he would
conform hereafter: Therefore, gentle Reader, when thou see him next; after my
hearty commendations, present him from me with his Distich again a little
varied.

Use thou old virtues, I shall forbear
New words not fitted to the ear.
Addenda to the Observator Observed.
PAge 6. l. 8. After the end of the Paragraph. But if any demand what made King
James so stout an adversary of the Arminians, the Observator has an answer
ready minted, an exceeding good one I assure you, and for which the Arminians
have reason to thank him: Reason of State, he says, it was, and King-Craft:
how so? because [the Arminians were united into a party under the command and
countenance of Olden-Barnevelt, and by him used to undermine the power of
Maurice then Prince of Orange] so then by the Observators own inference, Reason
of State and King-Craft will not tolerate the Arminians in a Commonwealth; and
if so, they well deserved the name of a Faction, as he page 73. most aptly
styles them, as men having as strong a tang of the Jesuits in Practical, as
Dogmatical concernments; and indeed a Faction, a turbulent, seditious Faction,
the united Provinces found them all along from the first of their spawning
there; more especially in that wicked conspiracy of Barnevelt who suffered most
condignly upon that very account 1619, and in no less damnable and hellish
plot, about three years after, wherein the States sitting in Council at the
Hague, and after them all other anti-Arminian Magistrates were destined to
slaughter: but this plot aborting and miscarrying, the next was to murder the
Prince of Orange, to seize upon the Magazines, to displace all Officers both
martial and civil, and commit an horrid Massacre upon all of different belief;
all which was by a blessed providence discovered and prevented, four of the
principal conspirators hanged, and the rest some imprisoned, others banished.
This was the deportment of the Observators Faction in the Netherlands, an
argument they are none of the best Subjects, be their Doctrine as Orthodox as
they pretend.

Page 10. l. Penult. At this mark * But seeing the Observator so disliketh this
impulsive of Irregularity, I will take it again and by exchange afford him
another for it, which though not so publicly declared, yet was by knowing men
in those affairs beheld as the real and genuine cause of this Commission, and
that was the Archbishops refusal to license Dr. Sibthorp's Book. But be the
impulsive to it what it will, sure I am Sr. Henry Martin told the Bishops they
would incur a praemunire did they act by this Commission, and that Legally the
Commission which should empower them ought to proceed from the Archbishop, not
from the King: to whose advice the Bishops did so far listen as they superseded
and forbore to act until a while after they obtained leave and Commission from
the Archbishop.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for, and sold by Edw. Dod at the Gun in
Ivie-Lane.
AN entire Commentary upon the whole Old Testament in 4. Vol. in Fol. wherein
the diverse Translations and Expositions, literal and mystical, of all the most
famous Commentators both Ancient and Modern are propounded, examined, and
judged of, for the more full satisfaction of the studious Reader in all things,
which compleateth the Authors Commet on the whole Bible, a Work, the like to
which has never yet been published in English by any man, written by John
Mayer Doctor in Divinty.

The Expiation of a Sinner in a Commentary on the Epistle to the Hebrews: Fol.
by T. L. D. D. a learned and Reverend Divine.

The Justification of a sinner being the main argument of S. Paul's Epistle to
the Galathians, Fol. Written by the Author of the Expiation of a sinner.

Thomae Loshintonii Logica analytica de principiis, Regulis and usu Rationis
Recta, 8.

The Angel Guardian proved by the light of Nature, beams of Scripture, and
consent of many Ancient and Modern Writers untainted with Popery; by Robert
Dingley Master of Arts, late Fellow of Magdalen College in Oxford; 8.

America, or an exact description of the West Indies, especially of those
Provinces under the dominion of Spain, in which not only the Nature and Climate
of the place, with the Commodities it affords is fully described; but also
plain and full directions given for the right ordering of the same, so as to
fit them for the use of the Inhabitants, and also for transportation, the like
never yet published in English, faithfully related by N. N. Gent. in 8.

Natures Paradox, or the Innocent Impostor, a pleasant (...) Hystory translated
out of French into English, by Major John Wright, 4.

Poems, Songs, and Sonets, written by Richard Lovelace Esquire. 8.

The Life and death of Mr. Carter, with other Tracts written by his son Mr.
John Carter Minister of Gods Word in the City of Norwich; 8.

Directions for writing of true English by Richard Hodges, in 8.

The Reign of King Charles faithfully and impartially delivered and disposed
into Annals by H. L. Esquire. Fol.

Judgment and Mercy; or the plague of Frogs inflicted, removed: delivered in
nine Sermons, by that late Reverend, and Learned Divine, Mr. Josias Shute. 4.

The Safe way to Glory, in several Exercises of General use, By William Smith
Mr. Ar. R. of Cotton in Suff.


