The chief ARTICLES of the PEACE, concluded betwixt the Emperor, Empire, and
France.
I. THat there shall be an Universal and Everlasting Peace betwixt them, and
their Heirs and Successors; so that the one shall not Assist the Enemies, or
Rebellious Subjects of the other. II. An Amnesty for ever. III. The Treaties of
Westphalia and Nimeguen being the foundation of this Treaty, they shall be
faithfully executed in every thing, but what is here altered. IV. All places
taken during the War, and all the Re-unions out of Alsace, shall be Restored;
but the Romish Religion shall remain in the Places where it now is. V. Trier is
to be restored, with Cannon, etc. as it is at present. The Elector of
Brandenburg, and all his Dominions are included, according to the Treaty in
1679. VI. All shall be restored to the Elector of Palatine, the Duches of
Orleance's Pretentions being left to the Arbitration of the Emperor and the
King of France; the Pope to be Umpire if they cannot agree, and the Elector mean
while, to pay her 100000 Florens per Annum. VII. The Duchy of Deuxponts is to
be restored to Sweden, with its Artillery, Records, etc. VIII. The Principality
of Veldentz, and the Palsgrave of Lodowicks Lands in the Principality of
Lautern, to be restored. IX. All Lands, Revenues, and Commendams, to the great
Master of the Teutonick Order in France and else where, to the Bishop of Worms
the like. X. The Town and Castle of Dinant, to the Bishop of Liege, with its
Cannon and Dependencies, and the Re-unions. XI. All shall be restored to the
House of Wirtemberg; and particularly, to Duke George, the County of
Monbeliard, and all his Possessions in Burgundy, whithout paying Homage to
France, except for the Village of Baldenheim. XII. The House of Baden shall
have the benefit of the Treaties of Westphalia and Nimeguen. XIII. The Counts
of Nassaw, Hanaw, and Leiningen, shall have all restored them. XIV. Strasburg,
and what belongs to it on the Left Hand side of the Rhine, shall remain to
France; and the Inhabitants, and other belonging to the Empire, shall have
liberty to remove themselves and Estates elsewhere in a Years time: The
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to remain as it was, without any further
molestation. XV. Fort-Kyel restored to the Emperor and Empire; and the Forts on
the Rhine, and in the Islands, demolished at the charge of the French. XVI. The
Towns and Castle of Friburg, the Forts of St. Peter and Star, and all those in
the Black-forrest, Brisgaw, and the Valleys of Lehen, etc. restored to the
Emperor as they are. XVII. Brisack, with all its Dependencies, the like; and
the Forts on the Left of the Rhine dimolished. XVIII. All those shall be
restored to the Emperor in 38 days after the Ratification. XIX. Philipsburg,
with the Forts on the Right of the Rhine, and the Cannon formerly belonging to
the Emperor, shall be restored. XX. The Forts over against Hunninguen, and the
Bridge there, demolished. XXI. The like at Fort-Louis. XXII. The Forts by the
Castle Traerbach and Montroyal demolished. XXIII. The Kurburger Fort the like;
and the Prince of Salm, and the Rhingraves and Wildgraves, shall be restored to
Kirn, and their other Possessions. Eberenburg, after the new Works are
demolished, shall be restored to the Barons of Sickingen. XXIV. The Duke of
Lorain is to be included in the Treaty, and put in full possession of all that
Duke Charles had in 1670 Old and New Nancy, with the Cannon that was in them,
restored; but the Walls of New-Town demolished. Bitch and Homburg are to be
dismantled and restored. The Duke shall have all the Re-unions in the 4th
Article. Sa ar-Louis, with half a Mile round, is to be left to France, as also
Longuick for an Equivalent., The French are to have a free passage through
Lorain to the Frontires. The Church Benefices to be enjoyed by the present
possessors All past Judgments in Law in Lorrain are to be Ratified. All the
Archives of Lorain and Bar restored. The Duke is to send Commissioners to take
the Government immediately after the Ratification. The Agreement in 1678. about
the Tolls shall stand. There shall be a free Commerce betwixt Lorrain, Mets,
Toul and Veaduin. All former Agreement 'twixt the Kings of France and Dukes of
Lorrain shall stand good, The Duke and his Brother may pursue their former
pretensions by Law, nothwithstanding any former Sentences against them while
they were dispossessed. The Duke and his Subjects may take their own Methods
for restoring their Vassals. XXV. Cardinial Furstemburg shall be restored to
all that belonged to him, as a Prince of the Empire, and Bishop of Strasburg,
on the French side the Rhine, and have a General Amnesty for himself, and the
Cannons that followed him, but the latter are not to be restored. XXVI. The
Landtgraves of Hesse-Reinfelt, are included in the Peace, and to be restored to
Rhinfelt and Lower-Catznellebogen, with a Salvo for the Rights of the
Landtgrave of Hesse-Cassel. XXVII. The Subjects on both sides, Ecclesiastics
and Laiks, Universities, etc. are to be restored to all they enjoyed before the
War; and Church Benefice, are to remain to the present Possessors. XXVIII. The
Treaty betwixt France and Savoy in 1696. is Ratified; and all that was agreed
to Savoy by the Peace of Westphalia and Nimeguen. And France shall be obliged
to pay the Duke of Mantua 494000...... notwithstanding the restitution of
Pignerol. XXIX. No new Right shall accrue to any Person by the Restitution of
any thing by France. XXX. All Hostilities shall cease immediately on the Signing
of the Treaty, Prisoners be restored, the Troops on both sides retire, and all
Archives and Papers, especially those of the Chamber of Spires, restored.
Contributions are to cease, and Trade open as before the War. XXXI. Every thing
in this Treaty shall be faithfully executed, notwithstanding any thing that may
be alleged to the contrary. XXXII. Either Party is at liberty to raise
Forteresses in their own Dominions, except as here excepted, and to make
Alliances without breaking the Peace. XXXIII. The Crown of Swedden is by Name
included in this Treaty. XXXIV. On behalf of the Emperor and Empire, are
included all other Electors, Princes, States, and Fiefs of the Empire,
particularly the Bishop and Bishopric of Basel, the 13. Swiss Cantons and
their Allies, Geneva, and Newfchatel by Name, the three Grison Leagues, etc.
XXXV. On the behalf of France, the 13. Swiss Cantons and their Allies, and the
Voltoline. And all those whom both sides shall think fit to Name, in six Months
after the Ratification. XXXVI. The Ratifications is to be exchanged in six
Weeks: And by a separate Article is is agreed, That if the Emperor and France
cannot agree about the Duchess of Orleance's pretensions to the Palatinate,
then the Popes Decision shall be put in Execution.

There remain several things still to be adjusted, as to the Affairs of
Religion, for which there are six Weeks time allowed. Conferences are held upon
that Subject every Day, and diverse Princes of the Empire have deferred Signing
till they see the Issue of that Affair.

Reprinted at Edinburgh by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson,
Printer to His Most Excellent Majesty, 1697.


