Mr. KNIGHTs Strange and Amazeing PROPHECY, For Three Years to Come: BEING, A
Genuine Prediction of the most Considerable Actions and Accidents likely to
happen in the Year, 1699 1700, and 1701. Fairly Deduced from 5 Visible Eclipses
of the Luminaries: Three Great and Formidable ones, and Two more Less More
particularly of that Great and Wonderful Eclipse of the SUN, which will happen
on the 13th Day of the next approaching Month September, when 11 Digits of the
Sun's Face will be quite Darkened, and its Effects, or Significations more
terrible, than that of Black Monday, In the YEAR, 1652.

Modestly Hinting to all Europe, and every Kingdom and State therein, the
probable Contingencies signified to them, by the Signs of Heaven.

By William Knight, Student in Astrology, Physic, and Surgery.

Certissimum est, Corpora Coelestia in hec Inferiora Agere non secus ac Sol and
Luna, quorum mirabiles effectus in Universa, quotidie Natura experimur.

Causinus. London, Printed and Sold by John Harrison, in Cornhill, near the
Roaly-Exchange 1 MDCXCIX.

Price, Two Pence.

Licenced according to order

Mr. Knight, Strange and Amazeing Prophesys, for three Years to come.
The Monn Eclipsed March, 5. at 7 h. p. m. 1699. Digits Eclipsed 9. total
Duration 3 h. Therefore it is effects will be found considerable, and will hold
it is Operations: Months, and more.


ACcording to the Documents of the great Masters in this Doctrine, we are to
account the Planet chief Ruler of an Eclipse, that has most essential
Dignities in the place of the Eclipse, and Angel succeeding.

This Eclipse is in Virgo, wherein the Planet Mercury has 5 Dignities, for
it is being in his House, 4 Dignities for Exaltation therein and 1 Dignity for
being in his Face; which in all makes 10 Testimonies for him.

The Angle succeeding this Eclipse, is the ascendent, wherein Venus has 5
Dignities, for it is being in her House, and Saturn has 4 Dignities, for having
Exaltation therein; and so we find by these Rules, those 3 Planets concerned in
the Government of this Eclipse, according to whose several Significations, it is
Effects will be But according to my Judgment, we must admit Jupiter for a
Co-^artner, he being exalted in the 10th, beholding both the Luminaries, and
disposes of the Sun in Pisces.

From the Regnancy of Mercury, we may expect to hear of much Subtilty, and
Craftiness, among Men, many cunning and underhand Projects in the World busy
Sects and Schisms, much Writing, Printing and Prating, for which many will
suffer; because Mercury is very weak, being in Detrement and Fall: Bad Trading,
many Losses and Crosses by Sea and Land, much windy and wet Weather.

From Venus we may hear of many great Marriages and Courtships; and so much the
more, she being in Sextile to Mars, Lord of the Seventh, it also s^gnifies much
suing for Peace, and good Correspondence where there are appearances of
Breaches.

From Saturn we may look for many cold bleak Storms and Tempests this Summer,
dark and cloudy Gusts, many Agues and lingering Diseases Want and Pe^^y in
several Places, by reason of Ingrosing and Fore-stalling Commodities.

From Jupiter we expect many Law suits and Religious Controversies, strong and
sturdy Debates among High and Low, great Thwartings, and Contradictions in
Counsels* 'twill be well if all Places keep from Mutinies and Public Breaches:
many fierce Storms of Hail and Rain; also much Thunder and Lightning in many
Places.

From the Position of Mars in the Eclipse, we expect much Drought, violent
Heat, great Fires and Fevers, furirus Routs, Tumults, and Commotions.

But we may well hope from the Sextile of Mars and Venus, and also the strong
Sextile of Saturn and Jupiter; that whatsoever Mischiefs may be Hatched,
^omented or Designed to amuse, amaze, and Disturb the Repose and Quiet of
Europe in General, or any particular Kingdom, State, or Republic therein, they
will be counter-mined and counter-manded by the sage and solid Advice Care and
Castigation, of the more Honest and Faithful Patrons and Patrons of their
Country they Live in, and in which they have good Propriety, and honorable
Settlement, well minding, that a change will be for the worse, and not for the
better; (as some vainly imagine) for when Saturn and Jupiter change their
Signs, they both get on the worse side of the Hedge.

This Eclipse began in the Ascendant, the Moon rose decreasing in her Light,
she received her greatest Obscuration in the 12th. House and recovers her Light
in the 11th. House: Thus much then may be inferred from the Premises, that it is
effects will begin with distrubing the Bodies and Miads of the common People,
go on unto Arrests and Imprisonments, secret Plots and Projects against Princes
and Principal Men; for the Moon is Lady of the 10th House; much Sorrow and
Trouble to great Ladies, great Contrivances against true Religion and it is
Professors; but it stands firm maugre the Malice of Men and Devils, and Justice
notably Retaliates upon great and small their just Demerits; let all Plotters
therefore be quiet.

As this Eclipse is in an Earthy Sign it signifies Earthquakes. Barrenness of
the Earth, and Breaches in such Banks and Mud-walls as are made to keep out
Water.

As it is in a Humane Sign, it threatens damage to Men.

As it is in a Winged Sign, it denotes 4 Destruction of Birds, and especially
Tame Fowl, and such as Men feed on.

As it is in the 12th House, it signifies damage to the greater sort of Cattle.

As it is near the East, it signifies hurt to Youth, and youthful things.

And Authors say. That an Eclipse of the Moon Vespertine, does much augment
it is effects; which I believe, will prove true.

As for the Countries most subject to the influence of an Eclipse, it will be
wheresoever the Eclipse is Visible; and also to those Countries, Cities, and
Towns, under the Sign wherein the Eclipse is; and to those places under the
Eclipse's Circle of Position.

According to the mind of the Ancients, this Eclipse should not begin to
manifest it is influence, until about three Months from the time of the Eclipse,
which will bring us to the 5th day of June; from whence, if we account three
Months for the Duration of it is effects, we shall find that June, July, and
August, are the Months allotted for the manifestation of of it is Influence:
Therefore, from a sickly and troublesome Summer, Good Lord deliver us.

But most modern Artists that I have Converst with by Sea or Land do believe,
that Eclipses do operate from the very time of the Eclipse; and, that if an
Eclipse be in a moveable Sign, it is Influence does then hold out but so many
Months for the Moon, and so many Tears for the Sun, as they are eclipsed Hours;
but in a fixed Sign so many 2 Months, or so many 2 Years; and in a common Sign
so many six Weeks, or Yerrs and half.

The Sun Eclipse^. September 13 at 9 h. 30 m. Mane. 1609. Digits Eclipsed, 11
total luration 2 h. 30 m. Ergo, it is effects will be very considerable, and
hol^ (...) operation^ years and ha^^


In the Lunar Eclipse, the Angles were all moveable; but in this they are all
fixed: So that as that signified much Celerity, Haste, and Expedition, this
imports much Tediousness and Tergiversation; but as this Eclipse is in a
moveable Sign, it will stimulate many sudden and hasty Evils; and as the other
signified unsteddy and uncertain Conclusions, this implies much Constancy and
firm Resolution either to good or Evil.

We here find Mars and Saturn Governors of this Eclipse, and a good Government
it alwtys proves when two such prime Steers rule the Roast, but the best on it
is, they cannot agree about the Business.

Mars is sole Ruler of the Angle succeeding the Eclipse; he having 5 Dignities
for it is being his House, 3 for having his Triplicity therein, and 1 for his
Face, whlch in all makes 9 Testimonies.

In the Sign wherein the Eclipse is, Saturn has 4 Dignities for having his
Exaltation, 3 for his Triplicity, and 2 for his Term, which in all makes 9
Testimonies; also for his share in the matter.

From Mars we expect much Drouth, Thunder, and Lightning, Fires, and Fevers,
Fiery and thundering Passions in the minds of Men, intestine Broils, and
Discords, the Wrath and Fury of Kings and Princes, sudden Deaths, and Dangers,
many Violations, and Combustions, many Impieties and Impurities in use among
Men.

From Saturn we look for much cold Weather, many Frights, and Fears, Fewds, and
Annimosities, long lasting Diseases, Exiles, and Deaths, Scarcity, and Want,
dark Air, and dark Actions, much Sorrow, and Sadness, cruel Servitude, and
Poverty, grievous Tempests, and Ship-wracks, damage to Springs, and Fountains,
many mournful aad sad Calamities.

During the whole time of the Eclipse, Mars boldly abides in the 10th and 9th
Houses; and Saturn lurks in the 4th and 3d Houses. Governments will find their
foreign and domestic Enemies Active; and Religion will find it is foreign and
domestic Enemies very Vigilant too.

This direful and ireful Opposition of the two malevolent Planets, imports many
dismal and furious Actions, and Accidents, strong Surmises, and great
Surprises, great Routs, and Rumors, violent and treacherous Counsels, and
Consults, deep and dangerous Conspiracies against Governors and Governments,
insolent Insults, and Insurrections, a great Propensity to the breach of
Articles, and Leagues of Friendship, great Plots, and Counter-Plots, mighty
Fatiegues, and Harrasings, very audatious and fatal Commotions, foul and
turbulent Weather.

But blessed be GOD, there is much Honey to be mixed with the Gall; for we have
honest Jove casting his Powerful Trine to Mars, and his Sextile to Saturn; good
and able Men will be doing their utmost to moderate all Differences, and
compose Disorders, not denying the use of their Counsels, Persons, and Purses
for such good Purposes; many therefore, will be the Treats as well as Threats
among Princes, and Persons of the Superior Order, much Business, and Bustles.

Much business I say, there will be among both good and bad Men: Bad Men will
be mighty active in disturbing the peace and quiet of those Countries they live
in, and troubling the Government they live under, and that with mighty hopes of
success: But alas, Clubs and Cabals made by an Opposition, rarely prove
successful; for they are always fearful of each other; and when the matter
comes to a pinch, happy is he that can first betray the rest, and save himself.
Indeed Oppositions are good Aspects for fair Fighting, but stark naught for
foul Plotting. Good Men will also be vigilant in foreseeing those evils, and
Fishing out they dismal effects.

From the Position of Mars in the 10th in Leo, and near co^ Leonis, we may
expect to hear of many great Spirits rampant, Grandees vexed with imperious
Subjects, and many such poor Subjects, as much perplexed with the severity of
their Princes; grievous complaints of Hostilities, Impositions, and hard Usage;
much Thunder in the Air, also very bold and thundering expressions among Men.

From the Position of Saturn in the 4th in Aquary, we may look for deep and
dark Contrivances against Governors, strong and sturdy means used to undermine
Governments, the ruin and downfall of Buildings, Earthquakes and cold Blasts,
doing much mischief to Corn in the Ground when there are great porspects of a
good Crop; much damage to Springs, Fountains, asd Watercourse, Conduits and
Decoys.

New for my threefold Repitition of the signification of Saturn and Mars in
this solar Eclipse, I do not hold my self guilty of any needless Totoligy; for
they are necessarily so to be considered; first as they are the Ruler of the
Eclipse, secondly as they are in Opposition and thirdly as we are to mind the
Signs and Houses they are in, according to all which, they (...) much Malice,
and mutual Hatred among Men in such Families where there are different
persuasions, and different Relations, there will be more than usual strife, and
debate; so likewise in such Kingdom (...), and Republics where there are
different Religions, or People of different Interests and Customs there will be
sturdy struglings and (...) among them; many furious and malicious debates.

Venus Lady of the Sign wherein the Eclipse is being (...) ^all, and in square
to Jupiter, denotes some difference and discord among the more religious and
civilized sort of People, and that too many will be more intent upon trivial
discents, than in minding the Intreagues and Machinations of the common Enemy
of them all.

Mercury in the 12th House Peregrine and Retrograde, signifies (...) and
Imprisonment to many forward and over nimble witted Scribes, Clarks, and
Accountants, and users of false Weights and Measures.

The Luminary Eclipsed, is Lord of the 10th House; and therefore is a doeble
Significator of Grandees, among whom there will be many and fact Disorders and
Disasters, both to their Persons and Authorities.

As the Eclipse is in an Airy Sign it signifies vehement Winds, a Sea^ city of
Provision, and Apparitions in the Air.

As it is in the Sign Libra, it imports a declertion of Justice, small Piety
and little Piety, and it being Matutine, it is effects is much Augmented; so
being in an equinoctial Sign, it is Influence will be Universal; it troubles the
Church, and spoils Seeds and Herbs.

As it is in a Humane Sign, it implies much trouble among Men.

As it is in the Astrism of the Virgin, it signifies a barrenness of the Earth,
and barrenness among Women, many Miscarriages, and abortive Births.

Because this Eclipse begins in the 12th House of Heaven, receives it is
greatest obscurity in the 11th, and ends in the 10th: Hence follows
Conspiracies, a great decay of Friendship, and troubles in most States and
Governments.

From the great Strength and good Aspect of Jupiter in this Eclipse, I do
heartily believe also, that there will be many good Moseses to stand in the
Gap, and good Abrams to plead with God for averting the gross of those evils.

I know well enough, that there are great differences among the Astrologers of
different Religions in applying the difference and Signification of Jupiter:
Protestant Religion; Popish Astrologers make him to signify their Religion, and
Pagans will have him to patronize their Devorcem; there Reasons all are the
same, because every one of them accounts their Religion the best; they will
therefore have the best Planet for it is Significator.

But undoubtedly, that is the best Religion that worships the one only living
and true GOD after the best manner; which must needs be that which most nearly
agrees to his own Institution, and meddles least with the Precepts of Men; for
GOD, who requires Men to worship hem, though fit to prescribe him a Rule for
his Direction, and least that Rule should be forgotten or corrupted, he
commanded it to be written in a Book, which Book can be no other than that
which contains the Old and New Testament, and is called the Bible. That
Religion then that most strictly obliges Men to keep close to the dictates of
this Book, is truly accounted the best Religion.

But forasmuch as Jupiter is the general Significator of all Religion and Laws,
he therefore signifies that Religion which is uppermost in any Kingdom or
State, and which is established by Authority, and the Laws of that Nation,
whether it be Protestant, Papist, or Pagan; so Saturn, Mars, and Mercury, are
the common disturbers of Religion, and the constant troublers of States.

November the 7th, there is a Conjunction of the Sun, Venus and Mercury all in
square to Saturn, and also in square to the places of Saturn and Mars in this
solar Eclipse; this will put the Eclipse upon Action, and set the opposition of
Mars and Saturn at work too: Some notable business now on Foot, wherein a Woman
or Women are much concerned, great Counsels and Consults how to Confront the
riged Impulses of a sturdy old Senior; much bustle and baseness, foul and
turbulent Weather.

About the 11th or 12th of November there is a quartile of Jove and Mars, Mars
being then on the very place of the Eclipse, and Jove in square to it; disputes
arise about civil and military Matters, Rights and Privileges warmly debated
in some Places, the Religious are like to be molested, many Duels, Lawsuits,
and pecunary Controversies, Fevers, and Plurisies: But the Sun, Venus, Mercury,
all in Conjunction, and in Sextile to Mars, will by great Good and wise
Counsel, mightily moderate those matters.

December the 11th, the Sun beholds the place of his Eclipse by a square, which
signifies some small disgusts among Persons of Quality, and some Bickering
between Rulers and their People; but the Sun soon lighting with the Conjunction
of Jupiter, sets all to rights again after a little Consultation and Blustering.

January the 15th 1700, there is a square of the Sun and Mars, and though they
behold not the place of the Eclipse, it will be worth Observation, by reason
Mars is Lord of the Assendant, and the Sun Lord of the 10th in the Eclipse;
Mars being now near cusp of the Ascendent in his own House, and the Sun in his
detrement, Some Grandees meet with notable business and bustle about this time
from their own Subjects and Servants.

The 12th of February, there is a Conjunction of the Sun and Saturn in Pisces,
the Sun Lord of the 10th in the Eclipse, and Saturn Lord of the 3d and 4th.
Sickness and molestation to Grandees succeeds, many die with Agues, Dropsies,
and Consumptions; much Snow or Rain, dark wet and slabby Weather.

March the 9th, the Sun comes to the opposite place of the Eclipse, and the
New Mood happens near the same time, which will make the Ingress very
significant: It will be a time of much Consultation, Congratulation, and
Condoleance too in some places; to which purpose, there will arrive many Agents
and Ambassadors in the Courts of Princes; for there is also a Conjunction of
the Sun and Mercury soon after the Ingress, besides the Trine of Mars and
Mercury, and the Sextile of Jupiter and Mercury. March the 30th, there is an
Opposition of Mars and Venus, from the Signs on the Ascendant and 7th Houses in
the Eclipse; and both Planets beholding the places of Saturn and Mars in the
Eclipse with a square: This Imports much noise and bustle in several Places, as
Poland, Loraine, Swizerland, and Ireland; cold and blustering Weather.

April the 12th, there is also an Opposition of Mars and Mercury in the like
manner, which will import much News of much Knavery acted both by Sea and Land.
The Merchants suffers greatly by Storms and Pirates; the Roads are now more
than ordinary infested with Padders, and the Town with Shop-lifters, and such
like Creatures. April the 27th, we have an Opposition of the Sun and Mars from
the same Signs, i. e. Taurus and Scorpio. More noble Gamesters now mount the
Stage, and more notable Exploits are Played; but there is no nobleness in the
use of Punniards or Poison, nor is it a noble Death to come to the Ax or Halter
about it; nor does every one that falls in a Duel die in the Bed of Honor. We
expect much Thunder and Lightning,

In Mars there is no material bad aspect that has any regard to the Eclipse:
Therefore, we are only to expect those evil Influences we have mentioned, to be
manifested in this Month. Mighty endeavors will be also used herein to
moderate Disorders, and bring things into a better posture.

June the 10th, the Sun comes to the square of the Eclipse, and near the same
time there is a square of Saturn and Mercury; some dislikes arise among high
and low; the Ears of Merchants grated with bad News; some cold gusts of Wind
and Rain; and yet the Month affords much good Intelligence too.

July affords us 4 Opposition to be considered, though neither of them much
affects the Eclipse. The Opposition of Jupiter and Mercury signifies Lawsuits,
Religious Disputes, scribbling Controversies and hasty Showers. The Opposition
of the Sun and Jupiter signify, discord among Princes and Prelates, Grandees
and their Trustees;s Eighty proings and connings in Counsel; high Words, high
Winds, and fierce Showers. Opposition of Saturn and Venus, signifies much
detrement to Women, and Fruits; cool and wet Weather The Opposition of Saturn
and Mercury, signifies many sly and deceitful tricks among Men, malicious and
subtle Projects, Lies and Libels, Fears and Jealousies, Colds and Gripes,
Storms and Ship wracks.

August the 7th, the Sun transites the place of Mars in the Eclipse, and the
9th day he passes by the Opposition of Saturn therein too, and soon after
lights with the actual square of Mars, and Opposition of Saturn; and before the
Month ends, there will be a square of Saturn and Mars: great Calamities are
hereby signified both to great Persons and great Places; fiery meatures in the
Air, and fiery Passions in Men; great Fires and Fevers are much to be feared;
many Deaths and Dangers insident to many about this time; much Cruelty and hard
Usage both by Sea and Land; violent Plots and Projects; in some Places the
Harvest suffers by bad Weather.

September the 12th, the Sun returns to the very place of his Eclipse; after
which, the virtue of the Eclipse will dwindle; but other bad Influences are
still in Operation.

October the 30th, there is a Conjunction of Jupiter and Mars in 26 degrees of
Capricorn, which usually operates upon Religion and Law, many times violent
Preaching, and violent Practice; military Impositions, and military Executions;
much boldness and blustering.

November the 6th, the Sun comes to the squate of Mars in the Eclipse, and the
8th, to thk square of Saturn therein; this will stir up a troublesome Ferment
among Grandees, much Spleen and Annimosity among them, vexatious Counsels and
Consults.

December the 28th, there is a Conjunction of Saturn and Mars in 10 degrees of
Pisces; much holy Hipocrisy is thereby signified; many angry Pulpit Peals,
Scism and Sedition zealously urged; Law debates, and Pecunary Troubles; great
Ship-wracks, and many Men drowned; great Rains, or much Snow; Floods, and
overswelling of Riverss

It is vvorth Observation, that the Planets Mars has been no less than 7 Months
this Year in Scorpio; during which time, he variously Disputes all the rest of
the Planets; many and great Marshal Consultations are thereby signified, and
much military Power imposed upon several Places under Scorpio, and it is
opposite Sign, besides other Places. All sorts of Christians that are at War
with the Governments of Algler, Tunis, or Tripoli, will be too often Kidnab'd
by those Rovers.

Luna Eclipsed Febuary, 23 at 5 h. 20 m. Mane. 1700. Digits Eclipsed, 11 total
duration 3 h. 30 m. Therefore it is effects will be considerable and hold in
force near 4 Months.


Observing no formidable Configurations a^^ending this Eclipse, I was once in
the mind not to concern my self with it: But having considered the Time, and
erected the Figure (you here see) for the same, I found the Position so
remarkable, that I resolved not to omit its Interpretation according to the
best of my mean Skill, which with as much freeness of Mind as I dare use, my
Reader shall have in the Sequel.

Had Astrologers the liberty to write what they may well deduce from the Stars,
a mean Artist might easily shame the most obstinate Antagonist out of his ill
Humor against Astrology; but our Pens are Padlock'd, and we dare not force
their Freedom.

The Rulers of this Eclipse are Jupiter and Mercury, the latter being Lord of
the Sign where the Eclipse is, and the former sole Governor of the Angles
succeeding: It Is well when Religion and Law guides the Helm of Government,
provided they are in a Capacity to hold it; we find both those Planets in a
pale and sickly Condition; Jupiter in the 12th House in his Fall, and Mercury
between the Square of Mars, and Conjunction of Saturn, also hastening into his
Fall: Hence comes much Sorrow and Perplexity to many that wear the Long Robe,
from the Highest to the Lowest Degrees among them; behold Mars in the 9th
House, Saturn in the Ascendent, and the Eclipse in the 7th.

All Eclipses of the Moon moves Tumtlts and Commotions: but most of all when in
the ^th House, then Wars and Rumors of Wars, Riots Routs, and Re^^sions are
much to be feared; I mean, a cautionary Fear, not in L^ ^usilanimity.

The Moon is (...) the 6th House; Servants and Subjects will be apt to rise up
and ^^tend with their Masttrs and Rulers, joining force with their Enemies
against them, though they suffer severely for it.

I am sorry to see Jove so weak and helpless, he lately slighted Mars, and now
Mars will as much slight him; but the Sun makes have to his Assistance, and to
persuade Mars into a better Humor, that more ^ar^ may be taken to support a
feeble Authority, so made by their own Remisness.

Saturn and the Dragon 's Tail in the Ascendent, signifies much Sorrow and
Discontent to the People in several Countries and Places; much murmuring and
muttering at their Superiors, great and grievous Complaints of Poverty and hard
Usage; a Sickly Season is much to be feared, and many Dismal Accidents; Cold
and Dark Air, Fewds and Fears many suffer by Hunger and Cold; great
Ship-wracks, Floods, and Inundations, doing abundance of harm.

Mars in the 9th House, and in a watery Sign and strong, signifies great
Preparations for Sea-force, and Sea-Actions; many stout Men of War at Sea on
all sides, to watch the motions and Designs of each other. The Moon applies to
the Sextile of Mars, and the Trine of Jupiter; many long and dangerous Voiages
made in expectation of great Advantages; but if it prove not otherwise, it will
be well; for the Sea looks grim and angry in this Face of Heaven.

Maximae Eclipsis and maximae Operantus: The greater the Eclipse is, the
greater are it is Effects; this is a great Eclips, and therefore it will be of
as great Signification. Significantit Eclipsis decreta sunt ejus quae proprius
cardines: Those Eclipses which are Visible had near unto an Angle ^o most
powerfully manifest their Influence. This is in the ^th House, and therefore
will strongly stir up Wars, Contentions, Strife, and Debates among Men. Maxim
illustres effectus sunt Solis and Luna: Great and Famous are the Effects
signified by the Sun and Moon; therefore, great and famous are the
significations of their great Eclipses.

The greatness of all those three Eclipses we have here treated on, and the
great and stupendions Effects likely to succeed them, will make abundance of
Admiration in the World.

Ex Eclipsibus magni proveniunt: From Eclipses great Effects always succeed.
Eclipsis Luminarium supper reivitates. Provincias and Regna magis quam super
privatae conditionis homines antetiam super Reges recipient enim multitudinem:
Eclipses pour down their Influences upon Men of mean Condition, or upon Kings
themselves; for they principally respect the multitude.

But we are not from hence to conclude, Princes too great, or Peasants too
little for the cognizance of Eclipses; for since the Sun signifies the
Nobility, and the Moon the Mobily; Eclipses of the Sun surely affects the one,
and Eclipses of the Moon the other accordinly; for as we may compare the
Nobility to one Body, and the Commonality to another, so ^^ch Prince we account
a Member of the one Body, and each Peasant a Me -- of the other; and we say,
that Eclipses do not only concern those Bod^ (...) ^eral; but also more
specially mind such particular Members whose rad^ ^minaries are touched by the
Eclipse.

I know two or three Grandees in the World menaced by these Eclipses; but
Potlomy's Nemo Perticularia Predicit shall be my Rule in that matter; for
though I know a Man may prodict many Particulars; I do also believe he ought
not at all times no do it.

But this let me mind my Reader, that these three Eclipses much concerns
Governors and Governments, as he may see by the Schemes themselves; for in the
first Lunar Eclipse the Moon is Lady of the 10th, and besides her Eclipse, she
is otherways much afflicted: So in the Solar Eclipse the Sun is Lord of the
10th, and the 10th House much afflicted; and here Jupiter Lord of the 10th is
much debilitated.

This Eclipse falling in the West Angle, we must allow it 9 Months repe of
before it starts up into Action, and that will bring us to the 23d day of
November; unto which, if we add 3 Months and a half for the duration of it is
Influence, we shall find December 1700 January, Feburary, and part of March
1791, are assigned for the manifestation of it is Effects; but that an Eclipse
should be in one Winter, and not operate untile the next, our modern Artists do
scarcely believe; but we hereing adhere to the dictates of the Ancients, though
we do also believe what we know to be true, that no Eclipse is guilty of
Idleness in the mean while; so that an Eclipse of the Moon falling in the 7th
House, it will be a complete Year in Operation, especially when great: but will
most vigorously manifest it is Effects in the latter past of time assigned.

From the long transite of Mercury in the Earthy triplicity much News may
arrive from the Southern parts of the World; many Southeon winds, Chappings and
Trembling, of the Eath, a Scarcity of Provision and deterement to young Cattle:
many hasty showers of Hail and sudden Frosts.

February the 11th. 1701, there is an Eclipse of the Moon in the First decanate
of Virgo, which signifies redition and discord, sterility and Cold Weather, an
aptness to Tumults and Commotions, The latter part of the same Month there is a
Conjunction of Saturn, Sol and Mercury in Pisces: Serious and Subtle
consultations are thereby signified about matters of no mean Importance: it
also denotes Storms and Shiq wracks, Cold and dark Air, much Snow or Rain.

About the middle of June 1701 all the Seven Planets will be in Watery Signr:
Saturn, Jupiter and the Moon, in Pisces: Mars, Sol, Venus and Mercury in
Cancer: Sure some mighty show is now made, and much business don upon the great
Waters: great Fleet at Sea, both men of War and Merchantmen; great counsels
and Consults in Watery places and about Watery matter; many showers, swelling
Seas and Ship-wracks.

July the 24th 1701, there is a considerable Eclipse again of the Sun Visible
to most parts of Europe: It falls in the Second decanate of the Regal, fiery,
and Fixed Sign Leo.

It creates much trouble in the Courts of Princes and molests Grandees with
mighty mutation fixed and fatal evils: the luminaries being then near the Body
of Mars, Barrenness of the Earth may be feared and so many great Fevers and
Epidemical disceases: Rome and other places in Italy will be much sublect to
fire and Faction, fie^ce Thunder and Lighting in many places.

Octtober the 2d 1701, there is another opposion of the two infortunes from
Virgo and Pises, which creaters much discension between People of different
Religions, intrests and customs; or if you would have it more plain, it moves
the old leaven of sploun and Anger between Turk and Christian, Papist and
Protestant; such as are established by the Authority of nations, and those that
conferm not to their modes of Governmene and Worship; it also Pesters
Governmedts with Plotters, the Roads with Padders, and the Sea with Pirates;
Cold and Blustering Weather.

And now a litrle Application, and so we'll Conclude.
It is so, that Eclipses when Great have so great Influence and effects; then
let all People Nations and Languages unto to whom these three Great Eclipses
are Visible, look about them: but more particularly, such places whom they
affect by the Signs of the Heavens they fall in, by the Eclipse's Circle of
Positions, and by the Circles of Position of the infortunes.

Turkey, all three Eclipses of the Moon are in Virgo: great ore the Troubles and
molestraoions thou must share in; many will be the Tumults and Commotions in
thy territories or Confines.

France, thy Great City Paris is much conce^ned, and some other places within
thy Limits thou art stell Vexing thy Poor Protestant subjects, and Heaven is
preparing a vexation for thee, and those that puts thee upon such Measures.

Italy, much Trouble houers over thy Head; sum of thy Princes cant agree with
each other, thy Pontifical see will be Troubling, and must look to be Troubled.

Savoy, thy severity to the Poor Mondovites will be ^etali^ed ever long with
intrest.

Spain, some Clandestine Overtures attend thee, and much in a little time will
accrue, thou have much more weighty matters to dispute then the disturbing of
the Scots at Darien who will not easily be Banged from their Post if their
Friends fail them not of timely supplys, and they agree among themselves

Portugal, thou have been a great while fiuiet and modefately thriving: But if
these to Lunar Eclipses in opposition to thy Palladium and the Transite of
Saturn through it, Produce thee no Trouble and Toil, it will be well: but I doubt
the Contrary.

Germany, many places within thy confines afe concerned, matters of much moment
fall on the Fronteers of Austra, and Subburbs of Vienna.

Poland and Muscovy look well to the Tartar and let your Christian Neighbors
alone, so they begin not with ye: But take the best care you can to prevent
intestine Discord, that no detrement come from thence: nor be not to forward to
fall out with erch other, for that will be good for neither.

Sweedland and Denmark, you have Enjoyed Peace many Years while your Neighbors
have invvlved don't be so eager for Trouble as to (Rather then Fail) design the
disturbance of each other, look well to your Confines, and live Ffindly
together; but if you cannot, or will not, I cannot help it.

Holland, thy great Trade and industry is envied, Clandestine designs are
forming against thee, look well to insurrecteons, and inundations.

Hybernia Both the Infortunes in the Sun's Eclipse, squares thy Ascendant,
which imports thee some Trouble, and bids thee take what care thou can to
prevent it; seditious Spirits will strive to disturb thee; the Rapparees will
be busy, both open and clandestine Projects will be acted about thee, and in
thee.

Brittannia, thou art the land of my Nativity, I dare not Item thee, but I hope
I may Pray for thee, and for thy Mighty Monarch King WILLIAM God send him a
long Life, and a Prosperions Reign over thee, and bless thee from Tumults,
Gires, Fevers, and Furious Commotions.

Thus have I fathfully and truly (according to Art) related the signification
of these three Visible Eclipses that are great and remarkable in themselves,
and falls out under as great and remarkoble Positions of the Heavens; and
therefore will have as great and remirkable Effects in the World.

I could (but for brevity's sake) have courted my Authors; however, I have
written nothing without Art, nor without the Authority of the best Artists; nor
do I intend hereby to amaze the World with those Celestial Persages; but to
let them see the dangers impending, that all possible care may be taken to
prevent them.

FINIS.

