The Engagement and Remonstrance of the City OF LONDON* Subscribed by 23500
hands*
ALthough, as Citizens, we are reduced to a necessity of Violence; and as
Christians, obliged to the Exercize of it; Unless we will rather prostitute our
Lives and Liberties, Fortunes and Reputations; Nay, our very Souls, and Altars,
to the Lusts of a Barbarous, and Sacrilegious Enemy: We have yet so great a
tenderness for Christian blood, as to leave unattempted no means, of
probability to save it. This is it which has prevayl'd with us to Declare,
First, to the World, what we Propose, and Resolve, ere we proceed to further
Extremities: and to Satisfy the Public, as well in the Reasons of our
Undertakings, as to Justify our Selves, in the Menage and Event of them.

We find, in the Midst of us, the House of Prayer converted into a Den of
Thieves: Our Counsels Affronted by Armed Troops, our Fellow Citizens knocked on
the head, like Dogs, at their own doors, for not so much as barking; Nay, it is
become Death, now, to desire to Live; and Adjudg'd Treason, but to Claim the
benefit of the Law against it. Witness those Infamous Murders committed, but
Monday last, upon our unarmed Friends: and the glorious Insolences of that
Rabble, toward such of the rest, as they seized, and carried away. But this is
nothing: to make us a Complete Sacrifice, we are to be Burnt too: a thing, not
only Threatened, in the Passion of the Tumult, but Soberly intended; for they
have laid in their Materials for the work already: a Prodigious Quantity of
Fireballs in Paul's, and Gresham College. Briefly, We are designed for Fire,
and Sword, and Pillage: and it concerns us now, to look a little better to our
gracious Guards. Not to insist upon the loss of Trade; how many Thousand
Families have nothing now to do, but Beg, and Curse these wretches? the Honor
and the Safety of the City lies at stake: and God so bless us as we will fall
together. We will not live to see our Wives, and Daughters ravished: our Houses
Rifled, and our Children Beggars, that shall only live to Reproach their
cowardly Fathers: and all this done too by a People, which we can as easily
destroy, as mention: by a Party, so barbarous, and so Inconsiderable together,
that, certainly, no creature can be mean enough, either to suffer the one, or
fear the other. In this Exigency of Affairs, we have found it both our Duty and
our Interests to Associate; and we desire a Blessing front Heaven upon us, no
otherwise than as we do vigorously and faithfully pursue what we here
Remonstrate.

First, We do engage our Selves, in the presence of Almighty God, with our
lives and fortunes, to defend the Rights and Liberties of the City of LONDON;
and if any person that subscribes to this Engagement, shall be molested for so
doing; We will unanimously, and without delay, appear as one Man to his Rescue.

Next, we demand, that all such Troops, and Companies, as do not properly
belong to the Guard of the City, nor receive Orders from the lawful
Magistrates thereof; that such Forces withdraw themselves from the Liberties,
within 12. hours after the Publication of This: upon pain of being deemed
Conspiratours, and of being Proceeded against accordingly, (for to this extent,
both of Judgment, and Execution, is every Individual qualified in his own
defense.)

We are next to demand the Enlargement of our Fellow Citizens, which were taken
away by Force, and in a tumultuons manner, contrary to the known Laws of the
Place and Nation.

This being performed, we shall acquiesce, in the Enjoyment of those Liberties,
which we will not lose, but with our Lives. In fine, to remove all Impediments
of the peace we desire: We do undertake, both as Men of Credit, and Justice;
that such of the Soldiers as will betake themselves to honester Employments,
shall receive their Arreares from the City, and such a further care of their
future well-being, as is suitable to the Necessities of the one part, and the
Charity of the other.


