A FREE PARLIAMENT Proposed by the City to the Nation.
GENTLEMEN,
HAving certain Intelligence of great Preparations against us from Abroad;
together with the daily and woeful experience, of a more barbarous, and
Ignorable Enemy at Home: we have bethought our selves of an expedient, which
may at once, both secure, and deliver the Nation from the danger of the One,
and from the Tyranny of the Other. In order to this effect; The City of London
has constituted 4. Commissioners, to treat Respectively with the rest of the
People of England, in the behalf of their invaded Rights, in such manner to
proceed, as to the said Commissioners shall appear most convenient.

In persuance of this Appointment; we Four, (whose Names, and Authority you
shall find in a Schedule, to this annexed) do, in the Name, and by the
Commission of the City of London, earnestly and unanimously desire a general
Assistance, toward a work of a Public and Universal Benefit; The transaction
of this Affair, we have committed to Persons, eminent both for honesty and
fortune: and to gain dispatch, as well as privacy, we have at the same Instant,
and by safe hands, dispersed True and Exact Copies of these to you, throughout
England and Wales. Our Application should have been more Regular, but for three
or four false Brethren in our Counsels, whom we dare not confide in. We find
few the Honester for the Quarrel, that are the Richer for it; and no other
Enemies to the Peace of the Nation, but the Gayners by Ruin of it. Upon a due
scanning of the whole matter, we have concluded, that nothing can restore us
but a Free Parliament: Nor can any thing compose that, but a Free Vote, without
either Force, or Factien. The most likely, means to procure this, will be a
general Engagement to endeavor it. We ask no more, than that you will follow
our example. That paper, which we commend to you, is already subcribed by many
thousands of this City. If you approve it, do as much; and if you think fit;
choose out of every County Two Persons of a Known Integrity, that may be still
among us, and at hand, to preserve a fair Intelligence betwixt us. No longer
since, than yesterday, the Conservators of our Liberties; Hewson and his
Mirmidons, put an affront upon us, and with some mischief too, upon this very
Point: The very mention of a free Parliament enrages them, and there is Reason
for it. Their Heads are forfeited, and if the Law Lives, they must perish. But
all this while, we are in a good condition, when the Transgressors of the Laws
must be the Judges of it. The very Boys, and Women had destroyed the Party to
a man, but that with much ado, we hindered them. The truth is, in such a
Confusion, more honest blood might have been spilt, than that Rabble was worth.
Upon this, the City is grown so impatient of the Soldiers, that it is to be
feared they will suddenly break out into an open violence upon them. They have
already entered into a solemn Engagement to that purpose. But we shall do our
best to quiet them, till we receive your Answer. In Fine; the End is
honorable, and we desire, the means that lead to it may be so too. Let nothing
be omitted, that may save blood; The Army is necessitous, and without pay, they
must or steal, or perish. Let us consider, they are our Country men, and many
of them, (the necessity apart) our friends. Let such a course be taken, that so
many of them as shall contribute to the Advantage of a free Election, may
without either fraud, or delay receive their Arrears: We shall do our part in
the Contribution, and in all offices of Relation to a Religious and Lawful
Settlement, as freely engage our Lives and Fortunes with you, as we do our
Penns in this Profession, that we are

December. 6. 1659. True Englishmen, and your Servants,

THE ENGAGEMENT,
We the Freeborn people of England, having for many years last past, been
subjected in our Consciences, Persons, and Estates, to the Arbitrary, and
Lawless Impositions of Ambitious, and Cruel-minded men; and finding our selves
at present, in danger to be Irrecoverably lost; partly, by Invasions, threatened
us from Abroad, and partly by Factions encroaching upon us at Home, without the
seasonable mediation of a Free Parliament: We do Declare, that we will by all
Lawful means Endeavor the Convening of it, and that we will, afterward,
Protect the Members of it as the Blood of our own Hearts. We do further Engage,
in the Presence of Almighty God, that if any person or persons whatsoever shall
presume to oppose us; or to impose upon us any other Government, inconsistent
with, or destructive to the Constitution of Parliaments, we will prosecute him,
or them, as the Betrayers of the Peoples Rights, and Subverters of the
Fundamental Laws of the English Nation.

For the Honorable the Commissioners of the City of London, for the Liberties
and Rights of the English Nation.
GENTLEMEN,
HAving already satisfied you by what Authority we Act, it concerns us next, to
acquaint you, to what purpose we are sent, and what it is which we have in
Charge to deliver unto you.

Your Proposals for the Settlement of the Nation; (and That, by the means of a
Free Parliament) have been as faithfully, and generally communicated, as you
intended they should, as kindly received as you could wish, and the whole
matter brought to as speedy an issue as was possible for an Affair of that
Weight, and Quality, to admit. In Testimony hereof, We are to give you the
Thanks of the People of England; and to assure you, that they are not less
pleased with your Method of promoting the Public Good, than they are Obliged
by those Affections which have disposed you to endeavor it. Particularly, they
are exeeedingly glad to find, that the City has entrusted such Persous in the
Business, as, beside all other due Qualifications for the Employment, have this
also; that they were never Parties in the Quarrel. It has been our Care
likewise, to proceed by the same rule; and for this Reason, If both Parties
should be taken in, there might (possibly) be some Animosities started,
sufficicient to obstruct the Proceeding: And again, should either of them be
left out, the matter would (probably) be carried by Faction.

This we are commanded to represent, rather as a Fair Expedient, than an
Absolute Necessity. In the next place, we are to inform you, that the
Engagement you sent us, found so prone a Reception, that we reckon it, with us,
a greater difficulty to f^nd an Enemy to the Intent of it, than to subdue any
whatever, that shall presume to appear against the Promoters of it. We do
however hold our Selves bound to assure you, that we are perfectly resolved to
join in the Charge, and Hazard of the Dispute, with you: and that we are as
unanimous in this Cause, as if the Treasure of the Nation had but one Master,
and the strength of it, belonging to One Body, were but Directed to the same
mind. The List of the Subscribers, we have here in Town; If you desire to see
it you may: but if otherwise, we offer to your Prudence to consider, if it may
not be of more Advantage, and Security to the Business in hand, rather totally
to conceal the Subscribers, if not also the Commissioners themselves. For the
thing it self, we are not only willing, but desirous to make That Public. It
is of so Honest, and Reasonable a Nature, that no Man dares oppose it, who
dares not be Damned; no man will, that deserves to Live upon English ground:
and to conclude, no man shall, and escape unpunished. Parliaments are the
Constitution Fundamental of the Nation, the Safeguard, and the Honor of it: nor
are we more concerned to Support them, than to be wary lest we mistake them. We
are to Distinguish betwixt Names and Things, that we be not governed by
Delusions; Where have we a greater Cheat, than that which styles it self the
Public Faith? Greater Subverters of our Liberties, than some that write
themselves, the Conservators of them? It Is not for 40 people to call themselves
our Representative. Is It not enough that they have Robbed us, unless they
Govern us too? They Will say we Chose them, so did we choose 300. more; and we'll
be Ruled by All, or None of them. Without more ado, having Formally assured
you of an Absolute Concurrence from the Nation, as to what they have received
in Proposition from you: It remains now, only that we recommend some
Additionals to you, which we conceive may be of some Benefit to the Common
Interest of the whole.

In the First Place we propose, That no Petition be presented to this pretended
Parliament, from the City of London, and we undertake as much for our Selves.

Secondly, That no Levies of Men, or Moneys, he suffered, in pursuance of their
pretended Acts; and in case of any Force attempted upon the Refusers, that we
immediately Arm our Selves, and by Violence repel it.

Thirdly, we judge it very fit, in regard of Dangers Imminent, both Foreign,
and Domestique, That a Free Parliament be speedily convened; the Time, and
Manner of Summons instantly agreed upon, with a Salvo Jure to all Interests. --
(By a Free Parliament, we understand, an Assembly of such Persons as by the Law
are Qualified to sit; and elected by Persons Qualified to choose, without any
other Restreint than what the Law imposes.) Not that we claim to our selves the
Right of Calling Parliaments; but the Impossi^ility of procuring one Regularly;
and the Absolute Necessity of having something like one suddenly This is enough
to acquit us before God and men. By these means, all Differences may be
composed, all Parties recon^

GENTLEMEN


