THE SPEECHES AND CONFESSION OF ARTHUR KNIGHT, And THOMAS LARET, At the places
of Execution in Russel street near Covent Garden, and at Islington, on
Wednesday last, being the second of this instant March, 1653.

Being condemned (by Order of Law) to be hanged on a Gibbet, near unto the
place where they committed the Fact: The one, for killing of Major Furnifal;
The other, for murdering of his own Wife.

With the great Oath and Protestation taken by the said Thomas Laret,
immediately before his Death, in the presence of Mr Cook the Minister: And his
Exhortation to all Men in general, both in City and Country, never to strike
or beat their Wives any more.

Published according to Order.

Imprinted at London, for G. Horton, 1653.

The Speeches and Confession of Arthur Knight, and Thomas Laret, at the places
of Execution in Russel Street near Covent-Garder, and at Islington, on
Wednesday last, being the second of this instant March, 1653.
ON Wednesday last being the second of this instant March, Arthur Knight was
brought to the place of Execution in Russel Street, near Covent Garden, where
he most barbarously murdered M. Furnifal, who had formerly been a commander in
the Army, in which time he behaved himself so well, that he gained the love of
all sorts of people, both in city and country, for wheresoever he came he had
a diligent care that his soldiers should do no wrong; yet we may see that the
best of us all can no ways prevent danger, but by heavenly providence; as may
appear by this Gentleman here spoken of, for one day he having been merry with
some of his friends, his chance was to light on two of his mortal enemies,
being brothers in wickedness, and Knights of the Blade; for meeting with him,
they saluted him, saying, God save you noble Sir; and after their falls
friendship, desired his company to drink a glass of wine or beer, who assenting
thereunto, all three went together to Mr. Bowers, a Cook, next door unto the
Rose Tavern in Russel street in Govent Garden, where having got the said Major
into a Room alone, Tho. Knight held fast the chamber door, whilst his brother
Arthur Knight in a most cruel and bloody manner fell upon him, wounding him
with his knife, stabbing him in several places, and cut his nose in a most
grievous manner, and then hauling of him down stamped upon him with his feet,
till he left him for almost dead; which having done, took the money out of his
pocket, and so run forth into the street, swearing,

God damme, We are now sufficiently revenged. The Cook when he saw what was
done, immediately followed them; and his wife after him: whereupon bloody Arthur
began to draw his sword, and swore he would do as much to him: whereupon the
Cook manfully ran into him, and took his weapon, by which means he escaped
with life: so the Cooks wife being a good spitited woman, ventured her life in
her husbands behalf (as an honest woman should do) and held the other brother,
or else consequently her husband might have lost his life. To be brief, the
Gentleman died of his wounds and bruises which they had given him. One of the
brothers is fled and gone; but we hear re-taken: The other by order of Law
condemned to dye, and to be hanged upon a Gibbet near unto the place where the
murder was committed; where accordingly he was executed; but before he went up
the Ladder, he made a short speech to the people; the effect whereof take as
follows: Good People,
AS it is a thing too apparent in these our distracted and froward Times, that
Conscience is fled, and Promise broke; even so is it verified by the practice
and proceedings of many desperate and hasty-spirited men: Which unwarrantable
actions, has now brought me to this untimely end; yet while I live, my heart
shall not faint me. I sorrow not to die; but I grieve at the manner of my
death. For might I in the field encounter with an adversary, and so die, it
would nothing discontent me: Or might I be a prey to some wild beast, and so
perish, I were a happy man. But to fall into the Hangmans hands, Oh me thrice
miserable and unfortunate! Every wrong I have done now called to remembrance,
wrings a drop of blood from my heart. O there is nothing to the worm of
Conscience; nor no Hell to a mind touched with guilt. For as Folly persuaded me
to lead a sinful life; so Justice has at length brought me to a sorrowful end:
Which I desire patiently to undergo, and the Lord strengthen me in this Trial
of affliction.

Then immediately after a short Prayer, pertinent to the work of the day, and
singing of a Psalm, he went up the Ladder, showing an end of courage even unto
the resolution of his death. And then lifting up his hands, and saying, Lord
have mercy upon me, the Executioner did his Office.

The Speech and Confession of Thomas Laret, at the place of execution near
Islington Church.
THomas Laret (by Order of Law) haing received the Sentence of Death to be
hanged upon a Gibbet near the place where the murder was committed; on
Wednesday last he was accordingly brought to the place of execution, where many
hundreds of people frequentd to behold this Object of pity And no sooner was he
come to the said place, but immediately Mr. Cook the Minister came, and proposed
several questions unto him, touching his life and conversation, and whether he
had not a hand in the murdering of the Cheesmonger, desiring him now to clear
his conscience before God and Man.

To which he answered, That he was as innocent of it as the child unborn; and
desired the Lord to bear him Record of his innocence therein, and of the truth
and sincerity of his heart, being spotless and free from any such guilt or
crime. This is truth (Sir) and nothing but truth (laying his hand upon his
breast) saying, So help me God.

Cook, I am glad to hear it; but pray resolve me one thing more.


Laret. I will. Sir, if I can.


Cook. I desire you further to clear your conscience of that great Odium, which
for some years has lain upon you, about the sudden death of your former wife;
and deal ingenuously, I beseech you, for your poor souls sake, even now to
declare in the presence of God, Angels and Men, whether or no, you were the
occasion of your former wifes death, as some report.


Laret. I protest (Sir) I am innocent of any such thing, and as I hope for
mercy from the great God of Heaven, so I here clear my conscience, and acquit
my self of any such bloody act, or inhumane crime.


Cook. What say you to the fact for which you are now to suffer death.


Laret. As for the crime which I am adjudg'd to dye for, I take God to witness
I die innocently; and I protest I never had the least thought of murdering my
dear Wife: no, the Lord knows my heart, I respected her with a tender
affection: but it is truth, being in a great passion at that time, I did both
strike her and kick her; for which I hope I have made my peace with God: And I
desire all good people that hears me this day to take warning by me, and to
avoid the striking of their wives, either in heat of blood or out of passion: O
the heavy sighs and woeful groans, that have been occasioned by those inhumane
blows, having been sore oppressed upon my lamentable and languishing bed of
affliction; and many a time, both day and night, have even cursed the hour that
ever I was born O the innumerable evils that have compassed me about, mine
Iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look up; they are
more then the hairs of my head, yet my heart shall not fail me: being assured,
that the mercies of the living Lord does far exceed my sins and transgressions.
O wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, good Lord, and cleanse me from my sin.
Purge me wirh hysop, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter then
snow. For thy name sake, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity, and strengthen me in
this great Work that I am to go forth: O let thy glorious countenance shine
upon me here; support me, dear Father, I beseech thee, during this moment of
time that I have to live; and after this life, grant me a gloous change from
this thy earthly footstool, unto thy eternal and everlasting Throne. And all
this I humbly implore for the merits of thy son, and my blessed Redeemer, our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Having ended his speech, he desired to see his little girl, which being
brought unto him, he embraced the poor soul, and wept bitterly. But the time
being short, his child was taken from him, and carried back again to its Ant.
Then the Minister desired him to prepare himself for death, and after prayers,
and singing of a Psalm, he went up the Ladder; and no sooner was the Roap put
about his neck by the executioner, but immediately he leapt off the Ladder
voluntary of himself, before the said Executioner could give the fatal Turn.


FINIS.

