PEACE TO THE NATION.
My Dear and Honest Countrymen,
I Am to greetyou with an Evangelical Salutation; Joy, and Peace: and to tell
you, that next to God himself, you are Indebted to General Monk, and the
Gentlemen about him, for your Redemption. If you do not Acknowledge, and
Improve this Blessing, you are Unworthy of it; but I need not prompt you,
either to those Duties of Praise, and Adoration, which you owe to the Blessed
Author of this Mercy, or to that Gratitude, and Honor, which you will
doubtless Pay to the worthy Instruments of it. That you may not buy your
Satisfaction too dear, I bring you Good Tidings, in few words: and contenting
my self with the Gr^sse of the story, I shall refer the nicer Particulars, to a
better Hand or Leisure.

In October. last, when Lambert scattered the Committee of Westminster (or (more
modestly) sent the Gentlemen to secure Portsmouth) his Unlucky Excellency
thought it then a fit time to set up for himself; and in the Head of a
Phanatique Party, to bid Defiance to all the Sober Interests, and Judgments of
the Nation. His Principal assistant in the work was Sr. Henry Vane, the Prophet
of that Inspired Rabble. The Faction was grown Bold, and Formidable; when, to
divert the Course, or meet the Fury of it, the General was Invited to draw a
Force from Scotland into the North: and In he came, but to a Nobler purpose,
than ever they Intended. They Called him in to save Themselves, he Came to save
the Nation. Upon the first notice of his Advance, Lambert was sent with a
considerable Army to meet him, and London left almost without a Public Guard,
(such was the Confederacy they had in the Anabaptistique Party, which was
privately Armed, and Listed in and about the Town.) In fine, after diverse
Affronts upon, and Tumults in the City, the Soldiery Revolted; the Fugitive
Members Returned; Lambert's Army Mouldered away; and his Excellency vanished.
General Monk having proceeded thus far without a Blow; but the more difficult
part was still behind, (for Treacherous friends, are much more dangerous than
professed Enemies) The General, resolves next, for London: and makes it his
design, both in his Passage, and after his Arrive, by all means possible, to
avoid bloodshed; His March speaks him a Soldier, and a Gentleman, for it was
Regular, and Inossensive. The Country courted him upon the way, as their
Deliverer, and he deserved it; For he has proved himself no less. The strict
reserve he used, was but what best became his Dignity and Prudence; he was too
Generous, to betray Another, and too Wise to be betrayed, Himself; under this
Guard of Honor, and of Caution, he past his Journey; not to trouble you with
long stories, how the ways were thronged with Cries and Addresses of the
Nation, for a Free Parliament; what Conference he had with the good Aldermen,
what Complements were made him, by the Other men of Westminster, etc. -- To
come to the Point, upon Friday after noon, (the third of this Instant February)
General Monk took up his Lodgings in Whitehall, on the Monday following, his
Excellency was conducted by Scot, and Robinson, (with the formality of a Mace
carried before them,) into a place, commonly called the Parliament House, where
he delivered himself according to good Discretion, and soon after returned to
his Lodgings: Laden with the Thanks of the House; Tuesday and Wednesday, were
the General's days of rest: but not so to the City: for, upon Tuesday the
100000 l. Tax came out, which Netled the Citizens shrewdly; and the day
following, they met in Common Counsel, to advice upon it. Where they resolved,
to adhere to a former Vote of the Court in the Negative. At the same sitting
was communicated a Declaration from Warwickshire, for a Free Parliament; it
was of a fair signification, and Authority; the Gentlemen that brought it,
received the Thanks of the Court; (not to mention the peevishness of 2. or 3.
Dissenters,) it is hoped they may be wiser and honester hereafter; This was a
Day of Business in London, and produced a Busier Night at Westminster: for the
Council of State, after a tedious Puzzle and Debate, Issued out Orders to
General Monk, for the Reducing of the City, directing him to proceed, in such a
Method, as they had prescribed him. In pursuance thereof, his Excellency
marched early upon Thursday the Ninth current Horse and Foot, into the City; by
that means frustrating a Respect which the Court had designed him, the Day
before; Having appointed 4. Aldermen, and 8. Commoners to attend him the next
Morning. His entrance into the Town, brought all the Horror and Satisfaction
with it, Immaginable: nor did the People understand for a long while, whether
they should Curse or Adore him: at last, in compliance with his Orders, he
seized diverse eminent Citizens, and sent them to the Tower, and took up his
Quarters that Night in the City; By this time, the People, beyond all doubt,
pronounced him the most execrable Creature that ever came within their Walls,
not understanding that the Mischief he did them, was but Jest, and the Good he
Intended them, was earnest. That in consideration of a weeks Imprisonment, he
would reward them and their Posterity, with perpetual Liberty. This however,
carried an appearance of severity, which was in effect, but a point of Miltary
Honor; For his Inclination, and Duty in this Action, Led him several ways: as
a Soldier he obeyed a Barbarous Order; as an Englishman he made it his care,
to take off the edge on it; and he was bound to do That, this day, by
Commission, Which he resolved to undo 2. days after upon a Nobler Principle;
upon Friday, (the 10th. of the Month, and the last of his Commission,) the
General demanded the Cities last Resolve, from the Aldermen; who still adhered
to their former Judgment. His Excellency, hereupon gave command to demolish
the City Gates, and so Returned to Whitehall. (Observe, that his Displeasure,
and Commission died together,) For the next Morning, (Saturday,) he made the
Town a large Amends: Declaring Solemnly to join with them, and their Associates
for a Free Parliament; (but having fairly first discharged himself to those at
Westminster, by a Letter in commune with his Officers; who have behaved
themselves as men of Honor in the Business: The Truth is, had not the General
been nimble with them, they had undermined him; for, contrary to Faith and
Honesty, to their express Agreement: they had not only entered into a secret
combination with the Secretary, but publicly encouraged their Assemblings and
Petitions; and more particularly, contrived the direct Ruin of that Person,
who had so lately preserved them. This is a Theme transports me; The Bloody
Votes were passed that Dismal Night: Let Nedham tell you; but never was a Joy
so Universal; wise men grew mad upon it, but so were mad men sober. The Cries,
the Bonfires, and the fame of the Roasted Rumps, did quite take down the
Legislative Stomach; It Is thought the thing at Westminster is vanished. In
fine, the hand of God is in it, his Name be praised.

FINIS.

