The Final Protest, and Sense of the CITY.
HAving diligently perused two Printed Papers, bearing date the 14th. of this
instant December: The one, in form of a Proclamation concerning the summoning
of a Parliament: The other, as an Order of the Common Council, commanding the
City to acquiesce in expectation of that Parliament: We find therein contained,
matters, so contrary to the Honor of the Nation, and to the Freedom of the
City, that we stand obliged, both as Englishmen, and as Citizens, to protest,
against the Impositions of the Former, as illegal, and the Concessions of the
Latter, as a direct Combination against us. These two Papers are Seconded by a
Third: (for the Two are One, both in effect, and Design,) and that is, a
Proclamation of Banishment, directing to the late Kings Party, under the notion
of the Common Enemy: so that there is no love lost betwixt the Committee of
Safety, and the Common Council, when the General provides for the Peace of the
City; and the Mayor, for the Safety of the Army; not to argue Acts of Oblivion;
and the violation of Public Faith in the Case: that they Conditioned for
their Lives and Liberties* and Compounded for their Fortunes. This is not our
Concern, what they do suffer; but what we may, if we Trust those, that Keep no
Faith with them: And that we'll take a care of: When They are Gone, Then we are
the Common Enemy; So are the Laws of God, and of the Nation, and such is every
Man that Loves them. What this Malignant Party is, these People talk of, we
neither Know, nor Meddle; the Gentry it is we Live by, and by the Laws of
Gratitude, and Hospitality, we are Bound to Protect them, and as well resolved
to do it, within our Walls, against any other Power, than that of the Known
Law. The short of the Design is this, a Danger is pretended to the City, from
the late Kings party, and to prevent the mischief, the Kind Committee Banishes
the Gentlemen; with Order to the Mayor of Wallingford, (late of London) etc. --
to make strict Searches for Delinquents. Now in pursuance of this Precious
Order, our Houses must be Forced, and we Disarmed, and Then, our Throats cut,
to preserve the City. Let those that would be Chronicled for Slaves, and Fools,
Submit to suffer this; and after that Infamous Hour, may a Yellow Coat, and a
Wooden Dagger be the Badge, and Distinction of a Citizen. To conclude, We our
selves are that City, so much the Care and Cry of the Proclamation; and This is
our Unanimous sense, and Resolve. The Army proposes to Pillage, and Murder us,
the Mayor, and his worthy Advisers, Ireton* etc. -- are to hold our hands,
whiles they give the Blow; So, that we are now to provide both against Force
and Treason; having One Enemy within our Walls, and Another in our Councils.
But withal, we have our Swords in our Hands, and our Brains in our Heads; so
that only to Strike the One, and to Dis-believe the Other, is to Subdue, and
Disappoint them Both. We do therefore declare to the World, that We will by
Violence oppose all Violence whatsoever, which is not warranted by the Letter
of the established Law: and that in pursuance of this Duty, both toward the
Nation, and City, an Insolent Soldier, and an Apostatized Magistrate shall be
to us as the same thing. -- Not to word it much further, as we will not be
Bafled, by Affronts, so neither will we be Fooled by Flatteries. -- After the
Loss of Trade, and Liberty, a vast expense of Blood, and Treasure; After many
Injuryes received, more Threatened, and none Returned; We made a sober, and
Regular Application, to the Authority of the City, for Redress. This They
Promised, and We Expected, til at last, instead of a Reparation for Past
Wrongs, or a Security against worse to come; We are paid with an Expectation of
a Parliament in January. This is a Logique We understand not. It is in English,
Lie still, till you have your Throats cut. It would be well to commit the
disposition of our Fortunes, to those people, that are at this Instant
designing an Execution upon our Persons; and to requite those Worthies, that
have already Robbed us of all we have Lost, with the Offer of that little Rest
they have Left. But this will not do our Business; we will not have our
Murderers, for our Judges: nor will we wait. That Parliament they Babble of so
much, will not soon Vote up the City again out of Ashes, nor all the Saints in
that holy Assembly, be able to bring the poor Cobbler into the World again, that
was Killed by order of his Brother Hewson. No, the Cheat is too stale, and we
are Determined to Redeem our selves; but with this Caution; we do solemnly
profess, that we will exercise all the Tenderness which possibly the Case
will bear. The Common Soldier is engaged rather out of a Heedelesse, than
Malicious Interest: We do therefore Protest, that such of those as shall not
evidence their Malice, by their Obstinacy, shall receive a Fair Consideration;
But, for such as Lead them, we do Resolve, not to allow Quarter to any one of
them, that draws his Sword in the Quarrel: and in Order to the Quicker, and
Gentler Dispatch of the Business: We conclude with a Text. Fight neither with
Small nor Great, but with the King of Israel. And so God give a Blessing to the
Endeavors of all Honest Men.


