To the Kings Most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Petition of Thomas Kynaston Merchant, George Porter Esquire Son and
Heir of Endimion Porter Esquire Adventurers in the Joint Stock with Sir William
Courten to the East Indies, George Carew Esquire Administrator of Sir William
Courten, and Sir Paul Pyndar, Charles Earl of Shrewsbury, Sir Thomas Meres Knt.
Executor of Sir Erasmus de la Fountain Knt. Deceased, George Cole Esquire Thomas
Coppin, and Charles Whitaker Esqs on the behalf of Themselves, and Others; With
many Orphans and Widows, Creditors of Sir William Courten and his Son; and Sir
Edward Littleton, and the late Earl of Bridgewater, Deceased.
SHOWS,
THat there is 150000 l. and upwards due to Us from the East India Company of
the Netherlands, by reason of their violent Depredation upon the Two Ships, the
Bona Esperanza, and the Henry Bona Adventura; which Debt and Damages was
reserved by Your Majesty's Treaty Anno 1662. for Satisfaction.

That in the Year 1664. Our said Wrongs and Damages were proved before the
Commons of England, and Your Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and
admitted by Your Majesty as a Ground of that ensuing War against the United
Provinces.

That Your Majesty upon Report of the Admiralty Court, owned our said Right and
Claim in the Premises under the Great Seal, and gave us Letters of Reprisal in
the Year 1665. with special Provisoes and Limitations to continue in force, as
well in Peace as in War; But afterward our said Right and Claim seemed for
some time to be suspended: For since that our said Right and Claim has been
Revived, and again been owned by Your Majesty, with Intentions that We should
receive Reparations at the next Treaty, as appears by several Orders and
Referrences from Your Majesty, and the Lords of Your Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council, and Reports thereupon hereunto annexed; All signifying, that in
Justice and Honor Your Petitioners ought to be satisfied in this particular
Case. And accordingly in the Month of July 1672. Your Majesty did by Your
Letters, Command Your Plenipotentiaries then in the United Provinces, to
provide Satisfaction for Your said Petitioners. And after that again, Your
Majesty Commanded Your Plenipotentiaries at Cologne to the same purpose. Yet
hitherto no Satisfaction, or Reparation has been made unto Us, or any of Us.

Wherefore Your Petitioners do Humbly Beseech Your Majesty, either to Permit Us
to make Use of our said Letters Patents for Reprisals Legally obtained, and
remaining upon Record; Or to use such Effectual Means with the States of the
United Provinces, or their East India Company to make Us some Satisfastion for
our said Losses and Damages out of the 800000 l. Pattacones payable to Your
Majesty by the last Treaty; Or that we may receive Satisfaction otherwise
according to Justice.

And Your Petitioners shall, as in Duty Bound, ever Pray, etc.

