MASTER SPEAKER HIS SPEECH TO HIS MAJESTY* IN THE High Court of PARLIAMENT,
the Fifth day of November, 1640.

WS
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for William Shears, 1660.

Master Speakers Speech in the High Court of Parliament, to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, the fifth of November, 1640.
Most gracious and dread Sovereign,
IN all submissive humbleness, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the
House of Commons are here assembled, who taking along with them your gracious
inclination, have according to their ancient liberties designed me their
Speaker.

Whereas I cannot but lament to think how great a mist may overcast the hopes
of this Sessions, yet a note of favor to me, who cannot but judge my self
unfit for so great employment, which so appears to the whole World.

Many there be of deep Judgment, and sad experience, that might have added
luster to this action, and expedition to the work, if they had pleased to have
left me in that mean condition they found me.

Non mihi tacuisse nocet, Nocet esse Locutum. And then might your Sacred and
pious intentions have had their full advancement.

But is it yet too late? may I not appeal to Caesar?

Yes* I may, and in the lowest posture of humility. I humbly beseech your
Sacred Majesty to interpose your Royal Authority, to command a review of the
house, for there were never more than now fitted for such Employments.

My Lord Keeper approves of him by his Majesty's direction, Then he goes on, It
pleases not your Sacred Majesty to vouchsafe a change.

Actions of Kings are not to be by me reasoned.

Therefore being imboldened by this Gracious approbation, give me leave a
little, Dread Sovereign, to express my own thoughts unto our gracious Lord
the King.

I see before my eyes with admiration the Majesty of great Britain, the Glory
of times, the history of honor, CHARLES the First, in his forefront placed by
descent of antiquity (Kings) settled by a long succession, and continued to us
by a pious and peaceful government.

On the one side the Monument of Glory, the Progeny of valiant and puissant
Princes, the Queens most Excellent Majesty.

On the other side, the hopes of posterity, and joy of this Nation, those Olive
branches set round your tables, Emblems of peace to posterity.

Here shine those Lights and Lamps placed in a Mount, which attend your sacred
Majesty as supreme head, and borrow from you the Splendour of their Government.

There the true state of Nobility, figures of Prowess and Magnanimity, fitted
by their long contracted honor in their blood, for the Council of Princes.

In the midst of those the Reverend Judges, whither both parts (as to the
Oracles of Judgment and Justice) may resort, Cisterns that hold fair waters,
wherein each deviation; each wrinckle is discernable, and from thence (as from
the Center) each crooked line ought to be levelled; The footstool of your
Throne is fixed there, which renders you glorious to all posterity.

Here we the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the Commons house, at your
royal feet, contracted from all parts of your Kingdom, Ensigns of obedience
and humility, all these united by the law equally distributed, which cements
this great body to the obedience of your Sacred Majesty;

And compells as well the hearts as the hands to contribute for the
preservation of your Majesty, and the Common interest,

Dissipates the Invaders of the Church and Common Wealth, and discovers the
Impostures, but (give me leave dread Sovereign) knits the Crown to the Sacred
Temples, and frees Majesty from the Interpretation of mis-doing.

Amongst these this great Council is most Sovereign against the distempers of
this Nation.

Were they infested at Sea, troubled at home, or invaded from abroad, here was
the Sanctuary of refuge, hither was the resort, and no other way found for a
foundation of peace.

It is reported of Constantine the great, that he accounted his Subjects purse
his Exchequer, and so it is.

Subtle inventions may pick the purse, but nothing can open it but a free
Parliament; which lets in the eye of Sovereignty upon the public maladies of
the state, and vigilance for the preservation of our ancient liberties; for
this we need not search into antiquity, look but a little back, there we shall
see our just liberties graciously confirmed by your most sacred Majesty,

And is our happiness shut up in the remembrance of times past only? No.

Those gracious expressions lately fallen from your sacred lips, as honey from
the comb, make glad the hearts of your people.

So that now we do more then promise to our selves a large and free
consideration of the ways to compose the distempers of these Kingdoms, and
then present them to your royal hand for perfection.

And such shall be our deportment, that as we shall labor the continuance of
our liberties, so shall we carry a high regard to preserve that Sovereign
power wherewith your Majesty is invested for the preservation of your Kingdom,
and to render your sacred Majesty terrible to the Nations, and glorious at home*

Are these the fruits we have enjoyed by Parliaments? we cannot then but wonder
at that horrid invention in this place projected, Monstrum horrendum, inform,
ingens but the Lord be thanked, Cui lumen ademptum est. Can this receive a
Palliation? Men, Fathers, and Brethren, and all at one blast; no reverence to
sacred Bones of Princes? were we not all in a lump by them intended to be
offered up to Moloch.

Let us never forget this days solemnization (But whither?) It is too much
boldness to presume longer on your Majesty's grace and goodness; and therefore
for the better expedition of this service; We humbly desire;

1. That our selves and servants may obtain freedom from arrests of their
persons and goods.

2. That we may have free liberty of speech without confinement, with a full
and free debate.

3. That your Majesty will vouchsafe our repair to your sacred person upon
matters of importance, according to the ancient privileges of the house.

That with such alacrity we may now proceed to manifest to the world, that our
retirements were to reinforce a greater unity and duty, and to endeavor a sweet
violence, which may compel (pardon dread Sovereign the word Compel) your
Majesty to the love of Parliaments.

And thus God will have the honor, your sacred* Majesty splendour, the Kingdom
safety, and all our votes shall pass, That your sacred Majesty may long, long,
long reign over us; And let all the people say, Amen. (*)

FINIS.

