AN ANSWER TO A Brief Discourse CONCERNING SINGING In the public Worship of
God IN THE GOSPEL CHURCH,

By J. M. 1690.

LONDON, Printed for the Author H. K. 1691.

Beloved Brother,
THe Apostle James says, (Chap. 5. v. 19.20.) Brethren, if any of you do err
from the Truth, and one Convert him; Let him know, that he which Converteth a
Sinner from the Error of his Way, shall Save a Soul from Death, and shall hide
a Multitude of Sins.

I have read your Little Book (which you gave me) concerning Singing. And now
after Prayers to GOD, and Serious Consideration of what you have said therein;
I return you this Brief Answer, which I do entreat you to Consider: So I
remain,

Your Brother, In our Lord JESUS CHRIST, H. K.

AN ANSWER To a Brief Discourse Concerning Singing, etc.
THE Subject that you intended to treat of (expressed in the Title page of your
Book) is, Singing in the Public Worship of God in the Gospel Church: That is,
say you, page 5. lin. 1, 2, 3. The Primitive and Apostolical Church; your words
are these: spiritual and vocal Singing was used in the Primitive and
Apostolical Church of Christ, is undeniable. You also confess in your first,
5th. page lin. 28, 29, 30. That Vocal Singing, Coloss. 3.16. is there to be
understood, etc. And in your second, 5th. page lin. 20, 21, 22. Intelligible
Singing (say you) for teaching and admonishing others, cannot be without the
use of the Organical Instruments of the Voice.

I beseech you (my Beloved Brother) to consider, that Singing in the Public
Worship of God, in the Apostle's days, was not only used and practiced (as you
have confessed again and again) but Commanded by the Apostle Paul, Col. 3.16.
where the word Let has the Force of a Commandment of God; as Ephesians. 4.29. Phil.
1.27. Ephesians. 5.33. Jam. 5.13. Read the words, especially consider what you say
concerning Women, 1 Cor. 14.34. Let your Women keep silence in the Church: And,
1 Timothy 2.11. Let the Women learn in silence with all subjection. Page 21. line
12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. read your own words; You say, p. 5. lin. 5. But the
Question is, Whether David's Psalms, or any Human prescribed or precomposed
Matter may, or ought not to be vocally sung by all the Church together, as part
of the public, constant, and ordinary Worship of God, instituted in his
Gospel Church.

You had done fairly, to have put this your Question in the Title Page of your
Book, but there is not one word of it there, except what you have confessed and
granted, again and again, (as I have already noted out of diverse Pages of your
Book.) And so I proceed to offer something to your serious consideration, about
the Essence or Being of Singing; Which, you say, consists in an Inward
Spiritual Exercise of the Soul or Mind of Man, p. 5. lin. 24, 25, 26. And this
must be granted, say you.

No Brother! You must not take it for granted, until your Reasons or Arguments
be examined, which you bring to prove it. You affirm, p. 6. lin. 9, 10, 11, 12.
That the Scriptures do clearly witness, That the Essence of Prayer and Praises,
and of Sin, do all consist in an inward Exercise of the Soul and Spirit. And
from thence you conclude, That the Essence or Being of Singing consists in the
inward Spiritual Exercise of the Soul or Mind of Man. If you consult with any
Logician, he can show you the Weakness of your Consequence in this Argument.

Now, the Essence or Being of Singing in the Church of God, unto edifying,
consists in the Voice, as well as in the Soul or Mind of Man: Page 16. lin. 16,
17. you say right page 9. lin. 9, 10. We find in Scripture another kind of
Singing, 1 Chronicles. 16.32, 33. and Psalm. 65.13. that is, the Virtual, or
Metaphorical Singing of the Creatures. But there is no other kind of Singing in
the Public Worship of God in the Gospel Church, unto edifying without the
Voice. You should have put the Voice into the Essence or Being of this kind of
Singing: The natural kind of the Singing of Birds, and of little Children, is
not without Voices, and Organical Instruments of the Voice: You have neither
Scripture nor sound Reason for your Opinion about Singing without the Voice,
unto edifying in the Church of Jesus Christ. You bring a Scripture to prove
Silent Singing in the Church, 1 Cor. 14.26, 27, 28. All I need to say in answer
to what you have said, p. 7, 8, 9. is, to show you, that you are mistaken in
the Mind of Christ and his Apostle in that Scripture. The Apostle mentions
diverse Gifts, ver. 26. a Psalm, a Doctrine, a Tongue, a Revelation, an
Interpretation: Then he exhorted them, saying, Let all things be done to
edifying; and ver. 27. If any Man speak in an unknown Tongue, let it be by two,
or, at most, by three, and that by course, and let one interpret; but if there
be no Interpreter, let him keep Silence in the Church. What is this to silent
Singing in the Church, any more than if you had brought it to justify the
silent Meetings of them called Quakers. Then, p. 8. l. 20, 21, etc. say you,
What can be more plain, than that Singing and other Gifts of the Holy Spirit
have their Essences in our Spirits, wherein we are capable of worshipping God
acceptably, without the verbal and vocal Instruments of the Body.

O my Brother! I know you are not one of them that approve of silent Meetings,
who supposing that they have a Light within them, whereby they are capable to
worship God acceptably without his Gospel Ordinances of Baptism, the Lord's
Supper, and Singing without verbal and vocal Instruments in their Silent
Meetings. In a word, This unsound Opinion of yours, will lead you, and others
of the same mind, into some Erroneous Principles of them called Seekers,
Quakers, and such as are for Non-Churches, if God do not prevent by his Holy
Spirit and Grace, or restrain.

The next Particular you treat of, is David's Psalms, p. 9, to p. 15. where you
labor to prove, That David's Psalms ought not to be sung in the Churches of
Christ, in the days of the Gospel. (I have proved, that the Apostle Paul
commanded the Saints and Faithful Brethren in Christ, Col. 1.2. to sing Psalms,
Col. 3.16. that is, David's Psalms. Read those Scriptures, Luke 20.42. and
24.44. And David himself says in the Book of Psalms, The Lord said unto my
Lord, sit thou on my right hand. And he said unto them, These are the words
which I spoke unto you, while I was yet with you, that all things must be
fulfilled which were written in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in
the Psalms concerning me. Acts 1.20. and 13.33. For it is written in the book
of Psalms, Let his habitation be desolate, and let no man dwell therein: and,
his Bishopric let another take. God has fulfilled the same unto us their
Children, in that he has raised up Jesus again; as it is also written in the
second Psalm, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. You cannot show
where the word Psalms are understood of any other, but only David's Psalms,
called The Book of Psalms.

But you having no Scripture against Singing of David's Psalms, do seem to
reason, and argue against singing of them, first because the Church of Christ
is now in a Wilderness-condition, and in a mourning Sackcloth-state, p. 12. l.
13, -- 21. But the Wilderness-state of the Church under the Gospel, ( Isa.
52.7, 8, 9. How beautiful upon the Mountains are the feet of him that brings
good tidings, that publishes peace, that brings good tidings of good, that
publishes salvation, that says unto Zion, Thy God reigns! Thy Watchmen
shall lift up the voice, with the voice together shall they sing: for they
shall see eye to eye, when the Lord shall bring again Zion. Break forth into
joy, sing together ye waste places of Jerusalem: for the Lord has comforted
his people, he has redeemed Jerusalem) should not hinder the Churches and
Servants of God to sing Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, making Melody in
their Hearts to the Lord Was not Christ and his Disciples in a mourning
condition, the same night out Blessed Savior was betrayed? yet they sung an
Hymn, Mat. 26.30. Mark 14.26. Was not the Condition of Paul and Silas a
Wilderness-condition? Act. 16.23. -- 30. And when they had laid many Stripes
upon them, they cast them into prison, charging the Jailer to keep them safely:
Who having received such a Charge, thrust them into the inner prison, and made
their feet fast in the stocks: And at midnight Paul and Silas prayed, and sang
praises unto God: and the prisoners heard them. And suddenly there was a great
Earthquake, so that the Foundations of the Prison were shaken: and immediately
all the doors were opened, and every ones bands were loosed. And the Keeper of
the Prison awaking out of his sleep, and seeing the Prison-doors open, he drew
out his Sword, and would have killed himself, supposing that the Prisoners had
been fled: But Paul cried with a loud voice, saying, Do thy self no harm, for
we are all here. Then he called for a light, and sprang in, and came trembling,
and fell down before Paul and Silas; and brought them out, and said, Sirs, What
must I do to be saved? Yet they sang Praises to God; and God wrought a notable
Miracle of Confirmation, not only an Earthquake, that shaked the Foundations of
the Prison, opened all the Prison Doors, and every one's Bands were loosed, and
the Keeper of the Prison was terribly affrighted and converted, ver. 34.

You say, p. 29. l. 26. The word Sung is not in the Greek: But it is there
read, And they having hymned. Which word, say you, is taken by diverse Learned
Men to be of a general signification of all kinds of Praises or Thanksgivings,
and not confined to Songs only. Neither do I confine the signification thereof
only to Songs: Yet Beza translates (...), quum hymnum cecinissent, When they
had sung an Hymn. Screvilius and Hill, in their Greek Lexicon, translate (...),
celebro, hymnum cano; and learned Dr. Owen, upon Heb. 2.12. [(...), which the
Learned Translaters do read, In the midst of the Church will I sing Praises
unto thee] has these words in his Exposition, viz. It is declared further,
first, what Christ will moreover do; He will sing Praises unto God. Secondly,
where he will do it; In the midst of the Congregation or Church. So that it is
manifested, say you, from the aforesaid Premises, that praising of God is not
limited to Songs of Praise. I do not limit the signification of the word (...)
only to Songs; neither you, nor all the Learned Men and Books in Sion-College
can prove that the word signifies the Essence of Singing (without the Voice) in
Heart and Mind only; especially, Col. 3.16. if a Minister of the Church, who
has received a spiritual Gift to sing an Hymn or a spiritual Song, do sing in
the Church; as 1 Cor. 14.15, 16, 26. What is it then? I will pray with the
Spirit, and I will pray with the Understanding also; I will sing with the
Spirit, and I will sing with the Understanding also. Else, when thou shall
bless with the Spirit, how shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned,
say Amen at thy giving of Thanks, seeing he understands not what thou say?
How is it then, Brethren? when ye come together, every one of you has a Psalm,
has a Doctrine, has a Tongue, has a Revelation, has an Interpretation. Let
all things be done to edifying; may, and in my opinion ought to administer his
Gift, 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. As every man has received the Gift, even so minister
the same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold Grace of God. If any
man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God; if any man minister, let him do
it as of the ability which God gives; that God in all things may be glorified
through Jesus Christ; to whom be Praise and Dominion for ever and ever. Amen.
Yet this I confess, That those Hymns and Spiritual Songs, which they sing in
the Spirit, and with understanding, unto edifying, are not those Psalms of
David, which the Apostle mentions, Col. 3.16. as I have proved before: Neither
will those Ministers or Members of the Churches of Saints, that sing Hymns or
spiritual Songs, affirm or assert, that they are David's Psalms, Hymns, and
spiritual Songs, Col. 3.16, no, nor given them by the Inspiration of the Holy
Spirit, as the Book of Psalms was.

And p. 14. l. 10, 11, 12. you say, Some of the Psalms were clear Prophecies of
the Sufferings of Christ, which to sing now, were to deny, That Christ is come
in the Flesh. If this Argument was good, it would also follow, That to Read
those Psalms now, was to deny, That Christ is come in the Flesh.

And p. 15. l. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. You say, There is no Instance can be given in the
New Testament, that any of David's Psalms were ever Sung by any Persons, or
Churches, etc.

And yet you say, affirm, and confess, That Vocal Singing of Psalms, Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs, was practiced in those Churches of Ephesus and Coloss, p. 5.
l. 20, 21, 22, 23. and p. 5. l. 1, 2, 3, 4. And you say Vocal Singing was used
in the Primitive and Apostolical Church of Christ.

But Women may not speak in the Church, and therefore they may not Sing, p. 21.
for Singing is Teaching. Why do the Churches of Saints require Women to declare
the Work of Conversion, in the Church? Or to bear Witness of the disorderly
Walking of any Brother or Sister, if they may not speak in the Church. Women
have the Essence of Singing (as well as Men) both in their Souls, and with
their Voices; and are allowed to speak by all the Churches of Saints.

Many other things you have said, and many Objections you have Propounded and
Answered, in which I am not willing to show your Weakness; but leave you and
others of your Persuasion therein, to Consider what I have said, and pray, that
GOD will Convince you of your Error, and make known unto you His Revealed Will
in the Holy Scripture of Truth.

FINIS.

