A LETTER From Lieutenant Colonel Knight IN The Province of Munster IN IRELAND,
Setting forth the Extraordinary wants of the Soldiery; AND The carriage of the
Army since the Lord Lisle's coming thence.

Tudor rose Scottish thistle French fleur-de-lis depiction of Irish harp

Printed in the Year, 1647. July 22.

SIR,
SInce my last Letter, our Army are remaining in Garrison when they ought to be
in the Field; but Soldiery is grown a Trade, and if they can but get a good
name at first, by putting off ware at a very reasonable rate, it is no matter
what they put off afterward, being but at first cried up; it is so with my Lord
Inchiquine: The taking of Dungarvan (we hear) is looked upon in England as an
action of great concernment, and so it is thought here, truly by many of the
best Officers, as causing in a manner the loss of the Army, I am confident of
this Summers work; for at the departure of the Lord Lisle, who by his great
care had provided all things in readiness to take the Field, and left the Army
in a very good condition, if we had at first marched into Butlers country (we
having then a months provision) which swarmed at that time with cattle, we had
first annoyed the Rebels, by being in their country: Secondly, our staying
there had cut off all possibility of their joining together: Thirdly, our Army
lying so conveniently to intercept any party of theirs that should advance,
doubtless we being then so strong in horse, (and this Butlers country being
not far off from Dongarvan) if my Lord had but sent Five hundred horse to have
blockt up the Town, they must of necessity have been forced to yield, they
having but little provision in town, and no fresh water at all: Lastly, his
Lordship, in all possibility, if his Lordship would have been persuaded to this
course, (allowing but a little more time) had taken this place without the loss
of any men, had kept his Army together, and half the Army had not been starved
as now they are; for his men wanted so much at that siege, that the poor
Soldiers were forced by hunger to run to the walls of the town to beg bread of
the Rebels, and the men starved so fast, as my Lord said if they had not
delivered up the town the same day they did, he must have been forced to have
drawn off; and the Rebels when they marched out they said, they could not have
kept the town four and twenty hours longer for want of water; I leave the
conclusion to your self, who by this may see the conscience of an Irish
General, who starves his Army here to feed his good name in England: His
Lordship, as soon as he had taken this Town (if I may so call it, consisting
but of twenty poor tiled houses) returned to Cork with the remainder of his
poor Soldiers that were not starved, either at the siege, or by the way in
their return (which every ditch can show were many) his Lordship rested here
about a fortnight: The 29 of May his Lordship marched no farther then
Caperqueen with the Army, a thing much wondered at, being in a starving
condition, and such plenty of provisions to be had in the Rebels country,
without any apparent opposition by them: The third of June 300 horse under the
command of Major Vordham was sent the directest way to Karrick, from thence to
drive all the country to kill Mac Thomas, where Major General Sterling one of
the Lord Inchiquines new Model, met with four Regiments of Foot, who returned
suddenly to Caperqueen, where my Lord remained; they got some cattle, but 'twas
an inconsiderable prey for so considerable a party: The fifth of June his
Lordship commanded out one Captain Poor an Irish man, with a good party of the
choicest horse of the Army, to discover the Enemy; they having intelligence of
the sign, drew together a good body of horse and foot, and advanced toward
Captain Poor, which the Scouts perceiving returned, and advertised Captain Poor
that they were advanced with a very great body; but it seems that the said
Captain Poor sent his Trumpeter to a Rebels Castle for drink, and neglected
the Alarm; thus Irish men prefer the gains of a little Irish drink, before the
shedding a great deal of Protestants blood; for in the interim the Rebels got
between him and home, charged our men, routed them, killed near sixty, which they
most cruelly butchered, took twelve prisoners, most that escaped loft their
horses, pursued our men till they came within half a mile to Caperqueen, where
my Lord remained with the Army, Lieutenant Selby, besides three Cornets lost;
one Colonel Grady that escaped out of London, was a chief actor in this defeat,
which (God be praised) was never paraleld in this Province; this Captain Poor
is not at all questioned for this business, my Lord said, He has got a great
deal of Honor by it; his Lordship having spent fifteen days provision at
Caperqueen, and performed this gallant Exploit, is returned in the middle of
Summer to his Winter Quarters at Cork, having a great part of his Army starved
to death, great store for hunger run away to the Rebels, and at least Twelve
hundred fallen sick; Colonel Needhams Regiment marched out of Cork toward
Caperqueen Five hundred and seventy, and marched in but One hundred; another
Colonel (they report) marched out Six hundred and returned but One hundred and
twenty, and Sic de ceteris, many Officers report that the Army is no more able
to march out this Summer: Thus you see the greatest Army that ever was in
Munster, is metamorphosed to a little or nothing. Truly our Soldiers are become
the obstacles of so great misery, as I believe could melt the hardest hearts
into pity that should behold them, which many much wonder at, considering it is
but nine weeks since my Lord Lisle left this Province, and his Lordship left
behind him 6500 l. in money, a full months provision since arrived here, 5000
l. in money and good store of provision, the Contribution since, Excise and
other Rents cannot amount to less then 4000 l. the Cattle taken to 1500. which
sums being cast up cannot amount to less then 20000 l. yet for all these great
sums received, the Officers want, the Soldiers starve, those Soldiers that are
able to march have six penyworth in bread per week, poor sick Soldiers have
sometimes nothing; but the best is, the Lord Inchiquine is well, and able to
play at bouls on the Fast day, to sit up whole nights a Feasting, with Dancing
and Fidling, while the poor Soldiers daily starve under his window: If this be
Religion and Zeal to the Cause, Good Lord deliver me from the like. For all the
starving condition, yet his Lordship permits Officers and others license to
Transport Cows, and some Oxen, though they are extremely wanted to draw the
Artillary; a license which does dishearten many: Sir Piercy Smith is made
Quartermaster-General of the Field. I could say much more of this nature, but I
am in haste to conclude: The present state of the Army is very aguish, and the
approach of the Rebels, I fear, will put us into a shaking fit.

Cork, June 22. 1647. Your humble servant, R. K.

SIR,
HAving so convenient an opportunity, I could not omit giving you the Relation
of some Passages here that have happened sithence my Lord Lisle's (unhappy)
calling over: It Is true, some (especially those that have Custodiums) were glad
of his going, but more do now wish he had stayed, especially the poor Soldiers,
for then, I verily believe, we had not been in such extraordinary want (both
Officers and Soldiers) as now we are: I doubt not but the Relation of taking
Dungarnon is stale with you; but whether you heard of the men lost there, that
were starved for mere hunger (and knocked on the head as they lay in the
Ditches, by the protected Irish) being not able to march away when the Army
drew from thence, I know not; but confident I am there was many a poor Soldier
lost there.

Truly, the poor Soldiers are starved, and dye in the very streets,
notwithstanding there are great store of Cows and Oxen transported into England
from hence by license from my Lord: What will be the issue of these things, I
know not; the Soldiers that are not sick, are so faint that they are not able
to march three miles aday, but as they march, fall sick and dye in the ditches
and hedges: As the other day there was a Regiment consisting of Five hundred,
that marched forth of Cork, and was not above a week abroad, and (upon no
Service all the while, that) when they came home marched not in again One
hundred and fifty. At Youghal there is no less then One thousand two hundred
Soldiers sick, some of them lie in the streets for quarter, and beg of the
people that pass along; yet for all that, the Soldiers are in such
extraordinary want: yet there are those that never served the State, that have
what would keep many a good man's child from starving: God put into the
Parliaments hearts to take some speedy course for our deliverance out of this
Irish Bondage.

The other day there was a party of horse consisting of (...) some out of every
troop commanded by Captain Poor (an Irishman) to discover a party of the
Enemies Horse and Foot that lay beyond Capperquin; the Enemy had intelligence
(I will not say by Poor's means) of it, sent a party of theirs to surround
them, fell upon our men, routed them, killed in the place about Sixty private
Troopers, one Lieutenant, and two Cornets; but the Irish Captain escaped, and
left his Soldiers to the mercy of his merciless Countrymen; yet for all this
was never questioned: It Is strange we have not English men enough in England to
Command us here, but must be Commanded by the natural Irish.

There was two Frigots bound to Dungarnon, for the Relief of that Garrison,
laden with Provision, Ammunition, etc; and were about the fifth of this instant
taken by the Washford Pirates: I fear God does not give a blessing to our
Endeavors, there is such ungodly, unjust, and corrupt dealing amongst us.

But amongst all these sad Stories, I will give you a pretty Relation of (my
Cousin) a great man in person (and now in Command) and though he be a friend of
mine, I cannot omit it; he was commanded with a party of Horse consisting of
500. to march into the County of Kerry for a prey (that County you know being
full of cattle) after they had marched a great way into the County, on the side
of a high Hill they discovered a great moving body, which the Commander in
chief swore (God damn him) was a body of the Enemy marching to surround;
whereupon he retreated, and on his retreat took a Prisoner, and examined him
what Forces of Horse and Foot were in the County; the Prisoner swore, None;
then they asked him what body of men were them on that great Hill; He swore
they were no men, but Cows driving away for fear of them, because the Alarm was
in the County that they were in it: So the Cows through their fear escaped, and
they came home like fools as they went.

I pray present my humble service to my Colonel; and use your endeavor to make
my peace with him: I know now that since his Recruit is Disbanded, and
Field-Officers dispierced, he cannot be against my being Lieutenant Colonel to
the Regiment: Let him know, That I am heartily sorry that ever any difference
should happen between him and me, or any of the Officers: I hope we shall for
all this love and live together like friends. I will carry a fair
correspondency with you know whom, till I see the tide turn, which I hope will
be shortly (let what will come to me) And farther tell my Colonel, That if he
pleases to accept of it, I will give him the true Relation of all passages
here, as often as I can meet with a hasty Messenger: it is very dangerous
writing, for many Letters have been intercepted both going and coming (a guilty
conscience needs no Accuser) this being all at present, but that I am

Signed by* Lieutenant Col: Knight.
Cork, July 4. 1647.
FINIS.

