THE FANATIQUE POWDER - PLOT, OR THE Design of the RUMPERS and their Adherents,
to destroy both Parliament and People. With a Caution against forged
Intelligence.
THat this Nation has been long miserable, under the power of a violent and
Restless Faction, is clear to all such as are endued with Memory, and Reason:
nor is it more superfluous, to reflect upon their passed Miscariages, than
Necessary to take some notice of their Later cheats, and Insolences. Their
Design was, to fix themselves in a Perpetual Counsel; contrary to Oath, and
Law; and to cut off successive Parliaments. To carry on the Project, they had
Armed all sorts of Libertines, throughout the Nation, particularly, threatening
London with fire, and sword, if they should not comply. Their barbarous
purposes were Disappointed, by the General's Re-introduction of the Secluded
Members: Together, with the united rage of the people against them. In this
hopeless and Deserted condition, what they could not effect by open Force, they
attempted by Treachery, and Corruption. They used all Art, and Diligence,
during the session, both to gain Opportunities, and to Improve them; but being
over-voted in the Main, They fell upon a more direct, and shameless method of
Villainy. -- They falsified the Lists of the Militia: -- solicited Petitions
from the City, for their continuance: -- Juggled the Army Officers into a
Tumult: -- Employed their Instruments to Destroy the General; -- Mutinyed the
Army, and the City; and Finally, they engaged a great part of the Souldjery to
Remonstrate against the rest of the Nation. But all too little, to prevent
their Dissolution; or to Disturb our Hopes of Settlement.

The General has approved himself, in the calm, steady menage of this wild
Affair, a Person worthy of all the Honor we can give him. These Brutish
Libertines, -- finding all their Plots Bubbled, -- their Mines vented* -- their
Party, weak and heartless, -- themselves Friendlesse abroad, and comfortless
at home, -- as Guilty, and as Desperate as Cain; after the sad despair of any
the least Benefit to themselves, they are yet pleased in the Contrivance of our
Mischief; They Are not dissolved, they tell us, -- and attempt to meet again:
That Is in vain; and now they come to their last shifts. These Sense less
Cox-combs offer the Honest General the Instrument of Government; as if, that
Noble, Generous Soul, were to be wrought upon, to prostitute his Honor, and
his safety; and all this, to preserve a Kennel of such Reprobated, and
Ridiculous Puppies. I wonder, seriously, how these Pimps, and Knights of the
Post, -- Scot, and his Fellows, escape the fury of the People: That
Rabbit-sucking Rascal, with his Fellow Cheats, and Pandars; these are the
Youths, Gentlemen, that offer you like Dogs, to any Master, that will bestow
the Haltering of you. For shame, bethink your selves.

To be as short as possible, thus far you're safe: but yet these Tumblers have
not showed all their Tricks: their last Recourse, is to the Forgery of Letters;
(but so ridiculously framed, they are rather argument of Sport, than Anger: for
the Brewer is much better at a Cheat, than at a Stratagem) There are diverse
Scandalous Papers dispersed, in the Name of the King; and as the sense of the
Royal Party. You shall do well, to take notice, that nothing of that Quality,
proceeds either from Himself, or his Friends. The Project is Phanatique, and
tends only to hinder our Expected, and Approaching Settlement. To mention One,
for All; there is a Pamphlet of yesterday, Entitled -- -- News from Brussels,
in a Letter from a near attendant on his Majestyes Person, to a Person of
Honor Here -- which casually became thus Public.

Do but observe this Formal Noddy, how he Boggles upon the very Title Page. --
How Casually, Good Man Sense-lesse? Did it Drop into a Printing House, and
Publish it self? -- his Title is followed, with a suitable Text; of so Pityfull
an Air, and Fashion, I am ashamed to confess the reading of it. Indeed, I
would advise the Secretary, rather to return to his Placket-Politiques, for he
is not half so good at State, as Bawdery. To deliver his aim in other terms,
for fear of giving the Reader a Vomit. The principal drift of his Discourse is,
to Personate a Royalist, Charging the Presbyterians with the murder of the
King, and professing an Implacable Animosity against the whole party -- Not to
employ more subtilty than needs upon so Frivolous a Subject. Let this suffice.

Who Murdered the King, the Nation knows; and who Interposed to save him; --
who they are, that at this Instant, oppose a Settlement, and who Desire it; --
Nay more, we know, who cannot Live under a Peaceable Government, and who cannot
Live without it: And it is fit to show all honest people to distinguish.

Those, that have designed us for Slavery, it is but reason to marque them out
for Justice: yet I should advise tenderness; where by saving a Few, Infamous
Malefactors, we do not hazard a more Considerable Loss. He that forgives
them, extends his Charity, but he that Trusts a man of them, Betrays his
Country.

March 24. 1659.
FINIS.

