THE Ladies Champion Confounding the Author of the Wandering whore, By Eugenius
Theodidactus, Powder-Monkey, Roguy-Crucian, Pimpmaster-general, Universal
Mountebank, Mathematician, Lawyer, Fortuneteller, Secretary to Naturals, and
Scribler of that imfamous Piece of Nonsense, Advice to a Daughter, AGAINST
ADVICE TO A SON.

Approved of by Megg. Spenser Damrose Page Priss. Fotheringham Su. Leming Betty
Lawrence Mother Cunny


Printed in the Year 1660.

THE LADIES CHAMPION.
OH! for a leg, an arm, or a limb of that Devil incarnate, the woman-hater, and
Enemy to multiplication, the Author of the Wandering whore. Come Sirrah, look
to your hits, I have a whole bundle of rods in piss for thee, quod desertur non
aufertur, thy punishment's only deferred for a while, thou shall have thy
swing, and thou know what follows after; for I know thou wilt run thy self out
of breath shortly: All thy Pumpings, Inventions, Romances, Stories of the
Strummulo, the Merkin, Spunges of several sorts, Scotch-spur, Padlocks, with
the List of Crafty bauds, Common whores, Wanderers, Pimps and Trappanners,
shall not prevent it; Thou did first begin with private whores, Cuckolds, and
Cuckold-makers under the notion and name of Mercurius Philalethes, but that
Element was too hot to hold, come this will be out of the frying pan into the
fire; thou know Mrs. B -- in C -- would have given ten pounds for thy
discovery and apprehension, Mrs. S -- will spend fifty pounds to vindicate her
cause, and make thee exemplary, and yet thou dare enter the List against a
thousand; beware their Clutches, lest they souce thee in Thetis poudering tub
to make meat for Sharks and Shaddocks, or fright thee like poor Lazari^o, by
shaving thee, tossing thee in a blanket naked, and turning the out of thy seven
senses, whilst they cry Hey for the brave women-barbers in Drury Lane, they will
spoil thy occupation for inveighing against their's, off goes thy stones as
sure as a gun or a club to make Billjard balls on, and thy yard their
Billjard-stick to play at their Portalls, then say thy Paternoster, speak with
all thy friends, for they are resolved (if they catch thee once) to see whether
there be any worms in thy brains; and if so, to wash them out, and put thy
brains in again, and if that wont serve thy turn, half an hour's exercise of
their preparation will be worse then the pox or purgatory; Come Bits and Bacon,
thou know how Thom.E. -- was used for thy sake in Holborn, kicked up and down
like a football, and forced to fly for fear of leaving of his brans behind
him, or amongst them: was not Dick L -- arrested (and forced to pawn his shirt
and his cloak to pay his fees) by Merrick? And was not another arrested by
Farmer the Poulterer in Newgate-market upon supposition of being the Author of
the Wandering whore? it is true his innocence cleared him to the damage of Su.
Lemings pitiful Poulterer, who feasted him and his friends carcases by way of
Composition with a Capon, Teals, Goose, Wine, etc. to the value of forty
shillings, and upwards, making him pay for his mistake and ignorance: Thou
Desperado, if Glover, Player, or Thom-Stern light on thee hansomly, say well
fair a light pair of heels, they will try whether thou art a kin to an Irish man
or no, and teach thee Hey then up go we, up tayls all, the Pitchers gone to the
wall. But hear^ you sirrah, is whore a common name to all women, which is so
common with thee? thou say foul Devil, thou have a List of fifteen hundred
Caterpillars and poisonous vermin which want destroying, beware lest a lesser
number don't devour thee, or burn thee in some Capacious C -- or other, or
quarter thee in pieces amongst them, sending thy bones and flesh amongst the
Crew, in order to the burning thereof, with as much Ceremony as Peter Aretine
for inventing the six and thirty several ways and postures of occupying, or for
being an Heretic; But Sirrah would not a whore be a necessary evil (as is
usually said of all women kind) if thou had not the gift of continence?
prithee what cause or provision is most necessary, most lawful, least
offensive, and least charges? ought we not amongst all evils to choose the
least? When then, sirrah, is not using a handsome Girl wholesome, pleasurable,
and tolerable? For since the number of females do far exceed that of males,
doubtless they would have a little of that same as well as the rest of their
fellow Creatures, who are all flesh and blood, and questionless were not
brought into the world with such instruments for no purpose or profit: so that
I conceive (in behalf of Ladies and Madams in our order) it less criminal for a
man to go and lie with a wench (I will not say with another man's wife) then to
lie with his wife when she is big with Child, or during her lying in
Childe-bed, in this Case what course or remedy shall a man take and use, who
has not this Gift of Continence, and may neither lie with his own wife, nor his
neighbors wife, nor his maid, his nurse, nor with a whore? questionless there
is a lawful provision made in this Case of Extremity, which I judge, conceive
and conclude to be in Polygamy, that is, in having plurality, several, or many
wives at one and the same time together, as the best Expedient for generation
and Continency, and strictest way to have few or no whores at all, as it is at
this day amongst the Turks, where one man may have as many wives as he pleases,
so he can maintain them and their children, or if they do maintain their
husbands. Put the Case an Heyr of a vast and yearly revenue, to whose issue
this Estate is entayld, should marry, or be compelled for lucre of money to bed
with a person he loves not, or one that proves barren, this weathly person is
desirous of Children to whom he would leave his Estate, or else he looses it,
leaving to it strangers which never got it, would not this man's marriage to a
fruitful wife be matter of much rejoicing to him, and to every honest and
chaste wife, if it were their condition, to see the fruits of their labors? a
President whereof I remember to be verified of an East India Merchant (of
somewhat a different quality) who was exceeding desirous to have his wife got
with child, a thing he could not perform himself,) giving her free leave so to
do during his absence, provided it were done with a Gentleman; not long after a
Knights son coming to her house, brought a bill of Exchange for a considerable
sum of moneys, which accordingly was accepted, and the day of payment
appointed; the pleasant Gentlewomen made very much of him, and agreed that the
same day he received his money, he should lie with her all night till the
morrow; which was accordingly done, she got with child of a boy, and in ten
months following born, and put forth to nurse at Bednal Green, (where wanted no
Expenses or attendance) without suspicion or jealousy of the father, in regard
of the sudden dispatch thereof after her husband departure, not long after her
husband arrived at home safely, who seeing no appearance of his last scuffle
with his wife, lamented the want of issue, chyding her for not making use of
that freedom he had allowed her during his absence, which caused her to admire
his humor, and relate her fore-passed action, saying there was a brave boy
begot by a brave fellow, a Knights son, and put out to nurse in such a place,
and of such an age; the news whereof made him impatient of seeing him, which
he did the day following early; where after plentiful gifts to the nurse,
hugging, kissing and embracing of the child, he told her he came to fetch away
the child, to which she said, it could not be dispensed with, without the
knowledge of the person who delivered him to her, and paid for his keeping, on
which he went away discontented to the Knights son, telling him he would spend
300 l. but he would have him; the other answered he would spend 500 l. but he
would keep him, so that incontinently a Suit was commenced, at vast charges
on both sides, ere the verdict came to be given up, which was likely to go
against the Merchant; of whom one Noy the Prothonotory said, demanding his
fee, he would turn the scales, which accordingly fell out, and speaking to
the Judge and the Bench, desired the favor to speak one or two words more to
the matter, which in regard of the variety of pleadings, and multiplicity of
Lawyers there present, was thought superfluous, and needless, yet granted by
the Judge, to whom he spoke, My Lord, put the case that your Honor and I have
each of us a piece of ground adjoining to each other, and nothing but a fence
or a ditch betwixt them, you keep a bull in one part, and I keep Covves on the
other, your bull break in amongst my Cowes, and gets them with Calves, does not
these calves belong to the owner of the Cowes? whereupon the verdict was given
on the Merchants side: who brought him up to the University, and dying left his
whole Estate to him, the Knights son continued unmarried to his dying day,
(having known her but that once) left his whole Estate likewise to him: here is
a rich President for all barren women, all women big with Child, and all old
women to follow, instead of being jealous of their husbands, it is an excellent
way to creace love instead of hatred amongst them, if they had but a right
understanding of each other, to let their husbands with free consent take
another wife by whom he may have children; for what were it for the Elder to be
nurse to the younger wife, to have the favor and smiles of her husband,
especially where there is disparity of years, of dissimilitude in conditions; I
question whether the sowing such precious seed in a barren soil is answerable,
fitting, or different from sowing it amongst whores, and if so, the marriage of
another prevents it, proving fruitful, and the perusal of Ochinu^ Dialogues of
Polygamy and Divorce, will convince any rational soul of the truth hereof,
published and printed for J -- G -- once living in Cornhil. And now have at the
new fashioned Dialogues written sometimes by a Convert, sometimes by a
Conversant, and another time by Eubulus, and next time by I cannot tell whom or
what, and yet all one and the same hand again: I tell thee these poor Creatures
termed whores will serve to supply a man's wants better then marrying a wench,
having nothing to show for it but two pair of legs in one pair of sheets, with a
windmil and watermil, from whence comes no grist vendible: again, a wife a man
cannot put off as one may a whore with eighteen pence or a couple of boards
without any disturbance or greater prejudice, if he escape pockyfying: again, if
a man in such a Case meddle with a maid, he must be forced either to marry her
or maintain her and her child, which is not so with a whore, who seldom
receives any wages after her work is over, but before hand, and that so
frequently that they seldom prove with Child, as Peg Cross the short A --
Wanderer is, as thou termst her, thou pretendest to be their profess't enemy
both in Principles and Practices, whence comes such frigidity, and coldness,
art thou not one of the Decayed Occupiers thou talk of^ it is likely so, or
else have lost thy Evidence, or been served as they do Eunuchs in other
Countries, where their stones are cut out, who would otherwise prove the
stoutest stallions, as an approved and experienced Doctor observed of one
amongst them who would lie tickling and towzing of his Mistress with his
standing T -- for three or four hours, nay all night sometimes together,
without tyring, but with no Ejection, it being impossible: but I believe thou
would have them go to it with Carrets and Parsnips, as the milk-maids did with
one another till they let them slip over head and ears, for want of tying a
string about them irrecoverably, and the spoiling of a good commodity, or moul
for casting boys and girls in: what would have become of that late and young
lady, in such a case, of whom I shall relate a pleasing story, from whom sprung
several curious branches, whose father was, and is a person of great wealth and
riches, yet covetous, and willing to rid his hands of her, at as easy a rate as
he could to another of a vast Estate likewise, but could not bring his designs
to perfection upon him, for upon the tender of a thousand pounds, he would not
seem to accept her without the addition of five hundred more, whereupon without
the privity of his Father, Mother, or any other, but himself, his Mistress, and
the Steward, this plot was contrived and executed, which was to marry her,
get her with child, come now and then to her in privacy, leaving her with
her Parents, till the jest broke forth, which in fevv months follovving did
so, whose mother descrying the rising of her belly, questioned her daughter
about the premises, to whom she ansvvered, that such a person, not guilty
thereof, had done it; which exceedingly troubled her, which caused her to
reveal it to her husband, who resented it with much more horror, for the
dishonor would fall upon him, and his whole family: in this trial his wits
were put to it, concealing it from all others, till his steward who was deep
in the plot, gave him an inckling thereof, of whom he ask't council, who
ansvvered him, there was no way under heaven but to marry her to her former
suitor, which he well liked of, and accordingly he and his steward rode to
visit him, where they were exceeding welcome, insomuch that the old man
invites him by way of retribution and retaliation to his house, which he
forthwith accepted: riding together the matter was started, and renewed betwixt
him and his daughter, which the old man gladly received, telling him he should
have the 1500 l. but he would have writings drawn betwixt each other, before
the sight of his daughter; which being completed, the daughter was sent for,
who appeared big-bellyed, whereat with a counterfeit amazedness, he said, How
now Peg; what have you done? and to the father, I Will have none of your
daughter, to which the old man replied, taking him by the sleeve, Son, son, a
bargain's a bargain: I tell you Sir, quoth the Gentleman, except you double the
portion for the dishonor done me, I will not have your daughter. Come, come
Sir, I tell ye a bargain's a bargain, to avoid all trouble you shall have your
portion doubled, which was accordingly performed ere the plot was discovered.
Now face about to the right, I Will charge thee again and again, for I have but
been skirmishing and bickering all this while, have at thee, with thunder and
lightning, I Will come Pell-mell upon thee: Is thy name Eubulus with a horse-pox
to thee, thou think to put the cramp in my mouth with a hard word, I warrant
thee, but I Will anatomize thy meaning, it is a good Councellor by the figure
Ironia e contrario, let thee alone in thy roguery, and thou wilt teach us all the
plain way to occupying: for all thy pretended sanctity, doubtless thou art a
young saint, but an old devil from experience, and the Devil is seemingly the
best Doctor: Will thy council gain the Elysian fields, satisfy Charon the
ferry-man of Hell, or lead the safe way to Bliss? I have taught thee in my
method to Rosy-Crucian Physic, borrowed of that learned and ingenious Writer
Mr. Ashmole: no, there is no such thing in nature, I would have said, rerum
natura, but for frighting my Ladies, and puzzling thy empty pate, thou think
all thy pack-thread intelligence must all pass for verities, but I that am
Eugenius Theodidactus of my own creating, and Secretary to Naturals, say, Cujus
contrarium verum est, construe me that if thou can Enbulus; for I Will have
thee to know, I understand Hebrew, Arabic and Syriack as much as the Grand
Sultan does Welsh and English Well, but thy name and thy nature are not all
one, sirrah, I Would have thee to know I am a learned Asinus, ex quovis ligno uon
fit mercurius; the Devils in thee for understanding, if thou know that too:
for I believe thou were never at the Uni Afity of Padua, where I acted the part
of Ignoramus instead of Commencing, yet I Will give my de^^nition according to my
degrees of Eubulus; Eubulus when I acted Acolastes the prodigal, was my good
Councellor against wenching; Eubulus, was my right-hand-Councellor against
High-way-men, Pick-pockets, and Parasites. Eubulus was always against shaking
of Elbows, Tables, Cards, and Gamings, and other cheating (as that of Sir --
Moreland, of 40 pieces of gold in a dream,) and making the world believe my
brains lay in a Long-lane Plush-jacket, a Green-bag, a reverend-staff, and
telling of fortunes, or railing at honest Fumigosus my old enemy, for not
flattering me in my ignorance. Eubulus was my friend after I had eaten the
husks of beans and pease amongst the hogs, but I never saw any calf but my
self: but this is a damnable Excursion, if I should weary the patience of my
Ladies of pleasure, to whom I commend the reading of my Advice to a Daughter
stolen out of Felthams Resolves, Modern Policyes, Overburyes Characters, etc.
taking the other bout with Eubulus, and then farewell: I Would have thee to know I
scorn to take such a puppyes council, for I have found more profit by pinching
and cheating, then thou shall ever do by writing or speaking go teach thy dogs
to dance: but I shall not leave thee so neither, wa'st not an impudent part of
thee, to discover who were Cuckolds and who were Cuckold-makers, of both sexes:
thou baudy Author, and abusive Raskal, is it convenient to speak truth at all
times, no not to Quaery it? Whether Old Actaeon was ever coop't up like a
Guinny Big? whether Actaeons picture were more proper then a Black Boy? whether
the seven Stars in L. -- might not more properly be the seven deadly sins?
Whether the sign of the Devil were not more suitable for the Angel in W --
whether ever a Ba^^er in London looked like Massienello of Naples? Whether
Smacket upon a wenches bum-trinket is not a term of art for every Barbers
mouth? and Have you any wood to cleave, a profitable sentence on Horsledown?
Whether Su Leming? A -- does not make buttons with the strings of her fiddle,
ever since the discovery of Ben. R -- his drawing a tabby gown out of his
Codpiece? Whether old father Fiery-facias will ever be cured of his red nose,
till he leaves looking under the Lines of Communication? Whether old Rats will
ever leave loving of Cheese? Whether that which is bred in the bone, will ever
out of the flesh? Whether a Flaunders Mare or a beautiful wench naked is the
better bedfellow? Whether plain-horns or gilt-horns are most fashionable?
Whether the Butchers brindle does not want Hukins his Quidlibets? Whether
London will ever be without Cuckolds and Cuckoldmakers? Whether the French
man's riding on the nose, does not spoil a good occupation? Whether it be most
lavvful to lie with a man's maid, his nurse, or his own wife, in Gander-mouth?
Whether any man can cure the Cut of his finger by thrusting it up a C -- as I
-- did? Whether lying with a feeble husband, or a stoutistallion, cures a
woman's melancholy? Whether Midwifes get most by men's or women's tayls? Whether
the taking a touch before hand, is not a sure way to try each others abilityes?
Whether the Earl of Manchesters Colors, or those of Cripple-gate, are most
commendable? Whether any man ever looked through a womb perspective-instrument?
Whether any man can be a Cuckold in his own conceit, so soon as another? And
whether any man would give his Consent, though he were hanged for it? Whether
Hosiers, Button-makers, and Toothdrawers, are not more apt to be Cuckolds-all-a
row then others? Whether Irommongers may not play ar Ticktack in a baudy-house,
as well as others? Whether two Cocks to one Hen are not odds? Whether handling
the Souldjers odds, or slitting of beans in Cheapside-market is most
profitable? Whether it be lawful for a man to pinch, kick and beat his wife
without a cause? And last of all Whelp and Bacon, Whether Heydon the Universal
Mountebank, did study Arts and Sciences in Jacobs-well- College in White
chapel during his cornuting? why thou Villain, did thou do it, or let
another to work? I Will erect a figure for it, and find thee out; the sign is in
Aries or Taurus, Im'e sure on it by the itching of the nape of my neck, which
makes me scratch where it does not itch, yet I Will turn and return to my Ladies,
craving leave so subscribe my self their

Unvanquished Champion Eugenius Theodidactus, cum multis aliis.

FINIS.

