A LETTER From a MEMBER of the Parliament of Scotland To his Friend at LONDON,
Concerning their late ACT, for Establishing a Company of that Kingdom, Tradeing
to Africa and the Indies.

-- Ridentem dicere verum,
Quid vetat? -- Horat.
Contraria Juxta se posita clarius clucescunt.
SIR,
THE Account you give me by your last, of the various Shapes into which some
Persons at London have transformed our late Act of Parliament, for Establishing
a Company Tradeing to Africa and the Indies, and their representing it under so
many several Colors, to those of different Capacities and Affections, puts me
in mind of the Shepherd, who, ambitious to be thought Weather-wise never failed
with an air of Gravity, to publish his pretended Revelations of the ensuing
Weather, in various and quite contrary manners to his several Proselites,
thereby securing to himself certain Evidences in all Weathers that could
happen, if any should dare to call the Infallibility of his Predictions into
question. And really, The exact Idea you give me of the manner in which these
Persons seem to busy themselves in other Men's Affairs, affords me matter
sufficient to renew my Speculation, concerning the precarious Nature of all
Mankind, in point of Interest; and by Retrospection into some Transactions of
this and the last Age, I am induced to trouble you with the following Narrative
of some Observations naturally arising from the same, which to me seem directly
to point at the Temper, Inclination, and real Interest of all BRITAIN: But
before I launch into so wide an Ocean; I cannot forbear expressing the
Satisfaction I have in reflecting, That the whole Representatives of a Nation
so little experienced in Trade, as ours, should with so unanimous a Voice
(Nemine contradicente) agree to such Measures and Foundation of Trade, as now
seem worth the Notice of so great a People as our Neighboring Nation; and my
Satisfaction therein is still the more exalted, by finding in your Account,
That the most Sober and Tradeing People of that Kingdom, are so far from
conceiving any disgust at, or dislike to it, that they generally express an
Inclination to be concerned in it: Excepting (as you observe) a few who (every
body knows) are preingaged to a dear Self-monopolising Interest, together with
some few others, whose Instructions from a Foreign Court must in all
probability oblige them to lay hold of any seeming Opportunity for blowing the
Coal of Sedition in this Island, that they may Fish in troubled Waters: And as
a little Leaven leaveneth the whole Lump, you must always expect to find such
Persons very vigilant, by their Emissaries, to amuse the Unthinking Crowd with
groundless Apparitions; and by a more industrious Artifice, have their
designing Insinuations buz'd into the Ears of some great Ministers, who having
the bent of their Thoughts employed about Matters of State and Government,
suitable to the great Sphere in which they move, may possibly, through want of
Time, consider this Matter no further than by a bare superficial View of such
fallacious Positions as may probably, by Prepossession be dogmatically obtruded
upon them, to serve private Ends, though masked under the specious Pretenses of
a National Concern. Wherefore, I hope those worthy Gentlemen at London, who are
concerned in this Company, will endeavor to anticipate any evil Effect of
these or the like Mis-representations and groundless Suggestions mentioned in
your Letter, by obviating the Fallacy of such noisie Arguments as (you say) are
daily with an Air of Magisterial Stiffness dictated at Garraways, and from
thence diffused amongst the credulous Multitude; which, whenever impartially
examined and considered, will doubtless appear to have no other Merit at
bottom, than a Noose of Sophistry to catch Woodcocks in. For there was never
any Constitution of Trade concerted by any free Kingdom, State or Commonwealth
in Europe, with greater regard to the Constitutions and Privileges of all
other Nations in Amity with His Majesty, than this has been: yea, should we
have had a Committee of English Merchants to Examine and Report our Proceedings
while we were passing this ACT, they could not possibly have been more nicely
tender of Encroaching upon, or Interferring with the English Immunities, either
Abroad or at home, than we have been. And in regard that Pyracy, Hostility, and
all manner of violent Force, is not only inconsistent with, but diametrically
opposite to the natural Laws and Institutions of Trade, we have, in the Body of
this ACT, precluded the Company from Acting or Settling in the very Indies,
without Consent of the Natives. And, in short, we had then the Law of Nations
so immediately under our Consideration, that it was thought by the most
Precautious of our Assembly, we had left no room for so much as a possibility
of Cavilling. But there is none so blind as they who will not see; and by what
you write, I find, had there been any thing in our Act that could not bear the
Trial of the strictest Enquiry on the aforesaid Heads, it had certainly been
long e're now ripped up and printed in Capital Letters by those who were at the
Trouble and Expense of Re-printing the Act at London in several shapes, and
under a new Title of their own framing, of design to adapt it more properly to
the Notion of Rivalship and Emulation, which (you say) they so industriously
preach in Coffee-houses.

Obj. O! but (say they,) Though there be nothing in the Act that at present may
seem to interferr with, yet in the Consequence it may prove pernicious to the
Interest of England.

In Answer to which, give me leave to observe, That as this Act was calculated
for a Common and Public Good, so though it be a received and standing Maxim,
That No Evil is to be done, that Good may come of it; yet no reasonable Man
will urge from thence the Alternative, That we ought to forbear doing an
apparent Public Good, because of a remote possibility of an imaginary Evil
Consequence.

And before I step further, pray let us take a short View of what Prospect
there may be of this bug bearing Consequence. Why, truly Scotland proposes an
Advantage by Foreign Trade, and leaves it at England's door to accept or
refuse, being concerned for one Moiety of all the Profits, Emoluments and
Advantages arising from such Trade; and by the bye England's embracing that
Offer, seems to me an auspicious Prognostic of future Success Now, should we
happen to be frustrate in our Expectation by this Trade, then all the vain
Jealousies of Rivalship and Competition fall of course. But if it should (as I
hope it may) answer our Wishes, by a plentiful and prosperous Harvest, in
return to our Honest and Infant Undertaking, England, sure, would be mightily
hurt, to reap One Half of all the Profits thereof; which I pray God may prove
the happy Consequence, so much seared by your Monopoly-men.

Yet all this (you say) cannot please them that are resolved to be implacable,
for that there are a certain sort of such good-natured Christians in the World,
as would choose rather to lose a certain Benefit and Advantage to themselves,
than endure the very thoughts of seeing their Neighbors in any tolerable
degree of equal Prosperity. In allusion to which, it is no new thing to tell
you, That ever since the Reformation of Religion, the Jesuits, in their various
shapes, have left no means unessayed, to propagate the several Sects and
Schisms which, during the last Age, have, like a general Contagion, overspread
this Island, and undoubtedly gave the first rise to all the sad Catastrophe and
dismal Consequences of the late bloody Civil Wars. And even so, since the Union
of both Kingdoms under one Monarchy, we have too too manifest and pregnant
Proof of how far the Matchevilian Maxims of Policy have, by the means of French
Pensioners and Emissaries, gained credit enough at the Court of England, to
improve the Remnants and Dregs of the ancient Feuds of both Kingdons into an
almost avowed Reason of State (though a much mistaken one) That it was the
Interest of England, to suppress and keep Scotland poor. Which was indeed
chiefly intended, and contrived with design to leave England in the lurch, and
carry on the real Interest of France, where this Maxim had its birth, by
re-gaining Scotland into their ancient League.

For the Sting and hidden Poison of the Serpent lay in this, That the People of
Scotland, from the natural consideration they must needs have of any severe
Treatment, or unreasonable and intolerable Exactions imposed upon them by their
domineering Neighbors, might in time be tempted, like the Israelites in the
Wilderness, to murmur and look back into the Onions, Melons, Garlic, and
Fleshpots of their old acquaintance.

Yet by the Influence of this Jesuitical, Barbarous and Hellish Principle,
together with the general Corruption of such colleaguing and self-designing
Ministers as have (to the grief of these Nations) been at the Helm of Affairs
during those latter Reigns, this poor Nation in particular has been most
unmercifully crampt and fettered in its natural Liberties, both as to Religion,
Property, Trade, and indeed, all the real Badges of a Free and independent
Kingdom, other than in shadow; till the late Providential and Happy Revolution
gave us not only a fair opportunity of reassuming all our ancient Freedoms, and
natural Liberties, but also of extending the same, in point of Trade, far
beyond those Limits which some of our Neighbors seem now unwilling to allow us.

And I would gladly offer it to the serious Consideration of any Honest,
Unbiased and Free-thinking Englishman, Whether, upon His present Majesty's
Accession to the Crown of England, when Ireland was in a manner quite lopped
off, France making mighty Preparations for War, all Europe invelop'd in almost
unquenchable Flames; and England it self, not free from Intestine Divisions,
and Bosom Enemies, who flattered themselves with the Hopes that Scotland would,
from the consideration of its being so long kept at Arm's length, be tempted to
act by an Interest separate from that of England? Whether ( I say) upon
condition of assurance then, that we would follow England's Example, in placing
the Crown of this Realm upon the Heads of our present Gracious Sovereign, and
His late Royal Confort (of Blessed Memory) when they feared our Demurring upon
it, England would not have willingly fulfilled, and put us in possession of the
long promised Union of both Nations; and settled the same upon such an equal
and lasting Foundation, as that we might have freedom of Trading into the very
Heart of their Plantations?

For, how little soever the apparent Proportion be, which our Nation may at
present seem to bear on the Theater of Public Action, as being in a manner
wholly eclipsed by the refulgent and radiant Beams of England's more
resplendent Greatness, I may without Hyperbole justly say, That as Matters then
stood, We had the Balance of Europe in our Hands.

Yet all the Considerations we had in view of our own particular Interest, and
the Advantages which we might have made of that Opportunity, soon gave way to
the irresistible Zeal and Affection which we had for the restorer of the
Protestant Religion, and common Liberties of Britain. For lest that by any
Delays in our Proceedings, the Measures of England might be protracted, We did,
in almost One Breath, Declare the Throne Vacant, our Selves a Free, Independent
State. Their Royal Highnesses King and Queen of this Realm, and war against all
Their Majesty's Enemies; as not in the least doubting, but that such our
generous and frank Proceeding, with respect to our Neighbors, at so critical a
Juncture of Affairs, might in due time reasonably plead for a grateful
Resentment from the King and Parliament of England, by an equally generous
Condescension, on their side, to our having the same freedom of Trade, by
which, but a little time before, the wisest and most leading Men of that Nation
thought it their Interest to have secured our Affection.

And that this was the sense of the Court of England at that time, needs no
further evidence than His Majesty's two successive Speeches to both Houses of
His First Parliament; wherein the consideration of an entire Union with
Scotland was seriously recommended: In order to which, some Schemes were
prepared and consulted by certain Noble Patriots of both Nations.

But no sooner had we in the interim, solemnly consummated, in manner
aforesaid, all that England could have either wished or feared from us on that
Occasion; but of a sudden all thoughts of such Union fell to the ground: so
that being left to chew our Cud upon that melancholy Proverb, Post est occasio
calva, which in our Dialect may be rendered, A True Scotchman is Wise
behind-hand; our next and only Remedy was, to make the best of a bad Market. In
order to which, we then Resoved to think of framing such wholesome and
advantageous Laws for the Advancement of our poor Trade, as might not only
rouse up and animat the depressed and often-disappointed Genius of our
fellow-Natives, but also invite and enduce Strangers more experienced in Trade,
to embarque upon the same bottom with us: and to that end, We did, in the Third
Session of this current Parliament, Anno 1693. Pass a Preliminary Act,
conceived in general Terms, for the Encouragement of Foreign Trade, which you
see narrated in the beginning of this last Act: By the gracious and necessary
Concessions of which, we have a plain Demonstration, through the Virtue of
those Noble and worthy Patriots whom His Majesty's discerning Eye singled out
of the Crowd of Pretenders to the Offices of State, That our present King is
not only Pater Patriae, but Pater Patriarum; and, like the true Emblem of that
Immense Diety whose Anointed he is, diffuseth his Favors with a more
unconfined and universal Influence than any of our late Kings of Britain; Their
natural Easiness of Temper giving many fatal Opportunities to the Mercenary
Ministers of those times, both to impose on their Masters, and prey upon the
Liberties of their Fellow Subjects: whereas, our present King does not only
penetrate into what is just, but has also a Nobleness of Soul, to execute,
with an impartial Hand, what to him seems to be so. And that the giving his
Royal Sanction to this Act, was the effect both of his Justice and Gratitude,
is plain from the natural Regard which in Reason we must needs suppose him to
have had to our frank and seasonable Services, when in themselves they were
most Valuable, and when indeed he stood most in need of them.

Obj. But (you say) the Outcry is, That these are such unprecedented
Concessions and Exemptions as never were, or ought to be granted by a Prince to
any Society or Company of Traders in the World: Ergo,

Hah! Is the Hue and Cry got up then? I am glad of it: For certainly, the
Great, the Grave, and Wise Men of the Nation, do never join in that Chorus.

But to be more serious; It Is true, that these Concessions may seem somewhat
strange to a People whose Wealth, Capacity, Naval Strength, Foreign
Possessions, Plantations, Forts, and Universal Settlements, want no more to
carry on what Trade soever they please, than to will and to execute.

But on the other hand, if they look upon Scotland, and consider it, as in it
self it is, deficient to a degree of Extremity, in all the necessary
Qualification of Trade above-receited; they must own of course, that nothing
less than these Concessions and Exemptions could give this New Company a
prospect of so much as a Possibility of ever grappling with such infinite and
almost insuperable Difficulties as they (and indeed, all other Beginnings) must
necessarily encounter with: so that if such Exemptions had not been granted, we
had as good have erected no Company.

And as to these Concessions being without Precedent, I will not pretend to
give an Instance of any that are exactly the same with the Privileges contained
in this Act: but if I let you see much greater I hope that may serve the turn.
Nor to do that, need I go so far from Home, as to search into the Records of
other Nations, such as France, Holland, Denmark, and others who have given
illimited Powers, and vast Encouragements to their respective Tradeing
Companies; but even in Scotland, when we could not be presumed to have had any
great Notions of Trade about Thirty five Years past, upon the Restoration of
King Charles II. in his First parliament, and the several Sessions thereof,
(before the French King had time to plant his Janissaries in the Court of
England there were several Acts pas'd in favors of Trade and Manufactories,
with Privileges and Exemptions far exceeding any in this Act, with respect to
the Purposes for which they were granted, Mutatis Mutandis.

And that I may not seem to speak altogether without Book I shall give you an
Instance of one for all; namely, the Act Passed, in the Year 1661. For the
Fishings, and Erecting of Companies for Promoting the same; which being too
long to be transcribed, I send you, by way of Poscript, a short Abstract of the
most considerable Privileges and Exemptions therein contained, as they stand in
order in the Act it self; and all these were granted for perpetuity: Whereas
all the most important Concessions in this late Act are limited, some to Ten,
some to Twenty one Years; in which time (God knows) we must run very fast, to
come up with any of all our neigbouring Nations, who have started so long
before Us.

Now let us further compare both the said Acts, and the Purposes for which they
were severally intended, and then, with respect to this last, we must think of
going we know not whither, undergo the Danger of boisterous Storms, and long
Voyages, with which we are not acquainted: tie up our Stomachs to strict,
regular, and unaccustomed Diets; prepare against the Effects of quite contrary
Climates, and there purchase Plantations, Collonies, Settelments, and build
Forts, etc. Yet as to the Time when all this will happen, he must be a wiser
Men than I, that can tell.

But as to the former Act for the Fishing, etc. all Matters thereunto relating
were to be transacted in view of our own Doors, and in our own Power. But then
you will ask me, How it came to pass, that this excellent Constitution for our
Fishings has had no better Effect? Why truly, I Will tell you, For the very same
Reason which may possibly prove the Overthrow of this New Undertaking (which
God forbid) if we have no better luck in getting honester Men at the Head of
it: For the Dutch, who have got most of their Wealth by Fishing in other Men's
Waters, looking upon us then with a zealous Eye, found a way (as it was then
believed) to grease a certain Great Man in the Fist; who thereupon embarked
himself, and all his Friends; with all his Might, on our Bottom; and who being
once at the Head of all, thwarted all, overruled all, and ruin'dall: For the
Honest and Well-meaning Men, finding themselves no other than Ciphers, grew
wearied, and so gave up the Cudgels.

By all which, you have a plain Demonstration and Proof, That what may do in
one Nation, will not do in another. But I Am resolved to wait with Patience, and
hope for the best: Exitus acta probat; the meaning of which is in English, The
Proof of the Pudding is in the eating.

Ob. But then (you say,) the unanswerable and thundering Dilemma, which these
Grumblers would seem, and do actually boast, to fasten upon his Majesty, is
That either he must retract what he has done, by some public Mark of his
Discountenancing this New Company, or otherwise he cannot in reason deny the
like Concessions to the several Trading Companies of England, who have so
largely contributed toward the Expense of this present War.

Answer This is truly the most plausible Difficulty of all that's offered, and
such a Noose as may readily catch Larks, but will never gravel the judicious
part of Mankind more than any of the former, as being all of one piece. The
better to obviate which, I shall give you a plain, easy, just and adequat
Parallel in the like Case, As for Example: Supposing me Lord of a considerable
Manor producing abundance of Corn, Hay, Fruit, and having all the marks of a
fertile and well cultivated Soil, which I have Let to Farm for a certain
Annual or Yearly Rent; which Rent I have, by Contract of Marriage, appropriated
to the Payment of my Wife's Jointure: in the interim, there comes to me an
Under taker, with a Proposal, That whereas I am also Proprietor of a certain
piece of unprofitable, waste Ground, together with some Acres of Land quite
under Water, both which yield me no Rent; he will engage at his own Hazard,
Labor and Expense, to cultivate the one, and drain the other, providing I
grant him a Lease thereof free of all Rent for Twenty one Years, to which I
readily and reasonably assent, as foreseeing the Advantage that must thereby
accrue, if not to my self immediately, yet to my Heirs and Successors. Upon the
executing of which Lease, should he who Farmed my Principal Manor in manner
aforesaid, come and tax me of being an exacting and partial Landlord, if I
would not also let him sit Rent-free, as well as his new Neighbor Undertaker,
Pray, what Regard do you think I ought to observe to any Demand that were
grounded only upon such a Reason? The Application whereof is so easy and
natural, that it were calling your Judgment into question, to expatiate any
more upon that Head: Yet lest you may say that omne simile est dissimile, and
think this to be only an indirect Answer to all the Parts of your Objection, I
shall touch them severally.

And, First, As to any public Mark of His Majesty's Discountenance to this New
Company, which would be the doing and undoing of a thing with the same breath,
is so tender a Point, that the very Thoughts of it is attacking and wounding
His Majesty, at once, in two of his most peculiar Attributes, Wisdom in
Council, and Stedfastness of Resolution.

Then as to what Concessions may be advisable to be given to all or any of the
Trading Companies of England, I must suspend my weak Judgment therein, the
King, and ensuing Parliament, being the only proper Judges thereof; only thus
far I Will venture to judge, That whoever audaciously dare pretend to anticipate
the Sense of so Great and August an Assembly, by Dictating in Coffee-houses
what his Arrogance thinks, forsooth, they ought to do, may likewise think
himself well come off at last, if he escape with only a Reprimand.

And then as to the last Branch of the Objection, which seems to point at, our
not contributing, so largely as they have, toward the Expense of the War; let
us consider, whether they think Us equally concerned? and whether We may expect
a proportionable share of the Glory and Advantage? If not, then we are but
Auxiliaries, and ought not to undergo any narrow scrutiny on that head: For, A
given Horse ought not to be examined in the Mouth.

But supposing (as indeed I think) We are equally concerned in the same Common
Cause; it must needs be confessed, That we cannot boast of any great store of
Wealth, (for which we may partly thank those Familiar Spirits of France, who by
a Legerdemain Trick of Hocus Pocus, have too often assumed the shapes of
Court-Cards, in the most considerable Games which have (till of late Years)
been played on the English Stage;) yet, in Proportion to what our Strength was,
in any tolerable measure, able to bear, we have always signified our good
Inclination, by giving such Supplies, from time to time, as have not only
raised very considerable Numbers of excellent Troops, but also Maintained the
same, till called out of the Nation by His Majesty; and then we successively
raised others, to be a constant Nursery for the English Army. This was all we
could do; and could we have done more, we stood in need of no Spur to do it:
The Widow's Mite in the Gospel was more acceptable to Our Savior, than all the
large Offerings of those who gave only out of the Abundance of their
Superfluities: Of them to whom much has been given, much shall be required. And
if His Majesty should question us upon this head, we can justly answer him with
a Scripture Phrase, Silver and Gold have we none; but such as we have, we give
unto him. True Hearts, and Valiant Hands; Brave Trusty Lads, armed with Natural
But who dare encounter Fire and Smoke, and whose Undaunted Resolution and
Valor, upon all Occasions of Trial, have to the Diminution of their Number,
given at least some small Addition to the Advancing Glory of the English Arms:
which if we had not given, an equal Number of equal Troops from any of our most
entirely beloved Confederate Princes (if any such they had to spare) would
certainly be good Meat, but must needs have cost England very dear Sauce.

And since I now treat of our Usefulness to England, how little soever they may
value it; I shall beg leave to look back again upon the further Motives that
induced us to be forward in passing this Act, and take also a further view of
the Advantages that may probably arise, not only unto our Selves, but to
England in general, by it.

As to the First of these, we observed, That the Customs, Fashions, and Luxury
of other Nations, having bewitched our Traveling Nobility and Gentry, had
Introduced a certain kind of Necessity among us, of using and consuming many
more and greater quantities of Foreign Commodities than were so much as ever
known almost to the honest Simplicity of our plain and wise Forefathers, and
more truly than we had superfluous Money to pay for; especially at such
exorbitant Rates as are imposed upon us at the third, fourth, fifth, and
(possibly) sixth hand, by our own Pedlars, and the exacting Broakers of all
other Countries about us. This we see a growing Evil, and such as we could not
justly answer for, to our Constituents, who were equally concerned, if we had
not taken it into our most serious Consideration, and with all expedition
applied the most effectual Remedy we could think of; which, after all our
Consultations, and the best Advice we could have, terminated in this Act; as
hoping thereby, that at some time or other we may, by degrees, come to have at
first Hand, and upon an equal Lay, such Foreign Commodities as are now palm'd
upon us.

By all which, you may plainly see, we had no sinister Design; we meant no harm
to any other Kingdom, State, or Company: Evil to them that Evil think: We had
no thoughts of drowning our Neighbors Garden, but of watering our own; and I
have no reason to doubt, but that the Simplicity and Honesty of our intention
therein, will upon all occasions meet with a suitable Return.

And as to what further Advantages England may probably reap from this Act; I
think, with submission, that of all sorts of Men, the English East-Indian
Company has least reason to murmur at it; and I am glad to hear the Wisest of
them do not, nor indeed, any of them (I believe) at their Heart. For,
whatsoever Concessions, Exemptions, or Establishment, the Wisdom of the ensuing
Parliament may think fit to grant to that Company, they have reason enough,
from the consideration of their own Mismanagement, which (I humbly presume)
occasioned the late Treatment some of them had at Westminster, to ground the
best part of their Hopes for better Treatment there at this time, upon the
Emulation which Our Act has seemingly entitled them to raise in the Hearts of
their Friends in Parliament, whom I heartily wish to be many: Salvo Jure
cujuslibet. For I am sure, the World is spacious enough to contain both Them,
and the Scotch Company, for more Efforts than either one or other, or both of
them, are able to put in execution. They may in time, be serviceable each to
the other, Manus Manum fricat; and as I hope, the English Company may have
reason, before the Determination of the ensuing Session, to Thank the King and
Parliament. They will at the same time be pleased to remember, that they owe us
a Day in Harvest; that is some seasonable piece of Friendship.

Now, if the ensuing Parliament do (as I believe they will) take the East India
Company into their Care, whether out of a particular Regard to the said
Company, or with respect to the Interest of the whole Nation, or out of
Emulation, from a mixed Consideration of both; I shall have infinite
Satisfaction, to find that we are so far useful to our Neighbors, as to let
them see that to be their Interest now, which for some Years past they at least
seemed to have overlooked, till we put them in mind of it. And my Hopes are,
That if Emulation will once enter within the Doors of that Noble Assembly, they
will raise their Thoughts upon the very Wings of Emulation, and take the right
Sow by the Lugg; that is, cast their Eyes about them, and point at Objects
worthy of such Noble Efforts as They only are able to put in Practice, by
curbing the Enemies of Britain, and putting some stop to the Career and
overgrown Greatness of its Rivals in Trade: of whose Affection or Friendship
England can be no longer secure, than they are sure of Gaining by England:
Whereas, We poor Mortals must at all times look upon our selves as in the State
of Matrimony, For better for worse: So if we are not allowed some reasonable
measure of Due Benevolence, that Essential Part of Conjugal Duty, the World
will certainly look upon Us as the more excusable, if at some time or other we
should venture to peep abroad.

Object. But still these Grumblers (you say) do urge that this New Company will
Steal vast Quantities of Goods both by Sea and Land into England, and
over-stock the Markets there with Indian Goods, to be Sold at Under-rates, to
the apparent loss of the English East India and Affrican Companies.

This is truly a very wide supposition; yet supposing it all to be true, (as I
believe it cannot) pray wherein is England hurt by it? For over all England
there must be a vast many more Buyers than Sellers of any one particular
Commodity, and as Of two Evils the least is to be chosen; so, Of two
interferring Interests, the most public and universal good of these two is
always preferrable to the other; then beyond dispute, the Buyers of such
particular Commodity (whom I take to be the Body of the Nation) will find it
their Interest at all times, to beat down the Market-price, especially of
Foreign Goods; otherwise our Forefathers of both Nations, were very much
overseen to make so many Laws, which stand yet Unrepealed, against the
Forestalling of Markets, and the Engrossing of Commodities into few hands. So
that if all Restrictions, Limitations, and Prohibitions upon Trade between both
Nations were wholly abrogated, the great and natural ends of Trade, would (in
my humble opinion) be more universally and much better answered.

Now, upon summing up the Evidence on both sides, I find we must reckon upon
many Enemies beyond Sea: But I hope I may modestly conclude, That after a true
Scrutiny is made, this Act will meet with no Enemies within the Isle of
Britain, but who may be comprehended in one or other of two sorts, and these
two (some say) very near related: The first are, such who may seemingly grumble
at this Act, for no other reason, but to make a Scaling-ladder of it, to a Wall
which (without it) they were past all hopes of ever getting over. The others
are, a certain set of Men, who (like Watermen) row one way, and look another.
From both which, I hope, the Legislative Power and Government of both Nations
will protect this Orphan.

To conclude then: As Almighty God, in his All-wise Providence, often reveals
and brings to pass his Great and Excellent Purposes, by ordinary and unexpected
Means; who knows, but that the harmonious Unity which (I hope) will appear in
the Equal, Just, and Impartial Management and Administration of this New
Scotch-English, or English-Scotch Indian Company, may, in good time, be a happy
Motive and Inducement to (at least) all the Wise Men of either Nation, to lay
aside misplaced Passion, the prejudices of Infancy and Education; Reason justly
for their Own and Public Interests sake; obliterate and bury in oblivion the
distinguishing Names of Scotch and English; and then voluntarily list
themselves under the United Banner of Undivided Britain; to be one in Interest,
and Inclination, in Offense and Defense. From the Consequences of which happy
Day, we may date the Era of BRITAIN's being truly GREAT, And pray, what should
hinder it? Nature seems to have intended Us for One People, as having
concentered us within the same Liquid Walls; we are the Subjects of One King;
we speak the same Language, differing only in Dialect, as most Counties do; we
we profess the same Religion, differing only in some Forms, which may or may
not be; our Laws point at the same End, to distribute Justice, and defend
Liberty and Property: All which may be soon reconciled, if the Wisdoms of both
Nations should once heartily set about it.

No man alive can have greater Veneration for the Government and People of
England, or be more tender of giving them any the least umbrage of Offense,
than my self: But if any particular person will, from the Light within him,
apply to his own Breast any Expression herein that may seem harsh, that is his
fault, and not mine: In which case, I Would advise him, like a Friend, to lie still
and be quiet; expiate for any former Escapes in his Life, by a better
Regulation of his Actions in time to come; submit to all Laws and Ordiances of
such as are put in Authority over us, and let the Wisdom of the Nation rule the
Nation.

If herein I have not answered your Expectation, yet you have an instance of my
hearty and sincere good Wishes to the Interest of Britain, and of my readiness
to comply with your Desire, whenever you are pleased to Command,

SIR, Your Humble Servant, PHILONAX VERAX.
EDINBURGH, Novem. 14, 1695.
An Abstract of the Privileges contained in An Act (mentioned page 7.) for the
Fishings, etc.
SAlt, Cordage, Hemp, Cork, Pitch, Tar, Clapboard, Knapple, Skewhoops and Nets,
free of all Custom, or other imposition whatsoever. All Herring and White Fish
taken and prepared therewith, free of any manner of Taxation or Burden in the
Exportation of the same.

All Strangers concerned therein Naturalized of course, and also free of all
Taxation-upon their other Effects, for the space of seven Years next after such
their Naturalization.

All Beer, Ale, Strong waters and other Provisions for Out-reiking of any
Vessel for the said Fishings, free of all manner of Impositions whatsoever.

All Lords, and Proprietors of Land, in all places throughout the Kingdom,
where such Fishing is carried on, to protect, maintain, and defend the same,
and all Masters if Ships, Fishers, and others whatsoever thereunto belonging,
from all harm and trouble; otherwise, to refound and satisfy respectively all
Loss and Damage sustained upon their Land.

All Ships, Boats, and other Vessels, in the exercise of the said Trade of
Fishing, and their employment therein, no ways Arrestible by any Creditor: The
Fishers, Masters and Servants in the said Vessels, during the whole time and
season of such Fishing, and their employment therein, free from all Actions of
Debt, and no ways convcenable before any Judge or Judicature whatsoever, for
any Cause or Causes Civil, which might be intended against them: and generally
all the said Persons, Masters and Servants, free of all Captions, Arrestments,
or other Attachments on their Persons, or against their Materials and
Instruments of Fishing, they being actually serving therein allanerly.

The Stock and Profits thereof free of all Stents and Taxations.

Printed at London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh, by the Heirs and Successors of
Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty, 1696.


