THE AMORS OF CHARLES DUKE of MANTUA AND MARGARET COUNTESS of ROVERA. A NOVEL.

Translated out of Itallian.

Printed for Henry Herringman, and Sold by Jos. Knight and Francis Saunders, at
the Blew-Anchor, in the Lower walk of the New-Exchange. 1685.

The LOVES of CHARLES DUKE of MANTVA; And of MARGARET Countess of ROVERA: A
Translation out of Italian.
THe Princess Mary remaining a Widow by the Death of the Prince her Husband,
employed all her Art and Care in Governing the State, which we may yet call
Hers; and used much Diligence in Choosing fit Ministers to assist Her in that
Affair, during the Minority of her Son Charles, who was too young to meddle
with Affairs of that Nature: I need not here undertake the description of that
extreme tender affection which all the World observed in this Princess toward
the young Duke; but will recommend it to those fond Women, who are Mothers of
an only Son, and sole Heir to a great and Illustrious Family: The Caresses of
this indulgent Mother were more powerful upon him, then all the Political,
Scholastical, and Military instructions which he received every day from the
different Masters of his Exercises. All the Ladies of the Court, to comply with
the desires of the Duchess (whose greatest pleasure was, to see her Son won by
those extraordinary Caresses,) and to delight themselves in the great
satisfaction they every day took in discovering new graces in that little
Prince, made it their whole study to please him, by carressing and embracing
him even in their Arms; although he was already in an Age wherein Nature
usually excites those motions which Love often produces. One day one of the
Principal Senators of Mantua observing the Ladies that waited on the Duchess,
and her Maids of Honor, were thus employed about this little Prince, could not
refrain from saying aloud, That the State would have but an Effeminate Prince;
in which, he proved no false Prophet.

Amongst all the young Ladies that attended the Duchess, there was one born in
the City of Casale, and was, by reason of her beauty, and good Meene, justly
called, The Ornament of the Court, and delight of the Courtiers: The little
Duke himself expressed a great inclination for her, and one may say much above
what his tender years seemed to permit: but perhaps her name being Margaret,
this young Prince believed he did nothing below himself, in admiring the Jewel,
which is generally called the purest.

The Princess, who was infinitely pleased with what ever her Son delighted in,
recommended him particularly to this young Lady (not as to a Governess, her Age
being almost equal, but only) to divert him in his hours of Recreation, which
was truly to recommend the Cabbidge to the care of the Kid, and to give the
Sheep into the keeping of the Wolf: For, this young Lady looking upon this
Employment as a good Fortune for her, and seeing very well that nothing was
wanting in this young Prince but the Age to Govern, she so well applied her
self to get his Favor, in making use of all those little Arts that usually
takes young People, that in a little time it was easy to be observed, her
Intentions were not so much to serve him as a Master, but to gain him for a
Friend; and, to change the quality of Servant into that of his Mistress.

The little Duke, who already began to take some other kind of delight in the
Company of Ladies, then what little Children usually do, very easily sacrificed
these First Fires of his Love, which were newly born in him, to this young and
subtle Play-fellow of his; who, on her side, was more and more inflamed with
Love to this young Prince, by the great and particular kindness he expressed to
her.

In the mean time, whilst these two young hearts burn in a reciprocal Fire for
one another, yet their years were so tender, that all their Pleasures consisted
in Talking, and taking each other by the hand, and perhaps in some little
stolen Kisses now and then: All the Diversions which the Duke found in the
Court amongst the Ladies; being, either to pull down the Stool, when they were
set to work, or else to fling their work into the fire, or sometime to steal a
Kiss, or to jumpe into their Arms, and talk of Love, which he as yet but
little understood. But Jealousy, which is so great a Courtier in the Palaces
of all Princes, failed not to make an early visit to the Court of that young
Duke, and was already got amongst all his little Play-fellows, and began
already to play the Tyrant in the Hearts of the young Ladies; and, chiefly
amongst those who believed they merited the Dukes Favor most; if not in
beau^y, yet by reason of their great Birth, or in the Favor of the Duchess
his Mother: yet, neve^theless, the Duke made still his greatest Court to
Mademoiselle Margaret; and, she failed not to give him a return; and the more
they perceived the envy of the other Ladies, who endeavored to Cross them, the
more powerful their Love grew to each other.

It was one day told the Duchess, That her Son was so taken up with his love
to Mademoiselle Margaret, that he would never make the Sign of the Cross with
any Hand but Hers: but the Duchess rallying presently that Man which told her
so, Answered him; Where there is no Malice, Love is sincere; Trusting to the
innocent Childishness of such tender years, and not being able to imagine, that
a young Child of nine years old (as he was) could have a Passion for a Girl of
the same Age. The Mother of Mademoiselle Margaret lived also in this Court, and
waited upon the Duchess, which was the reason of her daughters being there so
young: This old Lady was so crafty, that she wanted nothing but Poetry to be
that Corisco in the Pastor Fido; the more she discovered signs of Love in the
Duke to her Daughter, the more she instructed her in the Art to increase and
manage that growing Passion; and Taught her the Art of making Love, which she
understood in Perfection.

In the mean time the Duchess beginning to think it now high time to withdraw
her Son from the company of Women, amongst whom, he ordinarily, like other
young Princes, passed away the best part of the day; she chose a Governor for
him, prudent, and of approved integrity, and endowed with all necessary
qualifications fit for a man that was to undertake so great an Employment as
the Education of a young Prince. The Person she made choice of, as most fit,
was the Marquess of Arrigony; who received this charge with all the
demonstrations of Affection and joy imaginable; hoping, that his Services would
in time render him very considerable in the Government, by the impressions he
should make upon the spirit of this young Prince; but, it arrived quite
contrary to his expectations.

When the Duchess committed this young Duke unto the Care of the Marquess, she
above all recommended to him three things: First, To Teach him all the
Exercises of a Gallant Man with Mildness, that he might learn them with
delight. Secondly, To be sure not to neglect the Finding out what he was
chiefly inclined to, and most capable of; least he should give him too hard a
Lesson. Thirdly, And above all, not to force him to do any thing against his
will, and was absolutely against his inclination; and to be sure to allow him
his hours of Divertisements with the Ladies of the Court, and principally with
Mademoiselle Margaret, who was chiefly acquainted with his Humor.


To speak the Truth, these orders were not at all suitable to the Prudence nor
Humor of the Marquess; who could not imagine to what end they were given him,
seeing nothing in them extraordinary; besides, he was vexed within himself, to
see, by that, the Princess looked upon him as a Man very unread in what belonged
to the Government of a Prince: He Promised nevertheless to obey her Highness
exactly, and not to be wanting in that fidelity which was so natural to his
Family, and so particular to himself; yet he could not hold from saying, That
he was very ready to serve his Master to his capacity; but, in his opinion, it
would be better to disaccustome a little this young Prince from the company of
Ladies, then to use him so much to their Conversation; since he could receive
no Lessons from them but what were Effeminate, which was a thing very injurious
to Princes: To which the Duchess replied; That the honest and lawful converse
with Women taught great Men to Rule with gentleness; and that she desired
nothing more in her Son, nor from himself. The Marquess having no more to say
after that Declaration, made no Answers but of Protestations of obedience to
her Highness in all things. After that the Duchess sent for the young Duke,
and commanded him to look upon the Marquess as the guide of his Person and
actions; and persuaded him to think it no trouble to follow the Advises of a
Man, who would inspire no Sentiments into him but those of his Glory and
advantage.

The Marquess having paid his Respects and Acknowledgments to the Duchess,
retired himself till the Apartment ordered for him was made ready: In going out
of the Hall he met with Mounsieur Pianezza a Friend of his, and his particular
Confident, to whom he related his new happiness in the Dutchesses Favor;
withal, telling him the particular Orders he received from her concerning the
Education of the young Duke, not forgetting a word of all had past, especially
that passage which concerned of the young Dukes Recreations amongst the Ladies
of the Court: Pianezza judging this Order not very agreeable to the Marquess,
whispered to him very softly; Monsieur, Be you sure to tie the Ass where the
Master bids you, and let the Wolves eat it if they please.

The Marquess answered, smiling; I am too Old to make use of opportunity; and
too Young to serve the Amors of another.

Mademoiselle Margaret, who knew the humor of the Marquess was more inclined
to Rigor, and Duty, then of Compliance, would not have been troubled to have
seen the Education of her young Duke committed to any other then he; though it
is certain she was too young to make this distinction of her self, but that she
was instructed by her Mother. Now it happened one day, that this young Lady
meeting with the Duke and the Marquess together, she said (without doubt, by
the Instructions of her Mother) Sir, I am extreme glad to see the Choice the
Duchess has made of you for the Conduct of our Prince; for certainly, it could
have been committed to no person in the World so fit as your self; whose merit
is so universally esteemed, and it is likely to be most profitable for his
Highness advantage. The Marquess guessing from whence this Complement came, and
that her Mother had taught her what to say, could not refrain from Laughing
a-little; and taking her by the hand, acknowledged her Favor by all the
expressions he could think of: taking very much delight in the discourse of
that young Lady, who, to say truth, besides her other extraordinary beauties,
was very agreeable in her discourse.

Another time, meeting her in the Court of the Palace, she told the Marquess,
almost Laughing; Now the Prince is so much yours, we can be allowed no part in
him: The Marquess also Laughing, and putting his hand upon her Face, answered
her; My pretty little Lady, the Duke is too young to be yours, therefore you
ought not to be angry that he is so much mine: Thereupon the young Duke taking
Mademoiselle Margaret's side, answered presently, I will be theirs that will be
mine; Would you have me be yours? The young Lady only answered with a low
Curt'sy, and a Look, which showed the desires and sentiments of Her heart.

Some few Months after that, the Marquess being Declared Governor, and the
Duke of Parma being to pass through that Country to go to Venice, the
Duchess, although he intended to make that Voyage Incognito, failed not to
send the Marquess, at all adventures to meet him, with her young Son the Duke;
and the Duchess desiring, that he should be received in passing by, with all
the Honors imaginable, though he intended not to be known: The Complemental
dispute between these two Princes at this Ceremonious Enterview, kept them so
long in the hot Sun in the Fields, that the young Duke received no little
trouble by the heat which is so ordinary there in the Month of June: In the
mean time all things having pleased the Duke of Parma very much in this
meeting, and the young Duke returning home, he fell into a little Fever,
accompanied with so great a pain in his head, that it was the trouble of the
whole Court, especially the Duchess, who was most sensibly afflicted; no
Remedies imaginable for his distemper were omitted, yet nevertheless they did
no good, for the Fever and extreme pain in his head rather increased;
although Mademoiselle Margaret, whose grief was equal to her tenderness,
stirred not from his Bedside; laying her hand sometimes upon his head, which
was no small pleasure and ease to the young sick Prince. The Duchess his
Mother, who was almost every day coming and going to his Chamber, to inquire of
his condition, asking him one day, How he did? he answered her boldly; Madam,
ever since Mademoiselle Margaret has touched my head, I have scarce felt any
Pain. It was not very difficult for the Mother to believe her Son, from the
observation she had already made of his Love to that young Lady, and therefore
she said to him, Well, my son, she shall be put to bed to you, if the Marquis
your Governor will approve of it; He will not approve of it, (replied the young
Prince) because he does not know my disease: I do know it said the Marquis,
(who was not very far off) and I know that your sickness has need of a remedy.

During this sickness of three or four days the hearts of this Piramus, and of
this This be inflamed extremely, but in a way very natural and conformable to
their age, which did not yet allow them any other thoughts but what were
innocent; This young Lady, who was not less interessed in the repose of the
Prince than of his health, stirred not from his bedside from morning until
night, with a Fan in her hand to drive away the Flies, which in that Country
ordinarily torments the sick.

He being at last recovered from this fit of sickness, applied himself anew to
his exercises, though with little inclination or profit; The Marquis saw very
well that the love which this young Prince had for this Mademoiselle Margaret
grew up with him, and that his desires of profiting in Learning those things
more fit for his Study (without which a Prince looses his best ornament)
diminisht every day as he grew older, which was a most sensible affliction to
the Marquis, who took all the pains imaginable about him.

One evening after Supper the Duchess walking in her Garden with the Marquis,
she asked him the reason why her son made so slow a Progress in those exercises
he had learnt, as well Military as others, and wondered that at 14 years of age
as he was then, there was nothing at all extraordinary to be observed in him.
The Marquess fancying the astonishment the Duchess had put on was a reproach
to his diligence and affection both, was very much piqu'd, and a little
mortified, nevertheless without discovering his resentments; Me thinks, Madam,
said he, if I may have leave to say so to your Highness, that your Speeches are
very much altered from your declared opinion to me that minute your Highness
was pleased to give me that honorable employment of Governor to the young
Duke your son; For, I remember you commanded me then, to instruct him in all
things with mildness and moderation, and now your Highness wonders why I have
not forced his nature, and his strength. I confess, Madam, I scrupled nothing
more than disobeying your Orders, but to deal ingeniously with your Highness, I
must tell you this truth, that if my affection to him and my cares had not
roused him a little, and almost constrained him to apply. himself to those
exercises the most necessary for him, that he would this day be more ignorant
than he is; although whatever he possesses appears very inconsiderable to your
Highness, the Duke can sit very well, and has a very becoming grace on
horsback, he has often ran at the ring and won the Prize, to the shame and
confusion of the most experienced Cavaliers in that exercise, he is not very
unskilful in his Arms, and for his Dancing, certainly your Highness can better
judge of that than I: it is true he has but little inclination to the French
and Latin Tongues, nevertheless he understands the one, and begins to speak
the other; but if your Highness will permit me to speak my opinion, I must tell
you if that Mademoiselle Margaret were made tutour to the Prince, or were the
only thing he were to study, he would without all question profit much better
then he does. For he spends more time in making love to this Lady, then he
allows to his Lessons: whilst the Duchess and the Marquis were in this
discourse, the young Duke came into the walk, and the Duchess immediately asked
him, if it were true that the Marquis said; to which he suddenly made answer
without examining what it was, that it was a thing impossible for him to answer
a demand upon the sudden of a thing he was ignorant of; the Duchess would have
pressed him further, but that minute she received Letters of great concern from
Venice which she read, and communicated them to the Marquis as she was wont to
do all Papers of public business. In the mean time the young Dukes affection
for Mademoiselle Margaret increased every day, and grew faster then he; he
adored and respected her, and he did not seem to live when he was absent from
her, though but a moment, every one knows there is no Lady in the Court so
Fair, nor so cruel, whom interest and ambition does not soften, to gain the
love of their Prince, nay, the very men of Quality, the most considerable
amongst the Courtiers often shut their eyes and serve their Prince, near those
of their own Relations; certainly there never was a Prince so passionately
desired by the Ladies as this Duke Charles; he was often treated by many great
men, to no other end but to show him their wives, or their Daughters, but to
their great disappointment, because this Prince looked only modestly upon them,
his love to Mademoiselle Margaret made him neglect all others, looking upon
none but her with tenderness and love, and often protested he would not change
her for all the Fairest Ladies in the Universe.

And now this young Duke is arrived to his eighteenth year of age, I will call
him no longer the little Duke. This Duke then went often into the Chamber of
Mademoiselle Margarets mother, where he was always flattered and carress'd,
nay, the mother her self shut him up sometimes with her daughter, and left them
alone upon the bed playing together, carrying the Key away in her Pocket. One
day the Duke going to walk, perhaps with design, in the Palace Garden, he met
the mother and her daughter walking alone in the wood, the Duke no sooner
approached them then he cried, Mademoiselle have a care in coming so often into
this wood you are not ravished. The mother (who was the craftiest woman in the
world) answered him presently, So she is ravished by a Prince, there will be no
great hurt; but the Prince replied as quickly, You had better let her give the
Favor to a Prince, then stay till he force it: It is true, said the mother,
but Favors gained that way are more sweet and secret. The Prince in the mean
time took the young Lady by the hand to walk with him in the wood, whilst the
mother returned to the Palace very well pleased to leave her daughter in such
good company, who stayed three hours together in that place, none knows what
they did: But after they had taken their walk the Prince waited upon
Mademoiselle Margaret to her mothers chamber, to whom he said, Here, Madam,
take your daughter which I restore you in the same condition you left her with
me. I believe what you say, Sir, answered she, because you are a Prince.

From that day Mademoiselle Margaret began to take upon her, and show some kind
of Empire over the Duke, and the Prince found no inclinations in himself to
resist her. The Duchess appeared indifferent, and did not seem displeased at
their Friendship, imagining that the Duke was obliged one way or other to
divert his youth, and she was the more willing to allow him this Friendship
with Mademoiselle Margaret, because she was well acquainted with her
disposition, and believed she would not engage the Duke into any disordered way
of life prejudiciable to his Person or Fortune, and so while all this past, she
shut her eyes, and took no notice at all, and though one day she hid her self
to watch their actions, yet she could discover nothing between them but
testimonies of a Friendship which reason allows of.

But since the Love of these two persons was become the general discourse, the
Duchess consulted many times very seriously with the Marquis Arigone, who very
far from approving this too violent inclination, as many others did, who were
well enough pleased to let the Duke freely pursue his inclinations: He on the
contrary, forgot nothing, to let them see they ought to have prevented him: the
Marquess was pressed on by these reasons;

In Mantua there dwelt a widow that was one of the most considerable women of
that place, who was mother to one of the most fair and agreeable young Ladys of
all that State. This woman who was not very rich in worldly goods, suiting her
self to her fortune, lived only in the quality of a Gentlewoman, and not like
a great Lady; The Marquis, who had a passionate kindness for her, let no
occasion pass of diverting his melancholy hours at her house, and as she was
not very cruel to him, she granted him willingly those Favors that Love
demands, without expecting interest, imagining that the Marquess, who was
naturally very grateful, would not fail, for the Mothers sake, who granted him
all things, to serve the Daughter to his Highness the Duke; and this
opportunity pleased the Marquess very well, of showing himself grateful to the
kind Widow, in procuring the Love of the Duke for her Daughter, and also of
testifying his Affection to his Prince, in bringing to him one of the most
Accomplished young Women amongst his Subjects; but, since he feared it a thing
impossible to do, so long as this passion of the Dukes to the Lady Margaret
continued; he tried all ways to stifle it, but unprofitably; because the Duke
was so insensible for all other Women, as well Maids as Wives, that neither the
handsome nor ugly worked any effect upon him; for he used them both so
indifferently, they had no reason to be jealous of one another: The Lady
Margaret was the only Favorite, and the most loved; and what beauty soever
happened to be in the Dukes presence, he had eyes for none but she.

One day the Marquess imagining that it was impossible for the Duke to see that
fine young Lady of his Acquaintance, and not fall in love with her, carried him
to her Mothers house, who had invited him to that purpose; and had spared for
no Cost, nor Ornament, to set off the Beauty of her Daughter, but all was to no
purpose: and though the Marquess and the Mother left this young Lady and the
Duke alone two hours together in a Chamber, the Duke sat by her, as if she
had not been there, without speaking one obliging word to her: The
insensibility of this Duke was as a Dagger to the heart of this young Lady;
and, in truth, What is more vexatious to a Woman, then to see, that all the
arts she has used to gain a heart signify so little in the end. The Marquess
quickly perceived, that the Duke was not very well pleased in the place where
he had brought him; therefore in returning home to the Palace, he begun to
praise her extremely; the Duke, although he seemed to take no notice, and yet
nevertheless forced by the Marquess to speak of that Ladies Beauty he came
from, said to the Marquess, My Lord, This Lady is fair enough for you, who
sees her every day, but not for me, who never saw her before, and looks not
upon her so often as you do: The Marquess replied, Your Highness must then see
her often, that you may think her fairer than now you do: The Duke answered
smiling, If I should see her once more, certainly I should think her more ugly
then I do now. The poor Marquess was mad at this, and especially when the Duke,
whilst they were talking, turned about and showed him the Lady Margaret, who
they met in the Street; See there, my Lord Marquess, said he, there is the
fairest amongst all that are fair.

Whilst these things past, the Duchess growing angry, to see her Son so far
gone in Love with the Lady Margaret, carried by some unknown Politic reasons,
and perhaps at the earnest Solicitations of the Marquess, sent the Mother and
the Daughter away to Casal, yet with all the Civility imaginable, and with a
particular Promise to Marry her very suddenly, as indeed it happened soon
after: The Duke expressed no great signs publicly of resentment for her going
away, hiding his trouble, without all doubt, very prudently, to take all
suspicion from the Court: Till then, it was believed by most, that nothing but
virtue had passed between this Lady and the Duke; but others, that looked nearer
into the business, and could see farther into matters of Love, believed the
contrary; not being able to imagine, how Virtue could subsist with so great a
Liberty: and that a young Girl, who desired nothing more then the heart of a
Prince, could refuse him any thing. The Duke certainly was not without desires,
nor the young Lady without a good will; the youth of them both, and the great
liberty allowed them, gave strange causes of suspicion: In fine, believe who
will, that all their time was spent in saying their Chapelets, and their
Pater-nosters, for my part I never will.

Some time before the parture (...) the Lady Margaret, the Duke had ^y long and
private Conferences with (...) where there wanted no Tears on b^^h sides at
that cruel separation, as a W^^ting-Woman observed; he could ^^t forbear
promising to Write to her, till he had the opportunity of going to visit her at
Casal, which he gave her his Word should be very suddenly: These Protestations
of the Dukes raised her Heart a little, which was so sunk with the Fears and
Troubles of a cruel Absence she was to suffer, and gave her courage to ask his
Highness a word or two under his Hand, every month at least; which Favor she
demanded of him in these Words; If your Highness will please to Write to me
once every month, it will give me every day a Paradise: The Duke embracing
her, said, with all the tenderness of a passionate heart, go, and believe, that
nothing in the World shall ever be capable to carry me from loving you.

She was scarce arrived at Casal, but the Duke writ a Letter to her, as well
for his own satisfaction, as for the contentment of her he Loved, it was the

MARGARET,
My Heart;
THis is the first Letter which I write to you, with one of those Pens that are
guided by Love; I address to you, whom I alone adore, as the only and first
object of my Love: To tell you how sensible I am of your absence, you must ask
this Heart, which thinks more of you, then of it self; I do not swear it to
you; the Words of Princes needs no Oaths to Authorize them: however, I shall
give you such proofs, that you your self will not desire greater. Let me know
the success of your Voyage, and the state of your Health since you went from
hence, and whether you Love him that is wholly your

CHARLES.


This Letter was given in charge to a Post that was sent from Court to the
Governor of Casal, with express Order to give it to no other hands but she to
whom it was directed: The Joy of this young Lady was so extraordinary in
receiving it, that she read it three or four times over in the presence of the
Man that brought it; and every time with a Face overjoyed, to that extremity
she seemed to him, she would have eaten it, that so her heart might have been
the Cabinet to preserve it. The Mother was not at home when her Daughter was
thus entertaining the Post, and examining him with great concern of the Dukes
health, and chiefly of his Employments; and whether he did not particularly
Visit some Lady or other with great Familiarity: but, in these Questions to
him, she seemed not to understand what she did, for a Man of that condition,
that sees the Court but at a distance, is not to be asked such Questions: But,
it is true, she was at that time to be pardoned, since the occasion of that
Letter was enough to put her into extraordinary transports for him she Loved.
The Mother being returned, gave order for something for the Post to eat,
whilst in the mean time she read over and over again with her Daughter the
Dukes Letter, and consulted together for the Answer, which they returned by the
same Messenger, in these words;

Great PRINCE;
To tell your Highness how much comfort your Letter gave me, is impossible for
me to express; I could not defend my self from vanity, in reading so many
proofs of Affection from your Highnesses Goodness: if I were not well
acquainted with the nature of it, which is indulgent to all those who like me,
Courts with a most humble Respect all opportunities of obeying your Highnesses
Commands. It will not be hard for you to find amongst your Subjects a Merit
above mine; but, I Question very much if your Highness can find any more
affectionate to your Service then I am: I have already Sworn to you all the
Fidelity and Service can be expected from a Person of my Sex. It belongs to
your Highness to Command, and me to Obey; yet my Fears tell me, that you do
not so often think of Commanding me, as I do of Blindly Obeying you. As for the
Account you are Graciously pleased to desire of my Journey hither, I assure
your Highness, it had been very pleasant and happy for me, if every step I made
to Casal had not carried me from what I left behind at Mantua, so dear to ^e:
Your Highness asks me if I love you; How can you believe it possible to be so
ungrateful, not to love a Prince that loves me. I will say nothing more, but
that I am and will be, to your Highness, Great Prince,

A most Humble, and Obedient Servant, Margaret.


The Dukes of Mantua had a Custom, of going three or four times every year to
Casal, to Visit that place, so considerable, for its Situation, and because it
is the Capital City of Montferrat: The Duke resolved for the future to make
that place his ordinary residence; carried more by his Love to the Lady
Margaret, then for Interest of State: And none can express with what repugnance
he quitted that Town to go to Mantua, when at any time the necessity of his
Affairs called him thither; yet he indevour'd to conceal the true reason of
his stay so much in that place, by pretending the Air was so much better;
saying often, That the Air of Mantua was an Air for Monks to dwell in, but
that of Casal was an Air for the Seat of a Prince: And, in truth, he was very
much in the right, when he spoke so of those two places, so contrary to each
other; for the Air of Casal was extraordinary good, and that of Mantua had
nothing at all commendable in it: though, it is true, the Air where Princes
reside purifies admirably. All Affairs the Duke took in hand at Mantua
prosper'd very ill; but, on the contrary, it seemed that Casal was Fortunate to
all his Enterprises: There was scarce a day but the Duke complained of some
Indisposition or other whilst he was at Mantua; his Head, his Stomach, and I
know not how many more Infirmities tormented him, or at least he pretended it:
but, when he was at Casal, he never made the least complaint of any thing,
whether he had cause or not; but, if it happened, that some Fits of an Ague,
Fever, or any distemper seized upon him at Casal, he would lay the fault upon
his having staid too long at Mantua.

The Dukes of Mantua have a Palace near to Casal, called the Margaret, whether
they have always been accustomed to divert themselves some time of the Summer;
and there was a Physician in Mantua, who, being pretty well acquainted with the
temper of the Duke, and the inclination he had for the Lady Margaret,
understood very well, that all these Distempers the Duke so often complained of
at Mantua, had no other cause but an Amorous Fever; and therefore he failed
not to advise the Duke to visit often that wholesome Air of Casal: And, whilst
the other Physicians were searching out the cause of the Dukes disease, and
busying their heads to find a remedy, this wise happy brother of theirs advised
the Air of Margaret as the only place of Cure for his Highness, and was well
rewarded for his pains by the Duke, whose delight at Casal you may easily
imagine was great, and his health perfect. The satisfaction of going to Casal,
and leaving Mantua, was plainly discovered in the different Journeys he made,
in going and returning between those two places; by the have he made to the
one, and the slow pace he went toward the other: to Mantua he went with a
Tortoyses pace, and to Casal he flew as fast as an Eagle: Whenever his
Important Affairs obliged him to go from Casal to Mantua, he Traveled like a
Prince; but, when he was to leave Mantua, and go toward Casal, he went in
Post. The Pastimes of the Duke were not very great, nor divertizing to the
Court, for his greatest pleasure was in visiting the Lady Margaret, in whose
Company his most delightful hours were spent; and it was no great difficulty
for a young Prince to entertain himself very pleasantly with a young handsome
Woman, instructed by an old cunning Mother; who, in her youth, had at one time
obliged more then four several French Gentlemen, whilst they staid at Casal.
The house of this Lady was not far from the Castle, in one of the fairest
Streets of the Town, in which place the Tennis Court was kept; the Duke, who
hated Tennis when he was at Mantua, took great delight in it at Casal; perhaps
to show his Mistress his address; but, he spoiled his own design: For, he not
being able to take his Eyes from the Window where she was, he hardly stroke one
Ball of three. It was no small diversion to the spectators, to see those two
Lovers speak with their Eyes and Hands, and use a thousand other pleasant
Gestures, in that place, where there was constantly more persons assembled to
observe them, then to see the good play of those that were at Tennis: In the
mean time jealousy seized furiously upon all the Ladies in that place; but,
amongst them all, it chiefly laid hold of a young Woman whose name was Nata,
Grandchild to the President; she almost dyed with envy at the Dukes Courtship
to the Lady Margaret, believing her self much handsomer than her Cousin the
Lady Margaret; and had great desires (at least) to share with her in the Dukes
Affection: and her Grief increased the more from the vexation she had, to see,
that all her Beauty and Ornaments had not power enough to draw one kind look
from his Highness, for whom she had dressed her self to no purpose. The Duke
never went to Play, but by his dearly Beloved Margarets command, his Linen was
always brought to her House; he scarce touched the Ball three times, but away
he must go to shift himself in her Chamber, leaving the rest of the Players at
Tennis, sometimes three hours, to wait till he came down to make an end, which
he sometimes commanded them to do. A French Gentleman happening to be in the
Tennis Court one day, was by chance on the Dukes side, who was gone up, as his
Custom was, to the Lady Margaret; this Frenchman, impatient (as those of his
Nation commonly are) at the Dukes giving so long a time to rub himself, fell
into a passion, and said publicly to one of his Camerades; If the Duke of
Mantua must (as is reported) have the Command of the Imperial Army for the King
of Spain, Lombardy will quickly be ours; for he takes up more time in changing
his Shirt, then the French do in taking a Town.

There was no body but plainly saw this so often changing of Linen was rather
a pretense of the Dukes, than necessity; nothing moving him to run up to her
Chamber, but some Amorous fancy, which the fight of her at the Window awakened
in him; and there was great reason to believe it, for she never stirred out of
the Balcony as long as the Prince was in the Tennis Court; but, immediately
vanished when he went out to go to her Chamber; and, as soon as he was got into
the Street, to return to his Play, she appeared in the Balcony again: which,
discovered easily, that he sought no pleasure, but that, of being near his
Goddess; and she gloried in nothing more, then to let the People see, she had
been giving him his Shirt.

In the mean time the Mother of this young Lady, and also the Duke, begun
seriously to think, of finding out a Match for this beloved Margaret, who
wanted no pretenders, her power being so great with the Duke; who, in this
design, to Marry her, intended not so to rid himself of her, whom he loved
passionately: Nor did the old Mother resolve so to lose her; but, they took
this way, to disguise those shameful effects, which usually follow these kind
of dishonest Passions, as it ordinarily happens in Italy, where the Husband
often serves for a Cover: For, an unmarryed Woman, though she is Courted by a
Prince, is looked upon in that Country as infamous, if she entertain him; But on
the contrary, let a Married Woman be never so impudent, she is nevertheless
very well received amongst all Ladies of the greatest quallity.

The Family of this Lady Margaret had been so blasted by the abominable
carriage of her Mother with the Frenchmen, and the Spaniards; her eldest Sister
particularly, whose name was the Countess Louize, lately a Widow, had been
notorious, and had lived the life of a common Curtizan, taking Money of any
body; living that kind of life, which is so much practiced amongst those Women,
so well known by Travellors; she fell in love with a Frenchman, who came off
better cheap, and almost for a simple Grand Mercy; he being, as one may say,
more Courted by that young Widow, then he cared for, which made her fall into
strange disorders, when he was forced to return into France with the French
Army, in which he was an Officer, and left that poor disconsolate Widow to
re-take that habit of Mourning she had so lately quitted; and, it is believed,
she had remained unconsolable, if the Frenchmans place had not been kindly
taken up by a young Earl in Casal; but, what was most remarkable, was this
Countesses flattering her self with the hopes of Marrying this young Earl, by
the Credit her Sister had with the Duke, and his Authority; she gave him all
the Liberties imaginable, and they lived together like Man and Wife, with so
public a Scandal, that the Bishop intended to Excommunicate them, but was soon
prevented from that trouble; for, the young Earl at last cloyed with the
Embraces of that Lady, and weary of her Addresses, began to leave her off by
little and little; which, the Countess perceiving, addressed her self to her
Sister, desiring her to persuade the Duke, to Command the Earl to Marry her;
which, when the Duke went about to do, the young Earl briskly answered; Sir,
The Earls of Casal do not use to Marry Whores: Thus this poor abused Countess
sought her satisfaction in her patience, and tried no more that vain attempt,
of Marrying the Earl by the Dukes Authority and Justice, as her Sister
encouraged her to hope; for the Earl Swore, he would rather a thousand times
die a Man of Spirit, then live a base Cuckold: So the Countess seeing Force
would do her no good, employed Mildness and Caresses to gain him; but the Earl
being well acquainted with the Crafts of Women, used his opportunities, took
some times his pleasure, and derided Matrimony: Nevertheless the Lady Margaret
had pretenders good store, who were drawn more by their Ambition, because of
the Empire she had over the Duke, then by any other Motive; whilst she minded
nothing more then the enjoying her pleasures at full liberty, which she could
only do by getting a Husband quickly; but a Husband of her own choosing, fit for
the purpose; that is to say, a good honest Man, and one as the Italian says,
Un gran cog, etc. -- The Mother and Daughter both jumped in this opinion; the
Mother fearing, that if her Daughter should chance to fall into the hands of
some Fantastic Husband, she might lose all her authority over her; and they
both together feared, that his ill humor might be the occasion of ruining her
Favor with the Duke, and so they should be quite undone, and lose all their
hopes. The Duke also was mindful of his own interest in that Affair, and
consented not to the Marriage of his Mistress but upon those terms; choosing
rather to possess her in that condition she was already, then lose her in
another. The Duchess, on her side, considering the Interest of State, the
conservation of the House of Gonzague, and for the general satisfaction of her
Subjects, looking upon the Duke as the only prop of her Family, desired, and
sought nothing more then to see this Lady Margaret Married away; fearing, least
the Duke might, losing himself in this extreme ridiculous Love for her, think
of Marrying her himself: At that time there came to Casal the Earl of Rovera, a
man made for their purpose, and made as such a man should be; he he was born at
Savona, and descended from that noble Family of Rovera, which has given to the
Church those two famous Popes Sixtus the fourth, and Julius the second. The
humor of this Lord was very peaceable and retired, not caring to see any body
but those of his old acquaintance. In fine, he was a true Ball for these Ladies
to toss, and such a one as the Duke, the mother and daughter all desired; and
to speak him in one word, he was of a humor to let them do what they pleased,
and go were they had a mind to; and though he was not a man of great Learning,
yet he was for all that, a man of very good sense, and his wit was capable of
serving him better than his Language.

The design of this Earl had been to pass his Life in a single condition, if
the solicitations of the Duke and the Lady Margaret (who was resolved not to
let slip this occasion) had not altered his resolutions, and from the first day
he made her a visit, put him into a condition of not being able to live one day
without seeing her: Whilst they were treating of this marriage, the Lady
Margaret, to try whether the Earl were of a jealous humor, pretended one day
(as he sat musing by himself in her Chamber) that the Duke had sent for her to
play at Cards with him, so that she should be obliged to stay there with her
mother till the next day; and to persuade the Earl absolutely to believe the
Duke loved her passionately, She told him, That the Duke loving her as he did,
she could do no less than to satisfy him in all things that depended upon her:
but the Earl not understanding her, or at least, pretending not to know her
meaning, only answered, She would do very well to serve his Highness, and so
went away.

One of the nearest kindred to the Earl, hearing of this intended marriage,
went to him with design to speak freely to him concerning it as a Friend, and
told him, he ought to think more than once upon what he was going to do, and
that he should seriously consider, (before he proceeded any further) upon the
love between the Duke and the Lady Margaret; but the Earl answered, Matrimony
will break that Friendship. That same Friend of his endeavored to prove the
contrary to him by a hundred reasons, but could get no other answer from him
(after he had thankt him kindly for his advice) but this, The horns that are
grafted by a Prince do not sit heavy upon the head. Two days after another of
his Friends told him openly, that for his part he would not marry that young
Lady for any thing in the world, because that as long as the Duke lived, he
could not refrain from being jealous, and should assuredly die a Cuckold. This
second advice amazed the Earl a little, yet he said only that he believed
nothing of all these reports. In the mean time this renewed advice wrought such
an effect, that he went not to see his Mistress in two days, but love being
stronger, he could not refrain from visiting her again, so great was his desire
to marry her and make her his dear half.

The Duke seemed to take no notice of all these Passages, (though they made a
noise great enough,) but waited till the Earl spoke to himself about it, which
he at last did, at the solicitation of the mother, who let him know that her
house had been always protected by his Highness, and her daughter in
particular, to whom the Duke had always expressed much friendship, and she
could do nothing without his Highness consent and approbation. The Earl
answered her presently, That all Gentlemen were as much obliged to this duty,
and that they were not wont to marry without they were certain of the Princes
assent, and therefore it was his duty to do the same thing; after this reply he
parted from her to go to the Duke, that old Lady having promised him to do the
like in behalf of her daughter. The Earl had scarce began his complement to the
Duke concerning his marriage with the Lady Margaret, when the Duke interrupted
him to speak to him advantageously of her Family and her Person, assuring the
Earl of his affection and protection in all things; and to let him see how much
he approved of this marriage, he told him with a great demonstration of love,
that he was certain that one or both could not but be happy, since it was
impossible for him to find a more excellent woman nor more worthy of such a
husband, nor for her to find a husband more worthy of such a wife. The Earl
after he had paid his respects and deserved thanks to the Duke, said to him, I
marry the Lady Margaret, because she is protected by your Highness. To which
the Duke presently replied, laughing, We will love the Lady Margaret, and we
will love her until death, having been brought up together from the beginnings
of our life. The Duke after he had discoursed a long time with the Earl
concerning the particularities of this wedding, took him by the hand, and said
to him, Go, my Lord, you will gather a Flower, worthy of such a Rovera. My Tree
(said the Earl) wants a Flower which comes from the hands of your Highness.
This marriage then concluded to the satisfaction of the interested parties,
they received all the Complements, and made their Balls and Feasts a la mode de
France, which had been masters of Casal, more then fifteen years, and had so
well established the French Liberty in that Town to the delight of the
inhabitants, that they resolved to keep it for ever; and it is certain, that if
they were to change their master, they would accept of no other but the most
Christian King; so well do they remain satisfied with the French Nation, which
is a thing extraordinary in Italy, where they are commonly so much hated,
though the Italians can give no reason for their aversion to those People: For
it is most certain, that in those Places of Italy where any of the French
inhabit, they bring in one month more profit to that place, than the Spaniards
afford them in ten year. The Duke, although invited to this wedding, could not
resolve upon any consideration, to see his Lady Margaret given away, to whom he
writ this Letter.

My Heart,
IF I thought that thy Marriage would deprive me of those Privileges I have
hitherto enjoyed with thee, for certain I should rejoice very little at it, but
I do rejoice, because I assure my self thou marriest with a resolution to give
thy Husband but the leavings of our love: heretofore we have been forced to do
all things secretly to hide them from all the world; but from this day we shall
find it more easy to conceal our actions from only one man; give him the
appearances, but do thou be sure to keep thy heart for me, and remember that I
am wholly thine,

Charles.


The Duke let slip no occasion of being present at all the Balls that were
presented to the Bride in several places; and one day he was in a dress that
disguized him so much, that he had never been discovered but by his great
Familiarity with the Bride. The Duke having taken notice of a Diamond upon the
Bridegrooms finger in the fashion of a Heart, which himself had given his Lady
Margaret, when she was a maid, and was esteemed worth a thousand Crowns, was so
extremely angry to see the Earl wear it, that he resolved to go away from Casal
without speaking to her, but she having smoakt him, used all her endeavor to
appease him, and bring him back again, protesting he was in a mistake, to
believe she had given that Ring to her Husband, which she esteemed so much for
his Highness sake, as the pledge of his affection, that it was more dear to her
than any thing in the world. The Duke softened by her tears, dried them up, not
with a handkercher, but with his kisses, and after that staid in her Chamber
with her for some hours that day.

The wedding was kept with so great pomp and magnificence, that there wanted
nothing but the public presence of the Duke, who though he refused to appear
there in person, yet to show how much he honored them, he sent the Bride a
Medal of gold, in which was a Daizy, (which signifies Margaret) set round with
twelve Diamonds, and two Chains of great value, which he accompanied with this
note,

I advise thee to be cautious in the captivating thy self, and consider, if
thou art a prisoner to two persons, it will not be easy to cheat both thy
keepers. The love of the Duke to the Countess seemed after this wedding to grow
by little and little something cool, but it was but a feigned coldness: For he
often found his opportunities of entertaining her in private during his stay at
Casal. The Earl used all the art he was capable of to surprise his wife in her
private conferences with the Duke, but in vain; so that at last he began to
believe she had been slandered, and so rested in peace, giving her all kind of
Liberty; who had wit enough to make the right use of it, and contented the
Husband in public, and the Gallant in private; but since now the Time and
Necessity of the State seemed to demand a Successor to the Duke, so to
conserve that rich Patrimony still in the same House where it had long
continued, and there being no other branch left of the house of Gonzague but
himself; The whole State begun now to think in good earnest of marrying him to
some Princess worthy of so great a Prince, many matches were proposed, but
heaven, that ordinarily takes care of making marriages, ordained the
Archduchess Isabella Clare, a Princess worthy of a Crown, to be this Dukes
wife, and should by her Life and Patience add a new luster to the house of
Gonzague; some other woman perhaps would have brought the same disorder into
that house (and it may be a worse) than that which the house of Lorraine
experimented in the love which the Duke Charles of Lorraine expressed for the
Countess of Cantecroy, to the prejudice of that affection which he owed to his
wife Nicola. The Duchess, who notwithstanding all the indifferency which she
saw in her husband toward her, she expressed not the least jealousy of the
Countess, and although she saw in a little time her husband absolutely
estranged from her, and engaged altogether in the love of that woman, yet she
looked no less kindly upon the Duke her husband, even whilst the Countess
endeavored to keep him from her by all the ways possible, having writ this
Letter to him, notwithstanding she knew his Marriage with the Duchess was
concluded.

Great Prince,
I Am not ignorant that the marriage of your Highness with the Archduchess
Isabella Clare, will bring an increase to your Family, a glory to your State,
and a comfort to your servants, but as fast as ^he joy of possessing so great a
Prince does grow in the heart of the Archduchess, that of my heart will
diminish in the loss I am ^o suffer, of a heart that was always the ^bject of
my love, and all my desires: I hope your Highness will pardon me for writing to
you in this manner, but in the ^ondition I am in of loosing what I adore, I can
be no longer any thing else but an extravagant without conduct or ^eason; but
if your Highness has been ^leased to honor me hitherto by loving me as a
Friend; I desire you will at least ^ontinue your grace and favor to me ^n
loving, for the time to come, as your most humble servant

Margaret.


The Duke, who loved the Countess above his own reputation, after he ha^ read
her Letter two or three time over, sighing, in the presence of a brother of
hers who brought it to him tore it, after he had answered it, wit^ much
tenderness in these words,

Countess,
ALl Princes are accustomed to marry themselves more by reason (...) State then
Love; so they love the^ wives more by reason of State than (...) affection. If
the interest of my house d^ not oblige me to marry, nothing shou^ hinder me
from being always thin^ whose I shall be, in despite of all tho^ that would
oppose it; and since the have deceived thy husband to content m^ why cannot I
deceive my wife for thy satisfaction? trouble thy self for nothing and love thy

Charles


Although the furious wars in the year 1629. had very much exhausted ^he
treasure of that State, yet the Duchess in this time of the marrying ^f her son
spared for no cost, to render ^t very splendid and magnificent; all ^he Ladies
of Honor that had lived in that Court were invited to make the ^ntry of the
new Princess into Mantua more glorious. There was none ex^epted in that
invitation but the Countess, who the Duchess would not ^nvite to that Ceremony,
for some rea^ons, which, mortification to the Countess she soon after
complained of ^o the Duke, and her resentment was ^eightned by her being, as it
were, ^anish'd from the Court in a time when the Earl her husband had re^eiv'd
one of the chiefest Employments or the Ceremony of that Entry; of which place
he very well acquitted himself to the Contentment of the Duke his master: yet
notwithstanding ^ll this, the Countess would go to Mantua, and adorned her self
with all ^he gallantries that fine Ladies take at those times to set themselves
off at Court, whither she went to see the new Duchess, where at last the
Duchess mother to the Duke, gave her leave to stay to take part in the
divertizement of the Balls, which were given the^ for many days together, The
fir^ great Ball passed without the Duke seeming to take any notice of his Lady
Margaret; and although there w^ more of Prudence than coldness of affection in
this carriage of his, yet the Countess could hardly refrain from expressing
those signs of anger an^ jealousy which seized upon her heart imagining that
the Duke satisfied wit^ the beauty and carresses of his Bride began to neglect
her charms, which had so long captivated him; she omitted no opportunity of
speaking to the Duke, who understood her, and ye^ avoided talking with her,
though h^ did not forget to cause her to be taken out to dance as well as the
other Ladie^ of Quality, to whom Princes alwaye^ apply themselves to do them
chief honor at those times. But this politie^ dissimulation of the Dukes cold
carriage to the Countess continued but a little while: for before she returned,
to Casal with her husband, his Highnes^ would see her, and discoursed with her,
above an hour in private. I know not in what place they met, but the Marquess
of Arrigone passing by the place where the Duke and she were talking, and
perceiving them together, Your Highness (said he) goes back to the Sicut erat,
before you begin the Psalm.

The Countess went away very well satisfied, after this conference with the
Duke, which made it believed that his Highness confirmed the protestations of
his constancy to her; but it was impossible for her husband to discover the
reason of that great joy which was in her face at their return to Casal.

These beginnings of the Dukes Marriage, though they past thus coldly, yet it
was not to be imagined that it would continue so long; although it is true,
that the Thoughts and Affairs of Princes dispenses them in some sort from the
ordinary practifers of inferior People: and, most People imagine, the Prince
has performed his duty well enough, if he has got his Wife with Child;
nevertheless, this Duke Charles, whether it were through the tenderness of his
Age, having scarce yet arrived to his one and twentieth year; or through some
other reason, he ceased not for three months together to Caress the Duchess
his Wife with all sort of kindness; not only before his familiar Friends, but
also in the presence of the Ambassadors themselves, which was a great
contentment to the Duchess his Mother: but 3 Months after that, some business
at Montferrat, or, as it is conjectured, the Love to the Countess, who desired
him impatiently, or as some persuaded themselves, to leave the Duchess at
repose, obliged the Duke to go to Casal; This Voyage a little altered the Dukes
Affection to the Duchess his Wife, if one may give the name of Affection to a
Love so newly planted, whose Roots were yet but small and tender; the sight of
the Countess made him forget his Wife: and, it was observed, he had never taken
so great a delight in Caressing of the Duchess, as he took only in speaking
with the Countess: but, because the presence of the Husband was an Obstacle to
their pleasures, he round out a way by a pretense of business to send him to
Mantua: The Earl, who had from the first night of the Dukes arriving at Casal,
taken better notice of some passages he was troubled to discover, began then to
believe, what till then he had but suspected; nevertheless he must go by his
Prince's Command, without showing any repugnance for that journey: but, at his
return, he received an account of all had passed from a waiting Maid, to whom
he had made great promises of Reward, with Oaths to perform them, to be a
faithful Spy for him, of what passed between the Duke, and his Wife, in his
absence; she promised the Earl, to give him an exact Account; but, it was not
very difficult for her (the Countess not mistrusting her) to find out the most
private passages for this intelligence. The Earl had foolishly believed, that
all the Dukes Love had no other Conclusion but Playing at Cards, and perhaps
some little French Freedoms with his Wife; imagining, that her Brothers and
Kindred, that were interested in the same reputation, would have prevented any
further ill, but he deceived, himself; For, they were of the opinion he himself
had at first declared, (that the Horns Grafted by a Prince did not sit
uneasily upon the Head) and were so far from watching the Actions of the Duke,
and their Kinswoman, to prevent the shame of their House, that they were very
officious to bring them together, and serving the Dukes Loves with all
imaginable care and diligence; and the chief amongst them in this employment,
was he, whom the Duke had lately made Master of the Artillery at Casal; it was
he that conveyed by night his Sister into the Dukes Chamber, and most commonly
kept the Door, watching with the Male that was to carry back his Sister to her
own Lodging, when she had pleasur'd the Duke: In truth this Amor grew very
strong in this last Journey; the one began to hate her Husband, to satisfy her
Gallant; the other, to despise his Wife, to give himself entirely to his
Friend; and this was plainly perceived by what happened after the Dukes return
to Mantua; where he discovered (to the great astonishment of all the World)
that he was Cloyed of his Wife: No body being able to imagine, how a young
Prince could possibly be weary so soon of a young Princess, who also was newly
proved with Child, to the great Joy of the whole Court; whilst in the mean
time that chaste Dove knew not what to think of a Husband so young who expressed
so little Love to her; and nevertheless, although her Grief at it was great,
yet her Prudence was greater; so that she pretended not to see that which she
but too much discovered: The Earl, which the Duke had taken order to send away
to Mantua, was commanded not to stir from thence till his Highness returned,
which he obeyed; and the Duke was no sooner arrived in the Town, but he sent
him back to his own House, where his Curiosity cost him dear, and gave him no
small Mortification; the Servant he had employed to watch, having given him the
whole Relation of all had past between the Duke and his Wife: the shame and
confusion of this poor Man is not to be expressed, when he learnt the
circumstances of this Impudent Love countenanced by the baseness of is Wives
own Brothers; and although he seemed to take no notice of what he too well
knew, nor hearkened to the Discourses of his Friends upon that Chapter; yet, he
could not imagine, that the Crimes of his Wife, and his own misfortune was so
public: his melancholy grew to that height, that he saw not any body that
Saluted him in the Streets; and he fancyed every minute, that People were
making Horns at him behind his back: The Countess, who had a good Nose, smelt
out the reason of the Change in her Husbands Humor, and redoubled her Caresses
to him; fearing, least this jealousy which he appeared so insensible of before
his Marriage, might produce some unhappy effect; for, it is certain, that had
she known him to be of a jealous humor, she would never have Married him.

In the mean time, as the Earl and his Countess walked one evening after
Supper upon the Town Walls, the Earl asked his Wife, Did his Highness wait
upon you often? As he was wont, replied she; (seeing to what end he spoke it:)
And, What did you do together, said the Earl? to which, she answered, The same
that you did with the Duchess at Mantua. Thus they both rallyed one another.
The Husband perceiving what it was to have such a Wife, and the wife lamented
the trouble of having such a Husband: yet nevertheless the Earls jealousies
had some intermissions, his Melancholy often giving place to his Joy; so that
his Wife, and Brothers in-Law felt some time the effects of the one, and then
of the other. Whilst these things passed in the Year 1652, the Duchess was
brought to bed of a Son, which is now the only Prop of the House of Gonzague;
the Consolation of his Mother; the Glory and Hope of the State, to which he
gives great hopes, promising very much, showing himself a great and brave
Prince, and expressing aversion for an idle lazy life; and, on the contrary, a
great inclination for all the exercises of War: It is believed, that since the
Birth of that young Prince, the Duke conversed not with the Duchess as his
Wife; the reason of this opinion is his assiduous love to the Countess, as also
because the Duchess has not been with Child from that time.

This indifference of the Duke toward the Duchess was also imputed to two
other causes; the first, to her Natural coldness; the other, to I know not what
strange devise of the Countess: the last scarce is doubted of; for, as report
has said, this Woman fearing to lose the Dukes Friendship after his Marriage,
and seeking to enjoy alone a good, without which she despised all others;
resolved to tempt all ways to prevent that, which she thought an obstacle to
her design; to that end, having told her thoughts to one of her Sisters, she,
by her means, became acquainted with it certain Magician, who dwelt at St.
Sauveur, near to Casal; the Countess went to him, and obtained some words from
him; That he bid her be confident she should enjoy the Dukes Friendship alone:
but, because this Sorcerer was of an intelligence with a certain Religious
Dominican, that Lady gained him by his means; she rewarding him, by not
refusing him the satisfaction he required of her: so, after that this Charm
succeeded so well by the help of this Reverend Father, that by their Diabolical
Inventions, the Duke had that knot tied, usually so fatal to Marriage: Others
have believed that this was a false report, and that this Witchcraft took no
effect, but that the Duke made it a pretext to avoid the Duchess, whom he
loved not; and devote himself to the Countess, whom he adored, in which there
is no likelihood: For, let any body imagine how it can be possible for a young
Prince to live in the company of his Wife without touching her, if there had
not been some reason diabolical, or supernatural to hinder him: so, that it
must certainly be believed, that the Countess did bewitch the Duke.

The old Duchess, troubled at the Dukes infirmity, told him he should make use
of some spiritual or natural remedies to cure him, but (what was very strange)
he laughed at her advice, which made people believe that it was done by his own
consent.

It has been said that that natural coldness of the young Duchess, compared to
the Constitution (so contrary) of the Countess, contributed very much for the
small affection he had for her: but how could the Duchess leave off that purity
so rare and commendable, which she had always made the ornament of her life,
to comply with the Dukes desires, and which he found in another? There is no
doubt but that she loved as much as any other woman could do, but with a
sincere, true and real love, for to say truth, she was not in the number of
those that only made a show of love, but she loved her husband from the bottom
of her heart; so that all her affection was within, having not those little
foolish fondnesses which some other wives study with so much affectation to
show their loves: In a word, her affection was truly great, though she did not
make show of it; but to clear all this, I think it to some purpose to say
something by the way, to discover what the Dukes inclinations were naturally,
and also of that of the Countess Margaret.

All men naturally take great delight in the Caresses they receive; it is
certain that the Duke was more inclined to that satisfaction than any man; so
that it may almost be said, that weakness was a fault of nature in him who so
desired to be courted by the women, without which, it is thought, the Duke
would have been insensible for them; they say that this inclination of the
Dukes was caused by the Conversation of the Ladies of the Court, amongst whom
he was brought up, and spent most of his youth, having always been caressed by
one or other of those Ladies that waited on his Mother, who loved nothing more
than to see the women make much of him, and to be under the conduct of that
sex, and particularly the Lady Margaret, who had so used him to her carresses,
that he could not think of carressing his wife, if he were hot prepared by
hers, which is a thing that seldom happens, but what the one could not do, the
other was perfect in, and exercised her art so to the humor of the Duke, that
he could not defend himself from her Charms, though he had a mind to it, also
the Countess was liberal enough of her Courtships to him, moved rather by
ambition to domineer and govern the Duke, than by any sentiment of nature,
which is believed by the little care she took to court her husband at that
rate; and certainly the very Sirenes and Circes were never capable of more
inticements and flattering carresses than she used to please the Duke.

See here the poison of this Marriage, see here the Fall of the Dukes
reputation; a Princess too modest and little sensible of Carresses, and a
Prince too desirous of those kind of Charms; and on the other side, a woman
experienced in all the crafts of Love, to gain the heart of this Prince, and
take it from the Princess, and it is steadfastly believed, that if the Princess
had been of her rivals humor, the Duke would have loved her as well as he
loved the Countess, and had been as good a Husband as he was a Lover; and that
if the Countess had not understood the way of treating him in another manner
than the Duchess did, without doubt he would have had no greater a Complasance
for her; but yet it was better for the Princess to be as she was, than to be of
the humor of her rival: In the mean time, it is easy to be believed, that the
excessive carresses which the Countess made to that Duke made him not only hate
the Duchess in the way of Matrimony, but also to abhor Marriage it self for
her sake: for to justify this opinion, he was quite contrary to the custom of
other Princes, who delight in change; for he could endure to see no other woman
but the Countess, and it is certainly reported, that except his wife, he never
touched any other woman but the Countess, who was his ordinary Meal every day,
and his Feast also; however one day he was angry at her for something, he to
vex her sent for a young very pretty woman of the town of Casal, and because in
that rencounter there happened a very pleasant passage, I think it necessary
enough to mention it in this place in few words: This young Maid lived in a
house on the backside of the Church of the Augustine Fathers in a street great
enough, the Duke having often passed that way with the Countess, failed not to
look upon her still being at the door on purpose to be seen by the Duke; This
happened a little after the depart of the Earl in his voyage to Poland, the
Duke rather to laugh than for any other design, seeing this young woman, used
to say to the Countess, That wench is handsomer than thou art; It is true said
the Countess, (peek'd with jealousy) but she has fewer charms, therefore I
don't fear that she will deprive me of your love which is apter to be taken
with agreeableness than beauty; but what pleasure does your Highness take to
break my head with jealousy?

One night when the Duke was angry at her, or counterfeited himself so, to vex
the Countess, to trouble her brains yet more, he sent word to that young woman
by one of the Grooms of his Chamber, (who was the same that used to wait upon
the Countess to his Chamber at night in the Castle) that he would speak with
her, and that he should expect her after Supper. Her mother, who understood
this mystery, said to the Messenger, The words of his Highness cannot but
produce great grace to my Daughter, who is wholly at his service.

The hour come, the Groom of the Chamber went to execute the Orders of his
Master, and to conduct this young Maid into his Chamber, (I will not say into
the bed) but the Countess, being informed by the same man, who was her kinsman
and a very good friend of hers, ran presently to the Palace, where having found
that Prey, without taking notice of any thing, ran to the Dukes apartement, and
presented her self to the Duke, to make him change his resolutions, who being
made tender by her carresses, he cast himself into her arms, whilst the Groom
of the Chamber, too crafty to loose so good an occasion, conducted the young
woman, which he had brought, into his own Chamber, where he made her stay and
lie with him; so that she saw her self constrained to receive from the man what
she expected from the master. In the mean time her mother, taking hold on this
occasion, bragged every where that her daughter had great Familiarities with
the Duke, to whom nevertheless she had not so much as spoke a word. The Duke
being with his well-beloved, was in some apprehensions that the Groom of his
Chamber might surprise them with that young wench he had sent for, but he found
afterward that all things were carried very well. The Countess of her side,
reproached the Duke very much for his lightness and the injustice he did her in
going about to change a love which he had experienced so long, for one that was
so new, and besides, which was not worth the trouble. The Duke excused himself,
saying, All that was but in jest, and to make her jealous, from whom he
received those delights anew, which ordinarily is found in the reconcilements
of Lovers. But, said the Countess, what did that young Wench do in your Palace.
The Duke quickly replied, That if she were come thither, it was for his valet
de Chamber, and not for him. Your Highness then (said the Countess) serves the
Loves of your valet de Chamber. Thus the pleasures banished the suspicions, and
the peace was concluded without much pain.

In the mean time, the young Duchess, too well informed of this unruly life,
the Duke led with the Countess Margaret, could not defend her heart from
suffering all those torments which an honest and virtuous wife usually feels
upon such an occasion. She made some tell the Duke her Husband of it, desiring
him to stop the Course of that disorder, which was his shame, and the scandal
of his people: Her Prudence made her conceal her grief, and her Virtue obliged
her to stifle those reproaches she might have made to the Dukes infidelity,
which would draw upon him the hatred and scorn of other Princes; amongst whom
at that time there was not heard of the like. The Duke could not hear the
lawful reproaches of his wife the Duchess without being touched with the
remorse of his crime; but if he set before his eyes the wrong and injury which
he did to the goodness and fidelity of his wife, he faild not also to represent
to himself how little it was in his power to leave off loving the Countess.
Thus the mortification which he received from the reproaches was made to him
served to no other end but to put him into a condition of not knowing which
side to take; he knew his crime, but he could not hate the cause; and it was
impossible for him to banish out of his soul his love to the Countess, to place
the Duchess in her room; and although he wanted love for his wife, yet he
wanted not reason to know his disorder; so that he sought to sweeten the just
resentments of the Duchess by all kind of submissions, in which he let the
world see that he was very well skilled in saving (as it is said) both the
Cabbidge and the kid; people wondered how he could so well both please his wife
and his Mistress, and how it came to pass that the deceived Duchess remained
better satisfied than did the Countess, who effectually received from his
Highness all kind of satisfaction, who wanted nothing that she could desire
from him; but it was to be wished that the Duchess could have also the same
pretensions that the Countess had.

All that the Duke and the Countess did had no other end but to seek out ways
to enjoy one another more often, which happened as they wished. The one studied
to deceive her Husband, and the other his Wife: But to speak truth, the
Countess found it a harder task to cheat her Husband, than the Duke found in
deceiving the Duchess his Wife: for this poor unfortunate Lady perceiving that
this was an incurable evil and desperate, by a great Prudence shut her eyes
almost, that she might not see the disorders of her Husband; whilst on the
other side the Earl watched his wife, the more that he saw her give her self up
to the love of the Duke, to her great dishonor and loss of her own reputation,
and he had just reason for doing so: for since they were not ashamed to act
their worthy affairs almost before all the world, notwithstanding all the
diligence of the Earl to watch them; what would they not have done, if he had
winkt at their excellent Carriage?

If these two Lovers had been contented to do all in secret, the Earl had not
been much disquieted, nor had he taken what they did into his consideration,
but had rather, would have seemed to have received some satisfaction in the
hopes of being well used by the Duke, and to have received honors from him in
the fight of the world: For all his great trouble arose from the public
scandal, and the opinion he had conceived, that every body fancied he complied
with these amors, and thus it made him sick at heart, to be counted not only
a base man, but an infamous voluntary Cuckold, and publicly to be despised as
such a person: He never reflected upon the Nobility of his House, descended
originally from great Princes, who had always lived honorably, and had
mantain'd themselves for many years by a very advantageous reputation, without
ever receiving any stain; but those reflections made him repent he had married
a wife, whose carriage so much dishonored that illustrious Family of his; and
the good fame his Predecessors had acquired by their honest Lives; his anger
kindled a thousand times in his heart the desire of revenge, but the fear of
some thing worse happening to him, and to loose not only his fortune but also
his life, stifled all those thoughts in him. Shall I say furthermore, the
apprehension of a sad end and an untimely death hindered him often from
complaining to his wife of her wicked Carriage of her self; He durst not, I
say, correct her in secret, or to threaten her, fearing that, she being warned
by that, might procure to him a violent death in revenge to his upbraids of
her: so that he was often forced to pretend as if he had not seen those
passages he saw too plainly, and to be ignorant of what he knew too well. But
in fine, not being able to endure any longer a vexation that grew every moment,
pressed with grief and shame, he resolved to go to Savona, to ask Counsel of
his Parents, what course to take to deliver himself from a misfortune which was
so cruel to him and so great? and he had scarce acosted them, when one amongst
them reproached him of marrying a wife whether they would or no, who was the
daughter of an unchaste mother, the sister of a whore, and whose own honor was
suspected then when he would so obstinately resolve to marry her, and her life
since has proved what she was then. The poor Earl, extremely mortified with
these reproaches, could make no other answer, but that he never thought things
would come to this pass; his Parents nevertheless not to leave him in this Sea
of Confusion counseled him after they had comforted him a little, that he
should try to remove his wife from Casal calmly and with Gentleness, to bring
her to Savona, and there resolve to settle and live out the remainder of his
days in his own Country.

This Earl tried the way of following this good Counsel, believing for certain
that absence would cool this love, and that time would make him forget what at
the present was such a heartbreaking to him, and caused him so much shame;
being then returned to Casal, he begun to try if he could work this miracle
upon his wife, but all his endeavors were in vain; he told her his Parents
desired her company very passionately amongst them, that the Ladies of that
Town desired impatiently to enjoy her company, to render her all the service
and respect they thought due to her; he also prayed her to consider how
advantageous the Promises of that Republic were to him of making him a great
man, by the considerable employments they would give him, and that she should
assure her self he would spare no cost to give her all sort of contentments,
and to that end he was resolved to purchase a little but fair Lordship hard by
the Seaside, where in the Summertime they would divert themselves together,
by all the agreeable divertisements suitable to persons of their condition. In
fine, to conclude in a word, he gave her many other politic and moral reasons,
so strong and plausible, that they would have been powerful enough to have
convinced any body but her self: but the good Countess did nothing but laugh at
this discourse, and without flattering him any further, told him plainly, That
she was not of an humor to quit her own for a strange purchase, the certain
for the uncertain, and that which she was really possessed of for a picture and
shadow, that she had not married her self at Casal with intention to dwell at
Savona, that the contract of her marriage had made no mention of this change,
and that he could by nothing in the world find a lawful excuse to make her
change her own Country; and if he pleased he might desire to see his own
Relations at Savona, but as for her she would rather stay in the Company of her
brothers at Casal, and after all she assured him it was loss of time to dream
of that, because she was confident his Highness would never consent to their
parture, and yet to depart without his consent it was blindly to precipitate
her ruin, and thus the Earl was, constrained to desist from his enterprise,
and saw himself obliged to arm himself with a new patience. The Countess the
whilst judging by these words, that he had a design to retire her from her
Lover; imagining besides, that her Husband had prepared for her at Savona some
of those Morsels which the Italians ordinarily give to their wives in the like
Cases, as it often happens in Italy; which made her seek an opportunity to
speak to the Duke, and having easily found him, as she wished, she having the
Liberty to go and come to him at all hours, after she had acosted him and made
her curtsie, she told him at length the whole story of her Husbands designs,
not forgetting his very words in a manner, that showed how angry she was at her
Husband. This resolution of his extremely displeased the Duke, who looked upon
the Earl as very little politic, and not at all prudent, and thought it very
strange that for a foolish trifle (for he looked upon the making a man a Cuckold
nothing else) he would hazard the loss of his favor in retiring from his
service, he was of opinion that the honors he conferred on the Earl was
satisfaction enough for the honor he took from him, and that he had done him
Favor great enough in making him one of the most considerable of his Court,
which he had not done upon any consideration in the world, but for the Love he
had for the Countess.

But if the Earl consulted his Parents at Savona, to carry the Countess thither
out of Casal, the Duke and she consulted at Casal against him, and sought out
Pretenses to absent in good earnest that obstacle of their delights from them:
for is was every day a new work, and every time that this Lover came to Casal
he was in trouble to invent some new pretext to be rid of him, to the end that
he might supply his place with the Countess, and divert themselves with more
Liberty; But the Duke came so often to Casal, and was so often put to his
shifts to find out new pretexts of dismissing the Earl out of the way, that he
was now at the bottom of his scrowl, and his invention being tired, he knew not
what to do next: these Lovers propounded many ways to one another, whereof one
was to shoot him privately with a Musket, and pretend afterward that the blow
came from some of his enemies; but the Prince could not hearken to this
resolution, not being willing, after the example of David, to add murder to
his adultery, not being assured that he should repent as he did; besides, the
Countess her self was not of a nature ever to give her consent to any actions
of cruelty, the least in the world; or any that thus was an offense to the
Holiness of Matrimony, notwithstanding the heat that appeared in her first
motions and passion against her husband. They had already sent him to Rome,
twice to Florence, as many times to Venice, and I know not how many times to
Turin and Genes. The Duke at last would send him into France, in the quality of
an Ordinary Ambassador, but there were two obstacles that hindered that, The
hate and aversion the Earl ever bore to the French Nation, was one, and indeed
his declared aversion to them was so unreasonable, that he was used to say in
all Companies where he came, that if he had the Keys of Hell but one day, he
would with his whole heart send all the Frenchmen thither, even to the Devils
Palace, because they had corrupted the City of Casal, and by the introduction
of their Liberty had so changed that Town en bordeau. Thus it appeared not
reasonable to the Duke to send such a man to treat with them. In the second
place, that which hindered the Earl from being sent Ambassador into the Court
of France, was, The Fear the Duke had he would carry his wife along with him,
(as assuredly he had done;) and the Duke refusing to let her go, would have
disobliged him too much, and given cause to an apparent scandal, and therefore
this Proposition took no effect, and ended just where it begun, as unprofitable
to their design; but the resolution was certainly taken to dismiss the Earl one
way or other, if not for ever, yet for a great while; but they endeavored to
find out ways for their satisfaction that would suit with the glory of the
Husband and honor of the Wife, which they looked upon chiefly in this design.
As for the absenting of her brothers, there was no thought of that; for they
were very merry and well contented to see their Sister in the Dukes good
graces, and envied one another, who should most contribute to the pleasures of
the Duke and their Sister. The profit they received was so great by it, besides
the considerable charges conferred upon them for their service in that trade;
in truth those Gentlemen might well enough dissemble their trouble, to see
their Sister live so disordered a life, and content themselves more easily to
be the procurers of horns; since that office was not so great a dis-reputation
to them as it was to the Earl that was the Husband, who was to endure not only
the public knowledge of his dishonor, the injuries and reproaches of all the
world, but also the pride and ill humor of his wife in his house, without
daring to take notice of his being sent away from her, so often, whole weeks
and months, which was insupportable to him: therefore it must not be wondered,
if the Earl was weary of that life, as well as the Duke was of seeking out
excuses to send him abroad, to enjoy his wife with more Liberty, who at last
thought of a way very fit for his design.

There is in the Kingdom 'of Poland a Marquess of Gonzague, very much esteemed
by all the people in that Country, who although they are not of the same line
of the Dukes of Mantua, yet carry the same name, and arms, and are owned by the
Dukes of Mantua as kinsmen in all their Letters, which they send. It is true
that this kindred gives them no manner of pretense to the hereditary Succession
of the Duchy of Mantua, and Marquisate of Montferat: for the Duke of Mantua,
who by the Emperors consent, at first acknowledged them of kin to him, only
upon this condition, That they should be excluded from all pretenses of
Succession to that State.

The Duke then was of opinion that he might send the Earl into Poland, not so
much to make a visit to that Marquisesas to be informed of the employments,
estate, and riches, and the interest they had in that Court; and to make his
design hit the better, by the Earls making a longer stay in that journey than
he expected, he ordered him to go not in the quality of an Ordinary
Ambassador, but as a Gentleman traveller, who had no other end but to see the
Country.

This resolution taken between the Duke and the Countess, the Earl was sent for
to receive his Commission, and what else was necessary for that voyage, and to
prepare himself. The Duke gave him many wicked and false reasons, the interest
he had in being informed fully of the estate, and rank which those Lords held
in the Court of Poland, and told him that he had already writ Letters of
Recommendation of the Earl to them; in which, he had pretended that he was
only to pass through that Kingdom; and had his Highness Commands to wait upon
them from him, adding further, that he had willingly sent him in the quality of
Ambassador to their King, who was his Highness's kinsman, but for his own
convenience, and to save the great Charge which such an Embassy would have
cost him, and also for better profiting in his design, which carried him
thither, he thought it more necessary for him to go as a private Gentleman, who
had a Curiosity of seeing the world, than in any other quality, because that in
that Condition he could better inform himself of the estate those Lords,
without suspicion.

The Earl perceived very easily the Dukes design, and although he humbly
acknowledged the Favor his Highness did him in calling him to that employment
of trust; yet he could not refrain from excusing himself by telling the Duke,
that such a Commission was more fit to be given to a Page, than to a man of his
Quality.

The Duke who wanted neither wit nor cunning, would not receive his innumerable
excuses, although I know but one which the Duke replied to, which the Duke said
might have served had his design been something more than a private exact
information of the Condition in which his kinsmen were at the Court of Poland;
upon which informations depended all his affairs with that Kingdom, which when
he was satisfied of from his private voyage thither, he should then proceed to
the public Embassy to the Polish King, in which he made choice of him; and to
that end had given him first this private Commission, as most fit for his
designs, and therefore he ordered him to go as soon as he could possibly get
himself in readiness for such a Voyage; to which the Earl gave no further reply
but that he should do all in his power to be ready to serve his Highness that
hour he should appoint him for this journey; in which, he plainly discovered he
had no good will for him.

In the beginning this order to go for Poland troubled him very much, and put a
thousand Fancies in his head, and represented many things to the trouble of his
soul; but at last, after having well considered it, he concluded it better for
him to absent himself than to stay and break his heart, by being an eyewitness
of all the impudencies of his wife with the Duke, which were come to that pass,
that they made no scruple, scarce, before his face: but that kinsman of his,
which I spoke of before, who was aged, and an experienced man in all the
intrigues of Court, and therefore had so dissuaded the Earl from this Marriage,
he having smelt the Dukes intention, and heard the report that the Earl was to
be sent into Poland; as he was Elder than the Earl, so he spoke with more
assurance, and without flattery told him, I see very well that horns will be
very cheap. To which the Earl replied, Cuckold for Cuckold, it is better to
have horns made behind the back then before the Face.

The Earl had fifteen days given him to prepare for his Voyage, during which he
took care of all things necessary for such a journey; he took leave of all his
Friends, but in a manner told them that he gave them the last adieu: his
brothers in law counseled him to serve his Highness with much zeal and
affection; but he felt very well where his shoe wrung him, and thought within
himself that all their Counsels had no other end but, The dishonor of his wife
their own Sister. In the mean time, he could so well act his part, and
dissembled so well, that no body imagined that he went to Poland against his
will, he appeared so gay and pleasant; none would have believed, but that he
made this Voyage with all the satisfaction in the world. The Countess appeared
very indifferent to all this, and seemed to be neither well nor ill pleased at
it, knowing well that all she could have said would have been distrusted, and
therefore she spoke nothing to her Husband but equivocally upon that subject,
being certain that he was not ignorant that in all things she had no intentions
but those of pleasing the Duke; she was more than convinced that her Husband
believed not one word she said to him, although she had forced herself to
appear very much afflicted at his depart; and to express her joy the durst not,
believing with reason that excess of Folly would have given too public a
scandal to the World; however she assured him, that the Duke intended to raise
him to the highest Dignities the State and Court were capable of, and that the
Service which his Highness now desired from him was, To open a way to greater
Honors, to which he had designed him.

The Earl then parted from Casal in the Month of April, accompanied by his
wifes elder brother as far as Mantua, where after he had received his Highness
orders he passed the Mountains, and went on his journey.

The same day the Duke dispatched a Messenger to the Countess with this note,

My Heart and my All!
THe Earl is gone this Morning for Poland, where he will do nothing, and I
intend to go from hence within two days, to a place where I hope to do
something. I shall rest contented when no body works in thy Garden, which is
only worthy the labor of Princes; excuse me if I speak so freely, do thou be
mine, and for me, I shall be always thine, in spite of all those that would
trouble either of us; expect me with the same desire I have to see thee, and be
mine, as I am thine,

Charles.


It will not be unnecessary in this place to conclude the story of the Earl,
because we shall not henceforward have more occasions of mentioning him; I will
tell you then, that he continued in Poland two Months without doing any thing;
having not received all the remembrances, and instructions necessary touching
his Negotiations, although the Duke had given him his word to send them to him,
but it was but a Pretext, to gain time; because the Posts that went from Mantua
to Poland, went lazily, and arrived there but as late as possibly they could;
whilst in the mean time the Earl knew but too well for what reason the Duke
had sent him so far off, and into a place where he was obliged to be his own
Comforter for all his Misfortunes; but what afflicted him most was, That the
Duke sent him not so much as the particular Instructions, whereby he might
acquit himself aright of his Commission in the Court of Poland, and also sent
him no money, without which it is impossible for strangers to do any thing, and
having it, they compass any thing: and therefore at last, he writ to the Duke
and also his Wife these Letters following, which he sent by Paris:

Great Prince!
I Yet stay for those Letters of dispatch, which your Highness made me hope I
should receive in this Kingdom, and yet I have not seen them, although two
Months are passed since I arrived in this Kingdom, besides the days were spent
in my journey hither; I have much shame and confusion at being here and having
no employment, not being able to serve your Highness like a true and faithful
Vassal: Therefore in all humility I desire your Highness to send me with speed
something to do, that I may testify to you, with what fidelity Persons of my
Quality usually serve their Sovereign, who wish all prosperity to your
Highness, which you deserve, I am

Your most humble Vassal, The Earl of Rovera.


The other Letter which at the same time he sent to his wife was in these words,

My dear Spouse!
I Am so angry and so unsatisfied in being in a strange Country, from my own
House, absent from my wife, and without money, that if I had two souls, I would
willingly give one to the Devil. His Highness sent me hither with assurance
that the Instructions necessary for me, and the Bills of Exchange, should
certainly follow me; but seeing the contrary, I know not who to complain to,
and cannot but think that I was sent hither on no design, but of being rid of
me. I would nevertheless flatter my self, if it were possible, with the belief
that the length of the way might perhaps be the cause of the slowness of my
Letters, and hindered them from coming so soon as I expected; but for all that
I cannot but afflict my self, not being ignorant that those people, who make
use of my house in my absence, divert themselves, whilst in the mean time I am
suffering in the houses of others; it troubles me not to be here, but I am vexed
that I have not that which was promised; I pray thee solicit his Highness, and
speak to him by word of mouth, if he is at Casal, or by Letter, if he be at
Mantua, that I may receive satisfaction, and the Duke may be served; till now I
have not had opportunity of seeing any Lady, therefore I can say nothing to
thee of their humors nor inclinations at present. This is all I can write to
thee this day, deferring the rest to another opportunity. Adieu, I embrace thee.


But let the Earl write as many Letters as he pleased, he staid fifteen Months
in Poland, always waiting to receive his Orders, scarce once seeing in all that
time the Marquess of Gonzague, or at least once saluting him from the Duke: he
bit his fingers every day in despite of his being so cheated, he writ and writ
again, but to no purpose in the world, and received no answer to all his
Epistles but fair words, and to no end; which the Duke caused his Secretary to
write, which circumstance aggravated the Earls vexation, and put him out of
himself. In fine, seeing he could do nothing in that Court for the service of
his Highness, and that the Duke his Master had very little business to treat of
in that place, he made new requests to him, which he often repeated, for his
consent to his return to Casal, with protestations of his being more
serviceable to his Highness at Casal than at Poland, where he did nothing
either for the Duke or himself, as he thought, whilst in the mean time that
poor man rendered all the service required from him, since there was nothing
desired from him but his absence.

The great Liberty with which these two Lovers diverted themselves together in
the absence of the Earl, made them invent all the means possible to prolong it;
and since he renewed his desires and pressed so much his return, through
weariness of his staying idle in the Court of Poland. The Duke being resolute
for his absence a longer time, devised another plot worse than the former.

He ordained then the Earl by express Letters, That he should go to the Capitol
City of Persia, where he pretended he should stay there some Months in the
quality of an Ambassador, because the interest of his State required some
Correspondence with that King, and to engage the Earl to this, he promised him
mountains and wonders, assuring him that if his designs succeeded by his
Negotiation, he should want no Honors and Recompenses, there being none after
that such service which he might not pretend to for himself or his heirs.

The Duke sent him there Orders, with a Letter of Exhortation, and commanded
also his Secretary, and his wives brothers to write to him. They obeyed the
Duke, and sent to this poor banished man Letters full of Flatteries to animate
him to the Dukes service, with all the affection imaginable, and failed not to
aggravate to the Earl the honors which they presumed would accrue to him by
this voyage.

When the Earl received this Order, one would have thought the Devil had taken
him by the Collar; he eat his fingers with rage, and who ever had seen him
would have thought he would also have devoured his Letters, he begun to beat
his valet de Chamber, to discharge some of his Choler upon him, and that which
was most vexatious in this business, he was the more inflamed by the believing
his resentments so just and his extreme passion lawful, he saw plainly that the
Dukes only end was to make him die of want in that long and painful voyage,
that afterward he might enjoy his wife with greater Liberty; he could not
imagine any way what affairs the Dukes of Mantua could have with the Kings of
Persia, so that pressed with grief he took a resolution of sending his footman
into Italy with the same Letters which he had received from the Duke, reserving
to himself only the Bills of Exchange, without giving himself the trouble to
write to the Duke so much as one word of excuse, nevertheless he gave this
servant of his two Letters of transport, one for his Wife, the other for his
Brother in Law; The first was this,

Wicked Wife, the dishonor of my House, and the ruin of my Person,
I Refrained hitherto those lawful reproaches I could have made to thy
dissolute life, for fear of publishing those crimes, which at least ought to be
concealed; but since thy impudencies go so far, as to destroy, I do not say,
the quiet of my mind, (for it never tested any since my cruel destiny joined me
to thee,) but that of my soul, which thou persecutest even unto the farthest
places of the world. I think my self obliged now to let thee know, that I was
never blind as thou believedst me, but if I pretended to be so, 'twas an effect
of my Prudence; I complain not of the Duke who persecutes me for thy sake; I
complain of thy disloyalty to thy Husband. Why did thou marry, wicked woman
as thou art, if thy intentions were to be always dishonest? Thou deceivedst thy
self if thou did believe that at the beginnings of our Marriage I did not
perceive thy abominable amor; I knew, I saw with great regret, although I
counterfeited ignorance, and pretended neither to see, nor hear, nor
understand. It might have sufficed thee to have dishonored me at Casal,
without being so cruel as to drive me out of Italy. Do thou think I believe
that all these pretended honors are conferred upon me for any other end, but
in consideration of thy impudent dishonest life, to mock and abuse my
simplicity? I understand it well enough, and would to God I did not at all. I
forsake the name and quality of Husband, being forced to abandon my wife. I
should be the basest of men to go about to serve a Prince, who flatters me with
imaginary honors, whilst in effect he dishonours me: Yes, I hope to find a
happier Fortune in Barbary than in my native Country; and I believe that the
Inhabitants of that Country will not have so much cruelty for me, as my Wife
and my own Prince have showed me in Italy; Yes, yes, I renounce thee for my
wife, since thou will be a whore, and I am resolved to fly thy presence
eternally, that the world may not believe I consent to thy disorders. I confess
I need not complain of thee, because it is my self I ought to blame for all my
misfortunes, having been sufficiently warned by my friends and kindred of all
that I have suffered by thee, and the dishonor thou would bring me. But in
fine, since my destiny has sent this for my ruin, I run very willingly to it;
and do not thou think to escape punishment, which will come upon thee one day,
when thou dream'st not of it, and although the chastisements of Adulterers is,
like thine, deferred, yet it is sure to tome; go, God will revenge me, and
punish thee.


He finished his Letter to the Countess in these words without Subscription,
and sent it with another to his Brother-in-law writ in these terms,

THere is nothing I should less have credited, than that Brothers born of an
illustrious Blood would have served as Rascals in the prostitution of their own
Sister; There is no body either in Mantua or Casal, that is ignorant of this;
It is now become the Fame of your Family, and the only thing by which it is
taken notice of; but I am very much displeased to have my reputation engaged in
it; For as for yours I deride it, since you have been so base to offer up to
the Duke what no longer belonged to you. That opinion of yours, That Princes
can make no Cuckolds, resembles that Gold which covers Pills, to cheat sick
people. I have always looked upon it as such, and I have endured as much as I
can; but this minute that I have not gold enough left me to cover such great
Pills as are prescribed to me, I have no more Patience, and must complain,
since the Duke is pleased I shall this day begin to run over the World, like a
poor Pilgrim and miserable banished man: to the end that he may enjoy your
Sister in quiet. I resign my wife willingly to his Highness, and the shame to
you; till now you have acted the part of Rascals, and served the shameful
desires of my wife: Now take to your selves the employment of serving your
Sister. This is all shall be said to you from him that gives you absolutely his
share in the shame, that you may possess it all; he flies from the company of a
prostituted adulterous woman, and from the Pimps her Brothers; understand me as
well as I understand both of you.


These were the last Letters which the Earl writ to Casal, with which the Duke
looked upon himself so sensibly offended, having got them both into his hands,
that he swore in the Countesses presence to be revenged: Many were of opinion
that he was quickly after that satisfied in his vengeance he intended on the
Earl, because that minute he made his Oath, he dispatched many Letters, giving
order to follow him, and to learn what was become of him, of whom since that
time there was no news heard, which was the cause so many believed he was
killed by the Dukes Orders, but ^ cannot believe this last common opinion,
because that Prince had not so black a soul; and I rather think he was
satisfied enough with ordering him to be punished only by sending him far
enough off his State; some were of opinion that he went into Swede, and under a
disguize changed his Religion and became a Lutheran; and some believe he lives
at this day in some little place he purchased with those thousand Pistols which
the Duke sent him by Bills of Exchange for his Voyage into Persia: Others
pretend he has been seen in Portugal not five years since, which is not
certified credibly. But whatever is become of him, there has not any thing been
heard of him since that time, and at Casal there is nothing spoken of him good
or bad, and therefore we will talk no more of him, but here conclude the life
of that unfortunate Husband.

Let us now return to that poor Princess, almost forsaken by her husband, in
all things but outward show; who seeing her self thus treated by the Duke her
Husband, for the love of an infamous woman, and one so much below her in Birth,
that there is no other comparison between them to be made but what is given
between that of a Prince and a slave; so that it was very difficult for her to
hinder her self from loudly complaining of the Countess, and the more by seeing
every day her husbands affection grow colder for her, and increase to that
wicked woman, who alone possessed his heart. This afflicted Duchess was
desperate at all the abominable tricks which from day to day were played the
Earl beyond the Seas, only to leave his wife at more Liberty with the Duke;
and her affliction was very much increased when she was informed of his
despair, which had caused him to renounce absolutely the serving that Court any
more, and never to return to Casal, nor yet into any part of Italy; and since
she heard by the whispering murmurs of the Courtiers, that the Duke angry at
this procedure of the Earl had resolved to pursue him in revenge wherever he
went; in pity to this poor Lord, she went to ask his pardon of the Duke, and to
that effect she set before his eyes the example of David, driven from his
Kingdom, not so much by the persecution of Absalom his son, as the decree of
Heaven, to punish him for Adultery, which he had committed with Bathsheba, and
that horrid execrable and barbarous murder of Uriah her husband, adding, That
that Prophet had not so violently persecuted Uriah, as his Highness had pursued
the Earl; nor had lived so long a time in Adultery with Bathsheba as he had
lived with the Countess. The Duke, angry at these solicitations, rose up from
the bed where he was sitting, whilst the Duchess was talking to him, and
walking to the Chamberdoor, gave her no other answer than this,

Madam, that which men believed in the Old Testament to be a sin, all Princes
account this day a gallantry: and saying this, he went away.

The Duchess seeing all her words unprofitable, and worked nothing upon the
heart of the Duke, which was harder than any rock, to all Counsels that were
given him to take him off his scandalous living; she resolved at last to try
another way, and employ greater strengths than her own, though she went far to
fetch them. She knew very well the veneration of the Duke for the Senate of
Venice, and she had often heard him profess his considerable Obligations to
that illustrious Republic, with which he held great Correspondence for the
interest and consideration of his own State. Therefore she took the occasion of
petitioning that Senate in private to interpose their authority, to deliver her
from her troubles, and to take the Duke from his scandalous way of life with
the Countess.

That Senate, who does nothing without great Caution and Prudence, did not
think this a necessary business for the whole body of the Counsel to take
notice of, therefore they ordered Monsieur Justiniani to undertake it as a
particular man, and to use all possible diligence in the affair: That Lord did
not fail to receive that Commission with much respect and submission, but he
was not without fear that he should be able to effect nothing to the
satisfaction of the Senate, nor of the Archduchess; he nevertheless omitted no
opportunity of surprising the Duke, to talk to him about it, and having found
an hour fit for his purpose, he begun to talk of this Commission with an
admirable Eloquence backed with Reasons so solid as never yet was seen come
from the tongue of that Excellent Orator; but all his Eloquence and strong
Reasons were unprofitable; all the Discourses of this Illustrious Lord
producing no effect, and made no impression in the heart of the Duke, who
answered resolutely to that Oracle of the Senate, that there was but one remedy
to cure so great a sickness, and that was, To send for an Executioner from
Venice, to cut his heart out of his breast, because as long as it staid there,
it must of necessity be the Countesses, and without depriving him of his heart,
it was impossible to take from him the love he bore to the Countess. After that
reply Justiniani found it to no purpose to press him further, and to undertake
any more against so great a wilfulness, as he discovered in the Duke.

That Prince then shutting his eyes to all kind of Considerations, lived with
the Countess like a Husband with his Wife, he carried her along with him when
he went a Hunting, and also to the Palace royal of Mantua, where his wife the
Archduchess also lay, he eat with the Countess, slept with her, and caressed
her in the presence of all his Courtiers, almost before the face of that poor
Princess his wife, who although she saw not what they ordinarily did, did not
fail to hear of it, having the story of what passed between those two Lovers
brought to her every day, all the Ambassadors, the Gentlemen, Noblemen, as
also all the Ladies of Mantua, admired the great Goodness of this Princess, to
suffer with so much Patience so great an injury, or to say better, such an
affliction of heart; for to say the truth, that dishonest love of the Dukes
brought more glory to the Duchess than any disgrace, because she in that
Patience expressed so great a virtue, in despising jealousy, and mocking at
all those carnal pleasures of Matrimony, and letting the world see that all her
trouble and mortification proceeded only from no other cause than the sin her
Husband committed, and therefore we are not to call that Patience of hers a
corporeal injury, but an affliction of Spirit.

There wanted no Ladies nor Gentlemen about the Court, who counseled the
Duchess from time to time to revenge her self of that Prostitute, by one of
those Draughts so common in Italy, as the only remedy to put an end not only
to her own affliction, but also the Duke her husbands adultery, and to take
away the dishonor of the Countesses Family, besides the depriving the Court of
its great trouble.

Amongst the rest there were two persons of very large Consciences, as one may
say, wide as a Friars sleeve, offered themselves voluntarily to do this deed,
the one was a Tailor, who proffered to end the Countesses life with the Shot of
a Harquebuz, which he would in private Shoot at her, and no body should know of
it, and that he would take great care in choosing his time, asking for
recompense of that action but two hundred Pistols, to keep him in any place he
should be forced to fly to, it not being possible after doing that to think of
returning back to his own house; or if they thought that sum too much for
him, he asked no more than a good Recommendation to the Archduke, to be
favorably treated with him.

The other person that offered to dispatch the Countess was a Lady and her
kinswoman, honorable by reason of her age, who believing her self interested
in the dis-reputation the Countess had brought upon her Family, and touched
with shame and compassion for the Archduchess, offered her self also to poison
this adulterous Countess, so privately that none should ever know it.

But that poor Princess who looked upon all those Miseries, as being by the
permission of Heaven, and receiving them as coming from the hands of God, did
not only blame those bloody resolutions, and tragical designs of those
murderers, but she also forbid them for ever the presenting themselves before
her with those Propositions, and it is said that one day, as she was
discoursing with her Confessor (in the presence of the Governess of her house)
of the scandalous life the Duke lived with that Countess, and the Proposals had
been offered her of revenging that adultery. That Confessor told her, That
great persons might commit a small evil, to deliver themselves from a greater.
Which the Duchess scarce heard him say, but guessing well his design, which was
only to carry her to revenge, she quickly replied, We had rather suffer the
Countess to live with her sin, than to let her die with ours.

These words sufficiently testified the great goodness and admirable virtue of
that excellent Princess, with which she endured all her disgrace so well, that
she took more delight in suffering, whilst others were pleased, than she could
have taken satisfaction amongst all kind of prosperities, whilst other people
had been unhappy; also she never went about to buy her own repose by a Crime,
and satisfy the desires of her body by an offense so prejudicial to her soul,
which makes me believe that God will take her into his particular care during
her Regency, and so much the more, because she prefers the interest of her
Maker before all those of the world.

The Emperor and the Archduke sent by their Ambassadors a desire to the Duke
of Mantua, that he would a little open his eyes, an consider the great scandal
he lived in, even in the fight of all the Princes of Italy, protesting that
they propounded this to him not out of resentment, but were pressed to it out
of the tender affection they bore to his person. They also assured him that
they had not been solicited to this motion by the Princess their kinswoman, who
complained not in the least to them of ill treatment, but on the contrary,
protested to them that the Duke her Husband honored her very much, and except
in the bed near him, to which the Countess alone was privileged, the Duke used
her with all the civility imaginable, as well in private as public. Therefore
the Emperourr and the Archduke had no cause to complain of any thing, and less
yet, in that it happened contrary in this scandalous life of the Dukes, to that
which ordinarily passes in such a case by many that use their wives ill, for
the sake of their Mistresses. For the Duke contrary to other men, was grown so
crafty, that he knew how to act cunningly by apparently satisfying his wife
before the world, and taking his private pleasures with the Countess; so that
it was not easy for any to observe any change in the looks of that chaste
Princess, but rather much contentment and pleasure. It is true, that outside
Friendship in appearance ought not to be imputed to the care and prudence of
the Duke so much as to the goodness of his wife; who being endowed with a
singular virtue, and an extraordinary prudence, could hide her grief, and
express no signs of trouble in her Face, although her heart was pressed down
with affliction.

The Court of Rome received with much displeasure the news of this scandalous
adultery, and the trouble it received was aggravated by the quality of that
great Person, who was guilty of that public disorder; and therefore it gave
Orders to the Superiors of the Convents at Casal and Mantua to enjoin the
Preachers to exaggerate the nature of this Crime in their Pulpits, whilst in
the mean time the Duke suffered the World to Talk, and the Monks to Cross
themselves, and went to Sermons when the Fancy took him, and hearkened to what
he liked; upon which, it happened, that a Father of the Order of St. Francis, by
in indiscrete Zeal, having too much reflected upon the Person of the Duke, and
too openly spoke of the Countess, found himself so entangled, he was
constrained to quit Mantua, till he was forced to Swear, That for time to come
he would change his Note, and in Correcting the Vices of Princes, he would
henceforward use more discretion.

The Dukes Confessor was also exhorted to remember his Highness sometimes of
the Obligation he had to leave off his scandalous life; (as if the greatest
evil of that Crime lay in the Scandal of it:) but that good Father loved better
to be in the good graces of a Prince, Adulterous and Criminal, then Enemy of a
Just and Innocent one: And furthermore, he was so indulgent, that when he
Confessed him, he easily gave him Absolution; Laying all the fault upon the
weakness of our Nature: In truth, there are Confessors in these days, that are
cause of the loss of many Princes; For, they being Ambitious to Domineer over
the other Brothers of the Convent by their Princes Favor; they would be
content (rather then lose that Dignity) not only to send their Princes to
Hell, but also go themselves to the Devil; neglecting the Duties of their
Place, and their Pastoral Obligations, in excusing the Faults which these
Illustrious Sinners commit.

The Countess also received from time to time her secret Mortifications; for
the Bishop, solicited perhaps from Rome, and the Arch-Dutchess, represented to
her sometimes the condition of her life, threatening to refuse to give her the
Holy Sacrament at Easter, but it was but Threats, to which she hearkened very
little, and which gave her but little trouble, because she was confident they
would never be performed, for fear of disobliging his Highness; and the more,
because the excused her self, by laying the fault upon the Duke, saying to him
that came to speak to her from the Bishop, That being born a Subject, she could
not command the Duke not to see her any more, because he would do her that
Honor.

I cannot forbear in this place to relate an Accident, no less curious then
Politic, which happened during these passages.

My Lord Bishop of Cassal had undertaken a thing believed impossible by all the
World, which was, to find out a remedy to divert the Duke from this Love of the
Countess; which was so Public, that there could not be a greater between two
persons Married: but the whilst he labored by I know not what Political and
Pastoral Zeal, he found the end of his days in seeking that of a Scandal; this
Death of his regreted by all: he having been a Prelate of an exemplar life, and
held worthy of so eminent a charge in the Church, in which he had always
showed himself with great Zeal.

The Countess was not very sorry, seeing her self by that delivered from the
apprehension, of losing the Dukes good Graces, of which she was in danger, by
the strong exhortations of that Bishop. On the contrary, she had no sooner
heard the news of the Death of the Bishop, but speaking to her Sister the
Countess Louize, she said to her, the poor Bishop is dead, for aiming too much
at Fifty-Cuffs against Heaven; she meant by that, to show it was all one, to
Fight against Heaven, and to endeavor to ruin her Favor with the Duke.

The Earl her Brother going also to talk to her upon the Subject of the
Bishops Death, said to her, Sister, you have lost a great Enemy at least, if he
that is his Successor prove not of his humor: To which she answered; He shall
be my Friend, or nothing.

The Bishops Funerals were scarce ended, but, as well from the State of Mantua,
as Rome, there started up many pretenders to his place; The Pope pretended a
right in the choosing of a Bishop for Casal, in the State of Mantua, because all
knew very well, that although the right of making a Bishop of Casal belonged to
his Holiness, yet there was no great satisfaction to be found, for any that
should be made without the Dukes consent: It being certain, that to be a Bishop
of any Town, against the Good Will of their Sovereign, it is no other, then to
ruin any Man's Fortune, and keep him always in trouble: There is no person
that will accept it without having at the least the nomination of the Prince,
or else a recommendation from him; And for this reason, there were as well at
Mantua as at Casal, the pretenders to that Bishopric, seeking to the Duke for
a Nomination, or recommendation from his Highness.

Amongst many others, the Provost of Miroglio had a mind to this Bishopric,
and it was very easy for him to attain it, because no body dreamed of him, for
the way he took was better, and very different from those that the rest of the
Pretenders had taken; he addresses himself to the Lady Margaret, with whom he
had always held a very good correspondence, and now sought her Recommendation
by submissions and promises, with extraordinary Proffers; he promised her a
Purse with a thousand Crowns in it to buy her a Diamond; protesting to her,
that he would willingly tesign the Cross into her hands; showing her by that,
that he would nener do any thing which should not be as she would have it, and
to her satisfaction: he forgot not to entreat her, that for all these
considerations she would employ all her interest with his Highness, to obtain
his Recommendation to his Holiness.

This occasion looked so fair, that the Countess would not neglect it:
Therefore she promised him to employ all her credit to bring his design about,
so well, that he should be satisfied with her endeavors; she went then to her
Well-Beloved, and represented to him, how necessary it was to his Highness to
have a Prelate at Casal, of another Humor then the former; who, under a color
of Zeal, should not inter^upt the repose which their Loves enjoyed, since the
death of the last Bishop; telling him further, that Miroglio was a Man of a
perfect prudence, and worthy of that Bishopric; sounding these words often in
the Dukes ears, My Heart, I desire thee to act so, that this affair succeed in
behalf of this Gallant Man; and certainly, he was always looked upon as such;
for, being a Prelate, he acquitted himself of his charge very well, and
continues still to do so; and although he salutes every Body with a Smiling
Countenance, and all kind of affability; and that in his ordinary Discourses he
still mingles some jeasting word or other: he nevertheless with all that
forgets not to Govern the Church and his Diocese extremely well.

The Duke, who of himself was inclined to favor that Lord, not only consented
to the request of his Well-beloved in his behalf, but engaged himself further
to act with all his power.

After this testimony of the Dukes good will, the Countess willing to try the
constancy of this Lord Miraglio, and to discover what his Thoughts would be (if
he arrived to that ^ishoprick) of her Amor with the Duke, sent for him, and
after having assured him of the Dukes Favor and Protection, to the end he
desired it, she represented to him the great imprudence of the deceased
Prelate, who, not content to enjoy his Bishopric in peace, which he held by
the Dukes Favor, would trouble the repose of His Highness, in seeking to make
him pass for an Adulterer.

Monsieur Miroglio, who, penetrated to the quick into the Soul of this Crafty
woman, answered her like a Gallant Man; for, after he had very much condemned
the procedure of the dead Prelate, he Swore to her, that if ever he received
the Mitre, he would never do any thing, but what should please the Duke and her
self; furthermore, he added, That the Sins of Princes were but small in the
eyes of God; and in fine, he brought many other such kind of reasons, and
perhaps better to reach his end, and compass his design, only to appear blind
to the Dukes Scandalous Life, and Public Adultery.

The Countess was not unsatisfied with this Discourse, and tolerating that
Lord, she made him so many advantageous Promises, that he parted from her very
well contented, and pleased the more with the last words of the Countess, which
were, That he was as sure of being Bishop, as he was certain that the Duke was
Lord of Casal, and Sovereign of his State.

The time of parting for Rome being come, my Lord Miroglio was at the Palace,
to obtain the Letters of Recommendation from His Highness, and receive the
necessary Orders; but the Duke, to let him see that he considered in that
Choice, more the Interest of his Beloved, sent for him, and told him, My Lord,
you shall receive from the Countess all you wish: To whom he answered, with a
low Congee, The Hands of such a Lady could bring him nothing but good Fortune.

The Duke Writ diverse Letters to the Court of Rome, to recommend the Interest
of this Pretender to the Bishopric; but, amongst the rest, that which he writ
to his Holiness, was so much to his advantage, he could not reasonably desire
one greater; and because the Countess gave him this Letter open, I will here
give you the Contents to satisfy the Curiosity of the Reader.

Most Holy FATHER.
AFter having most Humbly Kissed your Feet, with all the Affection of my Heart;
I Salute your Holiness with all the Humility of my Soul; recommending in he
mean time to the Politic and Eccl^siatick Zeal of Your Holiness, the Interests
of my Lord Miroglio, Provost of this Town, and a Man very much beloved in my
house; be aspires to this Vacant Bishopric, and if I am not deceived, I
believe his Merit renders him worthy enough of it; the time of the War, which
makes this Town liable to great suffering, both within and without, obliges me
to be more earnest with Your Holiness, to consider the Person I recommend to
you, and Create Bishop of Casal this Subject, whom I look upon as my Intimate
Friend, and a Man qualified to remove all Causes of Jealousy, which usually
grow from the Introduction of Prelates who are strangers, into such eminent
Places; and therefore I desire Your Holiness, with the Humility of a Son, to
Grant me with this Grace Your Fatherly Benediction.


The Countess had no sooner given this Letter to Monsieur Miroglio, and the
others addressed to some of the Cardinals, then he went for Rome; where, being
arrived, he delivered the Letters, and Solicited his Affairs and Interests
with a care suitable to his Pretensions; and such as you may guess by the usual
diligence of those who aspire to the like Dignities.

The other Pretenders, who were very numerous, seeing how considerable his
Recommendations were, and that his Party was the strongest, begun A la mode of
the Court of Rome, to Cross him, and with all their power endeavored to
exclude him, by many proofs of his insufficiency, murmuring against his
Person; and which was worse, publishing many things against his Reputation.

There were two chief Reasons which they set up, to discountenance his
Pretensions; the First was, That there was no regard to be taken to those
Letters of Recommendation procured by an Adulterous Woman, and bought of her
with a great Sum of ready Money: And the Second was, That it would be Scandalous
to make Cousin of a Heretic a Bishop, who also carried the same name of her
Family: But not to leave the Reader in doubt upon this Particular; I will
explain it all in two word.

Twelve years before this, Don Mario Miroglio, Canon of the Cathedral Church
of Casal, near Kinsman to Lord Provost Miroglio, was retired from that Town to
Geneva, to the great displeasure of the Chapter, and the House of Miroglio, who
spared for nothing to bring him back from whence he was fled but he, deriding
all their Remonstrances, changed his Religion, to embrace that which is
Professed at Geneva; and was afterward Married; he dyed some time after,
leaving two Male Children behind him, to Eternize his Name in that Church so
contrary to the Church of Rome.

The whole sacred College was informed of that by his enemies, who had the
same pretension with him, and above all they chiefly informed the Cardinal
Sforza, as he that spoke the freeliest, and spared not the Pope himself, when
he was to give his advice, and they were not deceived, for the Cardinal Sforza,
going to the Pope, sought at first to snake a way into his thoughts, to alter
his resolution of making Miroglio Bishop, and seeing for all his endeavors,
that all things went on that Lords side, he was resolute, and could not
forbear, saying one day to the Pope in a full Consistory,

Most holy Father!
IF your Holiness resolves to make the brother of it heretic a Bishop at
least, let it not be the pimp of an adulterous woman.


The Pope notwithstanding knowing that Cardinals humor, said only to him,
that he was very well acquainted with the merits of the Lord Miroglio.

Miroglio then made Bishop, contrary to the expectation of all the world, and
to the great discontent of his enemies, he gave many thanks to the Countess,
besides giving her the thousand Crowns, which he had promised her before, and I
will not speak of the many Presents he made to diverse persons of the Dukes
Court.

This Prelate wanted for no civility nor respect for the Countess, and honored
her very often with his visites, staying many afternoons with her, whilst the
Prince was at Mantua; for when the Duke was at Casal, her house was forbid to
all the world, except the Duke, to whom it only belonged to Court that Fair
one; one day however, as the Bishop was going out of the Countesses house, to
whom he had been making a visit, he met the Duke, who said to him, My Lord
Bishop, it were better that your Greatness should enter, and I should go out
from this house, then for me to go in, and you to go out. He said this only to
give the Bishop to understand, that he who was a Prelate ought to give the
Countess the absolution of her sins, which he was going to commit with her.

But to return to the Duchess, who was, as one may say, forsaken; you must know
that seeing all things desperate as to the conversation of the Prince her
Husband, she resolved to give her foul some rest, to let him do whatsoever
pleased him, without seeming to take any notice, and to give these Lovers leave
to take all their swing, with a full resolve to mind nothing for the future,
and to take no further care, importuning them no longer, all she had done
having been to little purpose.

The greatest favor she had desired from her Husband had been, That he would
content himself with the scandal he gave to his own State, without doing such
gross things, to make himself the discourse of other Nations, and the scorn' of
the Courts of other Princes; and indeed the Duke and the Countess lived in such
liberty, that it was verily believed that there was a private divorce between
the Duke and his Duchess, so that by the consentment of them both, their
marriage was broke; and that he had after that privately married the Countess,
which nevertheless was very far from truth; but it was impossible to shut the
common peoples mouths, as long as this scandal was so public. The Duke cared
not to go one step without the Countess, they eat and drunk together, and they
never went to take the Air without one another; if the Duke went from Mantua to
Casal, or to Mantua from Casal, he always carried the Countess with him in the
Coach, Alone; and for her part, she could not in the journey suffer her self
one minute to forsake him who was more to her than she was to her self. I leave
these considerations to the Impartial Reader, and not to the Lover, or
whosoever he is that reads this Book, and is troubled with amorous fancies;
what followed these privacies.

The impudence of this bold woman grew to that excess, that not content to have
spoild the good Judgment, Nature, and the Prudence of the Duke, in seeking to
govern him her own way, and enjoy him according to the motions of her brutish
appetites, and believing her self not bolig'd to keep any measures, triumphing
insolently over her shame, it seemed very little to her to be talked on only
in her own Country, although she gloried much in that; but she chiefly aspired
at the publishing her favor with the Duke in other Nations, desiring they
should know how much she enjoyed with him above all that the greatest Favorites
could ever pretend to from any Prince; though she a little feared that the
stories of her sin and adultery might come to their ears; She was ambitious
that fame should publish her in all places, and that not only the people of
Montferrat, and the Mantuans, but all Italy (not to speak of Asia and Europe)
should know that she accompanied the Duke every where, that they should see her
play, and walk with him, and be eyewitnesses, that she slept with this Prince
when she pleased.

To satisfy this ambition she desired his Highness, that he would carry her to
Venice, to see the Solemnity which is there upon Ascension-day, but the Duke,
who weighed all things with more prudence, promised he would satisfy her, in
sending with her what persons soever she pleased to have in her company, except
himself; not thinking it fit for him to appear with her before the Senate,
since upon her account he had received a private rebuke from them, as I told
you before, but she who only sought to appear there before all the strangers
that were at that time at Venice, and to please her ambition more than her
curiosity, could not receive his offer; and told him plainly that she would go
with no other company than his Highness. In fine she knew so well how to charm
him with her caresses; and gave him so many reasons, that she made him resolve
to go himself, and carry her with him, as she desired.

The Duke would make this Voyage incognito, but his Mistress would carry her
Sister the Countess Lovize, and three other Ladies with her, all very well
dressed, and with them some Maids of Honor and waiting Gentlewomen, which was
the reason that those who were not acquainted with the Amors of these two
passionate Lovers took this fair Pilgrim for the Archduchess, who went
incognito, and to say the truth, this Voyage could not be made with more
magnificence nor joy for her, she might have been called a little triumphant
Princess, who had always the Prince at her side, who led her by the hand, as
well in public as private, and she was so over-joyed to see her self honored
and served by all the Courtiers, who treated her as if she had been their true
and lawful Sovereign Princess, that it is impossible to find words to express
her satisfaction.

The noise of their arrival in Venice was quickly spread through all the town,
and curiosity carried immediately all the town in crowds to the streets, to see
these two Lovers who were so much talked of, not only through all Italy, but
every where else, the streets were filled with a number almost infinite of
persons of both sexes, who crowded one another to behold with how great a grace
the Duke led the Countess by the hand in the sight of all the people.

It is confidently, spoken that this Prince spent in this Voyage more than
three thousand Pistols in many Presents which he made, he gave amongst the
Ladies of his troop five hundred Crowns, and the rest to the Countess, who
coveted all that she saw in every shop amongst the Merchants; and when she took
notice of any rarity, which was commended in that Country, she spared no
caresses nor flatteries to the Duke to persuade him to buy that knack upon
which she had set her heart. It is certainly believed, that the Duke till that
hour had not found any sign of covetousness in the Countess, and till then she
had never expressed a desire of any thing besides the love of her Gallant; but
the Air of Venice altered her nature, and what ever she had a mind to, the Duke
never contradicted her desires, he was so far from denying her any thing, that
one day as they past by a Jewellers shop, they showed this fair Lady a great
number of precious stones, amongst which there was a little Rose of Diamonds,
round beset with little Golden Eaglets, which held out their Bills to kiss one
another, which seemed almost the arms of the house of Gonzague, the Countess
then looking steadfastly upon that Jewel, and with great desires, without daring
to ask it, for fear of being too importunate, the price being more than four
thousand Crowns, with some caresses and flatteries, without once opening her
mouth to beg it, she obliged her loving captive to give it her with these
words, I shall not be much troubled to part with all my money to her, to whom I
have given all my heart.

In returning home they went to Padua, where by chance that day the Comedy of
Joseph was acted in music, which the Duke would see; he went thither with the
Countess, followed by all his people, and placed himself with the other Ladies
of his company in a Box over against the Stage, where he always held his
Mistress in his arms, embracing her in the face of the whole Assembly, who took
not their eyes of them one moment. In the mean time, when the Scene where the
wife of Potiphar is represented, forcing of Joseph to sleep with her, and
particularly at that place where that example of Chastity refuses her, and
flying away leaves her his Cloak. The Countess turning to the Duke said, I
cannot praise this young man, for having thus left an affamish'd Lady; to which
the Duke answered, All the world is not so charitable, nor so complaisant, as I
am for thee.

The scandal which all Lombardy suffered by this Voyage, displeased the Duchess
very much, and she could not refrain the expressing her resentments to the
Duke; but since her words accompanied with her ordinary Mildness had nothing of
indignation in them, they made no impressions upon the heart of her husband,
who had entirely sacrificed her to the Countess, with whom he lived in such a
manner that the world were almost persuaded that there had passed some
Clandestine Marriage between them, which was the Cause of no small displeasure
amongst the people who were very much afflicted to see their Prince so
effeminated,

In the mean time the Court of Rome murmured, and bore with much impatience,
not only the life which the Duke led with the Countess, but also were more
troubled at the Popes silence, who sought not to remedy these scandals: this
noise and these impatiencies increased by the return of Cardinal Leomelini, who
came from this Legation at Bologne, who having had some contests with the Duke,
sought a revenge: and since we are come to speak of that particular, I think it
will no be from the purpose to touch, in passing by, upon it as briefly as I
can possible.

The Nobility of Bologne had invited the Duke to see some Comical
representations that were to be in the Town, with a magnificence and
preparation extraordinary; and because the Duke could not longer live without
his Countess, nor scarce go four steps without having her in his Company, he
carried her again with him, as if she had been his wife, to see those shows
aforesaid.

The Gentlemen, that belonged to the Legate Cardinal Leomelini, could not
refrain from murmuring with some kind of scorn and mocks to the Dukes actions,
who with an universal scandal carried along with him an Adulteress, even into
the Towns of the resort of the Ecclesiastical State; on the other side those
who belonged to the Duke seeing themselves obliged to defend the reputation of
their Sovereign, after many injurious words on both sides, came to blows, to
the great displeasure of the Nobility in that Town, who saw themselves obliged
in that conjuncture to take the Dukes part, against those of the Cardinal, so
that the Duke seeing himself affronted, sent to complain to his Eminence, who
in stead of satisfaction in punishing the beginners, protected his men, and
threatened the Duke himself.

The Duke went out then from Bologne, all in rage, with design to cause the
Cardinal to be murdered in his Coach, and to that end he sent upon Good Friday
twenty four men well armed, who, being entered the Town, discharged at the same
time many Pistols into the Legates Windows, not that they had designs to kill,
but affront him; all the inhabitants were in a maze at the boldness of those
Cavaliers, who hazarded their lives with so such confidence they saved
themselves nevertheless without receiving any hurt, although they were pursued
by the Guards.

The Gentlemen of Bologne, and particularly those who had invited his Highness
to Bologne, perceiving that the Duke was very angry, and to prevent any further
mischief that might happen through this disorder, sent word to Pope Alexander,
to the end that the might hinder it, who, making use of his ordinary prudence
by a Maxim of Policy, took that employment from the Cardinal, pretending he
would give him one more suitable to his Estate, and put in his place the
Cardinal Farnese, who was of the last creation, and friend to the Duke.

Leomelini knew presently from whence this change came, and therefore without
loosing time returned to Rome to be revenged of this injury, which, to speak
truth, was an affront; to arrive at this design, he began presently to inform
all the Conclave of the Cardinals, and his Holiness also, of that shameful life
which the Duke lived with the Countess, and the great scandal which it gave to
all Lombardy. That song which the Courtiers sung quickly spread over the whole
Town of Rome, so that in the streets no other thing was talked on.

That Cardinal was very importunate to have this Duke proceeded against by way
of Excommunication, giving them to understand with his usual authority, that if
they suffered such an adultery to be unpunished, the Heretics without doubt
would prevail, and the holy Chair would suffer a great blow to its reputation,
and in fine would condemn the Church for tolerating and permitting adultery.

But the Duke informed of all these things, caused it to be told the Cardinal
Leomelini, That he would teach him to speak, if he would not learn to hold his
tongue. For all this his Eminence changed not his note, who being not
accustomed to tongue injuries, repeated always the same song, and very far from
harkening to peace, or to seek it, the more that he saw himself threatened, he
repeated his complaints the more to the Pope and his Cardinals.

But the Pope Alexander understanding the affairs of the World, nor being
ignorant how he ought to treat with a Sovereign Prince, went not so hastily to
work, and pressed not so much to undertake a Prince who had merited so well
from the holy Chair, nor however, at least, for no other subject but a woman,
he well knowing that the Duke was not the only Adulterer, and that that
busine^ would reflect upon many Princes who lived in the same disorder, and
therefore he gave not much ear to the Cardinal Leomelini, no more than to the
other Cardinals, who undertook this business to the Pope, not for any hate they
had to the Duke, but because they were set on by this Cardinal.

The Pope at last seeing himself pressed, and not to be wanting in his duty of
Pastor, ordered the Cardinal grand Penetencier, to write to Miroglio, Bishop
of Casal, that he should proceed against the Countess by the ordinary ways in
the like cases, that is to say, to refuse her the Communion at Easter, and in
case that she sought not to mend and change her life, to put an end to that
great scandal, after he had given her all those fatherly corrections, to which
his charge obliged him, he should proceed to Excommunication, or the other
Ecclesiastical Censures, which the Councils command to be used in such kind of
Cases.

The Penetencier failed not to obey the order that vas given him to write, but
not in the manner which the Cardinal Leomelini desired, because he writ to that
Prelate in gentle terms, commanding to behave himself in this affair with great
Prudence, with a suitable zeal, which did not suit with the designs and desires
of that Eminence. The Bishop had no sooner received that Letter, but he
communicated it to the Duke and the Countess, who derided it, and the more,
because the Bishop himself laughed at it too, who would not do any thing against
the pleasure of two persons, who had given him his Bishopric.

This Prelate taking his leave at the end of that discourse, the Duke taking
him by the hand said in his ear, My Lord, write to the Cardinal Penitentier,
That when the Pope Chases all the Bawdy-Houses out of Rome, we will drive the
Countess from hence. It is true, he said that more to ^ally with the Bishop,
then for any other reason, because he knew very well, that those words would
not go so far as Rome; though, as I believe, he had not much cared, or not at
all if they had; nay, if they had been told to his Holiness.

The Bishop returned a Letter to Rome full of good and solid choice Reasons,
which showed the necessity there was for the good of the Church, that they
shou1d shut their eyes to those disorders, not to enrage the Duke, for if they
did so, he feared he might do worse, and might proceed to trouble and punish
the repose of the Clergy; in effect, he was not deceived, for if ever it had
happened that the Countess had received that discontent, of being struck by any
censure of the Church; the Duke, who would also have looked upon himself as
injured, had without doubt molested the Clergy and the Bishop; for Princes
never want Reason to make Criminals: and since Ecclesiastical Men will not
acknowledge themselves Subjects to them, and particularly the Bishops, who look
upon themselves as exempt from owning that Title; but, it is a great abuse, and
they deceive themselves grossly.

The Answer of this Prelate happened, I know not by which way, to be communicated
to the Cardinal Leomelini, who presently began to murmur against that Bishop,
as he did against the Duke, not sparing him, even in the Consistory of the
Cardinals; and saying all the ill things he could of him, though falsely: For to
speak truth, this Prelate had always behaved himself like an honest man, and
has no vices that are worthy of reproaches.

What dissimulation soever the Holy Father showed, yet he was nevertheless
sensibly touched with the Advertisements he everyday received of the Scandalous
Life of the Duke and the Countess; and therefore moved with Zeal and
Compassion, he made many Prayers be offered in every Church, to the end, that
it would please God to touch the Heart of that Prince, and draw him from his
obstinate hardness of heart, in going on in so infamous a Sin as that was, in
which he had so long lived.

But at last, making reflection upon the duty he was obliged to, as Sovereign
Pastor of the Church, he saw well, that to hold his Peace, would not be to
acquit himself well: on the other side also, as he would not proceed in that
business with rigor against that Prince; he resolved, being combated with his
Duty and his Fear, to employ the most gentle remedies, and to employ in them
Persons also virtuous, endowed with Piety.

He (...) to that purpose, the Father Cat^ (...) Mantua and Casal; he was a
Person celebrated as well for the fairness of his carriage, as the excellence
of his virtue; with Fatherly instructions setting before him the Service he
should do both to God and the Church, and that he should Merit very much from
the Holy Chair, if he could overcome the Spirit of this Duke, and obtain any
Victory over that of the Countess, to make them leave off this Scandalous Life,
so much to the Scandal of the whole Church.

This good Father Capuchin, guessing the hardness of the hearts of Adulterers,
felt in himself some repugnance for this Employment, despairing of ever
conquering the Obstination of the Duke, or to move his heart, which Sin had
made harder then a Diamond; nevertheless, without reply to the Pope, he
received that Commission which his Holiness imposed upon him, with a ready and
as humble obedience which belongs to that Order of Capuchins, and is so suitable
to their Habit; in a word, with a Capuchins Obedience, and with Promises, To do
all in his Power to serve his Holiness and the Church faithfully, he would
spare no Cares to procure the Salvation of the Souls of the Duke and the
Countess.

The Pope, in giving this good Father his Blessing, commanded him, that if
peradventure he perceived that his Charitable Remonstrances, and Fatherly
Corrections had no effect, and that by mild ways he should work nothing upon
the Heart of that Prince, that he should proceed to some kind of Rigor and
Threatening, in the behalf of the Holy Chair; and yet withal that he should not
fail to let the goodness of the Pope be known, and to excuse him to the Duke,
if they came so far as to Ecclesiastical Censures against his Person.

This Father went from Rome with this Order, drawing toward Mantua; but, in
passing by Bologne, he communicated all these Orders he had received from His
Holiness to the Superior of a Convent of his Order in that Town, and asking his
Counsel, How he should Act, in an Affair of so great Importance? they consult
together, and both concluded, That it would be better to stay for the
opportunity of the Dukes being at Casal, to the end, that he might have the
convenience of assaulting both their Hearts together; our Capuchin followed
this advice, and in stead of continuing on his way for Mantua, drew toward
Casal, where he arrived two days sooner then the Duke, who came thither with
the greatest part of the Court.

This Capuchin being then arrived at Casal, discovered to almost the whole
Convent the occasion of his Voyage, and prayed them to join their Prayers to
his, to obtain from God a favorable success in so difficult and dangerous an
enterprise; but that policy of his succeeded very ill, contrary to his wishes,
because the plot being discovered, the Noise of the Subject of his Voyage to
Casal was spread through the whole Town, so that he was discovered before the
Duke gave him the Hearing; but at last his Highness coming also to be informed,
forbid every body to suffer this Capuchin to come near his Person, and not
permit him to enter in any place where he was; which this poor Father
perceiving, despairing of acquitting himself of his Commission, and the more
because he was told, That the Duke was going suddenly to Mantua; he thought it
necessary to take his Journey to Rome, following the Advice given him by the
Lord Miroglio himself.

All the World had great respect for this proceeding of the Court of Rome, and
so much the more, because it had employed those of the Order of Capuchins,
which is in great veneration in Italy; nevertheless that hindered not the Duke,
and the Countess, to mock at all they did to stifle their Love, which became
greater and greater; making the Proverb good, That privation begets Apetite;
because the more they saw themselves molested, upon the Subject of their
Amors, the more it inflamed in them the desire to do all things, that could
contribute, in any sort, to their Delights, and what pleased them.

The Duke was informed of all they said at Rome, touching his Love to the
Countess; and, in truth, they spoke of it with too much scorn; making Libels
and Satyrs, extremely piquant, against his Person; also, in return, they spared
neither the Cardinals nor the Pope himself in the Court of Mantua, though the
Duke did what he could to silence them, like a good Prince as he was (for his
greatest Vice was that Adultery) so great was his respect to the Holy Chair, he
would not suffer them in his presence to speak any thing against the Heads of
the Church, however his Courtiers being not of his humor, it was not in his
power to make them hold their peace; therefore their insolence grew to that
height, that there was seen at Rome some Libels, in which they Challenged the
Inhabitants of that Noble City to come to Mantua, to let them see they would
revenge the Affront they pretended to have received from them.

But it is now time for us to visit his Highness in his Tent, to see in what
condition his Love is, now he is turned a Soldier.

The good Fortune of the French had been so prosperous till then, that they had
carried their Victorious Arms beyond Flanders, Catalonia, and Roussillon; and
though they had not as yet begun to show themselves of that side of Caracene,
toward Milan, yet they took the way to be Masters of Italy, to which that
Nation ardently aspires: The Enemies beat the Field, and ranged sometimes on
one side, and then of another, upon the Banks of the River Tesino, with so much
Liberty, they seemed to be absolute Masters; they were commanded by the Duke of
Modene, one of the great Captains of our time; and he was accompanied with as
many Captains as he had Soldiers; that is to say, they were the Valientest
Warriors in the World; for, in truth, at that time the French were so esteemed.

But the Spaniards perceiving themselves not in a condition to oppose those
Invincible Conquerors; and, that the Affairs went but too ill in Lombardy,
addressed themselves to the Emperor, desiring him to assist them in the
Defense of a place which was so considerable in the Empire; this Monarch
granted their requests the more willingly, in regard of his own interest there,
as well as that of the House of Austria; and indeed he made it appear, that the
Empire was interessed in it, doing upon that account all in his power, and
joining with those of that House, with whom he entered into a very strict
League, to prevent the Duchy of Mantua from falling into other hands.

The Duke Charles was to that end nominated Vicar of the Empire, and they gave
him to that purpose the Command of an Army, that he joining with the Spaniards
might stop the Progress of the French Arms in Lombardy: In the mean time the
French thought fit (in their Council of War) to lay Siege to Alexandria, one of
the strongest Towns in the Duchy; and although this place was very well Manned
and defended, this resolution nevertheless gave much apprehension to the
Spaniards, since it was a place of such consequence to any that could possess
themselves of it; and for that reason the Duke Charles thought himself obliged
in Duty to go himself in Person to assist a place so important to the repose of
all Italy; after they had then ordered all things necessary for the succor of
Alexandria, he gave Order for the March of his Army; he parted, to that end,
from Millan, where he had been Incognito, to speak with the Ministers of Spain,
not on purpose, but to take an occasion of passing from Mantua to Montferrat,
and by that means to go to Casal, to visit his Countess, who impatiently
expected him.

As soon as he saw her, he expressed his kindness in an extraordinary manner to
her, having been absent from her 15 days, so that it was impossible for any to
snatch this Prince out of the Arms of that beauty in 2 days; notwithstanding
all the Remonstrances of those which were sent to him from the Army, who
exhorted him to come in all haste to the relief of Alexandria, which was going
infallibly to be lost, if there were not some kind of Succor sent immediately
to it.

The Countess had taken a resolution of putting her self in the Habit of a Man,
and to follow the Duke wheresoever he went; and although the Duke seemed to
consent to it at first, yet he thought it not very convenient in the end, and
therefore she saw her self necessitated to remain at Casal, having obtained a
promise from her Lover, That every day she should receive from him an Account
of his health, and the progress of his Highness with that of his Army.

This Prince parted from Casal then the fourth of August, accompanied with his
Countess, who went with him in his Coach above three Miles; and also, by an
excess of Gallantry, he^ Brother drove the Coach till they came to a certain
Village, where they stopped to take leave of his Highness; who, drawing apart his
Well-beloved, was sometime in conversation with her, but not satisfied with
that, and what he had enjoyed of her company all the way, they entered into a
Peasants house hard by that place, were they were together a full hour, to the
great heartbreaking of all the World, who waited for them in the Street,
although in the mean while the Countesses Brother invented all he could imagine
to divert the Company.

After these two Lovers had given their adiews to each other, having finished
all their Ceremonies in the Chamber of that good poor Country-mans house, they
went out, and being yet not able to separate for good and all, they staid at
the door, talking together, toying and fooling with one another, and also to
make Love half an hour longer, whilst in the mean time there arrived a Post
from the Marquess of Faensaldagnia, Gover^our of Milan, who earnestly desired
his Highness, That he would hasten his depart to the Army, where they
impatiently waited for him, having absolute need of his presence: who ever had
seen the Duke and his Countess so strictly embraced, would have thought they
were never to meet again, and if a Gentleman a great friend of the Dukes had
not confidently told his Highness that the night came on apace, and that it was
not safe for him to enter in the dark into a Country that was the rendezvous
of the enemy, I believe the Duke and his Countess would have staid a good while
longer in that place, which yet was not a very convenient one, to make love in.
In fine, after that these two Lovers had given some tears to their future
absence, they took leave of one another; She returning to Casal, and the Duke
marching toward Alexandria, where the Army staid for him, and where the
Spaniards Council of War was held, to consult upon the way to secure that place
so considerable to their State, and which they already believed out of their
power.

The Marquess of Faensaldagnia had commanded an apartement for the Duke to be
made ready in a Palace, a mile from Alexandria, about which was encamped the
Imperial and Spanish Army, as being a very advantageous Post to trouble the
enemy, who had no defense from their shot, and were blockt up between the Town
and the River.

The Duke was scarce arrived, but finding that Air unwholesome for him, and
being very much heated by the journey, he was presently seized by a Fever,
which obliged him to go to bed, but that which added to his trouble, was to see
himself in a Country so prejudicial to his health, and where he could not have
those things fit for his cure, with that diligence which his disease required,
Tortona being distant from him two miles, and that was the nearest Town wherein
there were Apothecaries.

Two things begun to trouble his mind and raise his spleen and melancholy, The
one was that such a misfortune happened to him in the First time of his life
that he had appeared in the field, fearing it would oblige him to return to
Casal, without the glory of having done any thing to show his courage; but that
which was his greatest heartbreaking was, That he fancied the Spaniards would
believe him a Coward, under which notion he should pass for such through all
those Countries, not being able to imagine they would be so civil to lay all
the fault upon his Fever, (which really was the cause) but would rather
believe it a fair pretense of the Dukes to hide his cowardly heart. The second
thing which so tormented him, was, To see himself alone, and deprived of the
service of his Countess, as he had been formerly: he resolved to keep his bed
notwithstanding, and stay in that Palace which they had provided for him,
because he would not loose the sight of the Spaniards, who came to visit him
(whilst his Fever thus perplexed him,) and advised with him of the means the
most fit to enterprise something upon the enemy.

This sickness of the Dukes was not carried so close but that it came to the
ears of the Countess, who was not a little troubled at it, and, as I believe,
it was his Highness that advertised her of it, being confident that she would
not fail to come to him as soon as she received that news. It was that which
the Duke desired with greatest passion; for being without his Mistress he was
without his heart, as he himself assured her brother, who writ word of it to
the Countess, by the express command of the Duke.

As soon as the news of the Dukes sickness arrived at Casal, the Countess was
so afflicted, that one would have thought she had no life left, and although
they did what they could to persuade her his disease was not great nor
dangerous; she nevertheless grieved very much, but she grew desperate when she
was informed that the French Army were so much up and down the Country, that
it was dangerous traveling between Casal and Alexandria, whither she would go
notwithstanding accompanied with only very few on Foot, through by-wa^es, with
intention to serve as Physician to this Amorous sick man, she sent out a Scout
before her journey, to be perfectly informed of the march of the enemies; that
so she might the better choose what way to take.

She was uncertain in her resolutions in what habit to travel in, whether that
of her own sex or of a man; fearful of being known if she should make that
journey in her ordinary dress; but having asked Counsel of her Governor in
that affair, he advised her to go with very few in her company, and to disguise
her self like a man.

The resolution for parting then being taken, after the Scout she sent was
returned, which was the same day that the Duke himself had informed her of his
being ill; she discovered her design to the Countess Lovize her sister a little
before she went, this Countess Lovize having formerly traveled as a man with a
Frenchman, whom I spoke of before, who was her Gallant, offered her self now to
accompany her sister in the same posture.

The Countess Magaret received this offer of her sisters very willingly, and
was the more inclined to it, by perceiving they two were so much of a humor as
to matter of journeys as well as other things; so away they went very late in
the evening accompanied only with their younger brother, and one man, to avoid
the encounter of the French, who costed up and down the Country every moment.
They went out of the great rode, crossing the Fields by little bypaths, that
were very much about, and made their journey much longer than the way they
quitted had done, but as ill luck would have it, they met with what they
avoided, and fell into the snare they took such pains to avoid.

They rested at night in a Village a little way off St Savior, without making
themselves known to their host, hoping to continue their way toward Alexandria
very early in the Morning; but they were deceived, as the Proverb says, He
that reckons without his Host must reckon twice. For it was scarce two hours
within night, when there arrived twelve Spanish Cavaliers, (perhaps the Host
himself had been their Spy) who, pretending to be Frenchmen, assaulted the
Inn where our amorous Pilgrims were lodged. These enemies came with so great a
noise one would have thought they had been the whole French army; the poor
Earl, who had accompanied his sisters, not having been accustomed to the noises
of War, and such kind of assaults as that, being afraid of his life, got up all
trembling to the highest Garret of the house to hide himself, thinking the very
Flies were Horses, and believing every Horse was a complete Army of the enemies.

In the mean time these two Countesses, disguised like men, were not yet got
into bed, and staid still in the Chamber, almost in despair, yet the Countess
Lovize raised her self a little out of her Fear, when she heard them speak
French, having been used to men of that Nation, though in quality of Friends
and not enemies, were those she had formerly conversed with, which these
Soldiers pretended not to be.

These brave Cavaliers were not much troubled to find out that these assieged
persons were Females and not Males, as their habits spoke them; and it was the
better for the Ladies that it was so, because that after they had given them
the divertizement of a two hours siege, they went away betimes in the Morning
to seek some other fortune, and left our Fair guests at Liberty, without
suffering any damage from them at all, unless it were some few kisses which
they were obliged to give them, and some other little rudenesses they offered
them, which need not be explained to the Reader.

The Countess Margaret was not a little mortified to be surprised by such an
assault as this, but on the contrary, the Countess Lovize was over-joyed in
having gained the affection of those besiegers, and had diverted her self with
those Counterfeit enemies, as may very well be imagined.

They went on their journey early in the Morning, toward Alexandria, although
the Earl their brother advised them to return to Casal.

Certainly these illustrious travelers wanted Conduct, to trust themselves in
a journey without any train in the time of war, and in a Country that swarmed
with Soldiers, not being ignorant that the enemies ranged every where, even to
the very Gates of Casal, two causes nevertheless excused them, Love and
Curiosity; for in effect, there was nothing but the Love of the Countess
Margaret to her Gallant, and the dishonest curiosity of the Countess Louize her
Sister, which made them hazard that little honor they had left; For certainly,
if they would have demanded a Convoy for their safety, they should not have
been denied it; but, who is ignorant that Love is blind, and always in have.

The Countess Margaret intended to relate this rencounter to the Duke, but her
Brother and sister thought it not very convenient, least it might give some
jealous trouble to that sick Lover, and therefore this past under Silence.

At last, being come to their Journeys end, into the Dukes presence, who was in
Bed, they did not trouble themselves with great Preamble and Ceremonies, nor to
keep him in long discourses; but their first conversation was Embraces with all
imaginable tenderness, which she gave to this poor sick man, who returned the
same to his Mistress (whose heart was pierced with grief) although the Room
was filled with many Captains, and some of the principal of the Army.

The Countess scarce had begun her Caresses to the Duke, but he seemed much
amended, and so much, that he looked like one that never had been Sick and also
all that day he had no Fever; which made it believed, that the Countess had
brought some Antidote with her to drive away the Sickness of her Lover.

The General of the Neapolitan Cavalry, who was by the Duke when this Beauty
entered the Chamber, taking leave presently of his Highness, in going to the
Door, said to one of his Friends who was in the Company, We may very well take
leave now, and go our ways, for the Duke will be no more for us.

Almost all the Commanders of the Army did nothing but grumble in the Camp at
the Countesses coming thither; believing, that as long as the Duke had this
Woman with him, he would forget his duty.

But, for all that, they found themselves happily deceived, because the Duke
recovered as he was, though perhaps not altogether cured, by the sight of the
Countess, gave himself up in good earnest to the exercise of his Charge.

It was a strange amazing sight, to see this Prince ride round about his Camp
on Horseback with his Mistress, giving the necessary Orders to his Army, where
he did wonders, that being his first time of Appearance in the Field; so that
there was very few persons that did refuse him the Honor he had Merited, of
delivering Alexandria; he knew so well how to make his Advantages of time and
place, that the Besieged became in a little time besiegers themselves; and
filled with extreme fears, those, who had been the most likely as Enemies as
Besiegers, to have given a mortal apprehension to his whole Army. The Duke
forbore not for all this, to give the best part of his time to his Amors with
the Countess, his Ague being turned to a Tertian, which gave him some respit,
but this alteration made it the more dangerous.

And since these Ladies had not brought with them Clothes suitable to their Sex,
they presently sent away an express to furnish them; it being very unpleasant
to the Duke to see her who possessed his heart, under any habit but her own; not
at all caring to see her dressed like a Man as well in the Chamber, as in the
Camp, whither he often carried her.

As for what belonged to the virtue of the Countess Louize, she lost not one
hour of the day by idleness, her great pleasure being to receive the Visits of
the Chief Commanders in that Army, amongst whom she passed her time with such
satisfaction, that she often lost her self, so that it was impossible for her
Sister to find her; it being certain that she had above half a dozen
Favorites, who fai'd not to content her to their power; and for that reason a
certain Florentine Gentleman, who, as well as the greatest Commanders, had
received from the Countess Louize some Favors, told a Comrade of his, That he
found the Whores of Casal very obliging.

The News of the Arrival of this Lady into the Camp, and of the Liberty which
she afforded every one, to offer her their Service, as well as the goodness she
had showed to that Commander we mentioned before, quickly spread it self into
the French Camp, so that it afforded the best sport in the World: and there was
a person, who, discoursing with the Duke of Modena of this Fair Curtisan, said,
in derision of her, Li Frances, Fanno Le Puttane, egli spagnoli le godono; The
French create the Whores, and the Spaniards enjoy them.

This he said in reflection upon her first Gallantry with the French Monsieur,
which I have already told you of.

In fine, The French Army raised the Siege from before Alexandria in the night,
the 16th. of August, after they had besieged it three Months; and they
dislodged themselves with so little noise, and so secretly, that their Enemies
themselves that were round about them perceived it not until morning after the
Sun was up; and that from the Town Walls there was no Tents, nor any thing else
to be seen.

The News was presently carried to the Duke, who was yet in Bed with his
Goddess; he expressed no small displeasure of this unexpected depart of his
Enemies, chiefly having resolved to give them Battle the day following,
believing, the Victory would certainly have been his, if he could have once
dsiputed it with them.

So, as soon as he was up, he went to visit the Batteries that the French had
made against the Town, having no body in his company but his Countess; her
Sister, the Countess Louize being gone in other Company; they staid nine days
at Alexandria, and in the evening of the last day the Duke went away,
accompanied by some of the chief Commanders amongst the Spaniards; and after he
had given the necessary Orders for the conservation of that place, and
recommended the care of the Army to his Lieutenant, he returned to Casal with
his Lady.

The joy of his arrival at Casal was Celebrated, that Town endeavoring to show
him all the Honor imaginable, in acknowledgment, that they looked upon him as
the Deliverer of a place of that importance; but, after all, those Feasts were
kept with much modesty.

The greatest pleasure of the Duke, was, to pass the best and greatest part of
the day in going here and there with the Countess thinking no mo^e of the Army
than of any thing else, to the great astonishm^nt of all the World; who could
not enough admire, how a Man could be ^o much devoted to the love of that
Woman, for he was quite contrary to other men, who love change* and often turn
their backs, not only to Whores, but even to their Wives, after they have
Married them: My dear Reader, I believe thou very well understandest me, and
that it is not necessary I should explain my self further, and therefore I will
only tell thee, That this Prince, the more he enjoyed his Well-Beloved, the
more his desire was kindled toward her; and in the Mornings, when he rose out
of bed he was mo^e p^ssionately in Love with her, then at night when he went to
bed to this Count^ss; the Fire of his Amorous passion was te-kindled at those
times that othe^s make use of for their repose.

From that time the ^uke failed not one day of that Summer to V^sit his
Countess at her own house, and when they were alone they made no scruple to
pull off their Clothes, and go to Bed together, without any more Complements;
The one, as if he were a Prince without a Principality; the other, as if she
were one of those Curtizans of Rome, that are always in their Smockes waiting
for their Braves. And although the Duke did often force himself to give
Audience to all the World that came to his Court, yet it was in such a way, it
was easily seen that he did it with Chagrin, and against his mind, and carried
himself like an extravagant; and it is not hard for me to believe it, since
that all his thoughts, his soul and heart breathed nothing else but his love of
the Countess.

But, for to give more convincing Proofs of this, and to assure the whole
World, and chiefly his own Subjects, that the Countess was absolutely his, and
possessed all his Affections, he appointed her two Men for Guards, who wore the
same Livery of his own Footmen, with order to follow this Lady wherever she
went, and to Guard her House night and day; this so public testimony of the
Dukes love, made her be respected, and more esteemed than ever, and also feared
by every one, so much it would have been looked upon as Sacrilege, to have
given her the least displeasure, or discontent; and there were at that time
four persons condemned to Banishment for having their Tongues a little too
long, and had talked too lewdly against this beloved Lady.

There was also another had the like ill Fortune, but he rather out of
Raillery, then for any thing else; hearing the Barrenness of the Countess
talked on, who had no Children, neither by her Husband, nor the Duke, began to
laugh, and said, Che non Faceva Fancialli, Perch voleva esser troppo seminata.

This poor Babbler carried not his words to Purgatory, for they put him in
Prison for some days, and he had staid there longer, but for the Intercession
of that person whom he chiefly had offended by his words, and was not inclined
to Revenge, although what had been said had not much pleased her.

Certainly that Lady deserved the affections of so great a Prince very much,
being adorned with all the advantageous qualities which she possessed; she had
a way of speaking so gentle and so attractive, that she captivated all hearts,
and obliged them to love her; I do not mean here of her extraordinary and
charming way with which she caressed the Duke, having no expressions capable to
describe them, but she was inclined to oblige every body, so it were not to
injure her self, nor as one may say, pick her own pocket, for in that case she
had no memory, being like other women, who are sparing, not to say covetous;
Pride never set his foot in her Carriage: but, on the contrary, the more she
saw her self in the Princes Favor, the more did the desire in her increase to
Speak Familiarly with all People, and to converse modestly with every one: The
Balls, Feasts, and Recreations of taking the Air, always took up her thoughts,
and her mind went no further then those noble Divertisements; and
nevertheless, when she chanced to meet the Duke in any place, she expressed a
carelessness of all things else besides the pleasing sight of his person, which
she esteemed above all; Anger nor Vanity never transported her; and if
sometimes she had occasion to Chide the Servants of her House, she did it
without those transports so ordinary to other Ladies; and also those Clothes
she had, so rich above the other Ladies of her quality in the Court, she wore
them without vanity, pride, or scorn, and contempt to those that had not the
like; It is true, she frequented the Churches more through Custom then any
other reason; and if she went to the Mass, it was only to be seen, and to see;
Yet, I must tell you, that she went thither sometimes, being Invited to it on
purpose by the Ecclesiastical Men, to the end of giving more Luster to the
Solemnities, which were at that time Celebrated in the Church; and also to show
her the great esteem they had of her Person, with which nevertheless she was
not satisfied. And although she had a Face Fair and agreeable enough, yet
there is nothing very lascivious; but, whilst the Duke was living, when she
was near him, she looked upon him as if she would have devoured him with her
Eyes, her looks at that time being the Effects of which, her Impudent Love was
the Cause.

But, above all this, there was some light of Prudence shined in her carriage,
which appeared in effect a Miracle, because this Fair one was not like those
Women that affect the Trade of St. Placidia to please their Friends; that is to
say, For all her great power over the Duke, and that was so absolute, she could
dispose of his Authority as she pleased, without the fear of displeasing him;
she yet kept her self for all that within the bounds of an humble modesty,
giving his Highness thanks for all the Favors he did her; assuring him, That
she was more then satisfied to enjoy alone the Loves of so great a Prince: And
the more the Duke offered his Service to her, and desired her to make use of
his Authority as she pleased, the less did she importune him with Requests; so
that when the Duke pressed her to ask some Favor at his hands, she usually
made answer, His Highness granted her Favor great enough, to let her enjoy his
Person.

After all this she Favored whom she pleased, and who were recommended to her,
which were without number, their being none ignorant, how great her power was
with the Prince, whose heart she possessed, and governed his whole will; and,
for that reason every one made Addresses to her, to help them in their
Affairs, according as they needed her Favor; but, on her side, she knew very
well what kind of Favors she was to demand of his Highness, not to displease
him; and she very rarely pressed him to grant any extraordinary matter, if she
had been of an humor to enrich her self, she wanted no opportunities of doing
it, and the Duke would never have hindered her; on the contrary, he advised her
to do it, and gave her all the means possible for it; so far, that when any
one addressed to himself to obtain a Request he used to say, For that you must
Petition none but the Countess and that was the only way to obtain their end.

That Charitable Countess had never yet the Repute of doing any thing out of
Interest; but it has always been thought, that all she did was to purchase to
her self Friends, rather then through hopes of any gain, expressing always her
aversion to that Lucre; It is true notwithstanding, that when any one offered
her some Fine thing, or considerable Sum of Money, she would do as those, who,
laying their hands upon the Present offered them, usually say, There is no need
of this, and yet take it willingly enough.

The greatest care of this Lady, and what she sought after with all the Passion
imaginable, was the Advancement of her Brother, which put the Duke to a stand,
what more to give him; having already Honored him with Employments and Offices
very considerable, and much above his deserts; or at least if he did any way
Merit them, it was very little: nevertheless the Countess never ceased begging
for him, and could have wished her Brother raised above all the Princes of that
Court.

The Arch-Duchess heard this news with a great heartbreaking; and
notwithstanding all the efforts of which her virtue was capable, she could not
hinder her self from being extremely displeased at the Advancing of that young
Lord, who never had a pretending Merit: but, that which occasion^d her greatest
Affl^ction, was, to, see her chiefest Servants rather cast down, then raised in
the least; and used with scorn, that deserved to be treated with Honor; which
caused these p^or unfortunate Persons to say, That the Duke showed more favor
to the Brother of an Adulterous Countess, then to the Servants of a Princess
his lawful and true Wife: and amongst other things, witness many Libels and
Satyrs, which I omit.

Although this innocent Princess received some kind of Mortification from all
this, however she never had a resentment against the Duke, because in the first
place she plainly saw, that he did nothing out of malice, but only to satisfy
that blind passion, which had enslaved him in the Chains of that Concubine:
And Secondly, she esteemed it not just nor reasonable to compare these
Gentlemen, persons of great Merit, with that Earl, that was a Man of no Honor.

In the mean time this Countess possessed all the Favor of this Prince, and kept
alone the two Keys of his Treasures; That of his Heart, by Love, enjoying him
without interruption: and the other, his Favors; since the Duke was so well
pleased when his Mistress made any Request to him; that she, knowing him of
that humor, made pretensions to him only for his satisfaction, as it is easily
to be known by this Letter following.

My little Heart!
CAEsar comes to tell me, that thou have an intention to ask some Favor of me,
in behalf of a Person that addressed to thy Courtesy, and because thou were
apprehensive of displeasing me, thou did not mention it yesterday in the
afternoon, that we were together. This way of thine of being bashful, makes me
believe that thou do not love me: for certainly, if thou did love me, thou
would act as freely with me, as I do with thee; also if I had ever yet
refused thee any thing, I confess thou might with reason ask me nothing: but
since I am so glad to grant thee all things, why art thou unwilling to ask me
any thing? To what end is Love painted blind and naked, if it is not to teach
Lovers Familiarity one with the other? The Principality is mine, and I am
thine, but the authority is common to us both, that is to say, thou may make
use of me, and I of the State; if thou love me then ask, command, and love thy

Charles.


But notwithstanding all these Protestations and Testimonies of love from the
Duke, this Fair One would never importune him by asking any favor that would
bring the least disquiet to his Highness, having wit enough to discern between
those favors she was to ask for his consideration, and those she was to demand
for her self. That for which she importuned him the most, and rung in his ears
from Morning until night, was, That he would carry her every where with him;
and not being pleased with staying so long at Casal, desiring to go into the
Country, and which was worst of all, she would not go that journey, unless the
Duke went with her. The Duke having at that time at Fancy to see Gennes, she
begun to second it, and to solicit his Highness by all kind of Supplications,
not sparing all the flatteries and courtships imaginable, to make him
condescend to her desire, who was already her slave of Love, which she held in
chains, she met with no small repugnance, nay much more than she found when she
was disputing with him concerning her journey to Venice, which, nevertheless
the Duke had made chiefly upon her consideration.

Notwithstanding she got the victory, and according as she desired they parted
from Casal in the beginning of July with a very small train, and without
discovering his Highnesses designs to any, he made as though he would go to
Mantua, not letting it be known which way he would go.

The Genoises did not a little wonder to hear of the arrival of this Prince in
their Town but more to see him there, since he was there before they could hear
of his intentions of coming to that place, and there were many that would not
believe that the Duke was come thither in so unseasonable a time, and without
any business there; but when they saw him accompanied with his Countess, they
laid aside their wonder, all the world believing that that journey was made for
the satisfaction alone of that Favorite, who had certainly a curiosity to see
that Town, which esteemed one of the most curious that is to be seen.

The Senate, following its ordinary generosity, received the Duke with all the
demonstrations of Love that they are accustomed to pay to Princes, who travel
incognito, and regaled him with a great number of sweetmeats and other
refreshments, and besides that honor, he received many visites from public as
well as private persons; but to say the truth, the Duke not going thither to no
other end but to divert the Countess, and satisfy her desires, he was not very
glad to be importuned by all these visites, it not being convenient for either
of them to receive those Civilities, and therefore to many it was said, the
Duke was not in his Lodging, and it was no great Lie for those few days he
staid in that Town, which scarce amounted to three days, he did nothing else
but go up and down with his Beloved, whom he led by the hand, followed by the
Countess Lovize her sister, and two other Ladies who came to keep her company,
which were also led by the Courtiers.

Two things appeared strange to the inhabitants of Genes: The first was the
Dukes entering into a Church to hear Mass, kneeled upon one step with the
Countess, to whom he did nothing but talk from the beginning to the end, as one
may say, From L'introibo until Deo gratias, de L' in principio, which made some
say, That the Religion of that Prince consisted in words and not in deeds. The
second thing so extraordinary to the people was, That when he went to see the
Palace, he still led the Countess by the hand, as if he had been her Squire;
but for my part I do not think that such a wonder, because though he led her in
public places, yet there was not so much cause for wonder, to see him lead her
in a place where she was not to be seen by so many. There was at that time at
Genes, an woman Cavalier, who one day discoursing with some of that Town
concerning the Ladies that followed the Duke, or rather, whom the Duke
followed, and amongst the rest speaking of the licentious disordered Life and
Carriage of the Countess Lovize, happened to say, When the Duke shall have
dishonored the rest of you Monsieurs of Genes, he will possibly drive away all
the Cows to Rome.

But the Genois, who was as witty as pleasant, made him this reparty, I assure
you that his Highness shall do nothing, because I know for certain that the
Romans love the Calves better than the Cows.

The same day the Duke went from Genes, there were two Father Capuchins, the
most famous in all the Province, who had undertaken to accomplish that which
the Father Catori could not, and who demanded Audience of his Highness,
pretending they had Orders from Rome to speak to him, pressed on to that, as
some thought, by the Cardinal Durazzo, archbishop of Genes, a Person of a
singular goodness, whose Zeal has not only edified those of his Church, but of
all the World.

But the Countess guessing very well for what those good Fathers came for, and
what was their design, that she left not the Duke a moment, nevertheless
because they were so importunate to speak with the Duke in private, saying,
That they had great things to communicate to him concerning his Person and
State; The Countess was forced to withdraw, leaving the Duke in the Chamber
with the Capuchins.

The discourse which these good Fathers had with the Duke was full of holy
Zeal, and they spoke with so much tenderness, that one of them melted into
tears; at every word, they conjured him in the Name of God, to forsake this
scandalous life, which he led before all his Subjects, or, to say rather, in
the sight of all the World; they added further, that, The Pope himself had wept
many times, and that his clemency once being at an end, he should be obliged
then to proceed to other Courses. They forgot nothing to inspire into him some
Christian Sentiments of Heaven and Hell, and they let him see the impossibility
there was to attain to the first, whilst he led this disordered and licentious
life, and the infallibility of his falling into the other. They alleged to
him many Places out of the holy Scripture, which they pointed out to him, to
let him see that the sins of the Prince was often a cause of God's punishing
the people, by an infinite number of Miseries, Wars, and Plagues. In fine,
they set before him all the most solid and strong Reasons, that their Wits could
furnish them with, not sparing for complaints, and threats from the Court of
Rome, protesting to him that if his Highness did not alter his Course of life,
that Court was resolved to proceed against him by the ways of Ecclesiastical
Censures the most severe. Briefly, they were not niggardly of all that a true
Charity, with which they were animated, could suggest to them, to make the Duke
quit his love to the Countess, and deliver himself from that shameful slavery
that had kept him so long a time in bondage.

During the Conversation of these holy Fathers with the Duke, the Countess was
harkening at the door, where she could hear every word distinctly: she was in
despair, with the fear that the Duke should yield at last to all these Councels
of these Fathers; he heard them with much Patience, without saying the least
word, till at last, weary of hearing them longer, and to hear the insolent
reproaches, which they made him, he answered them, That they had Chastity in
their Convent, and at Rome the Cardinals had Wenches, and the eonvenience of
diverting themselves, and therefore he did not wonder at their speaking to him
in that manner. And as one of them replied something that touched the reputation
of the Countess, who, as I have already said, was behind the door, she came
into the room, and interrupted their discourse, and pretending to speak low,
she said to the Duke, so that these good Fathers heard her well enough,

Send these Fathers to the Convent, and for us let us go to Casal. After that
his Highness taking his well-beloved by the hand, began to say,

These Fathers would have Us wiser than the Princes and Patriarchs of the old
time, who had at least one wife and one Concubine, not to speak of a great
number besides, of both the one and the other. To which one of the Capuchins
replied,

But your Higheness does not see that we are now in the times where the Gospel
is to be observed, and that it is indisputable for us, to act like Jews, now we
are Catholics. The Prince, touched to the quick by these words, answered them
with a threatening and fierce air.

My Fathers, without any other consideration, I will throw you out of the
Window, and so we will use like Jews those people that understand not how no
treat with Catholic Princes. Having said that, he presently called one of his
Gentlemen, and commanded them to conduct those Religious men out of the Palace:
after that he turned his back upon them, and went into a Chamber with the
Countess, who being in great wrath at these Fathers, protested in grinding her
teeth, that she would never give alms to a Capuchin, and she did not only say
so, but do so, so that some people said, That the taste of the Capuchins of
Genes had taken away the power of eating from the Capuchins of Casal, and that
these last did penance for the faults those others had committed.

Truly if these holy Fathers had had to do with some other Prince, it might
have been feared that they had not come off at so cheap a rate; but for good
luck to them they spoke to a very good Prince, who was of no ill nature,
preferred quiet above all things.

The Duke entertained himself often with the proceeding of the Capuchins, in
his return to Casal, and particularly one night in the Inn at Saravalla, where
he was lodged, he said to her,

My Heart, if I have loved thee hitherto, to satisfy my Love which would have
it so; I will love thee henceforward, to make them mad that would not have it
so. Upon that the Countess taking her time, replied, If your Highness should
cease loving me, you would let people see you are afraid of Monks.

All this was done to turn the Duke from the love of this crafty woman, but in
vain; for all the trouble the Monks gave themselves, who came as Ambassadors
from Rome, served for no end but to inflame the hearts of these two Lovers the
more, for since the Countess apprehended the loss of the Dukes favor, fearing
that some time or other he might suffer himself to be touched by some remorse
of Conscience, she employed all her Caresses that her Love could devise, and
such Charms she made use of, that they were assuredly powerful enough to have
provoked our Pope Alexander himself to have committed the sin of adultery with
her, although he is a man whose life is without reproach; so that the Duke who
was tender in his love, and loved to be made much of, seemed to melt as lead in
the Fire, and appeared in that encounter as if he would have sooner consented
to lose his State, than his Mistress.

After that Voyage the Duke left her at Casal, whilst he went to Mantua about
some particular affairs, he said there above a Month without going to see the
Countess, who was so afflicted for not seeing him that possessed her heart, not
satisfied with his Letters, which she received from him every week; she went
out very early one Morning toward Mantua, to find his Highness; but her good
fortune hastening her joy, she met the Duke upon the way, who went with her to
Casal, renewing her caresses, and making amends for the time lost.

Some months after it happened, to the great displeasure of the Duke and
resentment of the Countess, that many Copies of a Manuscript, entitled,
Whoredom, in form of Letters, under the name of an unknown Author, were sent to
diverse of the chief Nobility of Casal and Mantua, and also into the Convents,
the Duke was much troubled, being described there as the Prince of Whores, and
chief of the bandy-houses; and that which enraged him the more was, That it
spoke of the other Princes of Italy with Elogies and Expressions of respect.
That Satyr said more than it is possible to imagine against the house of the
Countess, and it was impossible to speak with more infamy, and it was the more
so, because it mingled truth and lies together, but in such a manner, that it
all looked like truth; and certainly it was reasonable enough, for they were a
Family of Six persons, whole life was the horror of all the World. In the mean
time, these Earls and Countesses had no great reason to be angry at what was
there said, if they had been Lovers of truth: For their house had for certain
been a perfect bandy-house, there being Six Ladies in that Family who lived
almost publicly like common Whores, I say, almost, because there were three of
them who carried it with more discretion, which were the two wives of the
brothers to the Countess, and one of the Countess Lovizes daughters, who acted
their parts more privately, and yet nevertheless would not suffer a Friend to
die: but as for the rest, which were the Countess Margaret, and Lovize, and
another of their sisters, kept by a Mantua Lord; they kept no measures neither
in their speeches nor manner of Life, so that they did all that they fancied
was lawful, and so their house merited the name was given it.

This good and jolly company were present with the Duke in all his
divertizements, which the more angered all Persons of Honor, and gave a great
scandal to all the people of the Duchy of Mantua, and also to all Italy.

This Prince led this dissolute and licentious life with the Countess fifteen
year, and so gave example to other Gentlemen of his Court to pass their time
with the other Ladies, which I have told you of; so that with reason her house
was called a bandy-house, there being no other discourses heard there but what
were impudent and dishonest, every one taking a pride in speaking as wickedly
as they could: This obliged all the other Ladies of the Town, that were of
Honor and Quality to avoid this abominable Company, and fly from those beastly
women, as from the Devil of Hell; Many other accidents happened to this Prince
by his love to the Countess every day; but a hundred Pens would scarce be
enough to recount them all: I have writ the Story of this amor but
superficially, for to repeat all things would be too tedious, besides there are
many things in it which, if writ, would cause nothing but scandal.

The love of the Duke was at this pass that he delighted in nothing but the
love of the Countess, when it pleased Heaven to take away that great scandal
from the eyes of all the people, and put an end to that crime which caused so
many others, by giving a Period to the life of him that committed it.

This Prince then was taken in the beginning of September, in the Year 1665,
with so violent a Fever, that the first minute it was thought Malignant by all
the Physicians; and soon after, not only dangerous, but desperate: The
Duchess appeared sensibly afflicted with this Sickness of the Dukes, and
omitted nothing that she thought could help him with all possible diligence;
and which was more commendable, the assisted him with all the affection of her
heart; which cau'd many to say, That if she had been in the same condition as
the Duke her Husband was in at that time, he would not have been carried with
so much heat and passionate care to her recovery.

There was Command given to all the Churches, To say their Prayers to God for
the health of the Duke; but since there was no hope given on that side for his
Recovery, he was advised to make his Will, which he did orderly enough: And it
is true, that in thinking of his Countess he sighed bitterly; and, desiring to
leave her something, he was silent a little while; after that, giving another
great sigh, he made known his Intentions.

My Lord the Bishop, who assisted him in those last moments of life, made him
understand, That for the satisfaction and edification of his Soul, he ought to
ask forgiveness of her Highness his Wife, for the Injury he had done her, to
which he seemed very much inclined; and then causing that Amiable Duchess to
come near his Bed, he embraced her with his left Arm, and taking her hands
with his right, he said to her weeping, Princess, my soul, this minute I am
come to know how much I have offended God by my Sin; and I also know that which
I have committed in relation to you; but my Lord Bishop, who takes a care of my
Soul in this extremity, assures me, That I may hope or the Pardon of the good
God; therefore I pray you that on your side also, you will give me some
testimonies of your forgiving me also.

The Tears and Sighs of that poor Princess stopped her speech, and would not let
her pronounce one word; but they wrought so sensibly upon all that were
present, that the noise of their Groans and Tears, which they could not in
pity refrain to so touching a sight, was very mournful, and so lamentable a
hearing, that the Bishop searing it might add to the affliction of that sick
Prince, counseled the Duchess to retire; and to that end took here by the
Arm and led her into another Room, where she began to weep in good earnest.

Toward the evening of that same day the Duke called for the young Prince his
Son, to whom he gave his blessing; and after he had given him some Instructions
of Living well, he concluded in these words; My very dear and well-beloved Son,
obey your Mother, and the more, because she is a woman of great Virtue; and
take not example from your Father, who is a great Sinner.

The next day, being the 15 of September, he past out of this miserable Valley
of Tears into the place of eternal Felicity, leaving the whole Court in an
extraordinary sadness, and almost inconsolable grief; the noise of his Death
was no sooner spread through the Town, but all the People was seen in Tears;
and with reason, for set aside his Sin, which after all that can be said,
proceeded from the weakness of humane nature, he had all the Virtues; or to say
better, in a word, he had all qualities necessary to make a great Prince, and a
great Monarch.

He used his Subjects very gently, and helped them in all things to his power;
having been often heard to say, That he chose rather to be a Poor Prince, and
to have rich Subjects, then to have his Subjects poor, and to be himself a
very Opulent Prince. Above all, no person ever went away discontented from him:
He also recommended to the Judges, Mercy and Justice; in fine, in two Ages
there had not been seen in Italy a Prince like him, if the Love he had for that
Countess had not hindered him from exercising that goodness, virtue, and
courage, which were so natural to him.

The People wept for him, and should not yet dry up their Tears, if the
goodness of that Princess-Regent and the hopes they have in the vettue of this
young Prince, the sole Heir of the House of Gonzague, and only Child to the
Deceased Duke; which is brought up by that Mourning Turtle with so much care,
did not comfort them; his virtue, his watchfulness, assiduous attachments to
the Government of the State, has Captived the hearts of all the People, and
makes him still be adored and loved by all the World.

The little Duke, of the Age of fourteen years, given no little consolation to
the Duchess his Mother, and to her Subjects; and I persuade my self easily,
that those incomparable qualities which begin to shine in his Person, will make
his name and memory eternal amongst those Great Men, whose name is in
Veneration.

He already receives Ambassadors with so good a Grace, and with so much
sweetness, that they cannot enough admire, how there can be so much virtue and
capacity in an age so tender.

It is thought, that the Death of the Duke is like to bring no good to the
House of the Countess; and already they begin to take away those Employments
with which the late Duke had Honored them, to the great satisfaction of all
the World; and to say truth, the abasing of that House is the Subject of the
Mirth of a great many; and so much the more, because those Earls, in
consideration of their Sister Margaret, had held up their heads so high, that
(as it is said) they could scarce with the end of their Nose touch their equals
without much difficulty.

This Change will certainly be very cruel to them, and they will have much
trouble to live with the young Prince, after another manner then they did with
His Father; it being very likely, that they not having been used to obey, they
will not know how to carry themselves to the Prince as their lawful Sovereign
Lord, having accustomed to treat with the late Duke as Familiar Friends, and
not as Subjects, and therefore they have reason to fear, that this alteration
will bring a notable change into their Family, foreseeing very well, that if
that young Prince once take upon him the Government of the State, he will make
them act with him after quite another manner then they did with his Father: And
this is one of the Chief Reasons why I will conclude this Story by the Death of
the Duke, without speaking further of the Countess, no more then of other
things, waiting for some other occasion, which we shall not want in time.

I will not however finish this Story, my dear Reader, till I have told you my
Thoughts, which is, that you have not taken so much delight in Reading it, as I
did in Composing it; if you had been an Eyewitness of all that I have written,
I doubt not but you also would have been as well pleased; and I know it by
myself, who having seen all this History, and all the passages of this Amor, I
receive more satisfaction in committing it to Paper: if you have not received
what you expected, or that my Style has not pleased you, or if by misfortune
you meet with faults, I prithee think, if thou art discreet, that Love is blind
and has a Band upon his Eyes, so hard, that it is impossible for him to see
either his own Faults, or that of others; I say of others, because if you
should have a mind to undertake my Correction, I shall not be of an humor to
follow your Sentiments; it suffices me, that I had design to divert you; but,
if my ill Fortune has deprived me of that good luck, I desire you to arm your
selves with patience as well as I.

FINIS.

