A LETTER From two PROTESTANT MINISTERS IN ENGLAND, To the PRESBYTERIAN
MINISTERS and People in Glasgow in SCOTLAND.
FRIENDS we have write these Lines to you, to be rightly informed, whether the
Report we have heard, concerning the Inhabitants of Glasgow, and their
Deportment toward the Quakers be true or not: For it is the common Discourse in
this Country, that the Presbyterians with you, do Beat, Stone, Pull, Hail, and
drage them by the Head and Shoulders, out of their Meetings, tear their
Clothes, shede their Blood: And that some of them have been laid for Dead by
some of you! And their Goods without Law taken out of their Meeting House, and
themselves not suffered quietly to be Entertained in common Inns, for their
refreshment! This however is confidently Reported in diverse Places in England,
to the great Scandal and Reproach of Professors; The Practice being very
inconsistant with that Christian Maxim, worthy the consideration of all Men:
Viz. Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris; But Peradventure you may say,
to excuse your selves, that they differ from all other people, so say we here,
and yet the Law protects them; And indeed your Actions to the foresaid people,
differ from all here, except the former Popish persecutors; And assure your
selves, if you proceed as we are informed, you have of late done, you will
bring your selves, and your Friends here, under the same Scandalous
Denomination, that the persecuting Papists have had, and do yet ly under
persecution for conscience sake; Which they pretend is a thing so hateful and
Unreasonable, Conscience being (as Calvin says,) free from the power of all
Men. Therefore we desire you to take the Advice of your Friends, and Well
Wishers here in England, who formerly have suffered for Meeting to Worship GOD,
as we perceive they now do by you: But if they by their Meeting do break any
good Law, made by the Government, then we Advise you to make application to the
Government, for your Assistance, and do not disquiet them by a Scandalous Rude
Rabble, of the Scum of the City, as they term them; For have you not read in
the Holy Scriptures, and Books of the Holy Martyers, How it was the wicked that
always persecuted the Righteous: By which they have left an evil fame upon
Record to posterity; Read the History of Mordiea and Hamon: Sirs, We advise
you, and it is for the best, if any Englishmen of the foresaid people come into
your City, and be abused as some of late have been, if we be rightly informed,
they will no doubt make Application to the Government, who will hear and
relieve them, as late Experience does show; We beseech you therefore, be
advised, for if you proceed in this Method, it will tend to the disquiet of you
in Scotland, and also to our disturbance who are your late persecuted Friends
and Brethren in England, F. L. and W R.

Isaiah 29. 15. 16. Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their Counsel from the
LORD, and their works are in the dark, and they say, who sees us? and who
knows us?

Verse 16. Surely your turning of things upside down, shall be esteemed as the
Potters clay: for shall the work say of him that made it, He made me not? or
shall the thing framed, say of him that framed it, he had no understanding?

Proverbs 19. 20. Hear counsel, and receive instruction, that thou may be
wise in the latter end.

Verse 21. There are many devices in a man's heart; nevertheless the counsel of
the LORD, that shall stand.


Sirs, If we have a more Christian account then heretofore, on the Subject
aforesaid: We shall give you our Names at large, and endeavor to supperceed
these Reports that are too common amongst us:

VALE.

If any Answer to this shall be returned, let it be left with Barcholome w
Gibson, Farrier in the Cannongate, Edinburgh the 7th. of the 6st. M. 1692.




