TREASON ARRAIGNED, In ANSWER to Plain English; BEING A Traiterous, and
Phanatique Pamphlet, which was condemned by the Counsel of State, Suppressed by
Authority; and the Printer declared against by Proclamation.

It is directed to the Lord General Monck, and the Officers of his Army, etc.

London, printed in the year, 1660.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
TAking notice of a Pestilent and Seditious Pamphlet; Entitled PLAIN ENGLISH,
etc. which is grown too Public, notwithstanding the utmost Care and Prudence
of the Counsel of State, and the Magistrates of the City, employed to suppress
it; I thought it my Duty to unmasque the Design; to prevent further mischiefs;
which might Arise, from the mistake, either of the Scope, or Reasonings of it.
I should rather have Printed my Reply, single; and only Quoted, what concerns
my Purpose, but for these Reasons.

First: That Infamous Paper, is already dispersed; and the reprinting of it,
with these Remarques upon it, I hope, will not Endanger the most partial or
weak person, into whose hands it Falls.

Next, I suppose it a more Equal, and Impartial way, to subject Both at once;
as liable to to a more strict examination.

The Declaration (which He draws out at length) is neither My Concern, nor
Subject.

The Text, is all my business, and the extent of my Design, is, Honestly to
serve my Country.

To his Excellency the Lord General Monk, and the Officers of the Army under
his Commaud.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
IT is written, The prudent shall keep silence in an evil time; and it is like,
we also might hold our peace, but that we fear a knife is at the very throat,
not only of our and your Liberties* but of our persons too. In this condition,
we hope it will be no offense, if we cry out to you for help; you that (thr ugh
Gods goodness) have helped us so often, and strenuously maintained the same
Cause with us, against the return of that Family which pretends to the
Government of these Nations. It is the public interest and yours, that we
hitherto fought for, and for which we now plead; therefore we insist upon it
with the greater confidence before you, because we are all equally concerned in
the good or ill of your transactions: We cannot yet be persuaded, though our
fears and jealousies are strong, and the grounds of them many, that you can so
lull asleep your Consciences, or forget the public Interest, and your own, as
to be returning back with the multitude to Egypt, or that you should with them
be hankering after the Leeks and Onions of our old bondage. Though it were
possible you should forget, yet certainly God will not, all the injuries and
oppressions done by that Family to his Church and people in these and other
Nations: Though the Inscription [Exit Tyrannus] which was fixed over the place
where the Statue of the late King formerly stood at the Exchange, has been
blotted out by the Rabble, yet it is written with the Pen of a Diamond in the
hearts of many thousands, and will he so hereafter in the adamantine Rolls of
Fame and History. No matter then, though the profane Vulgar take a liberty to
proclaim him both Saint and Martyr in the midst of there Bon-fires, and their
Tipple. All the good fellows were ever at his Devotion, because he was for
theirs, and commanded it to be observed upon the Sundays. But to the*end it may
be better known how goood a King, and how great a Saint he was, we have taken
the boldness at this instant to offer you an account of some part of the
transactions during his Reign: and because there are too many in the City who
wait the good time to re erect his Statue, we desire in the first place to
present you his Picture, as it was drawn by a good hand, the Parliament, in the
year 1647. at which time it was resolved upon the Qu^stion jointly by the Lords
and Commons in Parliament Ass^mbled, That they would make no further Addresses
or Applications to the King, or receive any Message from him.

Treason Arraigned, in Answer to Plain English, etc.
SOme two days since, came to my view, a Bold, Sharp Pamphlet, called PLAIN
ENGLISH -- directed to the GENERAL, and his OFFICERS, etc. --

It is a Piece, drawn by no Fool, and it deserves a serious Answer. -- By the D
sign; -- the Subject; -- Malice, and the style; I should suspect it for a Blot
of the same Pen that wrote ICONOCLASTES. It runs foul; -- tends to Tumult; --
and, not content, Barely to Applaud the Murder of the King, the excrable
Author of it vemits upon his Ashes; with a Pedantique, and Envenomed scorn,
pursuing still his sacred Memory. Betwixt Him, and his Brother Rabshakeh, I
think a man may venture to divide the glory of it; It relishes the mixture of
their united faculties, and wickedn^sse. As yet, it is true; the Hand is
somewhat Doubtful to us; but the Drift, -- Certain: and it is as Clear from
whence it first moved, as to what end it tends. It speaks the Rancour, and the
Interest of the Rump; be the Contrivance whose it will; and, beyond doubt, It
was written by some Mercenary to the Faction; and That, by their Direction, and
Appointment. It Is too Malicious, for a private Passion; and too Dangerous, for
one that writes not, either for Bread, or Life. Take it in gross; it is an Alarm
to all the Phanatiques in England; couched under the specious notion of an
Appeal to the General, and his Army, asserting, to all purposes, the Interests;
and Justifying the horrid Practices of the Regicide-Party. --

It Remonstrates; -- Expostulates; -- Tempts; -- Threatens; -- Flatters; --
Begs; -- Prevaricates: and by all Artifices, toward all Humors, it moulds it
self into an application suitable: -- only upon the Blood, and Family of the
late King; it lashes out into an Impious, and Inhumane fury, sufficient to
Disgrace, the Sober (in comparison) promoters of his Death; and to Startle
their very Consciences, that spilt his Blood with Pleasure.

Nor does the Brutish Rebel only quitt the Man, in point of Tenderness; his
Rage against the Royal Line, disturbs his Reason too. (otherwise smooth enough
to delude such as are not very well aware of him) Whether it be the Agony, and
Horror of a Wounded Soul, which thus transports him; or that, in these
excesses, he only P^rsonates the last Convulsions of a Heart-broken Faction; --
It matters not: Thus much we may collect from his distempers; That Rabble is,
at this instant, upon a Combination, to Tumultuate the Army, and the People,
and such as will not share the Guilt of their Conspiracy, they labor to engage
within the Reach, and Danger of it. That we may better understand what they
Design, we will see a little what they say.

This Pamphlet speaks the sense of the whole Gang; and thoroughly Examined, will
discover the frame, and the extent of their lewd Purposes.

I look upon it as an Affront to Christianity, and to Reasonable Nature; so
scandalous; I vow to God, in Favor merely of Humanity, I would suppress it,
were no more Copies extant of it: but it is too late for That. The Countries are
already Furnished; and the Town yet full of them; (the singular, and early care
of the Public Magistrate to hinder it, notwithstanding) so that it rests now,
only to lay open the vile Interests of this bloody Faction, and Antidote the
People against the danger of their Pestilent Infusions. Let Time produce the
Author; (if it be lawful to Profane the Light with such a Monster) The Matter
only of this Licentious Paper must be my Subject.

If we must never be Quiet, till these People think themselves Safe, we must
stay, till Divine Justice is dissolved; -- till they believe the word, and
Power of God, a Fable; -- till they can Lay that Devil, Conscience; -- and Blot
out of the Table of their Memoryes, all their Presumptuous outrages, both
against Heaven, and Earth; -- till they can Quench those Raging Horrors which
Exagitate their Souls; -- Remove those hideous Fantomes, that (whereso'ere they
fly) pursue them, with the Images of those they have murdered, Bleeding
afresh: and when they think to Turn away their Looks from the Dire object, to
the other side, they meet with a Remembrancer, that minds them of their
Sacrilege, and Treason, and then they start again, another way; and there, they
meet a Sword drawn, to revenge their Perjuries. In fine, their Injuries are of
a Large extent, and such, by Consequence, must be their Fears, (while they
persist in their Impenitence)

In this distress, rather of Thought, than Danger; of Terror from within,
rather than Violence, without; They do well, to Implore the General's help, to
save their Lives, that would have taken His: especially, obliging him (in
surplus) with this additional respect: That they have made him Free of the
Fanatiques; -- Embarked him in the same Bottom with Themselves; -- and
Finally, Involved the Honor, and the Saver of his Country, in common, with the
Blemish, and the Pest of all mankind.

Say, -- MILTON; NEDHAM; either, or both, of you, (or whosoever else) -- Say;
where this Worthy Person, ever mixed with you? (That is; You, -- or those that
Employ you, and allow you wages) more, than in order to those very Purposes, to
which he still adheres, and from whence, you recede.

The Return of that family, which pretends (as this Tumbler phrases it) to
Govern us; nor Was, nor Is the Question. The public Interest, that He fought
for, and you swore to; -- was the Preserving of our BIRTHRIGHTS; -- the good
old LAWS; -- his MAJESTY'S REGAL AUTHORITY; -- the PRIVILEGES of PARLIAMENT;
and -- (read the old Declarations) not to maintain a Canting Faction in the
Army; -- a Py-bald Ministry; -- or which amounts to all; -- the Residence; --
the Errata's of an Honest Parliament.

Again, to comply fairly with an Universal vote; -- That, does our Scribler
call, forgetting of a public Interest; and keeping of the Covenant, or an
Oath, is, with him, ^^lling of a man's conscience asleep. A desire to be well
again, after a Cu^sed sit of the Spleen (and plied with steel too) of well-nigh
Twenty years continuance, -- our demy-Levite, -- terms it a Hankering after our
old Leeks, and O^yons. -- Why Jack, or Mark, or Harry, -- or, (in fine) any
Body -- Every man as he Likes: You're for a Rump; it may be. -- I Am for
somewhat else. Believe me, I had ^ather Live poor* and Honest; than Hang Rich;
and Treacherous: -- then give my self a turn in one of the King's old Houses.
But --

De Gustibus, non est Disputandum.
I Am sorry my first Page is Printed. -- I shall be thought a Fool now, for
suspecting our Plain Englishman, of wit. Something there is in his Vein, like
Bottle-ale. Stir it; -- It Tumults, Sputters; and at Last, it spends it self in
Foam; -- but Nourishment, or Comfort, there is none in it. -- The Fellow's
Jadish, Dull; -- out of his Beaten, and Known Rode; but when he comes to rail
against the King; he is in his Element. There, he is a Through-pac'd, Egregious
villain; and yet a Stumbler; but a false Step or two may be Allowed him.

This Formal Devil; -- how great an Honor does he to the Royal family, in his
Reviling of it! -- The Injuries, and Oppressions it has done to Church, and
People, trouble him sore. The Blotting out of -- EXIT TYRANNUS, sticks in his
stomach too; but, though the Statue's gone, the story shall stand firm; there
lies his Consolation.

Audacious Brute, (the Blot, and the Deformity of Humane Race.) During the War,
the Nation lay oppressed under the Common fate of an Intestine Broyl. The Quarrel
was Disputed both with Pens, and Weapons, doubtfully, as to the Vulgar; --
among the wiser sort, some steerd their Course by Interest, or Passion; others,
resigned themselves, (abstracted from all other thoughts) to what they reckoned
Piety, and Reason. (Thus far the Burden seems divided.) After this, the King's
made a Prisoner; and his Party sunk; now I Demand; who has oppressed us since;
but those that Swore, till then, they fought to save us? If we look back beyond
the War, our mischief there was, that we were better fed than Taught. We were
Rich, Wanton, and Rebellious.

But I begin to waver in my undertaking; -- I find I have a Wolf to deal with,
not a man; that preys upon the Dead. A Devil! -- whose Business is to Break
the sacred Bonds of Unity, and Order; and to Calumniate virtue. Nor does it
serve him; the bare Murder of his Master, (as it does other Beasts of Rapine,
that leave the Carcass, when they have Sucked the Blood) This wretch must
descant, and Rhetoricate upon his Ashes, with an Audacious Petulanry: -- Make
Providence it self a Complicate; and with a Comique sawcynesse, Place, or
Displace; -- in Heaven, or Hell, as his Luxuriant Humor pleases.

BRADSHAW; this villain ranks among the Heroes; (and he deserves a Saints place
in his Calendar) -- a man, of whom we dare not barely hope well; so enormous
was his Life, and so Conform, his Obstination in that Lewdness, to his Death.

Whereas, that glorious Creature; that Died the object of this Monsters
Insolence, and Rage; -- that Innocently suffered, what that Infamous
Pageant-President as vilely Acted; -- that with a Primitive patience; Piety;
Constancy, and Resignation, endured the Scorns, the Injuries, and Persecutions
of his own Subjects; and, at the last, received his Death, from their very
Hands, in whose behalf he Died.

This Saint, and Martyr, (BOTH; beyond Controversy; so far as we can Judge) is
by our Charitable Intelligencer Enrolled in the Black List; -- Charged with
Indevotion, and Intemperance; so was our Savior a Wine-bibber, a haunter too
of Publicans, and Sinners: -- to whose Inimitable example, (I speak with
Reverence, to God and Truth.) both in his Life, and S^ffering, I do believe,
the story of our Late Sovereign, bears the nearest Proportion of all others. --
But it is amid their Bon-fires, and their Tipple, (this Misereant tells us) that
he is Canonized: -- and that his Majesty commanded Drinking as a Sunday
exercise. The world that knew the King, know this to be a Lie; (but it is our
M^r^urie s Trade; -- it is his Diana to amplify a little for the public good)
It Is true, there were some Liberties allowed upon the Sabbath, which being
misemployed, were countermanded. How does this scandal both of Providence, and
Society, escape Thunder, or a Dagger!

We shall now have the story of our King, and Saint: (he says) and to usher in
the re-erection of his Statue, his Picture first drawn by the PARLIAMENT in
1647. (as our libello^s Pamphleter would persuade us ^ when the Vote passed
both by Lords, and Commons, concerning Non-Addresses. I should be tedious to
reply upon every particular in the Declaration he makes use of: But as to what
concerns the needful, and the proper Vindication of his Majesty; together,
with those worthy Members, whom this seditious Rump-whelp labors to involve in
the same desperate, and exorbitant Proceedings with his ungracious Masters; --
In what concerns, I say, their Vindication, I shall be clear and punctual;
leaving the Judgment of the Controversy, to the impartial Reader.

WE revive this the rather, (says he) because the memory of men being frail,
cannot retain all particulars; which is the reason (we fear) why so many
formerly engaged against him as high as any, upon consc^entious accounts, both
Religious and Civil, are staggering and backsliding, and have need of some
quick and faithful Monitor to mind them of things past, and make them beware
of the present, lest they return with the Rout, and cry, Let us make our selves
a King again of that Family; that Family which so cruelly persecuted us and our
Brethren, and which still remains engaged by reason of State, and ancient
Principles of Enmity and Interest, to plow up the old Furrows upon our backs,
and re-deliver our persons and consciences into the hands of our old
Tormenters; and our men of might, and our Counselors, to become sacrifices to
the revenge of an implacable party. March on then, (my Lord and Gentlemen,) for
believe it, there is in point of Safety no possiblity of retreat, and much less
in point of Conscience or Honor; For, if you respect Conscience, (as we hope
you do) lay your hands upon your hearts, and tell us what hope you or we can
have, that the reformed Religion and Cause will be protected and maintained by
the Son, which was so irreligiously betrayed both at home and abroad by the
Father. It may be you do not readily remember these things, nor how much blood
was spilt by royal treachery, nor the manifold usurpations and designs by him
projected and acted upon our Liberty, the like never done by any Prince before:
and for Blood, the Scottish Ministers employed hither Anno 1644. proclaimed and
published in Print, That the Late King had spilt more blood than was shed in
the ten Heathen Persecutions of the Christians: and the Ministers of London,
(as we can show you by several Prints of theirs) declared, That satisfaction
ought to be had for blood; that he was a man of blood, and not capable of
accommodation with the Parliament. We mention not this to upbraid them; for, we
reverence their ancient Zeal in this particular, and humbly entreat them, as
well as your Excellency, and the Officers, and all the good people of these
Nations, to observe the forementioned Resolves of the Lords and Commons, which
were introductory to that most noble Act of Justice afterward executed upon
the King.

And that it may appear to be such, in despite of Ignorance and Envy, we have
been bold here to present you in Print that most remarkable Declaration of the
Commons assembled in Parliament, in pursuance of the said Resolve of both
Houses, wherein they declare the Grounds and Reasons why they passed the
Resolves of no further Address; and therein you will see also, how well he
deserved to lose his head, and his Family the Kingdom; whose corrupt and
irreconcilable interest had been the head and fountain of those Rivers of blood
and misery which had flowed so many years about these Nations.

TO help the memories of some, that may very well forget the things they never
thought of; and to reproach to others, their inconstancy, who, out of good
intent at first engaged, and after That, convinced of their Original mistake,
upon a better Light, relinquished; there needs no better Monitor, than such a
Person, whose Guilt and Desperation, transport him beyond all hopes of mercy;
-- This man sollicites for his Head, when under the pretext of Conscience, he
labors for a Party: and yet methinks he should not need. Alas! he is but the
Rump's Solicitor, he pleads their Cause, takes their Fee, and vanishes.
Impudent Creature, to presume to be afraid; as if a Hangman would disgrace
himself to meddle with him! O'h that Family -- That Family, puzzles our men of
Might, or (as the Droll words it!) our Counselors, wonderfully.

Now do I pha^sy the Fellow, this Bout, extremely: To see the Little Agitatour
fall upon his P^litiques, betwixt flattery, and sawcyn^ss^, Half-Tutor, and
Half-Parasite, with one eye up, and the other down, accost the General. --

My Lord, and Gentlemen, march on; (the word of Command; a Noble Rogue) for
believe it, etc. -- there is no retreat, he tells them, either in point of
safety, conscience, or honor, -- and then the Whelp takes another snap at the
King: as shamelesly, as senselesly, affirming, that the Reformed Religion,
(that is, (as I suppose he means) the Protestant) and Cause, (that is, the
Peoples Laws and Liberties,) was irreligiously betrayed by our late Sovereign;
who lost his Head in defense of one, and the other; the Caution he puts in
against the Son is of the same alloy, a Person, so indulgent to his people,
that out of his partic^lar Necessities, he yet relieved the English prisoners
that were taken in Flanders; although his Enemies; and, in point of Conscience,
further, so Tender, that he preserves the Church of England in the Dominions of
the King of Spain: and still, his Honor, with his Religion. But let us a
little examine his Instances, for he pretends now to proceed to proofs.

The Scottish Ministers (as he tells us) proclaimed, and published in 1644. That
the late King had spilt more blood than was shed in the Ten Persecutions of the
Christians, -- and the Ministers of London declared him a man of Blood, etc. --
(That is, the High Priests, and Officers, cried out, saying, Crucify him,
crucify him. (That Is the Original.) But to come closer to the Business, the
Scottish, and the Scotch Ministers, are a clear different thing. Scottish,
denotes the Ancient Faction of the Nation, (No Favorers of Kings,) and Scotch,
relates to their Nativity alone, abstracted from the Party.

First, They were Argyle's Creatures, s^l^cted to promote Argyle's designs: So,
not the Ministry of Scotland, but a Pack of Scottish Ministers.

Next, of no more Authority to the Rump, against the King, than to the Nation,
against the Rump, (in whom, they are as much unsatisfied.)

The Ministers of London did as much, he says. That Is something truly; till we
consider what those Ministers were, and by whom, placed, and molded, for that
purpose.

Marshall was the prime person in the Agency betwixt the two Nations; -- He,
that cursed M^roz; -- He, that was sent Commissioner into Scotland; taught them
their L^sson, There, and then returning, taught some of our reputative Divines
to sing the same Tune, Here. -- This is the Man, that closed with Nigh, when
Presbytery went down; and carried the 4. Bills to the King, at
Carisbrook-Castle, for which, they had 500 l. apiece. I could tell you of some
more of the Gang, that* under Question for confederacy with Love: after a due
formality of seeking God, delivered, as upon account of Inspiration, that
Oliver Protector was the person; and his the Government, of all that ever
were, or should be, the most agreeable to God.

This is not, to lessen the esteem of Holy Orders; neither to fix a rash,
irreverend Censure upon the Ministry: No man reveres the Character of a
Churchman more than my self. But it is to show the World, how much our
Pamphlet-Merchand is steered, by Interest, and Passion, and how little, by
Reason, and Truth.

The grinning Whelp, now, betwixt snarling, and fawning, would fain persuade
the General, and his Officers, (and all the World beside) that the Resolve of
Non-Addresses, by the Lords and Commons, was introductive to the Murder of the
King. Murder, I say, that is the Plain English of what he styles -- A most
Noble Act of Justice; His Method lies through direct Contradictions to the
Universal Rules, of Logique, Truth, and Honesty.

By this Insinuation, he charges that Exorbitance upon the two Houses, and
draws an Inference, from the Impardonable Quality of that Action, to the
Nec^ssity and Reason of pursuing it. This, he pretends to make appear, in
spite of Ignorance, and ^nvy, from the Commons Declaration, in persuance of
the Resolve of Both Houses, ^onteyning the Reasons, why no further Address; and
thence, proceeds to a Determination upon the Fathers Life, and the Son's
Inheritance; -- as positively fixing, upon the King's Account, those Plagues
this Nation has Endured; as if the Graceless villain were of Counsel with the
Eternal wi^edom.

I shall observe in order; and First; I Will prove, that the vote of
Non-Addr^sse, was not properly an Act of the two Houses; or if it were so, that
it did not rationally direct to the King's Li^e.

Secondly. That Declaration of the Commons, (SINGLY) decla^ing the Reasons of
the resolve of Both Houses (J^yntly) does not amount either ^o a Justification,
or Intention of taking the King's Life, -- No; not though I should g^ant the
Members Free; -- which I cannot; and the Authority Full: which I do not. -- To
the First. --

They were under a force. -- Upon a Debate in the Commons House, concerning the
Kings Answer to the 4. Bills, presented to him Dec. 24. 1647. and debated; Jan.
3. Commissary Ireton delivered himself after this manner.

The King had denied safety, and Protection to his people, by denying the 4.
Bills; that Subjection to him, was but in lieu of his Protection to his People;
this being denied, they might well deny any more subjection to him, and settle
the Kingdom without him: That is was now expected, after so l ng patience, they
should show their Resolution, and not desert those valiant m^n who had engaged
for them, beyond all possibility of Retreat, and would never forsake the
Parliament, un^esse the Parliament forsook them first

From hence, naturally results the menace of the Army, in case the Parliament
should forsake them; and Ireton understood the Souldjery too well, to mistake
them. --

As yet; ^ere's nothing Capital pretended against the King.

After some more Debate, Cromwell urged; -- that it was now expected, the
Parliament should govern, and defend the Kingdom, by their own Power, and
Resolutions; and not teach the people any longer, to exp c^ safety, and
Government from an obstinate man, whose heart God had hardened: That those men,
who had def^nded the Parliament, from so many dangers, with the expe^ce of
their Blood; would defend them herein with Fidelity, and Courage, against all
Opposition. Teach them not, by neglecting your own, and the Kingdoms safety, in
which their own is Involved, to think themselves betrayed, and left hereafter
to the rage, and malice of an irreconcilable enemy, whom they have subdued for
your sake; and therefore are likely to find his future Government of them
Insupportable; and fuller of Revenge, than Justice: Nota.
-- left Despair teach them to seek their safety by some other means than
adhering to you, -- who will not stick to your selves; how destructive such a
Resolution in them will be to you all, I Tremble to think, and leave you to
Judge.

This Speech, concluded the debate; and the better to Impresse his meaning, he
laid his hand upon his Sword, at the end of it. If this be not a Force, what
is? the Power and Inclination of the Army, being the only moving Arguments to
obtain the Vote. The Question was then put, and Carried, for no more Addresses.
-- But no pretense still that extends to Life.

I shall appeal now to the Declaration it self; to which our Regicidal Babbler
refers the world for satisfaction.

First, the Sectarians had stolen a Vote, Jan. 4. to engarrison Whitehall, and
the Mewes, (the Lords, not mentioned in the case) their manner of obtaining it,
was This. 'Twas Noon; and the Independent Party called to Rise. The
Presbyterians went their ways to Dinner: the Independents stayed, and did
their Business.

The Lords opposed the vote for non-Addresse; (10. to 10.) but the Engagement
of the Army, cast it; who sent a Declaration to the Commons, of thanks for
their 4 Votes against the King, engaging to defend them with their Lives, etc.
-- Is this a Force yet?

Soon after this; comes forth a Declaration, and Reasons, etc. Drawn by a
Committee, appointed by the Independents etc. So that even That too, was a
Piece, Contrived by the Designers of our Mischief, and by a Force, Extorted
from the Sober rest, that would have Saved us. This appears, from the Interpose
of the Presbyterians, to moderate the Eagerness of it, upon the debate. The
Last 4. lines of the said Declaration will be sufficient to stop the mouth of
any Reasonable Person, as to the point of Life; (even without the Violence;
which undenyably produced the Rest.) After an Enumeration of diverse
Particulars objected against the King, The Declaration concludes Thus.

These are some few, of the many Reasons, why we cannot repose any more Trust
in him, and have made those former Resolutions; (meaning the 4. Votes, whereof
that of non-Address was one) yet we shall use our ut most Endeavors, to settle
the present Government, as may best stand with the Peace, and Happiness of
this Kingdom*

This very Declaration touches not his life; it is not said settle A present
Government, but The --; (relating properly to an Amendment, not an Abolition)

Considering the Grammar of it; I do not wonder much, at a Compliance, in some
Measure, to an Indecency, in order to prevent a Greater Ill, that Threatened
Them, and Us: and That, was their design; For when it came at last to the
Result of Life, and Death, (as then 'twas evident, it amounted to no less)
Those Gentlemen, whom the Author of Plain English would willingly engage, as
Complicates; -- those Gentlemen, I say, did then oppose themselves, against the
Murtherous Faction, and voted for a Treaty, Dev. 4. Upon the 6. they were
Imprisoned, and Affronted by the Army for their pains. -- When the more
moderate Party, was removed, the Rest were left at liberty to consummate the
Kingdom's Ruin, and their own Damnation.

Come I Will go ^urther with the angry man; -- put case, these Gentlemen had gone
yet Forward; and dipped as deep as he could wish they had. Frailty is an
inseparable from our nature. It Is Humane to Transgress; -- It Is Christian to
Forgive, and it is our Interest to Repent. He that delivers me by Design,
'though but from that mis*fortune which he himself engaged me in upon mistake;
-- he is so sar from any Reason to apprehend my Revenge* he has a Title to my
Kindness: but our Incorrigil^e MONITOR, sets up his Rest upon a Final,
Reprobated, Impenitence. It Is the Will, Qualifies the Action.

I have been Tedious, out of desire to be Clear: but I shall Hast^n, and
Contract as much as possible.

Having already proved the Declaration (of the Reasons why no more Addresses)
to have been an evident contrivance of the Independent Faction, in the very
Frame of it; and Published, while the Army stood to Dare, and overawe the
sober Party, that was likely to oppose it; I do not hold my self concerned, in
any further notice of the Particulars therein Contained; and which our
Challenger produces, as an unanswerable Eviction, that the Late King, and his
Family, deserved Death, and Extirpation. (as, by and by, he tells you) -- Yet
something shall be said, even to his Quaeres, thence extracted (in due place;)
but I must first unvtile him to the People; and that, by laying open the
Dilemna he proceeds upon. -- He reasons Thus,

My Business (says he to himself) must be to hinder an Agreement with the
King. The Presbyterian party (I Am afraid) enclines to it. If he returns, we are
Lost: My own Soul tells me, we have sinned beyond Remission, and yet I see no
way to hinder it neither. The Nation is united against us; the Presbyterian
abhors us, as much as the Royal Party does; and the Army it self, begins to
declare it self our Enemy. What Is to be done, must be, both Quick, and Home.
These six ways lie before us.

First the Army must be wrought into a Tumult.

Secondly. The Presbyterian must be (Right, or Wrong,) involved with us in
Guilt, and consequently in Danger. They must be made to share in the Blood of
the Father, and in the Detestation of the Son, and be possessed, that there can
be no sa^ety to Them, but in a Common Interest with our selves To this end, we
may forge Letter's from Brussels. Suborn Witnesses to swear the King a Papist,
etc.

Thirdly. The Cavalier must be persuaded, that the Presbyter only designs to
set up for himself; and Arguments drawn from bypast, and mistaken Failings
upon promise, to beget a Jealousy. The inconsistency of Episopal, with
Presbyterian Principles must be objected, etc.

Fourthly All Persons interessed in Estates, got by the War, must be engaged,
for sear of losing them.

Fifthly. The General himself, must be solicited to take the Government upon
him; Promises urged; no matter whether true, or false: If this will not do, A
lvise him, as a Friend, to have a care of the City; and lid the City look to
him. Perplex them Both; We'll confound all the World, rather than perish.

Lastly We may publish the Declaration, of the Reasons, for no f^rther
Addresses: and try, if that way, we can either make a Party among themselves,
or with the People. We may so bring it in, it shall be dangerous to reply upon,
for fear of dis^^liging, and as unsafe, to let alone, for fear of seducing.
Here Is the Dil^mma; It will be answered, or it will not; If it be, 'twill
startle the Presbyterian; if otherwise, 'twill puzzle the People. I wish our
Common Enemy would go this open way to work.

Here Is the true State and Method of our Adversaries Thoughts, and Actions. Now
to his Quaeres, wherein I shall be tender, how I revive Disputes, either
unkind, or unseasonable; and yet not wanting to my Undertaking, That is, my
Undertaking to make evident, that his Fo^ndation is sandy, and the entire
Structure composed of rotten Materials.) I Will take his -- (what shall I call
them?) Suppositions, -- Objections, Questions, -- (or call them what you will)
one by one, and reply upon them in his own Order. Here he begins,

WOuld you see how and by whom the Irish Rebellion began, and upon whose score
those unparalled barbarous Massacres of hundreds of thousands of the
Protestants in Ireland, do lie?

NO, we would not see Now. We Question not, but you would be Kind enought to sh w
us; and cut our Throats here, just as those* Rebels did their Fellow Subjects
there. (For an ^r^sh Rebel, is but the Anagram of an English P^anatique.)

By whom now, is another Question, and a Harder. Beshrew me, 'ti^ a P^ev^sh
point. Why -- the I^^sh Rebe^^ion, began, by the Irish Rebels: a^ the English
R^bellion, did by the English R^^els. I hope Commo^ions in Ir^land are no
Miracles; nor^i^ it needful to assign them any other reason, than the Humor
of the People? -- Yet I Will be civil to you. I speak my Soul, I do believe, the
Irish Catholics in that Rebellion which you point at, took flame at the
Severity they apprehended, from some extraordinary Declarations against them
here, previous to their Rebellion.

This I must add further, the King, (for it is at Him* our Author's malice
strikes) at his Return from Scotland, did earnestly, and particularly recommend
the care of Ireland to both Houses, in his Speech, Dec. 2d. 1641. upon the
14th. he pressed them once again, to the same purpose; Adding, the great
Necessity of Dispatch; -- the daily Cries, and Importunityes of the Irish
Protestants, and offering all his Power and Interest toward their Relief, in
these very Terms. (See the Exact Collections, the 1. and 2. Speeches in the
Book.)

That nothing may be omitted on my part, I must here take notice of the Bill
for pressing of Soldiers* now depending among you my Lords, concerning which I
here declare, that in case i^ come so to me, as it may not infringe or diminish
my Prerogative, I will pass it.

And further, seeing there is a Dispute raised (I being little beholding to him
whosoever at this time began it) concerning the bounds of this ancient and
undoubted Prerogative, to avoid further debate at this time, I offer, that the
Bill may pass with a Salvo jure, both for King and People, leaving such
Debates to a time that may better bear it, etc.

To conclude, I conjure you by all that is, or can be dear to you or me, that,
laying away all Disputes, you go on cheerfully and speedily for the reducing of
Ireland.

By whom, Ireland was tumulted, I do not know; but that it was not by his
Majesty, is most evident. Nor is there any Question, but the Massacres there
committed, must lie upon the score both of the Actors, and Promoters of those
crueltyes: who they are, when I know, I Will tell you.

WOuld you know who it was that interposed betwixt the Parliament and the Duke
of Buckingham, and would not permit the Proofs to be made against him
concerning the death of his own Father?

THis I shall satisfy you in. --

A Letter was presented to the House from Thomas Haslerigg (brother to Sir
Arthur) which was read; to this Purpose. That there was one Mr. Smalling, a
Committeeman of Leichestershire, who had been a Deputy-examiner in the
Star Chamber, And affirmed, that above twenty years since, there being a suit
in Star Chamber, between the Earl of Bristol, Complainant, and the Duke of
Buckingham, Defendant; Concerning Physic, presumptuously administered by the
said Duke, to King James; the said Smalling took many Depositions therein, and
was further proceeding in the Examinations, until a Warrant, signed by the
King, was brought him, Commanding him to surcease, and to send him the
Depositions already taken: which Smalling did; yet kept notes by him of the
principal passages, doubting what further proceedings might be hereafter in a
business of such importance.

Sir Henry Mildmay moved that Smalling be sent for, and examined upon Oath by
the COMMITTEE that penned the said Declaration; but upon motion of the
Presbyterians he was ordered to be examined at the COMMONSBAR. Smalling came,
produced the Warrant, but no notes* so this Chimera vanished.

Tertio Caroli, this business had been ventilated, and examined against the
Duke, and no mention made of Poisoning, or Killing King James. It was then only
called, An Act of high Presumption, and Dangerous Consequence in the Duke, nor
was there then the least Reflection upon KING CHARLES. (See the History of
Independency par. 1. p. 74.)

WOuld you hear who it was that made so light of Parliaments, killing them as
soon as born, and making them a scorn by dissolution at pleasure; and at length
designed, and in fine drew sword against the very Parliamentary Constitution,
after he bad by imprisonments destroyed several eminent Patriots for their
freedom of speech in the Parliament on the behalf of the Public, and in
particular, touching the death of his Father?

NO; it needs not, I can tell you that. 'Twas Cromwell, and the secluding
Members. The RUMP; That drew Sword against the very Parliamentary Const^ution.
They clapped up Sir ^ obert Pie and Major Fincher for but d^siring a (...)
P^rliament; on the behalf of the Public: sending their Troops abroad to
seize, and Threatening (them e^e^) to (...) all the Declarers. (That which
concern* his Maj sti^'s Father, is spoken to already)

WOuld the Scots know who it was that designed them to be the first Subjects of
Slavery in Spirituals and Civils who hated their very Nation* though the Land
of his Nativity; who made a Pacification with them, with a ^rsa^be^ous in ent
to break every Article; and manifested it as so^n as he returned from Edinburg
to London, giving special command to ^u^n the said Articles by the hand of the
common H^ngman, and it was publicly done?

I Will tell you that too: 'Twas the old Argyle. -- But hold you Sir.

Touching the Treac^erous Intent, did he tell you his mind? ^ t I confess, you
are quick-sighted; you could not see things else that have no Being; -- as your
own Piety, and public Tenderness^; -- You have approved your ^elve, Se^r^h^r^
of Hearts indeed, witness your Sacrifi^es to your MOLOCH (the Good old cause)
your Butcheries by Q^arterin^, and Embowelling poor Wretches, only upon
Fri^olous, and I^congr^ous Circumstances: senselessely patched together by your
Ridiculous, and Suborned sons o^ B li^l.

Because that your own Party, did resolve, at first to break a^l O^th^s; and
has been only True, in a Fidelity to Hell, an^ Wicked^^ss; you make no
difficulty to measure others by your Impious selves; -- you Talk, and Act at
such a R^te, a^ if men were to be Damned upward; -- as if the (...) were a D
l^sion; Divinity an old wive's Tale; and (se^io sl^) not halfso much Respect,
is paid to the Two Ta^l^^ of the D^calog^e as to the Orders of your C^ff --
ho^s^. I shall not ra^el the T^ans^ction, sequent upon the P^cifi^ation yo^
speak of. -- But to your next.

WOuld you hear the Cries of the blood of Rochel, and of his own people
sacrificed in that Expedition to a foreign Interest, and of all the Protestants
in France, for his Barbarous betraying of them?

THe Rochel Expedition I Am a stranger to; so I suppose are you, that make the
Challenge. But if you had told me of Jamaica; or the Sound; I should have
understood you.

WOuld you cast your eye on past miseries, and recollect the manifold
intolerable Oppressions of people both in matter of Estate and Conscience, and
compare them with the indulgencies at the same time toward Papists, yea and
the designs laid to make use of Papists, to destroy both Parliaments and godly
People together?

NOw you say something, surely. The manifold intolerable oppression of People
in matter of Estate, and Conscience, etc. This I remember perfectly.

Your Major-General-Archy was an admirable Form of Government: So was your
Rumparchy. Clap a man up, and never let him know his crime, nor his Accuser, --
declare a man incapable of serving in Parliament, for having Bays in his
Window, or a Minc'd-Pye in Christmasse, sequester half the Nation, because they
will not swear back and forward; sell Freeborn men by Thousands into
Plantations; and in fine, beside Excise and other Impositions Arbitrary, lay on
the comfortable Load of 100000 l. a Month, upon a Beggered Nation, and at the
latter end of the day. (Is this the Oppress^on your wise Worship intends?)

Now for the matter of Conscience, I can help you out there too. To shorten,
let the Oath of Abjuration serve for all You follow this with a sharp charge
for making use of Papists. I could retort this, if I thought it valuable; but
frankly, in a War, the Subject of the Qusstion is not Religion, but Assistance.
Nor do I (though I might as well) condemn your Party, (that is, the Rump-men) for
the same practice.

WOuld you understand the correspondencies maintained with, and the
encouragements given to, the bloody Irish Rebels, for the ffecting his design;
together with the correspondencies and Solicitations settled in foreign
Countries, to the same purpose, with all the Circumstances evincing the truth?

THis is the same thing again, shake Hands, and to the next.

WOuld you be informed how often, and with how much solicitude the Parliament,
notwithstanding all these things, did, for peace sake, in a manner prostitute
themselves, and hazard the whole Cause, by appointing Treaty after Treaty,
which he never entertained but with intent of treachery, and thereby frustrated
all their good intentions and endeavors, before ever they passed the Votes of
non-Adresse?

Then, we beseech you, read the following Declaration, and be satisfied to the
full, whether or no the late King and his Family deserved death and
extirpation.

I Pr'ethee do not choke us with the venerable Sound of Parliament: I talk to
you, and of that Mungrel-mixture you plead for. A Parliament cannot do amiss,
(be not too quick now) they may have done Amiss, and the next Session may
repeal or mend it. What they did, I don't Question: but what you say, will (as
I humbly conceive) admit a Castigation. Look back upon your self; These are
your Words -- Which he never enterteyn'd (Treaty, that is,) but with intent of
Treachery, and, thereby frustrated their good Intentions, and Endeavors,
before ever they passed the Votes of Non-Address.) At this rate, you ground the
Non-Address, upon the Kings Intention of Treachery. A Positive disclaim of your
obedience, upon a Possible Dis-ingenuity in your Prince. Come, to cut short.
Dare you say, that he promised, and failed? That Is Treachery, to Betray a
Trust: By this Rule of Proceeding, had you required his Life, and he refused;
you might have taken it: his Crime was only the Non-Concession of what you
demanded; and he gave his Reasons too for that Refusal. Well, but let us come up
to the Vote it self. I have already proved, that it concerns not the secluded
Members; and now I shall entreat you to Back my opinion, with a slip of your
own Pen. Their honest strictness in the Negative, afterward, and their adhesion
to it, through all extremities, speaks manifestly the Intention of the parley,
and that acquirs them. It Is your own Argument in your fourth expostulation, you
charge his treaty with a treacherous intent, which you infer from a subsequent
manifestation of himself by Action. But to dispatch, should I grant all you
claim, yet did not the late King and his family, deserve death and extirpation,
The premises will not amount to it.

Now if you please go on.

As for our parts, we very well recount the Series of past transactions, and do
remember that in February 1647. when the two Houses of Parliament passed their
Resolves of making no further Address, but determined to lay him wholly aside,
they never were in a greater state of security and freedom, never passed any
thing with greater deliberation; and never the least disturbance or alteration
arose in either of the Houses against those Resolves, until some Persons in
the Commons House, otherwise affected, and who by procuring Elections of
Persons fit for their turn to serve in Parliament, in vacant places, brought in
new men of the Cavalier stamp (as is known) like themselves; and thereby
out-balancing the old Patriots, gained the Major Vote of the House; and so with
heat, and by design, obtained a revoking of those Resolves which had been
passed by both Houses in a time of temper, upon most serious Consideration: so
that though we shall not take upon us ex absoluto to justisie the interposure
of the Soldiery afterward, and their Exclusion of the Adverse Members (it
being a transcendent Act, not to be measured by ordinary Rule, and which
nothing can justify but Supreme necessity) yet this we can truly say in their
defense: In Judgment and Conscience there was so indispensible a necessity,
that had they not interposed, those Principles and the Concernments of the
Commonwealth, upon which the aforesaid Resolves of both Houses were founded,
had been utterly shipwrackt, and the whole Cause and its Defenders most
inevitably have sunk together; seeing the same heady confidence in treaty was
then given to the Father, which too many now incline to allow unto the Son, who
were first engaged against them in the War, and held out to the time of the
last treaty; whom (of all other men) his party do hate upon that account; and,
if they had an opportunity, would be sure to make them fall the severest
Sacrifices to the Revenge and Memory of his Fath r.

THis is already sif^ed, and a little picking will serve the Turn here. A
Cavalier, I find, is only an Honest man that crosses a Fantan; but the Old
Patriots it seems, were the Minor part of the House; and that is enough to
entitle the Nation to the Benefit of the Treaty resolved upon. For Sir (if
you will give us leave) we will be governed by the Major part. It Is true, your
Supreme necessity is a pretty popular Sophisme. But,

As necessity has no Law, so is it none; nor in any case pleadable against Law,
but by the Judges of the Law, which at all hands, is confessed to be the
Parliament, and the Major part of the Two Houses in conjunction with the King,
have ever denominated That.

I must needs take a little pains to correct the Centleman, in his next Fleere
upon the Presbyterians. He hangs like a Cock-sparrow upon the aforesaid
Resolves of both Houses (which is but an old Trick of a laying Knaves Bastard
at an Honest man's door) and then he preaches most Infallible Destruction to the
first engagers, whom the King will be sure to sacrifice to the Revenge and
memory of his Father.

This opinion, or rather suggestion of his, opposes all Principles of Honesty,
Generosity, and Prudence, which fall within the latitude of the case. Nay,
Taking for Granted, the very entrance upon the War Justifiable.

There might be Then a Question, now there is none. They intended only a
Reformation, here is a Dissolution. A liberty was there Designed; here is an
Intolerable slavery Imposed, Those quitted, when they saw their error; These,
for that very Reason, proceed. There is, in fine, this Difference; one side
would Destroy the King, the other would preserve him These, would Govern
without Law, and the other would be governed by Law After all this peremptory
rudeness at large; he bethinks himself at last of an Apology to the General;
and now the Pageant moves.

We urge not these things, with an intent to make the least reflection upon
your Excellency, and our Brethren the Officers under your command, as if we
suspected your sincerity and constancy, after so many plain and and pos^^ive
Declarations against returning to our old Bondage under that Family which God
so wonderfully cast out before us, and wherein we are confident he, for his own
Name and peoples sake, will never more take pleasure: but in regard the old
Adversaries behave themselves insolently and proudly, and publicly give out,
the time is coming wherein they shall satisfy their lusts u^o^ us, we thought
it convenient to whet your spirits with a repetition of these things, as we
have done our own, that the world may see we yet own our Cause; and do believe,
that what we have done as Instruments in driving out that Family, we have done
in Judgment and Conscience; and that you take a convenient time to let men
understand plainly that you also will continue of the same persuasion with us,
for as much as there are none of the particulars charged upon the late King in
the following Declaration, which would not, with many more, have been proved to
his face by a Cloud of Witnesses, if be would have put himself upon trial, when
he was called to answer for his actions.

ALas, good Gentleman; you suspect the General? No body can have such a Thought
sure: you do but Mind him of his Duty now and then, Refresh his memory, and
whet his spirits. He has declared himself against returning to our old
bondage, under that Family which God so wonderfully cast out before you; But
not against the liberty* and title of that Person whom God may, no less
wonderfully, Bring in, before you: and, I suppose my confidence is better
grounded, that the People will never more take pleasure in you; then yours is,
that God will take no pleasure in Him; the Nation will as little endure the
Rump, as you the King. But all this while, you Beg the Question, How comes the
King to be mentioned? The young man (as your Gravity descends to call him) he is
poor, and his Friends, Beggarly; You have the Balance of property on your
side, my masters; you're safe enough then. I would advise you now to wait, and
not Prejudge Authority. You're to obey, not to Impose a Government. If you
proceed to murmu^e, ^and show your Teeth, when you cannot Bite, 'twill be the
worse for you. Indeed, your Good old Patriots will be the Minor vole again of
the next Pa^liament, if you behave not your selves more mod^stly, the people
will suspect you; for mutinous s^rvants prove but untoward masters. Monopolies,
and some misgovernments were the True Cause, that engaged the well meaning
people, in the Quarrel, not extirpation of both Laws and Governors. But if your
Adversaries, do (as you say) grow proud and Insolent; in such a case, you may
be allowed, to whet your spirits (ae you express your selves, any thing but
your knives; you were at that sport once) your Judgment* and your conscience
we are satisfied in; alas, the difference betwixt yours and ours, is but a
Trifle. What we take to be slavvery, you call Freedom. -- A Rebel in our
Judgment, is a Patriote in yours. -- Murder, a Sacrifice; Robbing of
Churches, in your soft opinion, is but unclothing of the Whore; (a thing the
Rump's a little given to) we term That sacrilege. One frailty I must needs
take notice of among you, for all your talk of Providence, I find, your Arm of
Flesh strikes a great stroke in your spiritual conflicts; and when you are
worsted, you will take eggsfor your money; and Acquiesce, as well as your
neighbors. This I observe to be one Article of your Faith, you argue from
Divine Omnipotency, that Providence is ever on the stronger side. Suppose the
Gentlemen of the Back side, should look on for a Fit now; the Reyal Family (you
say) God cast out before us: Who casts out these? But to make all sure, you
press the General, and his Officers to declare., that they will continue of the
same persuasion with you. (This perseverance, I confess, is a main point) you
should do well to leave a note, where they may find you; for you're a little
variable, and they are a little shy of meddling with those that are giv^n to
change. You're possibly, this day, resolved for a Republic; te next, for a
Protector; by and by, a Counsel of Officers, and then, a Committee of Safety.
Come, come, Gentlemen, the General will be just, without your Counsels; and
steady, in despite of all your Arguments. Speak on.

Give us leave (we beseech you) to add^ one thing more, which we had almost
forgotten, to show the ^adnesse of those men that cancelled the Votes of
Non-Address, and would have brought back the late King by the Isle of
Wigh^-Treaty, and would now (is they might have their wills) bring in his Son
by the like, viz. that at the very time when that Treaty was on foot, though
this young man, who was then at Sea in the revolted Ships, declared all to be
null which should be agreed on by his Father; yet, hand over head, in they
would have had him, as others would now restore the Son upon the very same
terms which he so positively declared himself an enemy to in his Fathers
days. Good God! what a spirit of slumber hach s^ised such men, who were once
deeply engaged with us in the Common Cause,

As for your Excellency, far be it from us to entertain any suspicion
concerning you, supposing you must needs have upon your heart the true interest
of Religion, and your own too; and how much it is concerned in keeping out of
that Family, whose restitution we believe God will not now permit unto any
Designers, seeing he has from time to time so signally blasted all former
undertakings. As to what concerns Religion, you know what has bin their
Education and Depend^ncy abroad and should they return, it is obvious, all other
parties would be put upon their Guard to defend themselves against him and his
Clergy at home; and so all sorts of religious Parties, being constrained to
combine for mutual preservation and liberty, the War will soon be renewed upon
the point where it at first began.

WHat pity 'twould have been, this Gentleman should have forgot a thing that
never was, the King (indeed) sent an express to the City, the copy whereof was
carried to the House, by the Sheriffs, and some of the Common-Coun ell: 3. Aug.
1647. But not a syllable of what he mentions in it; nor any thing that way
tending, yet was it ea^erly debated, in Terminis, that the Prince should be
Declared a R^bell, and a Traitor. Among other Reasons, why it was laid by, one
was, -- the Covenant; a second, was This, It would not do well; to vote the
Prince a Traitor, the same day, that messengers were sent to invite the King
his Father to a Treaty. The clamorous puppy might bethink himself of better
Language; especially Addressing to an Eminent Person. The madness of those men
(he calls it) that cancelled the votes of non-Addresses, and would have saved
the King, etc. -- If all were mad that would have saved That King, or that love
This, we should not find many sober Persons, in the Kingdom.

This Fellow keeps so much stir to clear his Party of any jealousy, upon his
Excellency, that he most evidently creates, and discovers one. How comes
Religion now, To trouble our Atheistique Saints! These Reprobates have violent
taken the Father's life, and thrown the Son out of his Right and Dominions;
exposing him to the charity of Foreign Princes for a subsistence: and after
this; his Education abroad, is made an Argument by this Brute, against his
Return, where will he be next now?

As to your own interest in the station where God has placed you, it is well
known what the private sense and opinion of that Party is concerning your
Excellency, because you have been an Instrument in keeping Scotland many years
with so great vigilance and prudence, free from the attempts of that
irreconcilable Enemy. Admit such a thing were possible, which some fancy,
that you should be the man that would put the Crown again upon the head of that
Family; is it not plain what fate (setting aside all other Considerations) you
might expect from a seeming reconciled Enemy, and a King too? it being the
guise of Kings (as the Historians from innumerable Examples do observe) ever to
recompense with hate their most meritorious Servants; making no difference in
r^turn, betwixt the highest Obligation, and the greatest Injury. The examples
are so frequent in our own Chronicles, as well as foreign, that he who runs
may read it; and it is not proper here to recite them.

JNdeed he is hard put to it, to make the danger out from the King, to the
General, in case he should restore him. If there were nothing e^^e in it,
'twere enough, to make him Dear to the King, and to his Party, that he hates
you. Do not Deceive your selves: He Will be a scourge to the Phanatiques, and
every soul that loves either Piety, or Peace will assist him. Do not mistake me
neither. God forbid that all such as have either been misled by cunning
practices; or else transported by necessities, to seek a livelihood by
unlawful means. God forbid (I say) that all without Distinction, should be
marked with that Infamous Brand: No, I intend it only of that Frantique crew,
that preclude mercy, by Despising it: and persecute the Truth with a
Determinate Malevolence and spite: But note, the man begins to soften.

Alas, (Sirs) it is not an Army that shall secure you, nor the power of the
Militia that can secure our ancient Senators, (if any who have been engaged can
be so fond as to think of security) for, let the Young Man come in with freedom
to encounter both Army and Militia with the hare title of King, and actual
possession of the Throne, the eyes of Army and Militia will soon be dazeled
with the splendor of that Gay Thing, and fall down and worship at the sight
and hope of the Kingdoms of this world, and the glory of them; and then all
Bonds of Agreement (if any be) will prove but Rushes.

Oh, for God and his peoples sake, yea, and for the City of Londons sake, whom
Charles the Father branded in his Papers with the Character of Disloyal and
Rebellious City, (though at that time most renowned in her actings se^ an end
to the expectations of malicious enemies, and staggering f^ien^s, by clearing
up your selves, that we may see you in the light, vigorously asse^ting the good
Cause of these Nations: yea, for the sake of Parliaments we ask it: and we
doubt i^ not at your hand, seeing the people are not like to be brought to
contend any more for Parliaments, if after so long a Contest he should gain an
^pportunity of improving a possession of the Crown to an usurpation over the
Privileges and Majesty of Parliaments.

THis Thing, I Will lay my life, belongs to the Rump; it is so much concerned in
the behalf of our Ancient Senators. truly I Am half of his mind, in what he
says last. That is, I do believe, his Majesty would be made welcome; But for
faithless; nothing but an Abjuring, Perjured villain would suspect him.

See how that supple slave, is come about, now: how Arrantly the Rogue Beggs:
Oh! for God, and his People's sake, and for the City of Londons sake. (I am in
earnest; I must laugh before I can write on.) Might not this fellow be laid
hold of, upon the statute against sturdy Beggars, and lashed, he has absolutely
turned a piece of one of the Rump*Ballads into Prose.

Nay my Lord; (cries the Brewers clerk) good my Lord for the love of God;
Consider us and your self; this poor Nation, and that Tyrant Abroad;
Don't leave us: but George gives him* ashrug, instead of a nod.
Come hang your self, Beg right, here is your true method of Begging. -- Oh for
Tom. Scots sake; for Haslerigs sake, for Robinson, Holland, Mildmay, Mounson,
Corbet, Atkins, Van^, Livesey, Skippon, Milton, Tichbourn, Ireton, Gourden,
Lechmore, Blagrave, Bare-bones, Nedhams sake, and to conclude; for all the rest
of our Impenitent Brethrens sakes, Help a company of poor Rebellious Devils;
that only for Murdering their Prince, destroying three Glorious Nations,
Breaking the Bonds of Faith both with God and Men, Trampling upon Religion, and
Laws; exercising an Absolute*Tyranny over their fellow Subjects -- Endeavoring
yet once more to engage their Native Country in Blood; -- to Alienate the
Honest Souldjery from their Obedience, and in sine for Playing the Devil in
Gods name; are now in danger to Lose the Reward of all their virtues; -- The
Possessions which they have acquired by violence, by a Malignant, and desperate
design of Peace, and Settlement.

This is the State of your Condition, and this should be the Form of your
Application.

Once more, and he bids you Farewell.

But (my Lord and Gentlemen) leaving these things which touch only upon your
worldly Interests and Concernments, we are hold to say, (though the Jealousies
of weaker Brethren be great and many) we believe our selves to be sure of you,
because we have your Souls as well as your personal interests at pawn for your
fidelity to the Public. We remember your Declaration sent f^rm Scotland to the
Churches, and other Declarations at t^^ same time. We might mind you, if it
were needful, how you have called God to witness, That the ground of your late
undertaking in Scotland was, The vindication of the Liberties of the People,
with the protection and encouragemens of the Godly and the Faithful therein,
etc. and that you have no intention or purposes to return to our old Bondage;
but that the Providence of God having made us free at the cost of so much
blood, you will never be found so unfaithful to God and his People* as to lose
so glorious a Cause; but do resolve, with Gods assistance, to endeavor a
maintainiug of our dear-purchased Liberties bot^ Spiritual and Civil. But
seeing these Declarations made before God, Angels and Men, (as your selves have
said) do so much concern your Souls in the observation of them, that they
cannot but be much upon your hearts; therefore we me^^ion them, not as doubting
you, or endeavoring to persuade you, but to ease our own minds, and to comfort
the hearts of our Brethren, who have need to be comforted: And do wait for a
good time when your Excellency shall break forth, and more visibly appear
(through all the Clouds of Fear and Jealousy) a Defense and Protection
(through the goodness of God) to all his people that fear him in these
Nations; and so their hearts universally will return unto you, in assurance
whereof, and that you will be very much confirmed and encouraged after the
reading of this Declaration, We remain,

(My LORD), Your Excellencies most faithful Friends and Servants in the Common
Cause.
March 22. 1659.

STill I perceive you're sure; and yet for your weak Brethren sake, yon mind
his Excellency of a Pawn he has engaged for his Fidelity to the Public (only
his Soul) in a Declaration, before God, Angels, and Men: that he has no intent
to return to his old Bondage.

Why you Impudent sots; does a Confederacy with a Peddling, little, Sniv'lling
Faction, that would subvert Order, and Government, amount to a Fidelity to the
public? or does the avoiding the Old Bondage you keep such a Coil with,
Imply the setting up a New, and more Tyrannical Impos^tion.

In fine; the mention of the King, proceeds from your own Guilt, and Fears,
that have so much abused ^im. The General meddles not at all, to Impose upon
us: but only stands betwixt Authority, and Violence. His Excellency refers all
to the Appointment of such Persons as the People shall abuse, to Act in their
behalf, and cannot in Honor, fide with a Party of Jugglers, that only call
themselves onr Representatives, and we disclaim.

This is enough said to convince you and the World, where the Abuse lies; Now,
having eased your minds, (in your own Language) You may go ease yur Bodies too;
for I dismiss you; and all is but giving of the Rump a Purge.

Cursed is he that removes away his Neighbors Landmark.


FINIS.

