A LETTER from the FRENCH KING TO THE GREAT TURK, Lamenting the woeful Loss of
his Noble FLEET, and earnestly requiring his present Assistance.
With the Grand Seignior's ANSWER.
Most dear Brother;
PAR Dieu, I am undone, undone for ever; and bloodily afraid, that our good
Cause (which we have jointly carried on so long) will now (on a sudden) fall to
the Ground: For, alas, alas, I must let you know, that my Invincible Armado
has most unhappily rancounter'd with an English Drake, who has publicly
evinced, to the unlooking World, That I can be Overcome. O woe, woe to me! what
shall I do? I shake and tremble, I quake with a panick Fear; and the Violence
of Passion, at the first receiving of this amazing Disaster, has again
occasioned the tormenting Fistula in my distressed Ano. What shall I do? what
shall I do? I Am undone, undone, undone, every where beset with implacable
Enemies, and my utter Ruin is nigh at hand. Enraged Neptune does distract me at
Sea, and thundering Mars afrights me at Land. From Abroad I Am strangely
terrified with the very thoughts of my formidable Adversaries; and at Home I
continually dread the rising of the unruly Mob. To all which add, that my
Ghostly Father at Rome, has long ago declared me a Bastard, and says, That I
no ways belong to the Holy See.

In short, I Am forsaken both by God and Man! I have prayed to S. Denis twice,
but he has not heard me; and S. Ignatius (I think) is fallen asleep. All my
Beads and Gaudes do now avail me nothing; and a thousand Ave Mary's are said,
but all in vain.

Thus (my dearest Brother) I do let you know of these my perplexing
Circumstances, beseeching you (for the sake of Mahomet's Sleeve) to assist me
now in this my greatest Extremity.

Great Sir;

I need not tell you that my Enemies are also yours, and that yours are truly
mine. I beg it of you, that you would be pleased to cause your great Mufti
grant me the benefit of his Prayers; and that in all haste imaginable he would
dispatch some Lamenting Pilgrim to the famous Mecca, to salute in my Name the
splendid Sepulcher of your great Prophet, assuring him of my faithful
Allegiance for the future, and that henceforth I will no longer act the part of
an Hypocrite, (that being in all probability some Cause of my present Ruin)
but will publicly own his noble Principles, and that in the Face of the Sun,
still carrying before my marching Armies, a glittering Crescent, with the
following Motto, In hoc vince; and (to the utmost of my Power) I will propagate
the Holy Alcoran through the Western Parts of the Heretical World. I need not
tell you of my fervent Zeal to that meritorious Work, you being fully convinced
thereof long ago. I am not able to write one Word more at present, because
excessive Grief overwhelms my drooping Spirit: Therefore (my dearest Brother) I
do, again and again, request your present Assistance. And expecting an Answer
with the first convenience, do subscribe my self,

(Great SIR) Your greatly afflicted Brother, Louis le Grand.
Be pleased to direct for me at Valenciennes, at the Sign of the Lion above the
Flower de Lis, lodging with the Countess of Bourbon, one of my Seraglio.



A Copy of the Grand Seignior's ANSWER to the French King's LETTER, sent to him
in all haste by the Flying Post.
Dear and disconsolate Brother;
I Have received your Lamenting Letter by the foresaid Post, and am heartily
sorry at your woeful present Circumstances; but assure your self, that I will
truly Assist you to the utmost of my Power. And that you may be fully convinced
of my Sympathy with your sad Condition, I do hereby give you my Royal Word,
that for three Days to come I will abstain from being Drunk with Claret Wine.
And that my great Concern for you may farther appear, I Will command a public
Fast to be kept through all my Dominions, strictly charging my dutiful
Subjects, that (when they are best at leisure) they may consecrate at least half
a Day for public Mourning and Humiliation; enjoining a severe Penance on any
Person who will dare to eat Meat twice before Dinner that day. And to avoid all
sign of Joy or Rejoicing whatsoever, I Will promise you, that (during our
Humiliation) no Bell shall be tolled in any of my Sacred Mosques. And, finally,
for your farther Comfort, I am fully resolved to denounce open War against the
great Kingdom of China, and that because it does so abound with that nauseous
Fruit called Oranges, a Fruit most detestable to your Sacred Palate.

But since all this (though very great Comfort indeed) does not answer the
chief End of your Epistle, (it being present Assistance you want) I do hereby
let you know, that in that Point I Will fully satisfy you also. Courage, courage,
Brother, there is no fear; Are not you Louis le Grand, and I Seignior le Grand?
the Devil's in it if we maul not the Rogues now. Your Personal Valor has
sounded all the World over; pray therefore rouse up your self now at this Time,
a Time of so great Danger to our Sacred Cause: Come, come (Brother) cheer up
your musing Mind, and fear nothing at all. It Is true, you want both Ships and
Money at present; and what then? cannot I furnish you with both? Yes truly, and
I will do it. You know (Brother) I designed to have done great Things upon the
Danube this Summer, but that devilish Pass near Orsoway, has utterly ruined my
Design. Now seeing that it is so, I can freely spare you my whole Fleet of
Barks and Boats, (especially those that your shallow Seas can well admit of)
whereby you may be able, not only to re-ingage, but (I hope) also to defeat
your Enemies: Therefore I desire, that upon the receiving of this my Letter,
you will cause instantly dispatch an Express to your Royal Harbor at Barfleur,
commanding three of your best Ships (namely, the Royal Sun, the Conquerant and
Admirable) to meet my Fleet at the Straits Mouth, and from thence to conduct
them safe to the English Channel; and then if we chance only to get but one
sight of the Rogues, the Day will certainly be our own, I Will warrant it; yea,
(par ma foy and en verite) I can take my Oath upon it. As for Money (Brother)
fear not, I Will furnish you with your own Luidores, with which you formerly
gifted me in so great Abundance: Pray fear not, you shall have true French
Gold, and that as much as I can spare. You tell me, in a most tragical manner,
that you are ruined both by Sea and Land; your whole Kingdom being in a
dreadful Consternation at present, and the greatest part of your Fleet either
sunk or burnt; so that Earth, Water and Fire, do seem all at once to fight
against you. What then (Brother) have you forgot all your Philosophy? Are there
not four Elements? make have therefore, and fly speedily to the Prince of the
Air, and betake your self to his Royal Protection, and presently establish a
firm League, Offensive and Defensive, with him; I say, do it presently before
he hear of all your Disasters, lest then he be unwilling to consent unto it.
Make haste, and quickly dispatch your great Trustee the D. of Luxenburgh, his
good Friend and old Acquaintance; for if any Man in the World prevail, it will
be him. I desire to be a Member of that Noble Confederacy my self; so that
being Three in Number, I hope we shall prove the Invincible Triumviri. But,
pray observe one thing, that we must both give the precedence to this our great
Friend: But to comfort you (Brother) by all means you shall sit next to him; so
that in your Imperial Dets, our Royal Writs shall be thus superscrib'd, Lucifer
le Grand, Louis le Grand, Seignior le Grand, Every one Le Grand. Are not these
confounding Titles, enough to conquer the World it self, suppose we never
strike a Stroke? Yes truly, and that without any Miracle too. Assure your self
therefore of a most glorious Triumph over all your perplexing Foes, which is
the constant Prayer and hearty VVish of,

MONSIEUR, Votre tres cher Ami and Friar, Le Grand Seignior.

Printed in the Year 1692.


