A LETTER from the NORTH.
L^ (...) friends, as this ensuing Letter accidentally came to my hands, so I
could not but take notice of it; and finding it a Declaration (...) world) of
that birth which sticks in the womb, having not power to come forth, I was
constrained in spirit to give it a being a^ (...) of men, assuring my self that
the dictator thereof had given it Reason, with its innocence to defend it self
against Pharaoh and (...) Egyptian taskmasters, it being the way of the eternal
God, thereby to establish his Throne on earth in Justice, Righteousness and
Judgments by which means the destroyer shall be destroyed, and the oppressor
oppressed; then shall his captives go free, and his prisoners be set at liberty.

Honored friend,
THe serious consideration of our former Parliaments solemn Vows,
Protestations, and Oaths (to maintain the Liberties, Freedoms, and Privileges
of us the free born people of England) has made so deep an impression in our
hearts, that it can never be blotted out, nor yet can we let go out of our
minds, the Angel-like Declarations from the Army, in vindication of our said
Laws and Liberties; and we also well remember the present Parliaments first
Declaration, wherein they told us, and also engaged, to tender our Lives,
Liberties, and Estates, as much as their own, or the nearest and dearest
relations they had; yet notwithstanding, we apparently see them turn their
backs upon their promises and engagements, as visibly appears in your case; so
that we have cause to cry out with the late Parliament, in their primitive
being, Oh how apparently do we see our Laws, Liberties, and Privileges (so
much contended for, and for which so much treasure, precious lives, blood, and
time has been spilt and spent) forced and torn from us ( p. 657. B. Decl.) and
yet we can obtain no favor, remedy, or redress; or any Petition received on
the behalf thereof, though we have sought as much after it, as the woman to the
unjust Judge, therefore we have just cause to complain with the Prophet, Ier.
22. 3. Even the Dragons draw forth their breasts and give suck to their young,
but the daughters of my people are cruel, as the Ostridge in the wilderness,
and our persecuters are swifter then the Eagles of the heavens, they pursue
upon the mountains, and lay baits for us in the wilderness; therefore we a^e
resolved, come life, come death, to carry on a testimony against such
unrighteousness and injustice of men, very well knowing it to be one witness of
God on earth, and so acknowledged by the Army (p. 40. B. Dec.)

And we do also, in the names of our selves and many of our friends in
Hartford-shire, salute you: it was no small joy to us when we heard that the
Lord had by your Jury cleared you, whereupon in several places of our County,
your godly friends did upon Wednesday last set themselves solemnly to give
thanks to the Lord, who had heard our Prayers, when men in power rejected both
us and them: for we went to them a hundred of us, and waited two days upon
them, with our Petition on your behalf, but could get no Answer, but that at
present they could do nothing in it, one Reason was, as we were informed, the
paper that was printed that morning, called, Diverse informations, that was sent
to them to consider of, on purpose as we verily believe, from some great person
to obstruct our business; do the Authors thereof think that the Lord searches
the hearts and tries the reins, and that he will bring every work, and every
secret thing to judgment? so we returned home with sad hearts, being
astonished to think that these men of whom we had such choice hopes, should
deal so unworthily with us and you; we waited till the Sessions week came
again, to see if they would remember themselves, and do us right, but to our
hearts grief, we saw they would do nothing: we drew up another Petition, and
chose out five men from several parts of the County, sent it up signed with
many hundred hands of the honest men of the County, as before; and we dare
aver, they were both as honest sober Petitions, as ever were presented to a
Parliament; but then were our friends more slighted then before, for though
they waited with Bedford-shire men, and your poor wife, three days with their
three Petitions, they would not so much as look upon them, but no marvel, for
it is evident by what has since fallen out, that they were resolved to lay the
foundation of their power in blood, for they have slain you already in their
hearts, and are guilty in the sight of God, of shedding your blood; and yet
this is not sufficient, unless they can have you actually slain, as appears,
that beyond all presidents, you being cleared by a Jury according to Law, they
still keep you in prison, and call into question both Judge and Jury, a thing
they would not do, we are confident, to the veriest rogue in England: Oh woeful
cruelty, beyond example! we are persuaded that the blessed name of God was
never so profaned by any generation of men in the world, nor his enemies such
occasion given them to blaspheme, in as much as no men in power before them,
did ever pretend to such a degree of holiness and piety, and to make it only a
cloak to cover over their cruel and bloody ends, this fills our souls with
trouble, and our hearts with grief; especially when we consider what an
opportunity was put into the hand of these men, to have made both you and all
the honest men in England their own, whereas now we submit to them, even as the
Turkish slaves do to their tyrant masters, in as much as they endeavored at
once to expose all our lives, liberties, freedoms and estates, to be taken away
at pleasure, in case their actings be drawn into presidents; if any of us do
but anger Sir Arthur or any men in favor with the General or Parliament, all
must go for it; nay if any of us should give you a cup of cold water in the
name of a Disciple, we are as much felons as you were, and they had as much
ground to try us for our lives, and in case a Jury could not find us guilty,
they might detain us in slavery as they do you, against all Right and Justice.
Good Lord! what do these men think? can they imagine that your blood will be
pleasant to them? will it not be bitter in the end? yea doubtless; but the Lord
forgive them, though we cannot say, They know not what they do: it is true we
judge not thus of all, for we know that there are many precious souls among
them, the Lord deliver them from the snare of the wicked, and the Lord give you
and us hearts to wait patiently upon him till he work deliverance for us; to
whose gracious protection we shall constantly commit you and yours.

And so we conclude with the Armies own words, Oh when shall we see Justice
dispersed without partiality? or when shall the weal of the public be singly
sought after and endeavored? we hoped to have put an end to all tyranny and
oppression, so that Justice and Equity should have been done, and the meanest
subject to have enjoyed his right, liberty and propriety in all things, upon
this ground have we gone through all difficulties and dangers, that we might
purchase to the people of this Nation with our selves, a plentiful crop and
harvest of liberty and peace; but instead thereof, to the great grief of our
hearts, we see that oppression is as great here, if not greater then ever, p.
8, 9. B. Decl.

FINIS.

