RUMP ENOUGH: OR, QUAERE for QUAERE, In Answer to a Pamphlet, ENTITLED, NO
NEW PARLIAMENT, OR, Some Quaeres, or Considerations, humbly offered to the
present PARLIAMENT - MEMBERS.

LONDON, Printed for any man that loves Peace, March 14. 1659.

RUMP Enough, etc.
ALthough That Pamphlet, which Occasions This, considered in it self, is not
Worth a Reply: Yet, in regard of the Contrivers, and of the End it tends to, it
may deserve one. I look upon it, as nothing else, but the Phanatiques late
Petition, sliced into Quaeres; by some unskilful hand; and with a Harmless
kind of Simple Malice, directed to elude the Justice, and Necessity of their
great Patrons Dissolution.

I shall not much Insist upon the business, beyond the Obligation of a Formal
Answer: but I shall take such heed to That, as to leave little place for a
Return; and in the rest, make the old saying good* that one Fool may ask more
Questions, than Twenty Wise men can Answer.

The Quaere 's are as follows. 1. Whether this be not the Parliament, and these
the Persons, who began the War with the late King? And if so* whether it do not
highly and nearly concern them, even for their own sakes, to be the Parliament
that shall take up and Cloze the Quarrel, and not leave it to others,
especially, if as the general voice goes, the Kings Son must be brought in?
Ans* This is not the Original Parliament; That was composed of Three Estates;
King, Lords, and Commons. Further, these very Persons now sitting, Declared the
King, a Party with them in the Quarrel; beginning the War, in the Kings name;
-- For Him, not with (that is, as it lies here Against) Him. If thus; the House
must be Divided, as well now, in the Question, as formerly it was so in the
War. The Parliament (even in the Quaerists sense) were those, that (suitably to
their Duties, and Engagements) Voted a peace, in order to the pres^rvating of
his Majesty, but there was a Faction too, that contrary to Honor, Faith, and
Conscience, did forcibly seclude their Honester Fellows, (by much the Major
Part) and prosecute, and put to Death the King; Those that have been Honest,
are safe: nay, and so should those be too, that will at last be so, by my
consent: but I demand

Quaere.
What Equity, or Reason is there, that those Persons who murdered the Father,
and are still professed Enemies to the Son, should have an Equal Benefit with
Others, that were Affronted for their Loyalty to the Former, and are at present
upbraided (as if 'twere Criminal) for their Affection to the Latter? If the
King's Son must be brought in, whether they will or no, what have we to do
further with those People, that declare they will keep him Out, if they can?

2. Whether this Parliaments first undertaking and prosecuting the War with the
late King were Just, and upon good and Warrantable Grounds? If it were (as no
doubt it was) and God having by his Providence, after a long Interruption of
some of them, and a longer Seclusion of the rest, restored them to their Trust,
whether they ought not now to stand to their first Good Principles maintain
their first Good Cause, and secure all the good p ople that have been engaged
with them and by them?

Ans.
The war was just, in that part of the Parliament, which declared for the King,
and acted accordingly, but unjust in those that swore to preserve him, and
intended to murder him. That the Parliament ought to stand to their first good
Principles; we are agreed. In so doing; they are to bring to condign
punishment, -- the infrringers of their Privileges; -- the introducers of
Arbitrary power -- the Obstructors of successive Parliaments; The murderers of
the late King; -- the subverters of the established Government, etc. --

I grant you further, that they are obliged to secure all the good people that
engaged with them and by them; but not consequently all those that acted
violently against and without them* -- now my Question.

Quaer.
How is it possible, for those that began upon Principles of Contradiction, (as
the saving and destroying of the King, etc.) -- to stand to their first
Principles.

3. Whether this be not that Parliament, and these the very persons, who by the
good esteem they had among the people of their Integrity, Faithfulness and
Constancy; whether I say, this be not the Parliament, who by these and other
means engaged the Honest and Well Affected of the Land in the aforesaid War?
And if so, whether this Parliament having new power in their hands, are not
obliged in Duty and good Conscience to secure all the said honest and well
affected people for this their Engaging and Acting under them, and not leave
them as a prey to their prof^ssed enemies, nor their terms of Peace to be made
by they know not whom? Another Parliament, which there is too great cause to
fear, will be too much made up of such as neither have been nor are friends to
the Parliaments cause, nor to those that engaged in it.

Answ.
It Is not the gaining of a good esteem, but it is the Practice of Integrity,
that recommends a worthy Person. I may believe well of a cheat, and have my
pocket picked. But after that; I think, I should deserve a yellow coat, ever to
trust that fellow again, though he should plead; -- he had my good opinion
formerly. -- Some I confess are yet in Being of those whose Interests raised
the War, but these are not the men our Quaeristmeans: (and beside; the most
considerable of that number, are in their graves) For the rest; (to wave his
Argument from power to Conscience. --) Those people that dare not stand to the
Test of a Free, Legal Parliament, must not presume to act themselves, as an
Authority without Law, or Limit. In fine; -- If this be the same Parliament.
that sirst engaged -- them --

Quaere.
Why should the Secluders, and their Adherents; -- Those, which by Force of
Arms, Baffled this very Parliament, in 48* escape better, then the Cavaliers,
that fought against it, in 42?

4. Whether this be not the Parliament who by many Declarations and
Remonstrances, by Protestation and Vow, by Solemn League and Covenant have
declared and engaged themselves before God, Angels, and Men, and have thereby
drawn in and therewith engaged all honest People to assert and defend their
just undertaking and one another therein? whether as things now stand, (when
this just Cause, which through Gods assistance could not be won from us in the
field, is in great danger to be stolen from us by the dark contrivances of its
and our adversaries) if this Parliament should dissolve at such a time as this,
and leave all, both Cause and all engaged by them in it to another Parliament,
the greatest part whereof may be no friends but enemies, or at least strangers,
or but little concerned in the first undertaking; whether this would not be
exceeding contrary to all those former Declarations, Remonstrances,
Protestation, Vow and Solemn League and Covenant.

Answ.
I do allow, -- the Members of this present Session, are those Persons, that
stand engaged by Oath and Covenant: and to that Oath, and Covenant, we appeal.
-- For granted; they stand bound to protect all the Honest people they have
engaged; but not the Knaves, -- the Covenant-Breakers; I desire only this. --

Quaere.
Whether or not, are they that took the Covenant, bound to protect the
Violaters of it? -- Nay, can they purge themselves of manifest Perjury, and
Complication, should they not prosecute the obstinate opposers of it?

5. Whether it be not more then sufficiently manifest, what will be the
carriage of these Enemies to the Parliaments Cause, and its Adherents, when
they get power into their hands, since they are so forward already in their
discourses to charge the Parliament with Treason and Rebellion in their first
undertaking the War, and look on all their Friends as Rebels and Traitors for
assisting them in the Prosecution of it, and who are now in all places
contriving and promoting the electing of such into the New Parliament as are
Enemies to the present Parliament, their Friends and Cause, wherein if they
prevail (as it is too likely) their work is done? how absolutely necessary is it
then for the present Parliament to continue their Session, for prevention of
these Mis hiefs, which otherwise will ensue.

Upon these and many other very weighty Considerations, it can by no means be
accounted either honorable, or just, or safe, or prudent for the present
Parliament to dissolve themselves, till first they have fully asserted, and
vindicated their own just undertaking, and the faithful adherents to it and
them, and not to leave ^oth themselves and their Friends to the Malice and
Revenge of a vanquished Enemy.

If this should be, we may bid Adieu to the Honor and Renown of English Pa
liaments, and to all future hopes of assistance from the People, whatever the
necessity may be: And let English men bid farewell both to their Civil and
Religious Liberties, if after so high a Conflict for them, with the expense of
so much blood and treasure, and having by Gods blessing subdued their opposers,
yet after all to be exposed to a far worse Condition then before, which O God
forbid: We hope for better things from our present Parliament: All that we add,
is only this, If the KING must come, none so fit to bring him as our present
Parliament.

Answ.
It Is not the Parliament is charged with Treason, but that Rebellious Faction;
-- that, by an Insolence, praevious to the murder of his Sacred Majesty, threw
out the major party of their Fellow Members, which interposed to save him --
and it is in their behalfs, this pitiful, half-witted Pamphleter engages.
Should these Gentlemen sit, till they found a Free Parliament their Friends,
they would hardly Rise betwixt This, and the Day of Judgment: and that's all they
desire. Alas! a Trifle. -- The Care they take of our Religion, and Civil
Rights, in truth is a great Favor from them, that never understood their Own.
-- If the more sober, conscientious Persons at the Helm, think not fit to
dissolve so soon; these JONASSES, however, must be thrown overboard, to save
the Vessel. -- He that dissents* let him produce his Reasons: and in
particulars, but show what Good, they 've either Done, or Meant us; to Balance
the Calamities they have engaged us in. I should be glad to see these Men
Repent; hardly, to see them Govern. -- These Folks are Ruined, if they do not
Rule; the Nation, if they do. -- The Question then, is but --

Quaere.
Whether is more Prudential; by saving of some half a score Secluders, that We
should Perish; or by their SPEEDY DISSOLVTION, that we should save our selves?

FINIS.

