a cavalier armed with musket and rapier stands over a lion outside a town

A LETTER FROM THE KINGS MAJESTY'S COURT, OF THE KINGS Coming toward LONDON,
and was yesterday at SION HOUSE.

His Majesty's speech to the Duke of York there.

The Resolutions of his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX And the Council of War
concerning the Kings Majesty.

AND His Excellencies MESSAGE to the Officers and Soldiers in the North, sent
by Major General Lambert, and by him delivered at a General Randezvouse.

Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson, 1647.

A LETTER FROM THE KINGS MAJESTY'S COURT, Of the Kings coming toward London,
and was yesterday at Sion house.
Right Honorable,
I Have received your Packet, with the Orders of the Committee and the House,
what necessity of Moneys is here, you have I doubt not sufficiently been
advertised from Mr. Cresset; I suppose that your Honor cannot but think that
it is now full time that his Majesty have a new supply of Clothes, and some
Jewels, and other Ornaments for His Royal person.

Also for a further supply of Pewter, and Pans, and Kettles, and diverse other
necessaries for the Kitchen, of silver, for his Majesty's uses, and Linen, and
other necessaries, which are wanting to accommodate his Majesty, which I doubt
not but there will be a large supply of.

The Lieutenant Generell Crumwels Regiment is now set to guard his Majesty,
which the King does well approve on.

His Majesty has several of his Chaplains come to him, as Dr. Hammon, Dr.
Holsworth, Dr. Goffe, and others, yesterday according to the Court custom, the
Book of Common Prayer was used at Oatelands, and his Majesty had a Sermon
preached in the forenoone, and Evening prayer in the Afternoon.

This morning his Majesty rise very early, and called for the Commissaries and
the Officers of the Guards, to appoint him some Horse to attend him to
Sion-House (which is the way to London, where his Highness the Duke of York
is, with his Brother and Sister, attended by the Earl of Northumberland,)
whither his Majesty told them he was resolved speedily to go.

The Commissioners made all possible speed to get them ready, and a Troop of
horse were, presently appointed to attend his Majesty, and about seven of the
clock in the morning all were made ready, and the Officers and Soldiers
mounted, to attend his Majesty, and at that time this morning his Majesty took
Horse.

His Majesty had Major Titus his Querry rid bare before him, and the Lord
Mountague, Sir James Harrington, and the rest of the Commissioners rid with his
Majesty, with diverse Gentlemen of those appointed by the Parliament to wait
upon his Majesty. And one Troop of Lieutenant General Crumwels Regiment of
Horse rid a distance off, and in this posture his Majesty passed this morning
about half an hour past seven a clock from Oatelands toward LONDON.

A little after eight a clock this day (in the morning) his Majesty came
hither, with the Commissioners and Guards, and rejoiced much to see his
Children, giving the Earl of Northumberland thanks for his great care of them.

Many things passed between the King and the Duke of York, as to inquire into
his and his Brother and Sisters health, and content, and the like, in all which
his Majesty received much satisfaction.

The Commissioners sent into the Country Towns therabouts, to fetch in
provisions for the Kings dinner, which was brought in presently. And his
Majesty dined here this day with his Children, which has much pleased the
Country herabouts, that his Majesty is come so near his Parliament.

I suppose that his Majesty will return back again to Oatelands to night, for
here is no provision for stay here, and besides, we are very sensible of what
danger it will be to the Kings person to draw any nearer to London.

When those things propounded by the Army, and determined by the Parliament,
and their Conclusions presented to his Majesty for the Royal assent, his
Majesty will come to London, to sit with the Parliament by free consent of all
sides, which (in regard of the long time it will take up) it is desired that
the Parliament-Houses will make no delay therein, but come to a conclusion,
what it is that they will present to his Majesty, as is desired by Sir Thomas
Fairsax, and the Army.

Some things are resolved upon by the General and the Council of his Army, in
reference to the King, as his Majesty is advertised by those sent from his
Majesty to the Army, as to the enjoyment of his Rights, the continuance of
Monarchy, the company of his Consort, and Children, and other things much
satisfying his Majesty, which is past the account at present, From

Your Lordships humble Servant.
Dat. SYON HOUSE, August 23. 1647.
A Message from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, delivered by Major General
Lambert, to the Officers and Soldiers in the North.
Gentlemen and Fellow Soldiers,
HIs Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax has commanded me to repair to these parts,
and take upon me the charge and conduct of the Forces of his Assotiation.

His Excellency is very sensible of your love, and respects to him, and has
commanded me to assure you of the like from him to you.

And that however the proceedings of the Army have bin obstructed (by reasons
of the late difference,) not unknown to you, so that he could not (as yet)
procure a settlement of pay for you, yet His Excellency has thought of you,
and is resolved to take care for you equally with his own Army.

Sent from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairefax by M.G. LAMBERT.

FINIS.

