A Word in Season, to General Monk, (with his Officers, etc.) To the City, and
To the Nation;
My Lord, and Gentlemen,
YOu are, at present, in the Heart of the Nation, and in the Arms of your
Friends: where you are Safe, and Beloved. You have the Strength and Affections
of the City, at your Devotion, and it is your commune Interest, to unite in a
Concurence both of Power and Kindness. You stand and fall together. You are all
of the same Stock; Born to the same Freedom; Subjected to the same Laws; Nursed
up in the same Religion: And in fine, Obliged by the same Rules of Duty and
Wisdom, to promote the same Ends. I might add, that you are likewise exposed
to the same Danger, and from the same Enemy: by whose Hypocrisy, and Skill,
should you be Deluded into a Belief, of such who never kept Faith, (forgive me)
your Reputation is lost, with that Security; and you Fall, without either
Redress or Pity. In this very Instant, while you Treat, the Mine is working The
Instruments and Means of your Destruction are already agreed upon. Some are
employed to Infect your Councils, and Alienate your Soldiers: Others sit among
you, to Betray you. What by open Force cannot be Perfected, must be assisted,
by a Dagger or Poison. You have the Substance of this, already, upon Evidence,
and Experiment. Next to this Caution toward your Professed Adversaries, allow
me to propose a more Ingenuous, and open Clearness toward your Useful
Friends; if it were but to prevent Mis-understandings: Beside, that the very
Doubt is both Injurious and Painful. Offices of Respect, and Comfort, ought to
be performed with Liberty, and Chearfullness, without any the least mixture of
Scruple, and Reserve. These Frank and Mutual Enterchanges of Succor, and
Advice, beget a Trust, and Kindness; And That Is the true Foundation of a Happy
and Lasting Union. -- That Friendship which admits a Jelousie, wavers.

When You, (my Lord) your Officers, and Army, are become One with this City,
you have then but Contracted a nearer Alliance with the Nation: whose several
Counties, and Divisions, (how remote soever) are (with this Town) but Parts
still of the same Body. By a Consent of Interest, and Sense, they Prosper, or
they Wither, they Grieve, or Joy, they Live, or Dye. Nor are they more united
in their Interests, than in their Votes, and Resolutions; for they have
unanimously engaged with the City, to maintain their Rights, and Liberties, the
Reformed Religion, and the Freedom of Parliaments, against all Hazzards, and
Oppositions whatsoever. I need not tell your Lordship by what Audacious and
Illegal Violences, this Declaration and Remonstrance was extorted from them.
The Nation stood condemned to Servitude, and Beggary, even by those, whom they
themselves had Raised from that Condition, to aggravate the Bondage, by the
more Intolerable Authors of it. 'Twas now become a Crime, to name a Full, Free
Parliament, and Treason to appeal to any other Law, than the Insipid Vote of a
Legislative Conventicle. The Gaols are full of Prisoners upon that very score.

Was it not time, (my Lord) to bid these People hold their Hands, after the
expense of so much Blood, and of so many Millions; and all this only to
perpetuate a dearer, and a more Infamous Thralldom? The Pulpits were enured to
Blasphemy, and Non sense, and the Government prostituted for money, to Persons
able to disgrace a Bawdy House. -- These, and the like Indignities, put the
Nation upon their Just, and necessary Defense; And in that Posture they now
stand Ready, and Resolved.

Your Excellency has been tender hitherto of Blood, but if a speedy Order be
not taken, to Regulate those straggling Troops, that Act still in the Countries,
in Opposition to a Settlement, It will come yet to Blows: For questionless, in
case of a Necessity, the People will never stand still, and suffer themselves
to be picked out, man by man, till they be all Destroyed.

The Gentry and Nobility, are Slaves to every pedling Pursuivant. It Is but a
VVarrant from our Masters, and all is Fish that comes to Net: No matter for a
Crime, if there be a Booty. All that the People ask, all they design, is but
the Benefit of the Law. Will any English man deny it us? First, They have
sworn to defend it; next We have sworn, rather to dye, than lose it. This
Faction has cost the Nation more than 60. Millions, besides the Blood they
have Lapp'd: and yet 100000 l. a Month, and not a farthing less, will do their
Business, that is, 5000 l. a Man, or some such Trifle: For that, the Juncto
shares; perhaps the Soldier, once in a year, or 2. may get his Mornings
draught, and then be turned to Graze upon Free Quarter; and hanged for Mutiny,
if he but talks of Money. Its the trick they served all that have served them.
Who ever strikes, or Pays on their behalf, fights but for Bondage, and
contributes to his own Chains. If they had any Faith, they might be trusted.
But Oaths go down with them like Pills of Butter, they are dissolved, as soon
as taken. That Perjury which would poison a good Christian is but their
Nutriment. Nay worse than Wolves, they are false to their own Kind, and enter
worry one-another. I should be endless, to pursue this Subject till I want
Matter. In brief, My Lord, look to your self, and to your Friends; Life and
Death are before you, Choose. May Heaven direct and bless your Councils and
Endeavors, so far, as you proceed with Piety and Honor. To prevent Mistakes,
I do declare, that there are diverse moderate and sober Persons, in the Mixture,
for whom I have a fair Respect, and that the tartness of my Language, only
concerns the Furious and Phanatique of them.

A Word now to the City; and that a short one.] Gentlemen, upon your fair
compliance with the General, depends much of your safety: that is, so far as he
comports himself with Terms of Prudence, Equity, and Honor; (and he is too
Noble, to go Less) next, to himself, you find his Officers, of an Ingenuous,
and clear Conversation; and worth your Friendships, their Commands apart; you
likewise find the body of the Army, Civil, and well d^sciplin'd, you do
exceeding well to pay them all due respects: and to join Interests, and
Counsels, with them; -- you have done Wisely, Honestly, and Bravely too, to
oppose Taxes: that is, Taxes imposed without a Law, -- to be employed against
your selves; -- and such, as had you granted them, your President would have
extended to enslave your Posterity. -- Your care next, to disarm the
Sectaries, was very seasonable, your City had probably been in Ashes else by
this time. Consider, they bear the same mind still, and where they had those
weapons they can quickly have more. You cannot be secure without your Militia,
nor can any thing fairly obstruct your Procurement of it: In Titchburn's Case,
it was by the Commons ordered, that any six of the Common Council (upon
emergent occasions) might send for the Lord Mayor to call a Common Council, and
in case of default, call it themselves, and any 40 of them, to have power to
act as a Common Council, without the Lord Mayor, any thing in their Charter to
the contrary Notwithstanding: See the Hist. of Independency, part 2. page 83.
Not to exceed my limits, Forget not your suffering friends, and stand firm to
your Associates, and Allies. He that tamely suffers one Injury, provokes
another.

Now to the Nation, for a Farewell.] I need not press my Countrymen with many
Cautions, your Freedom of Elections, that is your Birthright; It Is that you all
declare, to Live and Dye for, you are too wise, to be cheated with Restrictions
and Qualifications: as if the Question were the Number, rather than the Choice,
at this rate, you may have a full House, indeed; but How? That is, full of the
Brats, the Kindred, and the Partisans of those that sit already; and then, they
that have gulled you all this while, shall govern you for ever, your very
Declarations against the Present Tyranny, have brought you to that Point, that
there is no safety left you, but in violence; for, while you talk, you dye, your
scattered Friends are gathered up, one by one; whereas, your SEASONABLE UNION
MAKES ALL SURE. As your Intentions are Honorable, so let your Actions be. How
far the Law extends, in case of Srutish, and Illegal cruelty, see St. John's
Argument against the Earl of Strafford; and with that I conclude: He that would
not have had others to have Law, why should he have any himself? Why should not
that be done to him, that himself would have done to others? It is true, we
give Law to Hares, and Deers, because they be Beasts of Chase; it was never
accounted either cruelty, or fowl-play, to Knock Foxes, and Wolves on the
head, as they can be found, because these be Beasts of Prey: The VVarrener sets
traps for Powlcats and other Vermin, for Preservation of the Warren.

Printed at the HAGUE for S. B. 1660.


