A LETTER From EDINBVRGH, NOVEMBER 30.1643.
Giving full satisfaction to all men why the SCOTTISH Army is not yet Advanced
into ENGLAND.
My true and constant Friend,
Give me leave to use this compellation of you who lives in the midst of so
many changes and changlings. Suffer me also to entreat you to afford me a
little of your patience (if it be not all spent) till you have perused and
pondered these few lines, expressing the condition of our affairs here, and
then pronounce your sentence.

Master Hatcher and his Company with the Treaty, and the Money, came to Leith
road November 21. so long a time it pleased God to keep him on Sea, and thereby
by exercise our patience.

The public Orders to the Shyres concerning the general Randevous (which is
appointed to be upon the 29. of December at Hairlaw, a place four miles from
Berwicke) were exped upon the fourth day after the arrival of the Ship, which
was November. 25.

The nearest Regements are appointed to march presently toward the borders,
there to quarter and exercise themselves, and to meet with the Cavaleeres, if
any of them shall appear till the day of Randevous.

Consider with your self, what time you will allow for sending the Orders to
the Shires, to call the Committees of the several Shires, to bring together
the Soldiers to their Colors, and to march as far as Barwicke, from which
some of the Regiments are no less then a hundred miles distant; after you have
impartially considered these and other such necessary duties and distractions,
you will not condemn us of delays or slacknesse.

Ireland has also bred us at this time, much trouble and hinderance, for upon
the very day of Master Hatcher his arivall, Commissioners came from Ireland,
expressing the unsupporable sufferings of our Irish Army: One of them swore to
my self, that being present at a Parade, he did see a whole Regiment, whereof
scarcely one hundred had either stockings or shoes, but all bare-legged and
barefooted in this season of the year; and yet poor souls, they are ready
to take the Covenant, and to spend their lives against the Cessation, if they
had necessaries for their lives furnished unto them.

Our Councels were tossed betwixt two extremities, upon the one hand to bring
them away, was to give up that Kingdom into the hands of Papists and Rebels;
to suffer the poor Protestants there either to be driven forth, and to come
upon us for relief, or their throats to be cut by their barbarity, which has
destroyed so many already; and to make the Rebels strong and united for
invading these two Kingdoms. Upon the other hand, to keep them there, and to
feed them with promises, and really to starve them, as we have done for a long
time were to fall in the like barbarity.

In this perplexity, we have been forced to dispatch from Air 4000 bolls of
meall, which we had provided for the Western Regiments, and are providing other
necessaries to be sent unto the with diligence. This has bin an unexpected and
untimeous, but a necessary diversion of our councels from the great business.
And has taken up a great part of our time, which the English Comissioners here
do know; and the wise there cannot but acknowledge.

The act of public faith is also concluded, and sent up that there be
nothingwanting on our part: No sooner did the Committee of the convention of
Estates resolve upon the day of general randevous, but the Commissioners of
the general assembly in their meeting at Edenbrugh, have appointed a public
fast and humiliation for a blessing from Heaven upon our expedition, which is
to be solemly kept in the Army, and in all the Kirks of the Kingdom Jan. 7.
being the Lords day, and the wednesday following according to the warning sent
to all the Presbitaries and the particular causes expressed therein, which I
have herewith sent unto you.

Thus have we revolved with our prayers and endeavors to join in the cause of
God and to wait for his blessing for success.

FINIS.

