A Letter Declaratorie, To the Disturbers of the Peace OF THE County of KENT:
Occasioned by a Petition tending to an Accommodation, Subscribed by twenty
seven thousand three hundred seventy three Hands.
OBserving with what diligence and expedition, Parties are drawn together,
armed, and by whom: we cannot but demand, to what end? The Country is quiet,
and desires so to continue: Our Interest is peace, not rapine and bloodshed:
yet are we also resolved, not to fall tame sacrifices to the spirit of slumber
and delusion, and render up our Religions, Laws, lives and fortunes, upon such
cold conditions.

We must crave leave to tell you, that a Petition, concluded on, and avowed by
the Universality of this County, representing their honest desires, in a modest
way, to the two Houses of Parliament, according to the practice, nay the
approbation of this present Parliament; -- That this Petition is by the most
active in this new commotion, discountenanced and menaced, which makes us
reasonably suspect, whither those designs may tend, whereof they have the sole
conduct. Our addresses are to the Parliament, not you, and from them we shall
await a seasonable Return; our desires being of a moment above your
cognizance. That we labor for is peace; and in a peaceable manner: Nor can we
without horror think of a fresh imbroylement.

The Petition we do all own, affirming the scope thereof so innocent, that we
dare deliver it up to heaven with our souls; and so determine to do, if
thereunto reduced by any troublesome interposition, till the great Council of
the Kingdom (to whom only and properly it referres) shall advise upon it.
Wherefore, to avoid the effect of jealousies, (the fountain of this late
war) we desire also the causes may be removed, lest introductive to another.

When you have satisfied this scruple, you have obliged your friends.

may.18th.
Printed in the Year 1648.


