A LETTER FROM SCOTLAND. GIVING A True Relation of the unhappy Loss OF THE
Gloucester-Frigot, Whereof Sir John Berry was Commander. With a particular
Account of the Persons of Quality drowned therein, and the miraculous Escape of
His Royal Higness the Duke of York.
SIR,
I Shall give you an Account from hence, as I received it from a faithful Hand,
of the loss of the Gloucester Frigot, which was thus:

Sir John Berry Commander of the Gloucester Frigot, having received on Board
the said Ship His Royal Highness in Margaret Road, in order to his Voyage for
Scotland, set Sail from thence with a fair Wind, the Weather continuing very
Fair, attended by the Ruby, Happy Return, the Dartmouth, and Pearl Frigots,
with several Yatches, and several Persons of great Quality, both of England and
Scotland, attending His Royal Highness on the Seventh Instant: At Night they
came about 16 Leagues off the Mouth of the Humber, about which place lies a
Sand called the Lemon-Oar, and whether by the unskilfulness, or wretched
neglect of the Pilot, God knows the aforesaid Ship in which His Royal Highness
was, and many other Persons of Quality, run on Ground upon the said Sands,
about Ten of the Clock at Night; but it pleasing God that the Weather proving
Fair and not Stormy, that the Ship did not presently Burst, nor did not
immediately Sink, but lay some hours e're She Sank; so that the Duke, and some
others, as many as the Long Boat could hold, had time to escape the Danger and
ventured to Sea, and got safe aboard on one of the Yatches, but for the rest
remaining on board, the Ship foundring before any Boats could come to their
Assistance, all perished, among whom was the Lord Roxborow, the Lord O Bryan,
the Lord Hollis, Lord Hume, Lord Dowglass, Sir Christopher Musgrave, Sir James
Hyde, Mr. Clifton, and an English Lady, whose name we cannot as yet learn; all
the Dukes Cooks but one, all his Footmen, and all the rest of his Servants, Sir
Charles Scarborow was miraculously saved (as we suppose) on some piece of the
Ship. The Captain, Sir John Berry, was also lost with his Brother, Captain
Berry, and several others who accompanied him: There was in all to the number
of three hundred and three Persons, and odd, of which but sixty were saved. The
Duke is since safely here to the Joy of his Duchess, and others who have been
to Congratulate his Escape from so great Danger: His Royal Highness is very
sensible, and extremely troubled at the loss of so many Noble Persons, and
others, and of so gallant a Ship. The Pilot is secured in Edinborow. This is
all at present, our late Insurrection being fully quieted. I am etc.

London, Printed for John Morice. 1682.


