A LETTER FROM The Navy with the Earl of WARWICK, Lord ADMIRAL: From
HELLEVOYT SLUICE, November. 24. 1648.

Being a Narrative of his Proceedings, in reducing the Revolted Ships with the
PRINCE: viz. The Constant Warwick, carrying 32 Guns. The Love, 38 Guns. The
Hind, 18 Guns. The Satisfaction, 28 Guns. A Ship laden with Sugars. A Catch,
and other small Vessels.


ALSO, The present Condition of the PRINCE, Duke of YORK, Prince RUPERT, and
the rest of the Cavallerie in HOLLAND, and from FRANCE.

LONDON, Printed for Lawrence Blaikloke, and are to be sold in the Old-Bayly.
1648.

From on Board the St. George riding at Anchor at Hellevoyt Sluice, Nov. 24.
1648.
Sir,
IN my last, being of the 14th. current, I gave you something an obscure
Relation of our and the Enemies Actions: But now having the advantage of time
and conveyance, I shall give you the recollection of a bad memory in a little
perfecter form.

Upon the fourth current, News came to us that the Revolters had gotten all
their Winter Provisions, their men, and abundance of Gentry, on board each
Ship, and had appointed several Frigots, from Oastend and other places, a day
of the Month to come to the Harbors mouth, intending upon sight of them to
set sail, being in hope of the States Men of War their Convoy out to Sea.

Upon this Information, a man was presently sent to Oastend, who told us, that
there were Irish-men victualing there. Upon this, the Lord Admiral advised
with his Council what was expedient to be done: they ordered every Ship with
which of the Revolters they should fight at Sea, expecting their coming every
hour, which was desired by us; and yet this news did somewhat startle some.
But when we supposed them in their highest condition, then was there the most
discontent, by reason of Prince Ruperts being made Admiral (as suddenly was
apparent;) for the next day, being the fifth, (a fatal day for Traitors) the
Constant Warwick, a Frigot of 32 Guns came from them, which they intended
should have maintained the rest, having new rigged and tallowed her. This
Vessel we only feared would escape and injure the Kingdom, because she sails
best of any in England; But God prevented their intentions in this, and since
that day they have not prospered.

The Lord Admiral having intimation from this, and other Vessels, that more
intended to desert them, if there might be an advantage of their secure coming
from them, His Lordship advised with his Council what ought to be done in
order thereunto, who concluded it might be advantageous to go up with his whole
Fleet, and Anchor board and board with them.

Accordingly, upon the eighth current, in the afternoon, our foresaile was
loosed, and guns fired for warning to the Fleet to weigh Anchor (although his
Lordship had made many scruples, and seemed to oppose it) but having lien long
in one place, our Cable being buried with sand, 'twas somewhat late ere we
could get our Anchors up, and the wind being also at North east, so that we
could not get up to them that night, but came to an anchor short, most of our
smaller ships anchoring very near them, so that they discoursed with them all
that night, in which night they put their land soldiers on board; But the Hind
a Ship of eighteen Guns, cut her Cables and came to his Lordship, receiving a
shot through her Hull, but hurt none; The next morning being the ninth, I
observed their fore-sailes loose, and Anchors apeeke, ready to weigh, when they
saw us weigh (half the Dutch Fleet were now gone) and as we heard, would fire
upon us. When we came up upon the flood again, in the afternoon, we weighed,
they weighed, and the Dutch weighed, all plying up the river. Our Frigots were
round their Admiral, endeavoring to provoke him to fire (as Prince Rupert
vapoured he would) but they then would not take notice of affronts. There was
so little wind that we could not make our Ships work, for our Reer-Admirall
run a ground, and one of theirs.

In stead of firing upon us, they all hastened to gain the Sluice, which we
might have prevented had there not been slacknesse in some -- We had one Frigot
in their Admiralls way, and lay before the Sluice mouth, where our
Vice Admiral might have been also, if ordered, and then the Valiant Prince
could not have run his head into that hole, as presently afterward he did,
by carrying a Hawser on shore, and the Guinea Frigot also, the rest being all
at an Anchor as near the Peer as they could get, and the Dutch as near to
them as they could get, and our Fleet mixed with them both, all the three
Fleets being within a small compass.

In the night they cut the Cables of five more (which we have since taken up)
and haled them all but one (very valiantly) into the Sluice, where one lay
thwart the others sterns.

Our men were mightily vexed to see such brave Ships of their Kingdoms, haled
into such a place to be spoiled, and might not have the liberty to fire upon
them. All the means in the world were used to provoke them to fire but one
Gun, but we could not prevail to make them break the peace that the Hollander
lay to keep.

The next Morning being the 10. as soon as it was light, I thought I should
have seen some scuffle, for the Love (a Ship of 38 Guns) weighed and ran right
for the Sluice: One of our Ships laid her cross the Hauser, forcing her to an
Anchor, some of the Soldiers on board her cried fire, but immediately she
yielded. After her, a Prize they had weighed and stood for the Sluice, we laid
her cross the Hawser and took her. There was a third run her self on shore,
to whom we sent three Frigots, and diverse Boats full of men, who yielded upon
condition that the Captain and his whole Company should go on shore with Bag
and baggage: But in the interim they send Boats laden with men to relieve her,
and our men chased them all to the Peer, and there Prince Rupert was busy in
building Forts, himself and his men flinging the Turffes, and Stones, and
Musket bullets at our men, but durst not fire so much as a Pistol. This Ship is
called the Satisfaction, a Navy-ship of 28 Guns, now a float again, and our
Reare-Admirall also, who has taken no harm, a thing much admired. We have
taken in all, the Constant Warwick, a Frigot of 32 Guns; The Hind, a Frigot of
18 Guns; The Love, a Ship of 38 Guns; The Satisfaction, a Ship of 28 Guns; A
Ship laden with Sugar, and a Catch. Since this they have raised two Forts, and
planted Guns in them, (our Fleet riding within command of them, some within
Pistol shot) have built a Court-of-Guard house. If the Town were their own
they could not keep a more strict guard. They take all men prisoners that come
upon the Island, take our Letters, and all things that come over Land to us.
The Lord Admiral has sent to the States to know if they will allow a Foreigne
Prince to raise works to debar the English Fleet in their Harbor, but no
answer is yet returned.

They have now taken the sails from most of their yards, are taking out the
Guns, and have haled in the fifth Ship that lay cross. These Ships have near
two hundred Brass Guns in them, which we apprehend they will sell, for it is
thought some of these Ships backs are broke.

They have one Ship of fifty two Guns, and three of forty Guns apeece, the
Guinea Frigot, which carries above thirty, The Blackmoore Lady, twenty eight,
The Roe-buck, twelve Guns, one small Pincke, two Hoyes, and two Catches, and
all hailed into the Sluice.

The Lord Admiral is now sending Frigots to Sea, toward the West, and
North-coast, to ferrit the Irish, and every day expects the Parliaments Agent
from the Hague to give an account of his Message from the States, and then I
suppose he will have some thoughts homewards, if liberty may not be gotten to
use our endeavors to reduce the Ships.

By the carrying on of things between the States and his Lordship, I apprehend
they have some mind to quarrel, which I shall be better able to judge of by
their answer when it comes. If we should receive but one shot from the Town, I
suppose the Lord Admiral would fire the Ships which would burn down the
Town.

We have lost three good advantages, two whereof were known and omitted, which
makes men grumble. The Prince is well again, and at the Hague, the Duke of
York is still at the Brill, who was ill, but escaped the Pox Master Crofts
gave the Lord Admiral a visit. Master of the Princes horse, who came lately
from France, says things look there with an English face.

Hellivoit-Sluice. Nov. 24. 1648.
Imprimatur

G. M.
November. 25. 1648.
FINIS.

