A LETTER FROM A PRESBYTERIAN OF QVALITIE, TO His FRIEND in the Country,
concerning An Engagement in this New WAR.

printer's or publisher's device

July 28 LONDON. Printed in the Year, 1648.

A LETTER FROM A PRESBYTERYAN OF QUALITY, TO His Friend in the Country,
concerning An ENGAGEMENT in this New WAR.
Sir,
THe receipt of yours brought with it much contentment, in that I understand
thereby, the condition of Affairs in your Parts, But as to satisfying that
part of your Letter, which requests me to give you a like account of our
present condition here, and what my opinion is of an engagement in this new
War, I must plead an utter disability; Yet to show you what a supremacy of
power you have over me, or rather what virtue is in your Command, I have given
you my slender sense, which though it be not flourished by a Rhetorical pen,
yet I Will assure you it comes from an uncorrupted heart.

You may remember, at the beginning of the late War, when you engaged your
person, and I my purse for the Parliament, how many Declarations were published
by the Parliament of their real intentions, to settle Religion in its purity,
to make the King a glorious King, to Establish a firm Peace, etc. All which
were confirmed by those sacred ligaments, the Protestation and Covenant, which
made me (I must confess) for some time a great admirer of the Parliament and
their proceedings. When the War grew toward an end, and that the Royal Party
was expulsed, I found sensibly in all parts of the Kingdom a working Factious
party of Independents, (and you know what those are, a Gallemaufry of all Sects
blended together) these (by the power and instigation of the two Generals, who
had the Sword in their hands, and of some prevalent Members in the House of
Commons) scru'd themselves into all Offices and Employments, had their Levites
in all Counties, especially in London, to poison the people with their
Doctrine; and indeed, began to be, and actually were, as violent against us,
(whom the world call Presbyterians) as against the most rigid Cavaliers:
witness the expelling the 7 Lords and the 11 Members, the imprisoning the Lord
Major and Aldermen, with diverse other worthy Gentlemen and Commanders: And
instead of settling Peace, an Army was kept on foot, merely to awe and
tyrannize over the Kingdom, and though some Forces were disbanded in several
Counties, yet they were such only, as that prevailing Faction could not
confide in.

Yet when the world began to see what an Independent Idol they were setting
up, then ever and anon the Members would set out some Ordinance or other
Papers, which should blind the people with a belief, that they intended to
settle Church Government and Treat with the King; when the truth is, they (like
watermen) looked one way and rowed another, as little intending either of
those, as any good to our Party.

But (Sir) the people (I say) thus perceiving which way this worm of
Independencie began to gnaw, this City, and the Countries adjacent Petitioned
for a Personal Treaty, (and you have heard what usage the Surrey Petitioners
found at Westminster, among those bloudhounds of the then Guard) nay, when they
faw how their Petitions were slighted, and their Petitioners abused, Kent
Arms, and then Essex.

The Grandees at Westminster, (seeing the dis-affection of the generality of
the people to their design, and that our Brethren the Scots were resolved to
come in to our assistance;) began to turn Cat in pan, and fawn upon us again,
hoping to make a Syncretisme, a conjunction of these two Parties against the
Common Enemy, as they call the professed Royalists, knowing themselves too weak
to deal both with the Scots and them. To this purpose they re-call their Votes
against the 7 Lords and 10 Members, release the Citizens, and others that were
imprisoned; and gave particular instruction to some of their chief Ministers
about London, to call upon a reunion against the common Enemy in their
Pulpits, and to cement the breach between them and us, as much as might be.

And when their Member-ships perceived that this City was minded and
necessitated in these new commotions, to name a General, and raise some Forces
for their own preservation, and well knowing how much the name of an
Independent is hated in their Common Council, and that their eyes were upon
Skippon, they laid this pretty Engine to entrap the City: Skippon (who had
formerly been slighted and laid aside by the Army, as smelling too much of a
Presbyter) had a good round sum given him, and other promises, sufficient to
make so unstable a man one of their Neophytes; which being greedily accepted,
Skippon had order to act his part thus. By any means not to discover any
inclination in himself toward Independentisme, till such time as the City had
embosomed themselves to him, and settled him in the Employment, then, and not
before, to cast off his Vizard: This he has done to purpose, and abused the
City sufficiently, by many underhand practices, for which he has lately been
called to an account by the Common Council, and has utterly lost his former
repute.

Now (Sir) could these Grandees, withal their art and daubing, and with their
money-baites, make us take the hook; and so by enduring the Dust and Sun, quiet
the present distempers, as we did the former, we should soon be in our former
Condition, the Army would be again brought to London, to awe the Parliament,
our chief and uncorrupted Members re-expelled, our Citizens re-committed, and
our City enslaved.

This (with much more, which might be added, were it not for exceeding the
bounds of a Letter) has made my Conscience clearly satisfied, that we ought by
no means to adhere in this new War, to these Anarchists, these Babel-Builders,
but rather to side with the Kings Party; for, though you and I perhaps may not
relish all that the Cavaliers profess, yet (trust me Sir) I think the worst of
their tenants ought to have preference before the best of the Independents; and
of two Evils you know, we are to choose the least.

Besides, this is not the old War, nor the old Quarrel, but new in both; the
Quarrel is not now betwixt the King and His Parliament, and that for
extirpating Bishops and evil Councillors, but betwixt the King, the Noblesse,
and most of the Commons of the Land of the one part, and a few factious Members
(puffed up with lust and ambition) and all the Sectaries of the Kingdom on the
other part; and this, whether Religion or no Religion, King or no King, Law or
now Law.

This has made the Scots (according to our Covenant) come into our assistance,
for settling Church Government and re-Enthroning the King. This has made the
Lord Willoughby of Parham (whom I hold to be a person of much Honor and
Conscience) accept of the Vice-Admiralship under the Duke of York; this made
General Laughern and Collonell Poyer Revolt from the Dominion of these
Levelling Saints. This has made the greatest part of the Mariners and Seamen
Ancher their Ships in a better Haven, and their Consciences in a better Cause.
And this I hope has, or will make all true Subjects endeavor the restoring of
His Majesty to His Crown and Dignity, and the destroying of this Independent
brood, the Army and their Adherents; since it is now evident, that they would
have no Religion, but a miscellany of Sectaries; no King but Anarchy, no Laws,
but their own wild and unlimitted Wills; And what a Visitation they intend to
this Famous City (if Colchester could once be theirs) and what Arms and other
preparation their Brethren of this City make for their aid and abetments, as
it is apparently known; so we hope the wisdom of the Common Council will take
speedy care timously to prevent.

This I dare say is the sense of may thousands in this City; For since the
Houses recede from their Covenant and Principles, it is good reason we should
withdraw our affections from them. In which number is

London, 21 July 1648. Sir, Your most humble Servant.

FINIS.

