A Letter from AMSTERDAM Containing the full relation of the Proceedings of the
Prince of Orange Against that City, and the transactions betwixt him, and the
Citizens, their opening of the Sluices to drown the said City, with several
other passages thereupon, and the Copy of the Prince of Orange his Letter the
Magistrates of the City.

WITH An exact relation of the five days seige or blocking up, of Amsterdam by
the Prince of Orange, and Grave William of Nassaw.

TOGETHER With a particular discovery of the whole design and opening the
Sluices to let in the Sea, which has over flown great part of the Land.

LONDON Printed by Bernard Alsop for T. P. and are to be sold at the
Royall-Exchange in Cornhil. 1650.

Letters from AMSTERDAM CONTAINING The full relation of the Proceedings of the
Prince of ORANGE, against that City, and the transactions betwixt him and the
Citizens, their opening of the Sluices, to drown the said City with several
other passages thereupon, the Copy of the Prince of ORANGE his Letter to the
Magistrates of the City.
SIR,
I Doubt not but the news of the Armies coming down against Amsterdam; has by
this time dispersed it self throughout Europe, but the occasion and the
transactions between the Prince of Orange, and the Citizens may be worthy of
your observation, viz. The Prince having a high displeasure and indgnation
against the Magistrates of Amsterdam contrived away whereby he intended to
surprise this rich and famous City by a stratagem, and to effect this design
without giving cause of suspicion what his intent was, He ordered Grave William
of Nassaw to empty all frontier Garrisons, upon pretense of conveying the old
Prince of Orange into Germany, and to be ready at the same time with his horse
to enter the City, which was contrived to be done on Saturday the thirty of
July about 3 or 4 in the morning at the opening of the Gates; for effecting of
which design with the more certainty and secrecy, about two hundred foot
soldiers were put privately into several Turf boats, which were to come up to
the City at the same time by water, and lying undiscovered, were to fall in at
the very same instant when the horse should enter the gates, and surprise the
Guard at the Regulaters highway, which being done, he thought good to make the
City without any resistance. But so it was, that when the Plot was almost ready
to be put in execution, it pleased God to disappoint al their purposes, partly
by reason of the great rain which fell all Friday (July 29.) in the afternoon,
and all the same night, which made the ways very deep and rotten; so that the
Prince his horse having a long march, of four and twenty miles tired.

Then they turned to a City about ten miles off, but the Citizens refused to
pass through or let them in, in regard they knew not what they were; whereupon
they were forced to march another way, which was to their great disadvantage,
and that nigh being very dark, and wanting good guides, they mistook their way,
which hindered them above three hours time, by reason whereof they could not get
unto Amsterdam before nine of the clock on Saturday, which was six hours after
the time appointed to enter the City, so that before they got thither, their
design was discovered to the Magistrates, by the Post of Hambrough, who
accidentally fell among the horse, when they were doubtful of their way, which
made his company very acceptable to them, in regard they might make use of him
to be their guide, but when he perceived their design, he stole away from them
and hasted to Amsterdam, and made known to the Magistrates, what he had learned
by riding a while amongst their troops.

Grave William perceiving that Providence fought against him (to the loss of
the time appointed, and best opportunity) was filled with discontent, and
quartered his Forces at Over-Qirtie, which is three miles from the City,
attending there to receive further Orders from the Prince of Orange, who was at
the Hague, and had there imprisoned many public persons that were sent from
Dort, Horten, Delf, and other places, and so confident was he, that the design
on which he had sent Grave William, would take effect, that he told the
imprisoned with his own mouth, Amsterdam was his own, but immediately after
news was brought him to the contrary, which so much startled him that its said,
he took his hat, threw it one the ground, and set his feet upon it. When his
heat of passion was over, he hasted away and on Sunday came to Grave William,
but his coming was to little purpose, for so soon as the Magistrates of
Amsterdam, received the information from the Post at Hamborough as aforesaid,
they caused all the gates of the City to be shut up, and the booms to be locked,
which are as so many gates by water, and put all the City-Garrison into arms,
with their muskets ready charged with bullet, They also caused several Brass
Guns to be mounted on their works, and sent many vessels well manned and
provided to lie upon Sinster, which is an inland River, and some men of war
rode at Anchor upon the Tij, which is an arm of the Sea, So that good guards
were quickly placed about the City, both by land and water, and the appearance
of men in their Arms was the more speedier for that at the beat of Drum they
were commanded forth in the name of the Magistrates of Amsterdam, which was a
thing not usual.

The city being in such a posture of defense, Grave William moved the Prince to
block up the city at a distance on the South side of Tij, conceiving that if
they could keep provisions from it, in time he should obtain his Desires. But
the Magistrates wisely foreseeing the danger, caused all the Sluices to be
opened, on Sunday about noon, it pleased God a little before to turn the wind
Northwest, which usually brings in much water; by this means all the low
grounds for many miles without Amsterdam lay under water in short time, so that
the Princes horses could have no grass, nor make nearer approaches, unless
upon banks, where above three a breast could not march and then it must have
been upon the mouth of the cannon: hereupon on sunday the Prince sent a
Trumpeter into the city, and 4 of the Cities Council was sent to the Prince at
several times, on Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, and stayed all Tuesday and
Wednesday night with him; in all which time several other messengers came from
him to the Magistrates. During all these transactions, several Letters came
from the most eminent towns in Holland, and from Utritch to the Magistrates of
Amsterdam, certifying their dislike of the Princes proceedings, and several
other Magistrates came also in person, affirming the same, which much
encouraged the City, and disheartened the Prince, who on Wednesday was commanded
by the States General (as is reported) to appear presently in the Hague, and in
four and twenty hours to cause all the Forces to repair to their several
Garrisons; and to that end on Thursday morning as soon as the day appeared, he
removed from before Amsterdam, at which there was no small rejoicing. During
the Prince his absence from the Hague, there has been mutenies, and the
inhabitants would have plundered the Princes Court.

Thus you have a Relation of the 5 days blocking up of the famous City of
Amsterdam, who in the Hague (no doubt) will prosecute the chief authors of this
design, of which more hereafter.

A Copy of a Letter sent by his Highness the the Prince of Orange, to the right
worshipful the Burgamasters, and Governors of the City of Amsterdam.
RIght worshipful, wise, discreet, and singular good friends; Being last time
in your City, I was so strangly entreated by you, that (to be no more subject
to the like) I have appointed Count William of Nassaw, with certain Troops in
your City, with an Order, to keep all things therein in peace and
tranquillity. To the end, that what I have further to propound unto you,
touching the service of the State, may not be interrupted by some ill-meaning
people: To which J desire you to put too your helping hand. And relying
hereupon, we commend you to the protection of the most High, and remain,

Your good Friend C. P. d' Orange.
Hague, 29. July, 1650.
FINIS.

