A DISCOURSE OF THE KNOWLEDGE OF BEASTS, WHEREIN All that has been said for,
and against their RATIOCINATION, is Examined.

By Monsieur de la CHAMBER, Counselor to the King of France in his Counsels,
and his Physician in ordinary.

Translated into English by a Person of Quality.

LONDON ^rinted by Tho. Newcomb for Humphrey Mosele at the Princes Arms in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1657.

To the READER.
THis Discourse is it self an Apology, and needs no other. It witnesses the
Author sufficiently learned to vindicate himself from the extravagancy of those
who may think him guilty; neither do I doubt but those who read him with
judgment, will rather submit then contest those Truths, which he advances,
and cannot but yield even to the probability of his Paradoxes; for he treats of
all, like the Counselor and Doctor of a King (whereto his great deserts have
raised him) or rather like a King amongst Philosophers, in a word like himself.
He divides the orders of Nature; he counsels and instructs men, and makes even
Beasts Reason. Look but upon his grand Design and he appears more eminent then
any of our modern Philosophers. I mean that Art of his, To know Men, which he
has long since promised the world; In the first Part whereof he has designed
the characters of the Passions (of which two excellent Books are extant) of
Virtues and of Vices; And in the second Part he intends a discovery of the
nature of Animals, and from the resemblance betwixt Men and Beasts to teach us,
that those whose parts are like theirs, have the same inclinations. Amongst his
Preliminaries he has brought to light a Discourse of the Knowledge of Beasts,
which although it had the general approbation of the most learned, yet having
met with the opposition of a bold Adversary, our Author thought himself obliged
to vindicate by this discourse of his, which contains the sum of that, and by
which he refutes all the cavils and objections of his Antagonist. So that if
any man after the perusal thereof be startled or offended, that he has granted
Reason to Beasts, give me leave to believe it must be either out of ignorance
or pride. That it destroys the immortality of the soul, and the essential
difference of man, is what they object. I know how dangerous it is to speak
physically of the nature of Souls; neither am I ignorant of the opinion of the
Galenists, nor of the heresy of the Manichees; yet I know also that many great
men have endeavored by the light of Nature to prove the Soul of man immortal.
Neither has any of them a more peculiar Argument then our Author who from the
immateriality of the not simply but intellectually reasonable soul, concludes
that naturally having no principles of corruption, it must necessarily be
immortal. So far is he from shaking, that he strongly confirms that immortal
principle. As for those who apprehend the loss of that essential difference
which they pretend betwixt themselves and Beasts, let them examine the matter,
and the difference will appear, but still the more manifest. The reason he
allows them is limited to corporeal objects, to the necessities of life, food
and shelter; its only direct; Its capable only of singulars, its restrained to
an opinative faculty; its a mere shadow of ours, much like that of our
fantasy when we sleep. So that they will have all the reason in the world to
believe, that this opinion raises the Reason of Man to make the difference
really essential to an Intellectual Faculty which tends to the nature of divine
things, and declares the soul potentially to be a Spirit; so that what we call
Intelligence in Angels, we may justly call Intellectual Reason in men; which as
it is inferior to that, so it is superior to that of Beasts which is sensual
and corporeal, whilst his is altogether spiritual. These two main objections
being answered, it remains only, that we should by authority vindicate it from
novelty. Tiresias, Melampus, and Apollonius are said to have understood their
very language. Plato tells us that in the golden age men reaped all their
knowledge from communication with them. And although the Scripture tell us of
some Beasts that have no understanding, yet it sends us for instruction to
others. And Philosophy acknowledges to have learned from them many of her Arts
and Sciences; they have instructed us in Physic, even in morality, nay they
have taught us piety. Porphyrius, Plutarch, Raymondus, Sebondus, for whom also
Montaign in his Essays has written an Apology, were all of the same opinion
with our Author, and if you will have the reasons of these and other learned
men, why they have allowed Reason to Beasts, take these in brief. That most
Animals have organs fit, and faculties like ours; In Anatomy the very cells of
their brain nothing different; that their industry not only equals but often
surpasses that of man; Essences and Properties are known but by effects: It is
not more reasonable to conclude that Beasts doing reasonable things, have a
reasonable Faculty, then to affirm that the effects are not reasonable, because
Beasts have not a reasonable Faculty? the Effects appear, the Power is occult.
That they seek necessaries without being instructed, and of themselves invent
the means to acquire them, that they are capable of discipline even contrary to
their own Nature, that most of them can discern things, and can accommodate
themselves to time, place and other circumstances, and accordingly operate
diversely; so that no man can deny but that they act formally for some end, and
know both that as the end and the means to attain it as means; nay more, that
they tend to a felicity proportionable to their Nature, Pleasure being their
highest good, and Grief their extremity of ill. To conclude, the greatest
difficulty seems to be in the terms; those who call it Instinct, cannot deny
but it acts with Reason; and those that allow them Reason, deny it to be
Intellectual. Now if you require examples out of History to confirm this
opinion, If Plinies Elephant repeating his Lesson in the Moonshine is not to
be credited, nor Ptolomies Stag who understood Greek, nor Plutarchs Dog who
could counterfeit the very convulsions of death; nor that Goose which was
Disciple to a Philosopher; what shall we say to an Ape that could play at
Chess, or of another that had learnt some touches upon the Gittar. But let who
will judge of Francis the First's Dog; that King having lost his Gloves as he
was hunting, and having sent him in search of it, and he after a tedious
inquiry returning without it, being remanded by his Master, runs directly to
Paris, and leaps up at a Stall where he had formerly observed Gloves hang out,
and tears down a pair and carries them three leagues back again to the King.
Let them I say judge whether this action were not from Discourse; sure I am it
could not be from his scent.

If you desire more fitting Examples, more pregnan^ Reasons, and more
satisfying Answers to all the objections you can make, you shall find them in
this following Discourse. So that after reflection and deliberation we can
never deny Reason to Beasts, least we condemn our selves for want of common
sense. Let us therefore rather improve our Intellectual Faculties by subduing
the sensual, and thereby make that essential difference appear, whereby at last
we may attain to that knowledge of our selves, which as it is the Authors, so
it ought to be our chief End.

T. N.

A DISCOURSE OF THE KNOWLEDGE OF ANIMALS.
The Introduction.
It Is strange, that Man, who believes himself Natures masterpiece, and that it
is his right to command all that is in the Universe, should not have informed
himself of that Title which gives him these advantages; and that he knows not
wherein the excellency consists wherewith he flatters himself, not whereon the
Sovereignty he claims, is founded. And what is the more wonderful, is. That he
who has given himself the liberty to assign to every thing the rank and order
which they ought to hold in the world, and to prescribe them the function they
are to exercise, should have forgot himself in this general distribution which
he has made, having reserved for himself no employment worthy of his
ambition, or of the quality he has taken. For although he boasts, that he has
Reason for his portion, and that he believes it belongs to him in propriety,
and that it gives him the sovereign command over all creatures; yet has he so
ill explained himself therein, and so weakly maintained the right which may be
his, that in all Ages there has lived very great Philosophers, who have
assured that Beasts had Reason; so that even there has been Times wherein it
was hardly permitted to doubt it: And that since the contrary has crept into
the Schools, the most cleer-sighted have held it as suspected, and the most
moderate have ranked it amongst those Questions which might be maintained on
either side. And certainly if we consider the wonderful industry wherewith
Beasts perform the most part of their works; the ingenious foresight they use
to shun evil, and seek what is useful for them; the sleights and niceties they
practice the one against the other; the society and the communication they have
together, and all those examples of prudence, of gratitude, and of generosity
which they have given us, and which have convinced such Great persons: It Is
impossible but we must believe, or at least suspect that Actions which appear
so reasonable, cannot but be managed by Reason. For if we would refer them to
Instinct, the nature thereof is so hidden, that there is no likelihood to
destroy such clear and strong conjectures, by so obscure and ill established a
thing; And which perhaps, if it were well known, would be found nothing
different or estranged from Reason.

In effect, whatsoever may be said of the Instinct, it must either be an
exterior cause which forces Animals and works upon them, without their
contributing any thing but obedience; or else it must be a faculty natural unto
them, by reason whereof they agitate themselves, and are truly the cause and
principle of their actions: now, as a man cannot maintain that it is a stranger
power, without falling into great inconveniences, and particularly in this,
That we should give an assault to the Almightiness and infinite wisdom of God,
for having left his works imperfect, and having deprived them of the greatest
part of those virtues, which are most necessary for their preservation. We must
conclude, it is a faculty born with them, which ought to be of an order as
elevated, as its effects are excellent, and which consequently acts with a
great knowledge. If it be so, who will not have cause to believe, that actions
whose successes are so well ordered, which have so well regulated a progress
and a concatenation, which so justly ties together the means with their ends,
must needs be enlightened by Reason.

But, what renders these presumptions yet stronger, is the weakness of the
proofs whereon the contrary opinion is grounded. For it is a thing which is
hardly conceiveable, that Ratiocination should be taken from Beasts, without
knowing the nature of Ratiocination. For certainly, hitherto no man has
exactly discovered wherein it consists, nor what the soul does when it reasons,
not what difference there is betwixt this operation of the mind, and the two
others. We are well assured, that in the first the Understanding forms the
images of things; but when we come to examine the latter where Ratiocination
consists, we fall short. And it is apparent, that Discourse, which like light
makes known the most obscure things, remains it self unknown, and hides it self
as that does in darkness.

Yet herein is the foundation whereon the decision of this famous Controversy
ought to be established. And there had been no more subject to doubt, if after
having shown how Ratiocination is formed, it had been remonstrated that that
action surpassed the forces of all those faculties which are in Beasts. So that
a man need not be astonished, if for default of having well observed that
fundamental Truth, a man is not sure of the party he ought to take; and if we
doubt of those Conclusions, which are drawn from Principles which are without
evidence and without proof.

Let them oppose as long as they please, That Reasoning requires Propositions
and universal Notions; and that it cannot be made without abstraction, and some
reflection of the knowledge it has of its self; which are things whereto it is
certain the soul of Beasts can never attain: Yet some will still say, that it
is not therein in which the reasoning of Beasts consists; that all these
conditions are strange unto it; and that the Sillogism which is called
expositive, is an evident sign thereof, since it cannot be formed of terms
purely singular without any abstraction, and there being no need for the spirit
to reflect on it self. Whence it follows, the difficulty is not taken away so,
but that the conjecture which we have of the Reason of Beasts, remain in full
force, and that nothing is objected which destroys or weakens it.

After which, who dares affirm that it is Reason which raises Men above
Beasts, without rendering that Right doubtful which cannot be contested against
him, and without putting a Soveraigncie in competition, to which all Nature
has subjected it self? No, no; There must be a more solid foundation which
must maintain his dignity, he must draw his perfection and excellency from a
higher source: In a word, he must have some virtue which must be so eminent,
which must be above all those which are in Nature, and whereto the most perfect
Animals can never attain. But we must yet confess, that he who should have
discovered so important a matter, has done no small service to all the society
of Mankind; and that perhaps he has little less obliged them, then those who
invented the most profitable Arts and Sciences. Besides that he would have
taught them the greatest and most precious things it has, that it would have
put the advantages and prerogatives it has out of contest, and it would have
justified the Empire it pretends, showing that it is not a Tyranny as it is
reproached withal, but a just and legitimate dominion. It would without doubt
withdraw them from the danger they are in at every moment, not only to commit
an injustice against Beasts and against it self, but even also some kind of
impiety toward God. For, in the doubt wherein we are, that Beasts have reason;
if it be found that in effect they have any, as it is not perhaps impossible,
would not the Man then be unjust to ravish a good from them, which belongs to
them as well as to him? Would he not do himself wrong, to ground his excellency
and his superiority on a thing which he has only in common with them? And will
he not thereby sensibly offend the Author, in seeking to suppress so glorious a
badg of his power and of his wisdom?

All these considerations had sometimes persuaded me, that every Man ought to
contribute with all his power to the finding out of a thing, in which every Man
had an interest, and since Truth is like those unknown Lands which from time to
time are discovered, and often rather by hazard then by address, that it might
happen, that the less intelligent might advance the discovery of those noble
functions of the Soul which have hitherto been unknown, at least whereof the
past Ages have left us but some imperfect relations. Upon this confidence I
had, as they say, set sail; and neither the fear of shipwreck, nor an
unprofitable voyage, could ever hinder me from hazarding my self in so high an
enterprise.

After having therefore carefully enquired the Nature of these Faculties, and
having made (as I thought) some considerable Observations, and which had not
been made before, I thought I was obliged to divulge them, and that I could not
suppress them without betraying the common cause. So that the Treatise of the
Characters of the Passions, wherein I have engaged my self, having given me way
to acquit my self of that duty, I had added to the Second Volume of that Work,
a particular Treatise of the Knowledge of Beasts; where all these Questions are
examined, and wherein I pretended to show by new and very probable proofs, That
Beasts reason, and their reasoning is formed only of particular notions and
propositions, wherein it is different from that of Men, who have the faculty of
reasoning universally; and that this faculty is the true difference of Man,
which marks the spirituality and immortality of his soul. This Discourse having
appeared in the World with a very happy fate, and if I may so speak, with more
approbation then I ever hoped; To that height, that some men persuaded
themselves, that the Propositions I had therein established ought hereafter to
be received for Truths which were not to be doubted; and that no body would
venture to write against so plausible and so solidly proved a Doctrine. For
mine own part, who could never have had so advantageous a sense of mine own
work, and who believe besides, that it is impossible for the Mind of Man to
penetrate these profound depths, and to take off those thick vails which hide
the Nature of every thing; which withheld me from falling into that vanity. And
I always thought, that an Opinion so far estranged from common belief, would
never fail of Enemies, which would assault it as soon as it should appear in
public.

Indeed, a little while after, Monsieur Chanet published his Book of the
Instinct and Knowledge of Beasts: The Title of which promises an Examen of all
what I had written on that Subject; the main design whereof was to show, That
Beasts cannot reason. As soon as his Discourse came to my hands, I fancied him
to be some Hero of the Schools, and some new Hercules, whose Commission was to
damn Paradoxes, and to maintain Vulgar opinions. And I ingenuously confess,
that at that time fear and hope equally divided my mind: I was afraid to find
such strong Reasons, that they would have obliged me to abandon those Opinions
which had been so well received, and which had afforded me so much reputation.
On the other side, the ardent love I have for the Truth, made me hope that I
should therein learn diverse things which were unknown unto me, and that my
losses would be repaired by those fair instructions I should gather from
thence. But in once reading of it, all those vain thoughts were taken away;
and, far from making me change my opinion, it fortified me in my first
sentiment, and made me believe, that those things which before I esteemed but
probable, might now pass for demonstrative, since they had been disputed
against with all the endeavors of a man of metal, who has meditated and
written so much on these things. For, this is worthy consideration, that M.C.
has deduced no proofs to destroy my Reasons, in which he has not used some
Sophism or Paralogism, as I shall make it appear in this Discourse: And that
necessarily his cause must be ill, since that with all the Memory and all the
Reading which they say he has, they could furnish him with no lawful defense,
he having made use of sleights and artifices only, which such men use who
mistrust the soundness of their own right.

Assuredly, if this manner of acting were to be permitted any man, it were to
be allowed me, who have stragled out of the ordinary road, who have brought to
light new Paradoxes, and whose proofs at worst may pass for the disports of the
mind, as well as those of those men who have made Elogies of Nero, and of the
Quartan Ague. But that M.C. should make use of them to maintain an Opinion
which is so generally approved by all the World, and which is held as an
undoubted Maxim in Philosophy, is an unexcuseable abuse, and which must charge
him with so reproachful a shame amongst those of his own party, that he could
not defend a good cause but by ill means, or that he should have prevaricated
in his own cause: I fear even lest I should be entangled in his disgrace, and
that those of the most judicious seeing my Writings, may not suspect an
intelligence betwixt us two, and that he is an Adversary I have appointed to
suffer himself to be overcome, and by his weakness to give credit to my party.
But to justify my self from this suspicion, I have nothing to say, but that I
had never heard any speak of M.C. till the Book he had written against me came
to light: And that there is no likelihood, that under color to give some
luster to my opinions by this artifice, I should engage a man of honor in so
base a design, without the fear lest he should have doubly made against me, and
lest he might quit himself of the faint, that in good earnest he might handle
me the worse.

I should indeed have been justly chastised for my imprudence, had I afterward
met with in his Book so many picquant and malicious words which he vented
against me, and which he has mixed with some praises, as those who infuse
poison with sugar. When I saw those shameful reproaches he made me; sometimes,
That my mind was distorted, and that I had not thought of what I had written,
(p. 124) That there is not the least appearance of truth, and that it is a
shame to stick at them, (p. 148.) And then. That I am ignorant of the Rules and
terms of Philosophy, (p. 240.) That I every minute fall into contradictions;
and, That he can hardly believe I am Author of the Work, (p. 242.) with a
hundred such like, which he utters with scorn and reproach. No, no; this
proceeding makes it evidently appear that he had no intelligence with me, that
he has defended his cause the best he was able; and that if he have brought
ill reasons to maintain it, it is because he believed them good, and was
ignorant of their defects. Neither would I absolutely condemn him for the
incivility he has treated me withal; and I should rather attribute it to heat
of dispute, or the natural sharpness of a Critic, then to any ill will he
could have against me. I know, that in combats of pleasure and divertisement,
it is almost impossible but some angry touches must be given; and that blows
cannot be handled so dexterously, but some will be ruder then they were
intended. But what was to have been desired in those of M.C. it is, that he
should have behaved himself pleasantly, and like a gallant Fellow, and not have
accompanied them with a pedantick severity, which appears through all his
Discourse, and which will oblige many men to believe, that Passion rather then
Truth has armed his pen against me. There are even some already who have made
this judgment, having observed how he introduced my Name to the Title of his
Book, and that he affected to repeat it in all the passages he was able. For,
since it not at all concerned the question, and that he might have examined my
reasons without nameing me, even as I had done those of other men. They did
believe that it must needs have been some secret malignity, which moved him to
place my Name for a Trophy in the front of his Work, and to lead it as it were
in triumph through all the Pages of his Book. For my part, I durst not judge so
sinisterly of his intentions: So far was I from complaining of him in that
encounter, that I find I have reason to thank him for putting me in the rank of
the Great men he has assaulted; and I shall never be ashamed to have my Name
appear with the Names of Mr. de Charron, and Mr. de Montagne, should he even
reckon them amongst those he had conquered.

It Is true, if he had been well advised for his own glory, he should never have
made mention of me, nor have discovered that I was the man with whom he was to
combat: Some might have thought, after having seen him enter the lifts against
such great persons, that I were of the same rank, and that he chose me as an
Enemy worthy both of his strength and courage. But when it shall be known, that
it is against me he has made this stir to lift up his buckler, and that it
will afterward appear, that weak and fresh as I am in these kind of trials, I
shall have so easily defeated a man who would pass for the Bravo of our Age,
and who in his Writings presents all Comers with a Challenge; it is to be
feared, it may much diminish the credit he may have, and lest he be accused for
a weak and quarrelsom person, who seeks to gain reputation at the expense of
another man's.

Had he therefore followed the councels which Prudence would have given him in
this encounter, he had saved himself from these reproaches, and had saved me
the pains to have answered him, without having interested my self in a
Question, wherein all Opinions are free: I should not have disturbed the
pleasure wherewith he flattered himself with an imaginary victory; and without
envy I could have suffered him to have triumphed over an enemy which he had not
overcome. But it had been a barrenness in me to have continued with mine arms
across, after the public Defy he has given me; and Honor obliges me to the
defense of the Truth, which I heard groaned under his censure, and which I
perceived ready to fall into the ambushes he had laid for it.

Behold, I am ready to defend it, I am here ready to maintain the Propositions
which M. C: has contested. The Reader shall afterward judge which of us two
has the better right. But that he may be instructed of all what may lawfully
be necessary in my defense, he must be informed of the order which I have
observed, and of the motives which have obliged me to another course then that
which hitherto has been followed.

Having considered, that the proof which has been used to show, That Beasts
reason, did not not convince those who hold the contrary opinion, and that they
shifted off all the strength of it by the word Instinct; which how vain soever
it be, forbears not to entangle the question, and render the decision the more
doubtful; I imagined the Truth was to be sought in the source; and leaving
Experiments which were contested, it might be found in Ratiocination it self. I
therefore would examine the nature thereof, and see whether there were any
thing which Beasts could not do, and which surpast the force of the
Imagination, and of the other faculties which all are agreed they are endowed
withal. But as Reasoning is a Knowledge, and that there are three sorts of
Knowledge, to wit, The first Conceptions, the Judgment, and the Discourse: I
thought it was fit to be known, wherein all three of them consisted, and what
action the soul performed in every of them. Having therefore found, That in the
first she forms the images of objects; in the second, she unites or divides two
of those images; and in the third, she collects together three, of which she
composeth several Propositions which form Discourse: methought that all the
difficulty was reduced to this point, to wit, To know whether the Imagination
can unite or divide images? For if it have that power, it must of necessity be
able to make Propositions, and in pursuance, Reasonings.

This is the principal Subject of the Treatise which I have brought to light:
The first Part whereof is wholly employed to show, that the Imagination can
form and unite several images, and by consequence, that it may conceive, judge
and discourse. The other Part contains the Answer which is to be made to the
strongest Objections which may be proposed against these Truths, and
principally to those which are drawn from Custom and from Instinct; where I
have explicated the Nature of those Causes, and made it appear that they cannot
act without the help of Reason.

This order was not pleasing to M.C. and in the Examen he made, he has not
only begun his Book by a Discourse of Instinct, but he would also have it
believed that I had done ill in not following that Method, seeing I held, that
the Instinct supposes a natural knowledge, and that natural knowledges ought
to be treated before those which are acquired. But he ought to have considered,
that all my design was to show, that Beasts reason; and that what was to be
said of Instinct, ought to be but an incident to the question. So that if I had
begun from thence, I should have placed the Accessory before the Principal, and
the Objection before the Conclusion. On the other side, had not this
consideration obliged me to follow this Method, could he not have remembered
that there are two sorts of it; the one which begins by those things which in
themselves, and naturally are most evident; the other which begins by those,
which in respect of us and by the sense, are most evident. That both the one
and the other is good; but that the latter has this advantage, that it is more
conformable to our ordinary way of knowing, which begins always by sensible
things. So although without a fault I might have first spoken of Natural
knowledges, which are first in the order of Nature, and consequently more
evident in themselves then those which are acquired; still methought it was
better to begin by those which were acquired, which are most sensible, and
therefore in our own respect the first and most evident. In effect, since I was
to show that Instinct supposes a natural knowledge, and that before that I was
to seek wherein Knowledge in general consisted; Could I have arrived by any
surer way then by certain and indubitable Experiments which we have through
acquired Knowledge, especially having none through the Natural.

Let us trifle no longer therefore, neither he nor I, on the general Order we
have observed in our Works: I think that his was not ill in that particular;
and that mine was necessary for my design. Neither will I change it here,
having observed the same disposition of Subjects, the same number of Reasons,
and the same sequel of Consequences which are to be found in my Treatise of the
Knowledge of Beasts. If there be any difference, it is, that there I have
observed as much as I could a Rhetorical discourse; and here I treat of things
in the ordinary way of the Schools, who divide the matters by Chapters, which
relate the Reasons, and which do not seeek that exact concatenation of words
which the Laws of Oratory require.

For, I thought it was fit to make an abridgment of all what I employed in my
first Treatise, and afterward faithfully to produce the objections of M. C.
without troubling the Reader to seek elsewhere to clear himself concerning the
subject of our contest. I therefore divided my Discourse into four Parts.

In the first I show, That the Imagination to know things, ought to form the
images thereof.

In the second, That the Imagination may unite those images it has formed, and
consequently make Propositions.

In the third, That it may unite several Propositions, and bind them together
with common terms, wherein Ratiocination consists.

The fourth contains the Answer which is to be made to those Objections which
are commonly proposed against the Reason of Beasts.

Now for as much as M.C. would not follow this order, I have been constrained
to recollect the reasons he has scattered here and there, and to reduce under
every of these parts, where I have examined them with all possible moderation
For although in some places there are some touches of censure and raillery,
which he may resent; I believe he will consider, that besides that most
commonly I do but defend my self with the same arms with which he has
assaulted me; the Critical part is in it self so severe and so crabbed, that if
some divertisement were not insinuated, it would become loathsome both to the
Author and to the Reader: And if it be lawful to say so, it is a food which
easily disgusteth, unless it has some relish and some sharpness.

But I have not only sought for him this seasoning in the civility of my
censure, and in the innocence of my raillery, I have endeavored to slip in
several Questions, which by their novelty may divert the mind of the Reader,
and untire him from the troubles which our Contest may have given him; for
without doubt he will take pleasure to know

1. Whether external Images enter into the Memory.

2. What the word Est (Is) signifies in Propositions.

3. How the Imagination may make negative Propositions.

4. Whether if a material power, such as the Imagination is, can form
Universal Notions.

5. Whether Beasts doubt.

6. Whether they hope, and whether they fear.

7. How they know the time to come.

8. Whether they know the end and the means they use to attain it.

9. What Action the Soul performs in Reasoning.

10. Whether one may reason in an instant.

11. Whether Reasoning was given only to clear doubtful things.

12. What the Nature of speech is, and of such like, which I have insinuated
into this Discourse; Wherein M. C. may if he please exercise himself, but
whereof he is not to expect from me any reply; For if he produces better
reasons then mine, I from this very time consent unto them; and if they are as
weak as those which he has already brought, it may be lawful for me to
continue in my opinions and to apply my self to better things then to prolong a
Process where all the profit rather accrews to him who has lost it; since he
gains both the time and the truth. Lets quickly dispatch this therefore, and
begin with the first Part.

But first of all it is fit, That the Reader should be advertised, that the
word of Imagination which is so frequent in this work may not be here taken for
a distinct faculty of the common sense of the fancy and of the estimative, as
they do commonly in the schools; But for a general Faculty which comprehends
all the powers of the Sensitive Soul which serve for knowledge. In the same
manner as the word understanding comprehends all the faculties of the
intellectual Soul, which make things to be known. Such as is the Apprehensive,
the Cogitative, the, Discoursive the Agent and Patient Intellect etc. In effect
all these different faculties which are to be found in the Sensitive Soul, have
in common amongst them That they know, and consequently there is a general
Faculty which knows, which is afterward divided into as many pieces as there
are several sorts of Knowledges. Now this general faculty having no
particular Name, may by the example of diverse other genders take the Name of
one of those species, and principally that of the Imagination which is the most
considerable, and most known. This is practiced also when in the destinction of
the parts of the Soul, the Imagination is opposed to the Appetite, even as we
oppose the Understanding to the Will. For its certain, that in this case the
Imagination and the Understanding comprehend all the knowing faculties, as the
Appetite and the Will express all the motive faculties, of the Soul. Howsoever
it be, by the word Imagination, I here understand the Sensitive faculty which
knows the things without specifying any of its differences, the examen whereof
conduces nothing to my design.

I am also to add to this advertisment, that the division of the Chapters and
Articles was made after the work was ended; for it interrupts not the sequel of
my discourse, and requires not those great pawses which in other matters were
requisite. The Critic also who is obliged in a continual combat, cannot
regulare his quarters as an Army would do which has no enemy before them.
Without stopping it pursues its adversary, and gives him no release till it
has vanquished him: Its thus that I have behaved my self in the heat of my
disputation, not minding the division of my work into so many Sections, but
because a long Discourse without any, disturbs the mind and eyes of a Reader, I
afterward advised with my self to make some, and to place those things in the
Title, which I esteemed most remarkable, that at first sight the Reader may
choose those Subjects which might be most pleasing to him, without ingageing
himself in others which were not according to his gust; But as this manner of
reading will be more advantageous to him then to me, and may leave him some
doubts which may make him have a ill opinion of my reasons, I shall beg thus
far from him, that he will not condemn them until he has read the whole
work, and without having examined the princip^es and foundations which I have
therein established And then if he cannot approve them, I shall condemn, them,
my self, and employ their excuses which the weakness of humane minds and the
difficulty there is to penetrate into secrets of nature furnish them withal
who have recourse thereunto.

For the rest what is printed in a great Italian Letter at the head of every
Part, is the Abridgment of my first Discourse of the Knowledge of Beasts. The
figures in the Margent design the pages of M. C's book out of which I have
drawn those propositions which I examine.

That the Imagination forms the Images of things. And that its there wherein
the first Knowledge consists.
THE FIRST PART.
IN considering the order which God has established through the whole Universe
where the less noble thing; serve for the degrees whereby we rise to the most
excellent, and all of them have some beginings of that perfection which is more
full and perfect in these; A man might easily persuade himself, that since the
Sensitive Soul is subordinate to the Reasonable, such a progress ought to be
made in their knowledge, that the first may be addresses to the latter, and
that the actions of the understanding may have their beginning to be as it were
roughcast in those of the Imagination. And to speak it in one word, since the
understanding knows thing, that it judges of them and draws consequences
from them, there must needs be something done in the Sensitive Soul, which
serves for the first draught of those actions, and in which some image, and
some vestiges may be observed. In effect it conceives things, it judges
whether they are good or ill, and concludes either to follow or to fly them:
And to perform these actions, it uses the same way as the Understanding does.
For as it judges and reasons by uniting things which are divided, and by
dividing those which are united, it does nothing but unite and separate the
images of objects, to judge of what is good or ill for the Animal. It is true,
that she does it very imperfectly, both because her power is of no great
extent, and because her knowledges are as the first sights wherewith the Soul
views things, and the first Essays she makes to discern them.

But to understand this, it is necessary to see how the Imagination knows, That
Knowledge is an Action.
and how far its knowledge may arrive. Having therefore presupposed that
Knowledge is the only function of the Reasonable and Sensitive Soul, forasmuch
as to be sensible, to conceive, to judge, and to reason, is nothing else but to
know, I have from thence inferred, That since all things which are below them
have the virtue of operating, they also must needs have it; and consequently
that Knowledge which is their only function is an Action. So that those who
say that the Senses know not their objects but by receiving their images; and
that sensation is a pure passion, place the sensitive Soul below all corporal
things, and destroy ever the Nature of Knowledge which was even placed in the
rank of vital actions.

This action is a production of the Image.
Now because Knowledge cannot be otherwise conceived but as a representation of
the objects which are made in the mind; If the Sensitive Soul knows, and if to
know is to operate; it of necessity must present it self with the objects; And
because it cannot otherwise represent a thing but by forming its picture, it
follows that in knowing things, it forms pictures and images of them, and that
there is no other action which may be attributed unto it proportionable to the
perfection and excellency of its Nature.

To confirm this truth, we have in pursuit showed, Their images are different
from the action.
that these images ought to be different from those which come from without.

1. Reason. Because these are not capable to make the representation wherein
the Knowledge consists, since they subsist only in the presence of the
objects, and that the Soul forbears not to represent them although they be
absent.

2 Reas. Because those which the Understanding uses are different from those
which the Imagination and the Senses may furnish; and since it forms them to
its self, the Imagination ought to do in the same manner.

3 Reas. Forasmuch as sensible images represent only the accidents, and that
the Imagination must not only know the sensible Accidents but the sensible
Body, and so the Images it forms represent both the Accidents and Subject once
together.

Their Images represent the Accidents and their Subject.
This latter proposition, which ought to serve as a principle, to show the
impotency which the Imagination has to make abstracts and universal Notions,
was maintained by four Reasons.

The First, That the Imagination being a power buried in the matter, ought to
have an object of the same Gender, and an action which terminates in a thing,
which in some manner may be as that is composed.

The Second, That being destined to represent sensible things, and having no
other virtue but to make pictures and images thereof, it ought to represent
them all whole, and such as they are; which it would not do, did it form the
image of accidents only.

The Third, That the images being to serve for a model to the Understanding to
form its Ideas, in some manner they ought to represent the substance of the
objects; otherwise they could not attain to the Knowledge of them, because that
after having separated all the accidents, nothing would remain, that might make
the representation of the substance.

The Fourth, That at last Experience taught us, that sensible Accidents are
only marks and signs which make the Imagination know those things which it
ought to fear or desire; and that at the first sight which we might have of
objects, we did not believe we saw only the visible accidents, but even the
bodies themselves: The distinction which we make afterward of them, being an
effect of Reason which distinguishes what the Imagination had confounded.

So that we may from thence conclude, that to speak properly, the Imagination
is not sensible, and knows not the color nor the heat, but what is colored
and what is hot; and although it seem as if there were nothing but the color
which presents it self to the eye, and that the heat only strikes the sense;
yet when the Imagination thereupon comes to form its Fantasme, it mixeth the
image of those qualities with that of the body, and confounds the Accident with
the Subject; Because it can operate only conformable to its nature which is
composed, and to its end which is the knowledge of the sensible body; And
therefore the fantasm it produces must be in some manner composed, as it is,
and as the sensible body also is.

These are the Reasons which have made us believe that the Imagination it self
forms its Images; That it forms them on the sensible species, which the objects
conv^igh through the organs of the Senses. That in forming them it knows the
things it represents. And last of all, That no created Nature can know
otherwise then by producing in it self the Images of the things which come to
its Knowledge.

But as to what may be said, The Images which are in the Memory, do not make
Knowledge.
that Knowledge consists not in this production of Images, since we know those
things which have preserved themselves in our Memories, and that it is not
necessary that the Soul should form those Images, since she finds them already
formed; We did answer, That although the Image of an Object be in the Memory,
yet it therefore makes not Knowledge, because the Imagination knows it not if
it operate not on it. Now it has no other operation but the representation
which is the production of the image: And therefore although the image of that
object be in the Memory, The Soul can have no knowledge of it, unless she form
another in herself; and as often as she would know it, so often must she make
new figures, which must be as new colors laid upon her first design: We must
not also stick at the inconvenience which might happen from the mutiplicity of
images which the Soul may form of the same thing: For as much as even as the
two images which are received by the two eyes, or by the two ears, confound
themselves in one, and represent but one only object; so also the phantasms
which the Soul forms of the same thing, unite themselves in one only; and the
multiplicity seems but to render it the more express; and that is the reason for
which the Memory for (...) it self by repetition, forasmuch as the images it
keeps are refreshed and renewed by those which the Soul adds a fresh, and are
as it were touched again with new touches and new colors.

Yet they are serviceable to it.
Now although the images which are in the Memory make not Knowledge, yet are
they not unprofitable unto it, for that they seem to reproduce it another time;
for as it is necessary to Beasts to remember past things, that they may provide
for their preservation: its fit there should remain in the absence of the
exterior objects, something which may bring them to the fight of the Soul
again, which might supply the defect of exterior species, and which by
consequence may seem to the same use whereto they were employed. That as these
are nothing else but examples, on which the Soul forms its phantasms, that it
may know things: So those phantasms which remain after in operation may serve
it for new models, wereon she makes new representations, and new knowledges.

From all these things thus established, we have reduced this other
consequence; That since the Imagination is of the rank of material things, its
incapable to form any universal Notions, for as much as what is material, is
determinate and singular: And because its object is the sensible body, and that
the image it forms to it self confounds the accidents with the matter, it
cannot make such pure abstractions as the understanding does, nor separate
accidents from their Subject.

It may very well make some of those abstractions which we call negatives,
whereby we stop to consider one accident of a thing without minding others: for
it may conceive and judge, that a thing is sweet without thinking its hot;
because this kind of abstraction destroys not its object, as the others do
which quite separate the accidents and the forms of the matter.

So that we may say, That the Understanding does in these encounters like the
Mathematician who assembles all the simple figures: But the Imagination
imitates the Architect, who assembles not the figures, but the stones of such a
figure: for it knows neither the color nor the heat, but it knows what is
colored, and what is hot; and when it judges that a thing is good, it is as
much as if we had said It unites such a thing with such a good thing; for that
it can form no image which is not composed; and that in assembling one image
with another, it must unite two composed ones together.

These are the principal points which we have employed in the first part of the
Treatise of the Knowledge of Beasts: Now let us see what M. C. has opposed
against them.

CHAP. I. That the Pefection of things is begun in those which are inferior to
them.
P. 41. of M. C's. Book.
FIrst he condemns the order which I have observed in Nature, and will not have
the perfection which is found in the most noble, to begin by those which are
inferior to it, in those things which are subordinate the one to the other: In
his first assault, the spirit that moves him may be discerned, and the design
he had to spare nothing, when he should meet the occasion, since he troubles
himself to destroy a thing which cannot hurt him, and whereof I pretend to take
no advantage; and that he therein imitates those passionate Enemies, who beat
down the ornaments of the Towns they besiege, although they can do them no
hurt, nor serve for the defense of the besieged. For the Proposition which he
would ruin, was placed at the entry of my Discourse but as a pleasant Avenue,
or as a piece of Architecture, which makes no part of the Edifice which I would
build: In a word, it is the Preface of my work which ought not to decide the
question I was to discourse, but only to prepare the Readers mind, and to
give him some suspicion, and some conjecture of that Truth which I would show
him. Neither is it to be found in the rank of those proofs which I have
employed to establish it, although I ought not to have forgotten it, had I made
a fundamental reason of it, as M. C: imagines. For although it be most
certain, yet is not fit to persuade all kinds of minds, and I very evidently
foresaw, that the Application I must have made thereof might have been
contested: After all, if I should have used it, as a necessary principle to my
design, I would not have proposed it naked and simple, as I did; I would have
maintained it with Reasons, and with an Induction which might have convinced
those who would have doubted of it.

This had been nothing difficult for me to have done, since Philosophy teaches
us, that in all the order of things, there is ever one first which possesses
in perfection that Nature whereon the order is established; and that all those
which are inferior to it, have only portions of it, which are greater or
lesser, as they draw nearer or are estranged farther from it; So fire is the
first amongst hot bodies, Heaven amongst the Diaphanous, the Sun amongst the
Luminous, and so of all the rest: And every of them has in the sovereign
degree that quality which serves for the foundation of that order wherein they
are. All that are under have it more or less weakened. It is not in the
qualities only wherein this disposition is to be found; it is remarkable even
in the essence, and in the very substance of things. For there is a first being
which possesses all the extent, and all the perfection of the essence, of
which the rest are but little portions, which are still diminishing to the very
matter, which is almost a nothing, and a Non ens.

The Platonic Philosophy is full of these considerations, it acknowledges a
first One, a first Good, and a first Fair, of which all the rest are but
participations. Aristotle even wills that in the order of Substances, there are
some more substances then the rest; that Form is more then Matter; That the
first is more then that which is called the second. And to draw nearer to our
Subject, There is no faculty in living and animated things which enter into
order, wherein the same participation is not observable. There are plants which
nourish, which increase and multiply some more then others; and those who know
their Nature well, may see that the most perfect in every kind has that virtue
which is fit for it in a sovereign degree. What inequality will not be found in
the distribution of the Senses, if we would measure the difference which there
is amongst Animals? for the sight, from the Mole to the Eagle; for smell, from
Insects to the Dogs; for touch, from Spunges, or if you will from the sensitive
Plant to Man; and so of all other Animal Virtues. In fine, he who would
consider all the genders of things, he will find some species which are as
bonds which unite them together, and as steps which insensibly lead from the
one to the other; for amongst Stones and Plants, there are Stone-plants found;
amongst Plants and Animals there are the Zoophytes* amongst fish and
Terrestrial Creatures we find the Amphibious, so far, that even to preserve
this order, there must often have been species in some sort monstrous to place
amongst those things which are most opposite; such is the Bat amongst Birds and
four-footed Beasts; for it is a monstrous Bird which has neither feathers nor
bill, which has teeth and breasts, and which goes on four feet although it
have but two. Such is the Triton amongst Aquatick Creatures and Man; such also
betwixt him and terrestrial Animals is the Guinny Monkey called Banis, and a
thousand such like, which may be observed running over all the species which
are in the Universe. All which evidently make it appear, that it is a Law which
Nature has imposed to make an essay of her works in the meanest things, that
she might complete them in the highest, and that in those she might put the
beginning of that virtue which she intended perfect in these; Which being so,
had not I reason to leave this suspicion in the Readers mind, That the same
might be in that of Reasoning. And since the Sensitive Soul was subordinate to
the Reasonable; and even therein there must be some vestiges and some
rough-casts of reason which were perfect in this: At all adventures, it was a
proposition which was to be made good by the proof I was to make of the
reasoning of Beasts. And I should have been guilty to have suppressed it, since
it may serve for a new example to confirm that fair disposition which the
wisdom and providence of God has established in the World.

So that M. C. has not only grossly abused himself when he did believe that I
made it the foundation of my proof, but even also when he would accuse it of
falseness, since he knew not the use I had destined it unto, and that he
produces no reason which might convince it of error. He says well, p 41. That
there are a thousand most excellent Faculties in Minerals, the least tract of
which appears not in the Elements; That nourishment and the other parts of
Vegetation are complete in Plants, and are not began in those things which are
inferior to them; That Sight, Memory, and Imagination are only to be found in
Animals.

But all this makes nothing against the truth of this Proposition: when it
assures that the lowest things have the beginnings of that perfection which is
to be found in the highest; this ought to be understood of those which are in
one and the same order, and which consequently have a Virtue or a Nature common
amongst themselves. For all things are not in one and the same order; and as
many different Virtues as there are, and several Natures which may be common,
so many several orders of things there are, such as that is of Bodies
Diaphanous, Luminous, etc,

There are without doubt in the Minerals, qualities which are common with the
Elements, and which consequently make an order amongst themselves, as is
hardness, weight, and such like. But there are those also which are particular
unto them; and the order which is found in them, is shut up in the gender of
Minerals, but it is always according to the proportion we have observed: For
Gold, for example, possesses the Metallic Nature in perfection, and all other
Metals have but their portions greater or lesser as they are nearer or farther
estranged from that rich metal. We may say as much of Plants and Animals.

So that M. C. objects, That the vegetative Faculties of Plants is not to be
found in things inferior to them, and that the Sensitive are only in Animals.

That excludes not the order and the disposition we speak of; on the contrary
it supposes and confirms ^t, since all the Faculties are diversely divided; and
that there are subjects which have only the beginnings, and others which are
entire and perfect, as we have showed. To weigh also M. C's. reasons, we may
discover a pure Paralogism, who from a true Proposition draws a consequence
con^radictory to it, since it destroys the order which that supposes.

But perhaps the other which he adds may be more regular; For he says
afterward, that as God would have the specific Virtues to be those which are
most perfect, he would also have them most incommunicable; whence it follows,
that far from having established that order which I would persuade, he has
established one quite contrary.

Many things might be said on this subject, were it for my purpose; but as I
hold them indifferent, neither will I examine whether specific Virtues are the
most perfect, and in what sense it may be true: I will content my self to say
by the way, That properly they are not in order, because they are
incommunicable and indivisible, and that there must be something which must
communicate and divide it self, to form that order of which we speak, which is
an order of dignity and perfection. They are then only by accident, that is to
say, because they are joined to things which may truly be brought into order:
It is just as if in transparent bodies, some were marked which were hot; for as
hot it could not enter into this order but by accident, to wit, because it was
found joined with that transparency. We might even assure that the Species and
the specifik Virtues are in order but as the marks of the order; forasmuch as
the species is as much as the numbers make, not the ordered but serve for marks
to the order which is made: For as the numeral quantity (if it be permitted to
substitute this word to that of the Schools) is that which divides it self, and
that every division is marked by such a species of number which is indivisible,
and which cannot be augmented not diminished, without losing its name and
nature. So the Essence being severally divided to all beings, makes as many
species, as it suffers divisions, and every species is the mark of such a
division, and of such a share which is made in the Essence; Now the mark of the
order is of the order but by accident. But this is not the place to deepen
these things; let us content our selves to conclude, That since specific
Virtues are capable of no order, they being neither to be divided nor
separated, M.C. has ill taken his measure, when he opposed them to the
propositions I made, which speak only of things which may be ordered and
diversely divided.

At last he concludes, That if this order be found in Knowledge, Beasts, Men
and Angels would be of the same species, because they would not differ one from
the other, but by the more or the less, whereupon no specific difference could
be grounded.

But as the things we now treat are not essential to our question for the
reasons we have specified, and that this objection considers the grounds, this
is not a place to examine it, and I shall answer it in the fourth part of this
work, where I shall make it appear, that the more or the less marks, and often,
causes different species.

In the mean time, that we may no longer be amused at the Incident which M. C.
has found whence he can draw no advantage: We must enter into the Examen of
these pieces which are to be decided in the process which we have together.

CHAP. II. That Knowledge is an Action and a Production of Images.
FRom the beginning he will not have knowledge to be the only function of the
sensitive Soul, Because (says he) it has also the Memory, the Appetite and
the Motive Virtue which make it act actions different from Knowledge.

But M.C. deals not fairy here, or else he minded not that the word Sensitive
is a precise term which marks the particular reason in which the Soul ought
here to be considered, and which for that cause is equivalent with those which
the School calls Reduplicatives, which if it be so, my Proposition admits of no
difficulty: For it is certain, That the sensitive Soul as sensitive, has no
other function but Knowledge; because to be sensible is to know, and that
Sensitive means the same thing as Knowledge. Now its true, that the soul, as a
Knowledge, has no other Function but Knowledge, and if it produces other
actions, it is no longer as sensitive and as knowing.

But were it true, that as sensitive she had other powers; yet must that ever
which knows things be more noble then all the rest, as M. C. confesses
himself, p. 42. So that we may always from thence conclude, that its an active
power, since the rest which are inferior to it have the Virtue to act. So that
the reason which we have established remains in full force, and necessarily
proves, that Knowledge ought to be an Action; in effect it has been drawn from
the confession of M. C. which made him forsake Fracastors part, although in his
opinion no man has so well spoken of Knowldge as himself. It is therefore
agreed amongst us too, that Knowledge ^s an Action; but he consents not with
me, that this Action is a representation; otherwise he would be forced to
confess, that there is no other means of knowing, but by forming the images of
objects, because no representation can be made but by making the picture of the
thing which is represented. And truly there is a great likelihood that this
reason has convinced him, since he who pardons not even the least syllables,
found nothing to say against this consequence, and contented himself to remit
the decision thereof to Fracaster who is of opinion quite contrary to his:
However it be, if he did certainly believe that Knowledge consisted not in this
representation and production of images, he ought to have taught us what action
it was the faculty performed in that encounter, and not to have imitated those
ill pleaders who always reserve themselves to deduce their reasons in time and
place; The Tribunal of Philosophy suffers not those delays and those escapes;
it wills that every man clearly would contribute to the Knowledge of the Truth,
and bring into society as into the public Treasure all those riches he thinks
he has discovered.

Yet is not this M. C's. opinion, who in several places of his work highly
protests, That he ought to establish nothing that he held the Negative, and
that he is Defender only to such an instance. Whereto notwithstanding we may
by the way say he was not called, neither was he more considerable then an
infinite many, who are as much interessed in the question as him self. But we
treat not here of forms; the ground must be examined, and we must see what
other action besides what we have observed, may intervene to form Knowledge;
for it is true, others as well as M. C. have thought that it was not sufficient
to know things for the faculty to receive the images; that besides that, it
ought to perceive, to consider, and to comprehend; but those who will well
consider these terms, will find they leave the thing as doubtful as at first.
For a man may ask what it is to perceive, consider or comprehend images; what
the soul does in considering them, in comprehending them, in perceiving them?
Is it that she applies and unites her self to them? Besides, the application is
no principal action, and is but a condition to act. There is no action appears
therein which answers the nobility of so high a Faculty. Is it not that she
enlightneth and illuminates them? These are the Metaphorical terms which do not
clearly express things, and all those brightnesses and lights produce nothing
in these matters but obscurity. Not therefore to stick at the vain and
unprofitable manners of speaking, and without being concerned in M.Cs. quality,
who makes profession to destroy all, and to establish nothing; Let us conclude
that there is no other means to know, but to form images, and that there is no
action that can furnish us with the knowing Faculty, porportionable to the
excellency of its nature as that is; since by that means, it in some manner
makes the objects it knows; that it transforms it self into them, and as
Aristotle says, That it makes it self all things.

M. C. opposes to these Truths, That the Senses know their objects without
forming any images of them, having no others but those which they received from
them.

But this Objection being accompanied with no proof destroys not our
Proposition. As we believe That the Sensitive soul knows in forming its images;
we hold also, and everywhere where she knows she does the same thing; and
therefore when she knows in the organs of the Senses, she forms in her self the
picture of the things, the species of which she has received; so that when she
is diverted elsewhere, and that she cannot make this production, she knows
nothing of all their objects, although they have perfectly received the images
thereof; but we will hereafter re-touch this subject

The sensible Species enter not the Memory.
Let us see whether it be true, That the sensible species enter the Memory, and
whether they may preserve themselves there, as without proving it M:C. assures
us.

All those who have spoken of the visible species, have said that they had no
permanent being, being in a continual flux, that their preservation depended on
a continual influence of the cause which produced them, and that it
communicated it self but in right lines: If this be so, as experience hinders
us from doubting, I would willingly ask how those species which enter the Eyes
may be conveyed into the Memory; and if this Faculty be placed in the bottom of
the Brain, as all the world believes, what course can they hold to go straight
thither, so many turns and obstacles being to be met withal in the nerves, and
in those other channels through which they are to pass? For it is to no purpose
to oppose unto us, that they render themselves there, by the several
reflections they make, since the substance of the Nerves and of the Humors is
too gross to give them a passage, and that the reflection so many times doubled,
weakens the images, and represents the objects but confusedly; but if they
could arrive at the Memory, could they subsist there, since they have no
permanent being? This without doubt cannot be conceived without contradiction;
for if it be their nature to be in a continual flux they can never be fixed and
permanent, no more then the motion: And it is the reason they of themselves
vanish as soon as the object disappears; forasmuch as losing themselves in the
same instant that they are produced, they had need be renewed from one moment
to another: And if the cause which produces them absent it self, it can make
no more of them. If it were then true, that the Memory might preserve them in
the absence of the Objects, it must supply their defect, and it must with them
have the virtue to produce them uncessantly. Now if she had that virtue, she
might form them all alone without help of the Objects; it would not be needful
to have seen Colors, to remember them; and blind men might judge of them as
well as the clearer-sighted. On the other side, if the visible Species are
nothing but the Rays of Colors, which (to speak properly) are but weakened and
diminished lights, as we have showed elsewhere; the Memory to produce these
species must have interior colors, and be truly colored as well as the
objects which produce them.

M. C. has too clear a spirit not to have seen these impossibilities; but he
has chosen to dissemble them, that he might have the more ample matter of
contest, and not be obliged to conclude with me, That since the images of
objects which the senses have perceived are preserved in the memory, they must
be different from those which the objects send thither; and that otherwise they
would not be proportionable to the nature of the Soul.

The Images which the Imagination forms, are different from those which pass
from the Objects, as those are of the Understanding.
On what I have said, That the Imagination ought to form different images from
those which come from without, since the Understanding forms those which are
different from those wherewith the Imagination and the Senses furnish it: M. C.
answers, That I prove not this consequence, and that I can say nothing which
hinders him from denying it. For my part, I doubt not but he may deny whatever
I may produce which is most certain and most evident: After having protested
that he will stick to the Negative, if he acted otherwise, he would betray his
cause and give himself the lie; however it be, any man but he without any doubt
would find this Consequence good. The Understanding to know, forms images
according to its nature; whence the Imagination to know, ought also to form
images conformable to its nature. For since these two faculties have that in
common. That they know; they must needs also have some action which must be
common unto them to form Knowledge. Now it is certain, the Understanding forms
its images because they are spiritual, and that the Understanding only can
produce them. The Imagination must also produce hers; since there is no action
which can be common to these two faculties, unless it be the production of
images.

M. C. adds, That it would from thence follow, That the Imagination ought to
make universal and spiritual conceptions, since the Understanding makes them.
But I shall desire him to tell me whether he of a truth believes this
Consequence which he draws from thence to be good: The Understanding forms
images; Therefore the Imagination forms spiritual images. For I did not say,
The Understanding forms spiritual images; but I showed, That it forms its
images because they are spiritual. This is called in the Schools. To argue from
things called simply to those which are conditional; or from those which are
divided, to those which are conjoined. But let us to another Subject, which
perhaps may be more for his advantage.

CHAP. III. The Imagination represents not only the Accident, but also their
Subject.
HAving a design to show, That the Imagination forms not the Accidents only,
but she makes somewhat of their Subject also enter; and that its phantasm is
not a Representation by the example of Color, but of what is colored; nor of
Heat, but of what is hot; in a word, That all sensible Accidents are therein
represented per modum concreti, as they speak in the Schools. The first Reason
which I brought, is. That the Imagination is a power buried in the Matter,
which ought to have an object of the same gender, and an action which
terminates it self in something which in some manner is composed as that is. M.
C. finds this reason very strange, and answers, That the Imagination is no more
buried in the Matter then the Accidents which we give for its object, and that
they are as composed as she is. But if he speaks this in earnest, we are both
agreed; and he must with me confess, That the Imagination being a Faculty in
the Matter, the Color which is represented is also a Quality in the Matter:
And I will have nothing else, but that what is hot, which is a heat in the
Matter, is represented by the Imagination, and not the Heat by it self. Yet it
does not seem it is at that point he means to stick: For he opposes against
us, That a man cannot give the Imagination an object which is of the same
gender, nor which is composed as she is, unless it be a pure Accident; since
the Imagination is a Faculty, and that the Faculty is a pure Accident, as we
have said in the Discourse of Instinct, page 9.

This objection is captious; and I make an Appeal here to M.C. his sincerity,
to know whether it be allowed in good Logic to change the sense of the Terms
of which we were agreed. The question here is concerning Physical Accidents
which cannot be separated from the Matter; and he gives us the change in
Metaphysical Accidents, which subsist only in the Understanding. It Is true,
that when we examined what the essential difference of Man was, we said, That
the Faculty of Reasoning could not be it, because it is a pure Accident, and
that the difference of Man ought to be a Substance. Now he cannot disavow, but
that the search of essential differences is from the securing of the
Metaphysics, and that the Faculty ought to be no otherwise considered but in
Physic. So that he unprofitably labors to ruin what we have now established
for what we said in that place. We consider here the Imagination as a Faculty
which operates: Now it cannot operate without Matter which serves for its
organ. It cannot therefore be conceived but in the Matter, and by consequence
it must have an Object which must be material, and an Action which terminates
at something which must be as that is composed.

But what says he? The Imagination is no more material then the external
Senses, which nevertheless know the Accidents only.

I could hereupon answer him, That he supposes what is in question: For in no
part of his Work has he proved, that the external Senses know Accidents only.
But as it is not his mind to establish any thing, I shall content my self to
demand of him whether by the external senses he means the organs of the senses,
or the faculty which is in those organs. For if they are only the organs, the
external senses do not know; If it be the sensitive faculty, it must operate,
and consequently form its image. Now this Image represents somewhat besides the
Accidents, as we pretend to have showed.

The Imagination represents things all entire.
The second Reason I brought in confirmation of this truth, is grounded on that
fair observation, which some have made on the same subject I now treat; to wit,
that there are two orders of things in the Universe, the one of which in the
first intention of Nature were made to be absolute, the others were destined to
represent them. In this latter order are the knowing Faculties; for they have
no other virtue but to know, and cannot know but by representing the things;
it is what Aristotle said, speaking of the Understanding. That it had no other
Nature but that of being potentially (...). That is, to be able to make and to
be made all things wherein the representation consists. Hence we concluded,
That if these Faculties are destined to represent things, they must represent
them all entire, and such as they are; otherwise it were not to represent them:
Even as a man would never say that a Painter had made the picture of a man, had
he painted only the Eyes or the Mouth. In effect, as the Members of this
division relate the one to the other, since the first compeehends all what is
absolutely, the other must have the same extent, so that the knowing Faculties
represent all things which are absolute; now thus to represent them, is to
represent them all entire. So the Imagination which is destined to know
sensible and corporeal things, ought to represent them such as they are; that
is to say, as sensible and corporeal, and because they are not corporeal
without matter, it necessarily ought to represent them to its self with its
matter. And consequently, the Images it makes, represent not only the
accidents, but even the subject which sustains them. Its true, that its
representation is not exact, that it distinguishes not the subject from the
accidents, and that it represents them but confusedly; but it is sufficient to
say, It knows it. And the order which Nature holds in all things; would that
the knowledge of the Imagination should not be the most perfect, and that it
should be but the beginning, and as it were, the first Essay to attain the
perfection of that which the Understanding was to form.

M. C. imploys several Answers to invalidate the force of Raciocination; and
although at first he seem only to sport and divert himself, yet that he might
not be reproached, not to have been serious enough in so important a matter: I
shall treat with him as if he had believed of a truth, That if the Imagination
being the representative of things, ought to represent them all entire; it
follows that the picture which is also the representative of things, ought to
represent them all entire, and when she was to make the picture of a man, it
must paint his Soul and his most hidden Faculties.

I grant him not only, that the Picture represents the thing all entire, for
that unless it were entire, it were not the thing it ought to represent. But it
follows not from thence, that the picture ought to represent the Soul and the
Faculties of man, forasmuch as that makes no part of what it ought to
represent. If he had showed, that the picture ought truly to have represented
man, certainly it were obliged to paint his soul and his body, since man is
composed of them both. And if we say that it represents man, it is but by
accident, and because the understanding supplies the deficiencie; the Nature of
Man representing to him that which Art furnishes him withal only in figure.
It is not so with the knowing Faculties, which are as the Natural pictures of
all things; and which by an Art, if we may so say, more excellent then all
those which Men have invented, have the power to represent the very substance
of their objects.

The defect then which is in M. C. his Consequence, comes from that he takes
the word of Things in the general signification, although I have restrained it
to a certain gender; and as the Logicians speak, he changes the Supposition,
and from a Term which is distributed, he makes a Distributive. But not to weigh
too exactly what he spoke but in raillery, let us observe his other Answers
which explicate his true sentiments.

The Nature of the Imagination is altogether Representative.
He says, That the Imagination moves the Appetite; and therefore that its
Nature is not altogether Representative. And I deny this Consequence, although
I agree with him in the Antecedent. For the Imagination moves not the Appetite,
but by representing unto it those things to which it ought to bear it self. And
to speak properly, it is not moved, it is rather that which moves it self in
pursuit of the Judgment it makes. As for the virtues which M.C. gives it, by
which he pretends That in Nature is not at all representative, we have already
answered this objection, page 22. As well as to what he adds, That the Nature
of the external Senses is as much or more representative as the Imagination:
For if by the external Senses he understand the Sensitive faculty which is in
the Organs, it is not more nor less representative then the Imagination, since
its the same thing. He might remember that I had expressly marked, That by the
word Imagination I comprehended all the powers of the Sensitive soul which form
Knowledge. For although the sense of that word have not in common discourse so
large an extent as I have given it, yet after I had explicated it clearly
enough, there remained nothing of an Equivoke: And since the question is of
things, and not of words, which serve only but as they are valued, M. C. ought
rather to have comprehended the thing of which I spoke, then to have poposed
his gainsayings.

The Imagination is more representative then the sensible Species. 182.
At last he objects against us, That the visible Species are more representative
then the Imagination; and that she represents the Objects more perfectly then
the Phantasm which is in the Memory: It is what he should have proved. For if
he supposes that the Imagination represents not the Subject of the Accidents,
he supposes what is in question: And if he will confess that she does
represent them, he must also confess that the Phantasm represents the things
more imperfectly then the visible. Species, since they represent only the
Accidents, and that represents the Accidents and the Subject together. On the
other side, the word [To represent] is taken actively, when we employ it about
the Imagination, and signifies the same with Making the picture. Now if this be
so, the Species represent it not in that sense, since they make not the
pictures, and that themselves are the pictures of things. And therefore M. C.
deceives himself, when he would compare them with the Imagination which makes
the pictures and images of things; That if he will compare them only with the
Phantasm, he must abandon the one half of his Proposition; and for the rest, he
must save himself from the Dilemma we have now made him.

The third Reason we made use of to show that the Imagination represents
somewhat besides the Accidents, is, Reas. 3. Because the Understanding cannot
form the Idea of a Substance.
That if in some manner it do not represent the substance of the objects, the
Understanding would find no ground for those Knowledges in the Phantasm it
represents. For, after having separated all Accidents from it, there would
remain nothing whereupon it could form the Idea of its Substance. Whereupon M.
C. says, That I should have added, That the Understanding could not know
universal things, did not the Phantasm represent the Universality; neither
would it know Man, did not the Imagination form a spiritual Image of his soul.
I am much obliged to him for the advice he gives me: But the Laws of Logic
defend me the use thereof, and teach me, That when a man changes the Terms of
a Proposition which he would bring to an Absurdity, he labors in vain, and can
conclude nothing at all. Seeing I had said, that the Understanding would have
nothing whereupon to form the Idea of its substance, did not the phantasm in
some fort represent the substance; All what M. C. could legitimately infer,
was, That the Understanding could have nothing on which it could form the Idea
of universal things, did not the phantasme in some sort represent unto it
universal things. And then, although the Consequences which are drawn from the
first intentions to the second are commonly captious; yet I should freely have
consented herein, without fearing any inconvenience; because that I can
maintain, That universal Natures are all in every of their Individuals not
formally and precisely, as they say, but nevertheless really. So that in this
sense it being true, that the phantasm may represent such an Animal; it may
also in some manner represent the universal Nature of that Animal. But I will
not engage my self in the Combats which the Schools make on this subject: And
that I may no longer contest with M. C. I shall grant, That the Understanding
knows things which are not represented in the phantasms; The Understanding
has Knowledges direct and oblique.
and that by means of the Discourse he makes, and the Consequences he deduceth,
he discovers in the objects of Natures and Virtues, whereof the Imagination
gives him no notice. But it follows not from thence, that it knows all things
after the same manner. Besides these Knowledges which are oblique, there are
those which are direct and intuitive, whereby it sees and knows things as they
are represented by the Senses. And did not the phantasms express it, it could
never attain to the knowledge of them by the way of Knowledge.

If this be thus, as no man need doubt, M. C. can draw no advantage from what
he has opposed. For were it true, that the Understanding knew Universal and
Spiritual things without the help of the Imagination, it will not from thence
follow, That he did know the Substance; of which we have spoken in the same
manner, since there is another kind of Knowledge whereby it may know it. In
effect the Imagination conceives what is hot, what is animated: And there is
no likelihood when a Beast sees another Animal, that it conceives only the
color, the figure, and the motion which it perceives therein; but it
conceives somewhat which has all those Accidents. And this cannot but be the
Substance, which in Man serves for the Object to the direct knowledge of the
Understanding. For in separating all the Accidents which the Imagination
confounded, he at last discovers that thing which is void of those Accidents.
So that a man cannot say he does it afresh, no more then he who finds a
Treasure, makes the Treasure by digging the earth and putting by what hid it.
In pursuit of this discovery, the Understanding imploys its oblique knowledges,
and by several relations and diverse inductions which it makes, he adds to this
Substance other Notions which were not truly represented in the phantasme, as
Universality, Spirituality, and the like.

But this is not the place where we are to examine this Subject: And without
troubling our selves to establish our Reasons, it will be sufficient to show
that those which M. C. has made use of to destroy them, has been nothing to
their prejudice.

For as for what he adds, That he knows not why I will not have the
Understanding know those things which are not represented in the Phantasm.
since I will have the Imagination should know the Substance without the help of
external Senses and sensible Species: He makes me speak there as he pleases
him self: Had he taken notice of my words, he would have found them quite
contrary to what he said: And that I will have, That the Understanding knows
the things which are not represented in the Phantasm; And that I will not have
the Imagination know the Substance without the help of the Senses, and of the
Sensible species. For although I assured, That the Imagination forms it self
its Phantasm; yet I have always said, that it formed it on the Model of those
sensible Species which are received through the organs of the Senses; And
therefore it is not without their aid, as he would have that I had said. Yet I
know that this is not the meaning which he gives to my words, neither will I
stick at it. And I would only observe this Equivoque to make it be remembered,
That those who undertake the Censure of other men's Works, ought to keep
themselves on their guard, and not to expose themselves to the danger to be
reprehended by those they would correct.

I see then well enough, the Reason which he would employ against me, is, That
if the Imagination may represent the Substance, the picture of which the
sensible Species are not to make; the Understanding, which is incomparably more
knowing and more perfect, may also represent it without the Phantasms giving it
any image thereof. But this objection is easily resolved, because we do not
consider here the Understanding in it self and in its pure nature, which may
have such a power; and perhaps Souls separated may thus know corporal things:
But we respect it in the state it is in us, and in its ordinary manner of
acting, which requires the help of the inferior Faculties: Otherwise we might
prove, That we had no need of eyes to see things, since a man might see them
without, as Spirits do. It Is the Law which Nature imposes to this sublime
faculty. That at often as it is linked to the Body, it ought to serve the
Senses and the Imagination, and not anticipate that knowledge which they are to
give it. And since they are destined to representation in corporal things, it
ought to expect the report they are to make and take in for the ground of their
first knowledges. Now it is certain, they give in an account of the very
substance of things, for that they cannot do otherwise, for those reasons which
we have before recited. And certainly Nature should have been deceitful to have
reduced all the Knowledge of Animals to exterior Accidents, and to have denied
them that which was the most important for their preservation.

These are the greatest endeavors M. C. has made against our First Part. For
what he afterward adds is so weak, that there is nothing which can excuse it,
but that he was at an end of his work, and that in all likelihood his mind was
tired with the long labor he had undertaken.

In effect; On what we have said, That the Imagination confounded the Accidents
with their Subject; The only Reason he objects, is, That it is not true. For if
he pretends to have sufficiently proved it, Because the Imagination knows not
the Subject, and that the Qualities serve not for marks to know them; It Is what
is in question, and consequently cannot pass for a proof.

Reas. 4. Drawn from Experience.
As for the Experience I proposed, which at the first sight we have of visible
Accidents; We do not only believe we see the Accidents, but the Bodies
themselves wherein they are. He answers, That this experience is false, because
(says he) the first sights or single conceptions can precede the affirmations
and the reasonings, without which one cannot conclude nor know a Substance by
means of an Accident. But to what purpose does he speak here of Affirmations
and Reasonings? in this encounter we will not have the Imagination reason or
affirm any thing, neither is it by means of the Accident that it knows the
Substance; at one sight it sees both, as it sees the color and the figure. And
when I say, That it believes it sees the subject of accidents, it is not by the
reflection it makes on its first knowledge, but it is in its common way of
speaking of such things as they think they certainly know. For when any object
presents it self to sight, it is true, we believe we see it, and we think we
are not deceived in that knowledge which our eye affords us; and yet for all
that, we cannot say we make any Affirmation, Conclusion or Reasoning. How ever
it be, it imports me or the truth but very little, that M. C. denis the
experience which shall be confessed by all other men, so as they be not blind.
And if we would consult with the most ignorant, who commonly are the most
certain and most sincere Judges we can choose, for what concern the senses; they
will all say, that when they see a stone, they do not only see the color and
the figure, but the thing it self, which has those qualities; it is not that
at this first sight they destinguish it from its accidents, because the
Imagination confounds them, and conceives the one with the other; and if they
come afterward to distinguish them, it is the effect of their Reason, which
separates what the Imagination had confounded.

But M. C. cannot comprehend That Reason separates what the Imagination has
confounded; For, says he, if the Imagination forms an Idea of a different
substance from that of the accident, it must distinguish them.

And I cannot also apprehend why he brings a proposition for a proof, which is
contrary both to his sense and to mine. For he believes not that the
Imagination can form an Idea of substance different from that of the Accidents,
unless he would destroy all what he has proposed. And for my part, I am so far
from having had this thought, that I ever said, That the Imagination
represented the accident and the substance confusedly, and therefore without
any distinction. I confess that this representation is made on the model of the
sensible species, which represent but the accidents only. But the sensitive
Faculty makes none of this distinction, because it cannot make it without
knowing, and that it cannot know without forming its fantasm. Now the fantasm
ought necessarily to represent the accidents in concrete, that is to say, with
the substance, as we have already proved and that therefore it cannot
distinguish the Substance from the Accident.

For the rest, the more easily to conceive this manner of operating, from which
the Imagination cannot dispense it self, we must consider the art of casting of
Statues; for although the Mould in which they are made be hollow, and that it
can only give that figure which is imprinted on it; nevertheless, the Statue
forbears not to come out massy, and on an empty pattern which has but the
superficies, the Founder makes a solid and flat work; the Imagination does the
same, since the sensible Species which bear the image of the Accidents only, it
so forms its phantasm that with those accidents it comprehends the main and
body it sustains.

To return to M C. the Hypothesis whereupon he grounds his conclusion is
imaginary, and he cannot save himself from the reproach which may be laid to
him, to have imposed on me things I never said, or to have formed to himself
Chimera's to fight withal.

In pursuit he demands How according to my principles, the Understanding can
make this distinction, since the phantasm represents not the ground thereof,
and that after having separated what was confounded, nothing remains to make
him know the destinction.

It were easy for me to Answer him, that the phantasm represented to the
Understanding the ground of this distinction, since it represents two confused
things, which might be separate, and that after it has separated what was
confused, the separated things which remain make it know the distinction; for
the separation does not really differ from the things which are separated, no
more then the motion from the things which are moved. But to cut off these vain
subtilties which are destroyed by themselves if we would have the terms they
are conceived by, we in one word say, that this distinction is rank of those
things which we have showed in the may be known by the Understanding without
being represented in the phantasms, for whether it be proved for the action it
self it does, or for a general notion it forms on that action, it is certain it
can have no direct knowledge of it, and that it must reflect and reply on it
self to know it.

These are the chief observations which M. C. has made against the first part
of my work, Observations on the censure of the first Part.
and which he has placed at the end of his Book, to crown his Labor, and
only that he may have cause to tell me, That he has examined all my
Reasonings; but although there be nothing in all his work directly opposite to
mine, having even sought to finish where he began, the whole is, to know
whether he has succeeded well or no, and whether he had reason to believe that
his sixteenth Chapter should dispense him from stoping at those things which I
have here treated. For ny own part, after having seen the Title of his Book
which promises to speak of the Knowledge of Animals, I think in some place he
ought to have explicated what Knowledge was, and how it was to be made: And
since he will not have them made Propositions nor Discourses, that at least he
would satisfy these premises which obliged him to show how they knew things;
that is to say, how how that simple conception is made, which he and all the
world allows them; nevertheless, there is no one word of all that in his whole
work; and that sixteenth Chapter which should have dispensed him from examining
what I had said thereupon, speaks of nothing less then of that first Knowledge,
and treats only of Ratiocination; we must needs afterward say, that passion
has altogether blinded him, and taken from him the sight of those things which
he ought most carefully to have examined. For this was the ground of all what
both of us had to say, since both of us had a design to speak of the Knowledge
of Beasts. And if I have well proved, that they know things by forming of their
images. I have a great prejudge to conclude that they may both judge and
reason. Since Judgment and Discourse are made by the union of images, which is
not so difficult to make as their production. And if on the other side he had
made it appear, that the first Knowledge was not formed after that manner, he
without doubt had much shaken all the body of his proofs, and he would have
vaunted to have overthrown one of the strongest Arch batteries of my work.

However it be, if he had had the true spirit of Philosophy, instead of seeking
that little vanity which he had of saying, That there were none of my Reasons
which he had not examined, and to speak in his sense, which he had not justled
and combated; be should have helped me exactly to have acknowledged those
Truths of which I had made the first discoveries: He should in earnest have
approved those things which were conformable to reason, and have added
afterward his own light, which might have made me see what I did not perceive.
Finally, he should with some restraint have come to the censure of my
Propositions, which are so glorious to the sovereign matter of the Universe,
and which are more capable of putting into spirits the admiration of his bounty
and of his magnificence then any other thing which is in nature; for if the
soul can produce the images of things, and that it has no other means to know
them but that; who would not admire the wonderful fecundity which God has
given it? since as many times as it knows, as many times at it remembers the
things it has known, it must as many times produce those images, and
consequently make an infinite number of them, without being tired in their
production, and without draining the source it is drawn from: But if its also
true, that it in such a manner produces those Images that they not only
represent the sensible Accidents, but also the bodies and substance of things,
who cannot but be ravished with astonishment to find here below so perfect an
Abridgment of the Divine almighty power, and to see that the soul in some
manner created like a new world, and that it forms in it self all what God has
made in this visible world? After all this, if M.C. had not thought it fit, to
have raised this Doctrine so high, he should at least have considered the
splendour it was like to have given to all those difficulties which are
encountered on the nature and operations of the soul. For besides that, it makes
it evidenly appear why repetition fortifies the Memory, why the Imagination can
make no abstraction nor reflection, nor consequently any Universal notion; it
serves for a foundation, and a prejudge to show that the Understanding operates
by shorter means and easier then those prescribed by the Schools, and that at
Law it is a Faculty which is not tied to the Matter, and which consequently is
in the order of spiritual things.

If M.C. then had made any reflection thereupon, I doubt not but it would have
obliged him to have weighed my reasons more justly then he has done. And that
the least favorable judgment I could have expected had been that, if my
opinion were not true, yet it were very probable, and that it might have been
placed in the rank of those new Systemes of the world which the Astronomers
have invented, which perhaps are no more certain then the former, but yet which
the more readily give a reason of all the Phenomena's.

The End of the First Part.
That the Imagination can unite or divide the Images it has formed.
Wherein the Judgment consists.
THE SECOND PART.
THere are four principal Reasons which we have made use of to prove that the
Imagination can unite Images.

The first is drawn from the Dreams which Animals have in their sleep; for as
their Imagination does then figure other things. besides those which the senses
have represented, even as it happens in those of Men; It must necessarily
dispose the Images which it has produced in the Memory, after another manner,
and order them otherwise then they were; and consequently, that they must unite
some which were separated, and separate others which were joined together

The second is taken from the Diseases which trouble their Knowledge and their
Judgment: For we cannot doubt but that in that estate they represent the things
quite otherwise then the Senses and the Memory make them known, and that they
mistake the little for great, and the good for evil things, etc. Which cannot
be done but by the mixture which the Imagination makes of Images against the
natural order which they ought to keep.

The third is evident in Birds which learn to speak, which continually trouble
the sequel of the words which they have learnt: For there is no man but will
infer from thence, but that the Images of the things which they keep in their
Memory may mix themselves, and that their Imagination is able to unite them,
and to to join them together at pleasure.

The last is, That the presence of good or ill makes them remember what they
formerly have had, and makes them fear or hope the like. Which would never
happen, did not the Imagination unite the present things with those past and
future.

From this Truth thus established, we concluded, That the Imagination could
make Affirmative propositions as well as the Understanding. For when it judges
that an Aliment is good, it does nothing but unite the Idea of Good with that
of the Aliment. And therefore since the Imagination can form the same Images
and unite them together, it may make, as it does, Affirmative propositions. And
indeed, since all the World is agreed, That Beasts judge whether things are
good or ill for them: It is certain that they cannot make this Judgment,
without uniting the Images which they had formed thereof. Now in uniting them,
they must make Affirmative propositions even as they make Negatives, when they
separate them the one from the other; it being true, That if they can unite,
they can also divide them.

CHAP. I. That the Imagination makes Affirmative Propositions.
I Here expected the Examen of a Philosopher, and I do not so much as find the
Artifice of an Orator, who dissembles those Reasons which solicit him, and
passes over them as if they did not deserve that he should stop at them and as
if they were not worthy of him who propounded them; for these are the very
words M. C. uses against me. After he had said, that I had strongly obliged my
self to have proved the Proposition I had advanced, he would have wrought
wonders in favor of the common opinion. But I would fain know what he would
have done, had I well proved them; would he have confuted my reasons? Without
doubt he ought not to have done it, unless he would have combated the Truth.
This was the place wherein he ought to have exercised it, since he did believe
my proofs were invalid: And not having done it, he gives me cause to believe
that he thinks ill all what he would nor examine, and that all what he has
examined is not ill; and so that there are but few things in my Work but are
good, since there are so few which have escaped his Censure.

However it be, I think it is fit to see whether my proof be so bad as he speaks
it to be: For I have not only thought it worthy of me, which were a very slight
commendation, but I have believed it is more solid and more evident then any he
could produce. If indeed it be true, That to make Affirmative propositions, the
images are but to be joined and united which are to compose them, as the
Schools are of opinion; I thought it had been a necessary consequence, That the
Imagination was able to make those propositions, if it could unite the images
it formed. And I imagined, that without obliging my self any further to prove
so certain and evident a Consequence, it had been sufficient to show, That the
Imagination could unite its images. And so all the question may be reduced to
this point, To know whether the Reasons I had propounded did well establish
this Truth? M. C. who denies it, without doubt was never acquainted with the
force thereof. For although at first it seem to prove nothing, but that the
images unite themselves in the soul, without saying that they unite themselves
by themselves, or whether it be the Imagination which unites them: yet if a man
would but remember the foundation which I believe I have solidly laid, That the
Imagination knows nothing, but it forms the image thereof; a man will be
obliged to confess, That it represents nothing to it self in dreams, in
sickness, and in the repetition of things which are taught Animals, but that it
also forms the images thereof; because it is evident, that in these encounters
it knows in the same manner as in the others. Now if it forms these images it
self, and that disposes them after another manner then they are in the Memory,
it is certain that it assembles them together, and that consequently it makes
Affirmative propositions.

Whence the confusion of Thoughts comes in Dreams and in Sickness.
M. C. says thereupon, That it conceives these things united; and that the
confusion in them is not in the Imagination, but in as much as it is in the
phantasmes wherewith the Memory furnishes it. But if this be true, how can it
be possible that those images which are confounded in ones sleep, should so
easily reduce themselves into their order after one awakes? How after the long
agitation of a sickness, which has embroiled and mixed them with so much
disorder, could they reduce themselves again into their rank, and into the firm
order wherein they were? If M. C. had taken care of this, he would have
believed as we do, That the confusion comes not from the phantasmes which are
in the Memory, but from the Imagination only; which in the continual motion it
is, casts it self on several images, the one separated from the other, without
changing the sequel and natural disposition which they have together. It Is just
like a Ball, which by the several bounds it makes, falls on several squares;
for its fall changes not the order; and although it falls sooner upon the one
then upon the other, yet they still remain in the same situation in which they
were placed. So the Imagination which can never be at rest, and which is always
agitated, falls on several images of the Memory, and forms thereupon the dreams
and the chimera's wherewith it entertains it self being asleep. But the natural
order of the figures whereon she has wrought, suffers no change; and when a
man is awakened, the soul finds them in the same disposition they were before.
The same thing happens in those sicknesses which offend the Judgment: and there
is no difference, but that in dreams the Imagination commonly agitates it self
without being solicited by any external cause; and here it is carried away by
the tempest which is in the spirits and in the humors, the violence whereof is
so great, that without being able to stop at what the senses represent it
withal, it runs here and there toward those images which are in the Memory,
and makes a confusion of all the images it encounters; but when the storm is
over, all is found in the same condition it was, and the Images which are in
the Memory have changed place no more then the Isles and Rocks in the sea
suffer in a storm.

If this be so, the Imagination which alone makes confusion in these
encounters, assembles the images it has found, and so unites them that they
make a link and sequence together as is necessary to produce dreams and
extravagancies, which are observed in diseases: And then there is no difference
betwixt the union it makes, with that the Understanding makes, when it joins
one Idea with another to make an Affirmative proposition.

The Imagination can add an Est and a Non est to the Terms it unites.
M.C. (p. 241.) oppugns us, That it is not in the power of the Imagination to
add an Est or a Non est betwixt two Terms; so that it cannot deny, nor affirm
any thing, nor consequently make any Proposition.

But if it cannot make use of the Verb Est, it will not follow that it cannot
make Propositions, because there are some wherein it is not used, as almost all
those are which consist of two terms only, which the Schools call by Secundo
Adjacente. For when we say, That an Animal runs, that he flies, etc. these are
perfect Propositions, wherein the Verb Est is not to be found. And although
they say that they are reduced to the form of others in putting the Participle
in stead of a Verb; yet as this manner of speech is not natural, it is a sign
that the phantasm represents not the thing naturally as it is. Indeed, of a
thousand persons which will say, The creature runs, there will not be two but
will believe that by those words they understand that the beast is running, And
those Philosophers which Aristotle quotes in his Physics, who would not use
the Verb Est in their discourse, could not but believe that these Propositions
were equivalent.

But it is not here where we would stick. We must observe what M.C. his thought
is when he says, The Imagination cannot add the Verb Est to the Notions it
makes. Does he understand the word, or the thing which is signified by it? If
it be the word, I grant that Beasts use it not, because their language is
natural, and that that Verb is a Term of Institution agreed upon amongst Men.
But it follows not from thence, That Men's imagination cannot employ it, since
the word explicates the thoughts of the Imagination, as well as those of the
Understanding. If he understand the thing which is signified by the word, he
must observe whether the Imagination is capable of forming it: For if it has
that power, it may then add the Verb Est: And if Beasts communicate their
thoughts, they must have some Accent which must have the same force with that
word of which we speak.

All who have spoken of this Verb, What the Verb Est signifies in Propositions.
not omitting Fracastor, who is M. C. his great Doctor for matter of Knowledge,
say, That it is an exterior sign, whereby men observe the union or the division
which the Understanding makes amongst Images. And certainly, since words are
the signs of the thoughts, that word which enters into propositions cannot be
useless, but must mark something which is in the thoughts. Now there is nothing
in the interior proposition which the Understanding makes, to which the Verb
Est is answerable, but the union or the division of the Images; And therefore
it is true, That this union or division is the thing which is signified by it.
If this be so, all the difficulty is reduced to this point, To know whether the
Imagination is capable to unite images? For if she can unite them, she does the
thing which is signified by the Verb Est. And as the Understanding by uniting
the Idea of Good with that of Aliment, does all what is necessary to say, That
the Aliment is good: If it be true, that the Imagination can make such like an
Union which it would express by language, it would have the same foundation as
that has, to say, That the thing is such as it conceives it; since the word
Est signifies nothing else but the union of images. Now in my opinion,
whatsoever M. C. thinks, we have demonstrated, That the Imagination unites
images, and therefore that it makes propositions.

The Imagination may add Images to those of its Object.
All what M.C. produces to destroy this Truth, is, That a material Faculty
cannot add any thing to its object; That the Verb Est is not amongst the
species which come from without; and that to mix it with the Terms, it marks a
doubling in the Knowledge, and somewhat which comes very near Reflection. For my
part, I conceive not the sense he gives the last words; for according to the
common way of speaking, a Doubling in the Knowledge is a Reflection. Neither can
I apprehend how a Reflection comes very near a Reflection, since it must be a
Reflection which were not a Reflection. But I should have too much to do, should
I stick at the way of speech which he uses: Let Us only say, That the word
Thing which he uses, has too floating a signification to induce us to what he
pretends. It Is true, that the Imagination cannot add any thing to its object,
if by that word we understand any Nature; but it may add conditions and
modifications thereunto. Union is not an absolute Nature, it is but a
Modification, which is not really different from those things which unite
themselves. And this surpasses not the force of the Imagination, no more then
the rest of the actions it does; for Union is the action of the Imagination, as
well as the first Conception. And if it were true, That Union were above its
power, because it is not comprehended in those species which come from without:
By the same reason, the first Conception and all other Knowledge would also be
beyond its power, since it is no more comprised in the Species, then the Union.

What he adds of Reflection, is to no purpose: For the Imagination ought not to
be more obliged to make reflection, when it knows the images with the union
which it gives them, then the Understanding which makes none in the like
encounters. Otherwise it must needs be, That it could never form direct
Judgments nor Affirmations without Reflections, which are unheard of things in
the Schools. For although he says. That in all Affirmation there is a Reflection
of the Mind made on the Knowledge of the Senses; forasmuch as if we did only
know the Species, without knowing the Reception, we could never affirm any
thing: It is certain, that this Reason combats Experience; most part of men
affirming things, without knowing whether they have received the species
thereof, having never heard speak of them, and knowing them not at all.

For the rest, I dare not say that M.C. deceived himself herein, attributing to
the Imagination all what the Understanding is able to do on the union of
images; believing, that as the Understanding may make a reflection on its
action, and form a notion of the Verb Est altogether distinct and separate from
that of the terms, the Imagination ought also to do as much, if it can make
propositions. No, I have too great an opinion of his sufficiency, to have that
thought: But I imagine that he would try by those objections he has made,
whether I had any knowledge of the School-subtilties. And therein truly I shall
ingenuously confess that I am but little versed, as in all other things; and
that it is an unhappiness both for him and me, that I know no more of them: For
that without doubt there are many places in his Work, wherein I have not
observed the hidden artifice, and consequently whereunto I could not employ the
subtiling of my spirit.

CHAP. II. That the Imagination can make Negative Propositions.
WHat follows, is perhaps of the same rank: For I understand neither the force,
nor the address of the reasons he produces to show, that the Imagination makes
no Negative propositions; although that were a Subject which might furnish him
with quantity of fair observations, and wherein he might exercise all the
Niceties of his Logic. In the mean time he contents himself to say, That the
Imagination makes no Negations, and knows them not, because in effect they are
nothing; and that they cannot furnish images to make themselves known. Could he
be ignorant, and did he think that I did not my self know, that Negation may be
considered two ways: Directly, carrying our thoughts outright on the absence
and the privation which is on the subject; and obliquely in considering the
subject deprived of such a thing, and which is not such a thing. We are agreed,
that the direct Negation is a Non ens, and is in effect Nothing; and the
Understanding only can conceive it, because it requires a most subtle
abstraction, and an exact reflection on the Knowledge. But we also hold, that
the Subject which has not any thing, is truly deprived of the thing which it
has not; and that after that manner the Imagination may make a Negation. For
even as he who kills a man, makes that the Man is no more, although he does not
directly make the Negation of the Man: So the Imagination separating those
images which make a whole, makes that that whole is no more.

On the other side, as all these things are made of themselves, or
accidentally, the Negation which the Knowing faculties form is made only by
accident, because no action can be precisely terminated in a Non ens. For he
that kills, gives the blow; and the loss of life comes by accident in pursuance
of the blow: So the Imagination separates the images; and to this separation,
which is a real and true action, happens the Negation.

How the Negation may be represented by the Imagination.
But M. C. says, (p. 142.) That the Negation, whatever it be, cannot furnish
any Image to make it self known. We have already answered this objection: For
if the word Image signifies only the representation of an absolute thing, it is
true that the Negation furnishes no image to make it self known: But if it
comprehends the Modification of images, as is not to be doubted, it is certain
that the Negation furnishes an image at least to make it self known by
Accident; forasmuch as the separation which is a modification of images, is
represented in the images; and that by this separation the thing is no more
what it was before in the thought. So that even as the Imagination makes
Affirmative propositions when it unites the phantasms, it must also make
Negatives, if it can separate them. And as it imploys the word Est to mark the
union of images, it has also some exterior sign which designs the separation
it makes of them, and then it expresses them by the term Non est, or by some
other which is equivalent.

Nothing remains then, but for us to show M.C. That the Imagination separates
Images. But what means is there to make a man see any thing, that shuts his
eyes, and who would not so much as believe them when they should be made known?
All the Reasons we have deduced have the same evidence for the separation of
images, as they have for their union. And since it is certain, that in Dreams
and Sicknesses the Imagination assembles phantasms which are not of the same
order; To assemble them, she first of all must separate those with which there
was a natural tie. Yet will not M.C. consent to this truth, as clear and
evident as it is. And he says, That to persuade him, I must employ Reasons like
those I use to prove, That the Imagination knows the substance of objects. I am
very glad that M.C. who is so serious, would sport himself here. He must also
give me leave to say, That he might do it more modestly then he has done: For
in stead of playing upon me, he offends me; and instead of using raillery, he
wrongs me. Were I to revenge my self, I should only answer, That since he did
not apprehend the Reasons he speaks of, it had been useless for me to have
produced the like: But as there is a great appearance that he will be now
better instructed than he was then, and that the confusion he will be in to
have used me so unworthily, is revenge enough for me; I shall content my self
to assure him, that I have not only taken the leisure, but also care to examine
the Reasons he condemns, and that others as judicious as himself have approved
them; And that for his reputation it had been to have been wished, that he
himself had not had the leisure to have examined them. For, had he been
contented with what he had said here, He could have made those believe which
had net the commodity of reading them, that they were as strange as he imagined
them. But the passion he has to leave nothing uncontradicted, by which he had
finished his work, has in the Addition made it appear, that he understood them
not. And I am confident that this happened through his fault, and none of mine.

After all this, could I not have shown that the Imagination makes Negative
propositions, it were indifferent for the design I had to prove, That Animals
reason. It Is sufficient that she makes Affirmatives to infer what I pretend, as
we shall see in the pursuit. I had made it appear in my first Discourse, That I
built no foundation on the proof which I might draw from Negative propositions,
speaking thereof but by the way, and with that briefness which the Examen of
those things required, which are quite contrary to those of which has been
amply treated. So that without forsaking the opinion I have of these
Propositions, I shall grant M.C. that I have not well established them, so as
he will confess that he has not sufficiently destroyed them; And should he
have succeeded, that it would nothing prejudice the Right which I defend.

How Beasts judge of Things.
But let us conclude this troublesome Discourse by the address which he uses to
show. That Beasts judge not whether things are good or ill unto them. For he
will have it pass for an authentic proof, ( p. 143.) The sense of most part
of Philosophers, who believe they judge of nothing; and that they know the
things which are good for them by simple conceptions, without affirming that
they are good. And indeed, if he could oblige me to admit for the Judges of a
Dispute, those who are my Adversaries, he would have found a good Expedient to
have gained his Cause. I know that it is the common opinion, and that the
School teaches, That the Imagination is not said to compose, but in that it
considers two images at once, as he says. But these are Judges or interessed
Witnesses which I refuse in this cause. Were it to be decided by Authority, M.
C's. would alone of it self have as much power over me, as that of all the
Philosophers which he quotes. And where it is not necessary to produce Reasons,
I shall as willingly follow his opinion, as that of all the Schools. But here
we must of necessity: And it is not sufficient to say, That Beasts judge of
nothing; It must be proved by some Reasons which at least must be probable, and
must not subject us to the tyranny of these Philosophers, who have no other
motive to believe things, but that their Master said it.

But M. C. would have us believe from his bare word, That Beasts judge not of
the objects of their Appetite, but as the External senses judge, That an Odor
is good or ill; that Fire burns; that Honey is sweet, and Wormwood bitter;
without its being necessary to know those things, for the tongue to say, This
is sweet, and this is bitter.

First he confounds those Knowledges which are altogether different: For the
Senses know after another manner, that Honey is sweet, and Wormwood bitter,
then they do that Fire burns, and that a Smell does good or ill. And I shall
always grant, that Beasts judge not of the objects of their Appetite, but as
the Senses know that Fire burns, or that an Odor is ill. But at the same time I
shall deny, that they judge of the objects of their Appetite in the same
manner, as the Taste judges of the sweetness of Honey, and bitterness of
Wormwood. For the Sense may by a simple conception judge of the sweetness of
Honey, for as much as it is the proper and immediate object of the Taste; and
that it is not always necessary that the Imagination should make a progress
from one thing to another: But when it judges that the Fire burns, it passes
not only from the cause to the effect, but it adds also one Image which is not
sensible, to one which is; by judging that Burning is evil, which is an Image
which the Senses furnish it not withal: since to be good or ill, useful or
useless, are such things which know per species non sensatas, as the School
says, and which require, besides the judgment of the Senses, that of the
Estimative faculty.

But I say yet more; To make this Judgment, Reason is often employed therein:
For when an Animal sees the Fire, and that he will not come near it for fear of
being burnt by it, he must have proved that it is the effect of Fire to burn,
and remember the evil which formerly it had done unto him; and consequently he
must unite the image of the burning, and the ill which he received thereby,
with that of the present object, and that of the ill which he apprehends
therefrom: Which could not be done without discourse, as we shall show
hereafter.

Besides, what need had he to add, That to know things, it was not necessary
for the tongue to say, This is sweet, and this is bitter? Does he believe
Propositions may not be made without speaking; and that the judgments which the
soul makes in it self without expressing it by language, are not true
judgments? If that were so, Dumb persons would be more unhappy then we think
them to be, since they should not only have lost their speech, but even their
judgment and their reason. However it be, it is not the Tongue which makes
propositions, it is the Faculty of the Soul, and words are but their images and
the copies of them.

But perhaps M. C. would have said the same thing, but that his tongue (as they
say) went before his thought: For it is very probable, that in stead of saying,
That when the Sense judges of the sweetness of Honey, and bitterness of
Wormwood, it is not necessary to know these things, that the Imagination should
conceive that this is sweet, and that is bitter, since it knows those objects
by a primary and simple conception; he has also written unawares, That it is
not necessary the Tongue should speak it. For my part, who intend to deal
heartily with him, I shall quit the advantage those words have given me, and
grant, That it is true, that when the Senses know their objects by a simple
conception, the Imagination makes no propositions, because it then makes no
union, and that the things present themselves unto it altogether united. But
that is not to say, that it always represents them so, and that it often knows
them not the one after the other: For an Animal may see Honey, without knowing
that it is sweet; and after he knows the sweetness thereof, he may unite the
image of Sweet with that of Honey, in which case without question a proposition
is made. And truly it is impossible to conceive the active and moving nature of
this Faculty, without observing how at the same time it passes from one thing
to another; and having the power to preserve the images, it at the same time at
pleasure assembles and separates them.

I add this word to undeceive M.C. who ( p. 140) believed the Choice and
Liberty was important; for our tongue commonly uses it as well as that of Will
to mark the actions which Animals make of their own proper motions. So they
say, that a Beast goes whither it will, that it eats what it pleases, etc. And
in this sense there is no inconvenience, That the Imagination unites the images
as it pleases.

But it is the custom of M. C. Critically to amuse himself on words, What
Negative Abstraction is.
and to give them what explication he pleases, as he does here, and as he once
did on the word of a Negative Abstraction. For on what I had said, That the
Imagination could conceive an Accident without taking heed of others, and that
it was called a Negative Abstraction, he says, That that may be done without a
Negation, and that it is not to speak according to the terms of Art to call it
so.

But besides that, after I had explicated my self what I understood by that
word, and that it was lawful for me to call it what I would, I could answer
him, That he makes me suspect that all terms of Art are not known to him, and
that he has never heard of certain things which the Schools say are every way
Negatively. Or this term, as well as that of Negative Abstraction, although it
imports not a direct Negation, yet it marks an oblique and indirect one. In
effect, when we say that the Imagination conceives one thing, without taking
notice of another, we indirectly design the Negation of the things which we
minded not.

But let us forbear these Whimsies, and ask M.C. if after we have made the
defects of the objections he has produced appear, he will believe, That there
was any temerity in me to maintain, That the Imagination of Beasts makes
Propositions. And if he fears not left this reproach should justly fall on him,
having made so much noise, and to so little purpose, when he would triumph
after having so ill defended himself; Certainly if he succeed not better
hereafter, I well perceive that he will have a great share of the glory I shall
have to have showed, That Beasts reason; the weakness of his Discourse being at
capable to persuade this Truth, as is the force of mine.

The End of the Second Part.
That the Imagination can unite diverse Prop^sitions, And out of them make
Discourses.
THE THIRD PART.
AS the Proposition is gathering together of diverse simple Conceptions;
Discourse also is of diverse Propositions which are tied together by common
terms; so that if the Imagination can make Propositions, it is a great
prejudication that it may also make Discourses; supposing that it may use
common terms to link them together. After having therefore showed in the
precedent Chapter, that she can make Propositions, we must now prove how she
can use those common terms for from thence it will necessarily follow that she
can reason and pass from a more known thing to that which is less, so that the
knowledge of the first is the cause of that it acquires afterward; wherein we
will have the Nature of Ratiocination to consist.

The images confound not themselves.
To this purpose we have made it appear, that when diverse images united
themselves in the Soul, they do not so confound themselves but that they still
keep their Natural distinction, and that therein they are like the visible
Species, which unite themselves in the air without confusion, and gather
themselves again, if we may so say, even to a point without breaking the order
and the natural distinction which they have. So that to speak properly, the
imagination rather joins the fantasms, then unites them; for she ranks and
places them without mixing them, assembles them without confounding them, and
making a whole of diverse different parts, it leaves every one in its order, and
in its particular determination; this being presupposed, since the Imagination,
even by the consent of our advirsaries may consider one accident of a thing
without heeding the rest, and may stop at what is sweet, without minding what
is white. The imagination may take the one after the other, and unite them
together.
It may also consider what is white, without thinking on what is sweet. And
consequently she may separately know all the Images which are united and joined
together. Now if she can unite two different Images, as we have showed, she may
resemble those she had separately conceived, and form as many several
Propositions as she can make several unions, since the Proposition is nothing
else but the union it makes of two simple conceptions: For having conceived a
thing which is white, soft, sweet, and good to eat; she may stop at the white,
at the soft, at the sweet, at the good to eat, without considering them all
together; and in the power she has to unite Images, she may also assemble the
white with the soft, and the soft with the sweet, and the sweet with what is
good to eat, and in pursuit join the former with the latter, there being no
more reason why she should unite the white with the soft, then the white with
that which is good to eat. In a word, she may make as many Propositions, and
afterward return on her first Notion, to unite it with the last, in which the
Nature of Reasoning consists, as we shall more amply show hereafter.

Now if she be capable of these actions, she without doubt forms a Discourse
which we call Gradation, and even a perfect Syllogism* Example of the Syllogism
which the Imagination makes.
if we cut off one Proposition, as it often happens; For she makes three
Propositions. The first of which is linked to the second by a common term; to
wit, the sweet, and the last with the two others by that of white, and by that
of good to eat, as may be here seen: This White is Sweet;
This Sweet is good to eat,
Then is this white good to eat.


But besides the concatenation of these Propositions if it were belonging to
the essence of Ratiocination to pass from a known thing to one unknown; The
Imagination goes from a known thing to an unknown.
it is certain, that the Imagination makes the same progress in these
encounters, for it instantly knows not that this White is good to eat but only
after it knows that it is sweet, and that what is Sweet is good to eat: In
effect, when a Dog sees a white thing, although he may come to it to eat it yet
he eats it not till he has first smelt and tasted it, which is an evident sign
that he does not certainly know that this white thing is good to eat, until he
pass over the other qualities which give him a perfect knowledge thereof; and
certainly if a man would consider the different connection which sensible
accidents have with the nature of the things, and that the savor for example
has more with the goodness of aliments, then the odor or the color, he will
be obliged to confess that of necessity the Imagination must often pass from a
known thing to that which is less so, and consequently that she makes several
judgments which have the same concatenation and progress which the true
Syllogismes require, and which make her know these things she was unassured of
by others, which are more evident.

The Reason which we have here somewhat more extended then it was in our former
Discourse has been confined by the several Experiments which reign almost in
all the actions of Animals.

The first Experiment is this, A Dog would eat somewhat which is hung on high,
he considers it barks for it, turns and leaps at it, without getting it; at
last he observes a place raised up whereby he may rise to another, and thereby
at last he may catch what he desires. I say this cannot be done, but he must
join the phantasm of the place where he is with that of the first step, and
that with the latter and in pursuit with the thing which he would have: And
that all this would be useless unto him, did he not reassemble the first Notion
with the last. Since it is by that latter action that he knows the thing which
he had before judged to be impossible was no more so. And therefore as this
gathering together could not be made without joining several Propositions with
common terms, and without passing from a more known thing to one which was
less, so there must necessarily therein be a true Ratiocination.

The second Experiment consists in the wild beasts use in hunting which they
make against one the other, where it is necessary their Imagination must figure
it self means, without which they easily perceive they should catch nothing;
for they must then needs make a design to follow their prey And the
difficulties they encounter oblige them to form another to use that wile
without which they cannot catch it; And last of all, they have Wile with the
Prize, which can never be done without discourse, and any may easily judge.

The last Experiment which the order of our former Treatise has obliged us to
unto from these, to show that Custom and Instruction are never acquired without
Discourse, may here again take its place, as that which is decisive, and which
receives no valuable answer. It is then true that when we teach or accustom
Beasts to do any thing, by the caresses or by the menaces we use; and after
that the remembrance they have thereof engages them to do the same thing which
they have been taught: the Imagination must needs reason thus, That since such
a thing has at some other times caused them good or ill, that which presents
it self being alike, ought also to cause the same effect: For the images of the
blows they received are different from those which the imagination forms at
that time, since these are of past things, and those are of present and future;
so that she must unite the image of the present thing, with that of the past,
which is known to it, and that by this she must know that which is to come. And
if this be not to reason, there is no reason in the world: And if it be a true
Discourse, there are but few actions wherein beasts do not reason; all the
difficulty which may be made, here is, To know whether the Imagination can know
things past present, and to come. But if we consider that Beasts hope, that
they fear, and that they desire, there will be no way left to doubt of this
truth, since these passions suppose the knowledge of the good or evil to come:
For if they are capable to know this difference of times, which is the most
difficult to know; the others which are more easy cannot be unknown unto it,
the Memory being destined for things past, and the Senses of those which are
present.

Proof 4. Of the reasoning of beasts.
We may yet add hereunto the proof we drew, to show that instinct is ever
accompanied with reason, since it confirms the truth which we establish: For as
the motion of the Appetite ought to proceed all the actions of Beasts, and that
this motion is always advanced by several propositions, which are terminated by
the operation, which is as the Conclusion, as Aristotle will have it: All these
propositions which are lincked together by common terms, and which instruct the
Soul in what she ought to do, must needs have the form of a true reasoning. In
effect, before a Beast begins to do any thing, its necessary it should know
whether it be good, and afterward that its feasible. And last of all, That the
practical judgment should intervene, whereby the Imagination judges it ought
to be done; in pursuit whereof the appetite stirs its self, and causes its
organs to agitate; and to show that these several Propositions are necessary in
these encounters; besides, what the common sense teaches us, it is that Dogs
and Hawks often see their prey without pursuing it, judging that they cannot
take it, because its too far from them; sometimes they seem to doubt, and are
apparently troubled to resolve whether they should pursue it or no. Now its
certain, that seeing the Game, they judge it good; and that not pursuing it,
they judge the thing not to be feasible. So the conclusion which consists in
operation, fails for want of one of the Propositions as it happens in all true
Syllogisms.

These then were the Reasons which we thought we ought to employ to show, That
Animals reason. For although there be an infinite many more, one part of which
several great persons have used, and which may be augmented by those which men
of Judgment may deduce from so rich and fruitful a Subject; we neither judged
they could accommodate themselves to the Principles we had established, nor to
the shortness we sought, nor to the belief we had that ours alone might
demonstrate this truth. We must now observe what hurts they have received from
M.C. his Critics, and whether they have been weakened by his assaults.

But in the first place I am obliged to say, That I have before me an Enemy
very wise, and very advised, and who through the mistrust he has of his own
forces, uses all the address of great Commanders, who gain as much as they can
the advantage of sun and wind, and amuse the Enemy with light skirmishes,
without assaulting him in front, and deciding the business by an equal battle.
For besides that M. C. thinks he has Aristotle on his side, and that he has
opposed against us all the Laws of Syllogisms; as if himself had seen the Chief
of my Reasons, he disposes them as he pleases, and in a very strange order he
confutes my Conclusions, before he has examined the Grounds; and for all
Objections he has produced only imaginary Inconveniences or Paralogisms. In
effect, in the 14 Chapter he treats the depth of the question of the Reason of
Beasts: In the 16. he shows they make no Propositions: And at last he speaks of
the Knowledge of the Senses, which is the first of all Knowledges. On the other
side, he often unlinks a Reason from a Subject, or is affected to join it with
another which is more useless. And the best I find, is, That as he imagined I
should have followed the order he keeps, he in many places accuses me of
supposing things as not being proved, because he had then spoken of them
without remembering that I had demonstrated them before. But against all these
wiles, which lose their name and effect when they are not discovered, we may
here speak in gross to M.C. till we have considered them by denial.

The Rules of Logic destroy not the Reasoning of Beasts.
First, That neither Aristotle, nor all the Rules of Logic which he has given
us, does not destroy the Manner of Reasoning which Beasts use; because they are
like two different States, which govern themselves by different Laws. And if
Aristotle have made those which are necessary, whereby the Understanding forms
its Discourss; it is not but that there may be others for those of the
Imagination. I would have it granted as an indubitable Maxim, That no lawful
Conclusion can be drawn from particular Propositions; and that the fourth
Figure of Galen is useless, nay even faulty. But this takes place only in
humane Ratiocination, which ever requires some universal Proposition; and not
in that of Beasts, which can only be formed from particular Judgments. If M. C.
would have upheld the Consequence he draws from what is said in the Schools, he
should first have made it appear, That no Ratiocination can be made without
some Universal Proposition. For though he has endeavored to prove it, besides
that the Expositive Syllogism will always convince him he can never make but
that this must be a true Syllogism: This White is sweet;
This Sweet is good to eat;
Then this White is good to eat.


And it is to no purpose to oppose, That it is in the fourth Figure. For were it
true, this Figure would not be faulty in the Reasonings of the Imagination, as
we shall show hereafter: And were it so, it would be always true, That a
vicious Syllogism is a Syllogism; and a man cannot say, That he that reasons
ill, reasons not.

In fine it is certain, That Ratiocination in it self, and without considering
the differences thereof, is a Discourse which from two Propositions linked
together by a common term, inferrs a third. And as this may be done by
particular Propositions as well as by universal, it is indifferent to the Nature
of Reasoning in general, for either the one or the other to be therein
employed. For if in Reasoning there must be two things which convene in a
third, and agree also amongst themselves; and on the contrary, this Agreeing is
to be found as well in particular as in universal Propositions, as is to be
seen in the proposed Example, where the [White] and the [Good to eat] agree
with the [Sweet] which is common to them. In effect, as this Agreement is
grounded on a Whole wherein diverse things are comprehended, and that there are
two sorts of them, to wit, the Particular and the Universal: There are also two
sorts of Agreement; the one which is particular, which serves to the
Ratiocination of particulars; and the other which is universal, which serves to
the general. But we shall more amply explicate this in the Examen of M.C. his
Reasons.

In the second place I say, For what concerns the Order he has disposed my
Matters in, although he thought he had done much for his own Cause to have
transposed my Reasons and my Proofs, and from the first start to go about to
destroy the Reasoning of Beasts, without having examined the Principles wherein
I thought I had established it; I fear he is to be reproved, that he has
proceeded neither with candor, nor with any good form.

As these Reasons are the lights which lose or augment their splendour according
to the situation they are given; It is certain, that having placed mine
otherwise then they ought to be, he has much weakened them; and that those who
will not take the pains to consider them exactly, will not observe that
vivacity and force they might have had in my discourse. But the question is,
Whether he ought to have used this treachery? For although every man be Master
of the Order of things he treats of, this in Critics has its exception, and
principally when we take in task all what an Author has written on any
Subject; for then sincerity and candor oblige us to preserve the legitimate
advantages it has acquired in the disposition of its Matters; and who makes
him lose them, loses also the quality of Faithful and sincere. Nevertheless I
would have M. C. defend himself from all his defects; yet I believe he cannot
excuse himself of that whereon he fell, falling upon my Conclusion without
before having destroyed the foundations whereon it is sustained. For whatever
he may say against it, if I have sufficiently proved, that the Imagination
unites several terms, and several propositions, and that the bond which the
Syllogism requires meets in this union; he must himself confess, that she
discourses in these encounters, and what reasons soever he brings to the
contrary will never absolutely decide the question, so long as mine subsist.
All they can do is to render them doubtful, and to reduce us to the advice of
Aristotle who will not have a man abandon a well-established Opinion for some
Objections although they were not to be answered.

Certainly M.C: ought to follow the maxim of Conquerors, who never leave any
place behind them which may hinder their progress or their return. And he who
holds but the negative part, and who as he says himself is to this instant but
a defender, he should rather have denied my principles, and so have rendered all
my consequences vain, then amuse himself to establish uncertain things on
ruinous foundations, and to propose inconveniency in those examples I have
deduced, from whence he can draw no universal Conclusion.

Again, if after all these great conquests which he believes he has made, he
had at last assaulted the Fort wherein I had entrenched my self, he might find
some show of excuse; but when he presented himself before it, he passes
forward, and says That it was not worth stopping at. For my part I could say as
much of his Answers, did I not know that in what Van soever it be there is
nothing which ought to be despised, and that even false are not useless in
discipline; those he has given us here respect the examples only, which we
have demonstrated that Beasts reason: So that in some sort we may say, that he
had no mind to assault the body of our Army, and that his design only was to
beat up a Quarter.

CHAP. I. An Examen of the Reasons which M. C. has produced against the
Syllogism we used for an example of the Reasoning of Beasts.
IN the first place he says thus, That when I suppose a Beast pressed with
hunger sees a white thing, feels it soft and finds it savory, and after that
concludes that this white thing is good to eat, I make him speak a kind of
Reasoning which the Schools call Sorites, which beasts are not at all capable
of, since there are many men which cannot make them, having not breath enough
to make so many Propositions, nor without confusion to take again so far
estranged a term; and that on the other side this way of arguing is very
uncertain and captious.

I in a word shall answer this objection, That Beasts may form a gradation.
that when this form of arguing is led by the senses as it is here, it is very
easy to make, because the presence of the object hinders the confusion of the
Imagination. In effect, there is no man so stupid, who cannot make an infinite
many Propositions of this kind; for present him with but twenty things placed
in order, he may say that the first is before the second, the second before the
third: And after having thus run them over without any trouble, he may conclude
the first is before the twentieth. On the other side, it is not uncertain in
those things which are confounded together, and as it were identified. For if
the same thing be all white, all soft, all sweet, and all good to eat; it is
certain that one may assuredly say, that this thing is white, and that this
white thing is good to eat. So that the Imagination going from one quality to
another by means of the senses, it can never be decided when it joins the
former with the latter. After all, as this form of Discourse is not uncertain
and captious, M. C. can conclude nothing else but that some one may be found
which is uncertain and captious; but it follows not that this or that must be
it. At worst he should only prove, that Beasts should often deceive
themselves, should they use this way of reasoning. Which we shall willingly
grant him, since no body believes they are in their judgment infallible.

He adds, That if one of the Propositions were cut off to make the Syllogism;
This White is Sweet,
This Sweet is good to eat,
Then this White is good to eat;


A man concludes nothing from hence because its in the fourth figure. But he
should at the same time have told us what form he gives to this fourth figure,
since all men do not form it after one manner; some contenting themselves with
the disposing of the Medium; others would have the Conclusion thereof indirect;
for if he believes it sufficient that the Medium should be placed quite
contrary from what it is in the first figure, this figure is not faulty, since
it proves and concludes on the same principle, and in the same manner as the
former. It is only useless, since in effect, its the same with the first, to
which its indifferent for the force of the illation, whether the Medium be
Subject or Attribute in the one of the two first Propositions. Now if this be
so, the proposed Syllogism is not faulty, and concludes directly as the
expositive Syllogism would do in the first figure.

But if M.C. believes that the conclusion therein must be indirect, he deceived
himself when he would have it that this Syllogism was in that figure; for to
put it therein, the condition must be changed, and instead that it says, Then
this white is good to eat, a man must say, Then this good to eat is white; I
say yet more, had it been made so, yet were it not indirect, because that to be
white, sweet, and good to eat, are here particular things, which are identified
in one subject; and therefore one may say That this White is good to eat, and
that this Good to eat is white, without being in danger to change the natural
order which these things ought to keep amongst themselves; it is not so when
there are general terms; for necessarily it must be that as they are superior
to the rest, they keep the natural order which their superiority requires; and
when they enter into a conclusion contrary to that order, the conclusion is
then indirect; in effect the fault which is to be found in the fourth figure
where the conclusion is indirect; comes but from that the general terms, which
naturally ought to be drawn from their inferiors, are not so in the Conclusion;
now this reason supposes that there are general terms and universal
Propositions, and therefore it concludes nothing, if Syllogisms are found in
this figure, wherein there are only terms and particular propositions. So that
we may conclude that the defect we have observed in this way of arguing
respects only the Discourse of the Understanding, and not that of the
Imagination, where rules are a part and which is not subject to all those
Maxims which are drawn from Universal Notions. And indeed the Expositive
Syllogism has a place in all the figures, notwithstanding the laws they
observe for the universality of propositions.

That there is somewhat in the Conclusion of this Syllogism which is not in the
Antecedent.
But let us withdraw our selves from these thorns whereto M.Cs inadvertency
has led us; and let us see whether it be true, That there is nothing in the
Conclusion of our Syllogism which is not in the second Proposition, as he says,
whence he infers That its useless, and therefore that therein there is no
Syllogism; The reason he brings is, That since before the beast forms the
Conclusion of the Syllogism he judges that the sweet which he holds betwixt
his teeth is good to eat, he must of necessity eat it, because knowledge is
given to beasts but to raise their Appetite, which is forced to move it self by
the first pactical judgment they make, and which consequently gives them not
the leisure to philosophize on useless Propositions.

And I for my part say, that M. C. has not given himself the leisure to
philosophize on these useful and necessary propositions: for there is not one
of the reasons he brings which witnesses not its precipitation, some being
found so contrary to what he says presently after, others being doubtful or
false, and all of them wanting that strict connection, which makes good
consequences.

In effect, after having objected against me, that there is nothing in the
Conclusion of the proposed Syllogism, which is not in the second proposition,
he says, That I had done better to have reduced it to this Enthymema, This
White is sweet, then its good to eat. But I would willingly ask him, whether in
this Enthymema there is any thing in the Conclusion which is not in the
Antecedent; if he grants it, there must also necessarily be in the conclusion
of our Syllogism somewhat which is not in the second proposition, since the
antecedent it like (...) to the second proposition: If he denies it, how will
he have me make an Enthymema which ought to be composed of two propositions?
For although in course he has condemned it, it is not because there is nothing
in the Conclusion which is not in the Antecedent. But because it must be as he
says, that the beast must know that all what is sweet is good to eat. We shall
examine this Reason hereafter. In the mean time, let M.C. if he can
dis-intangle himself out of the puzzle this Answer has put him in.

To take the depth of the business we must see Whether truly there be nothing
in the Conclusion of our Syllogism which is not in the second Proposition.
Certainly if these propositions are different, for being composed of terms
which signify different things, these two are also different the one from the
other, as some others which may enter into a Syllogism; since Sweet is the
subject of the Minor, and White is the subject of the Conclusion: And that it is
not to be conceived, that to be Sweet is the same thing as to be White, M.C.
cannot with reason contest this truth.

But says he, That the Beast should stop at the Minor without going to the
Conclusion, because that at the same time he knows that the white is sweet, he
also knows that its good to eat, and that he must necessarily eat it without
having time to form the Conclusion.

And what! may he not be hindered from eating it? And in that case it is not
true, that it is a necessary thing he must eat it, and that he may not have the
leisure to conclude. Without doubt M. C. has confounded the Action with the
Desire; for it is certain that a Beast knows a thing sweet; it commonly at the
same time knows it good to eat, and then he desires it at the same time: But it
follows not from thence that he must eat it, and that he must not make as many
different propositions as he unites different notions. Now the Notion of White
and Sweet is different from that of Good to eat, and therefore the Beast makes
as many several propositions of these three terms as it directly unites them.
The strongest difficulty and objection of M.C. consists in this, that these
propositions are made at the same time, and that discourse requires they should
be made the one after the other. Whereupon we are to demonstrate two things; to
wit, That they are not always done at one time, and that it is not necessary
for Discourse that they should be done with time.

For the first, It is certain that a beast may know that a thing is sweet
without judging that its good to eat, because that if he judged it good to eat,
he would desire to eat it, and in effect would eat it, if he were not hindered.
Now a beast which is not hungry, desires not to eat what he has found sweet,
and consequently judges not that it is good to eat; for since the sensitive
Appetite is forced to move it self upon the first practical judgment which the
Imagination makes as M. C. says, and as its true, if this Beast had judged that
a thing was good to eat, it must necessarily follow that after this practical
judgment he must desire to eat it, and by the same necessity that he must eat
it, in effect, were there no hinderance; He may then know a sweet thing by the
judgment of the taste, which cannot deceive him, and not judge it good to eat
because he has no need to eat. Thus these two notions are not made at the same
time as M. C. will have it, and therefore they may enter into the form of a
Syllogism. Perhaps he may object against us, that the example we have proposed,
supposes the Beast pressed with hunger that he had need to eat, and in that case
that these two propositions must be made at the same time: But all he could
infer from thence were that this example is not good, and that another must be
produced, where these propositions must be made the one after the other, which
would be very easy to do. Yet besides what we might say, that this Beast
before it was pressed with hunger might have known the thing was sweet, and
remember it afterward when he was hungry without any new proof, and might then
judge it to be good to eat, having before judged that it was sweet, and so
these two notions would not have been made at the same time; without amusing
our selves to answer these vain objections, we must make M.C. see, That it is
not necessary to discourse for the Propositions which compose it to be made at
the same time.

That one may Reason in a moment:
First, Should a man judge by the nature of Knowledge he might well perceive
that so excellent an action ought to be made with all the readiness observable
in those which are less noble then it, since that way of agitating is one part
of its perfection, and the more perfect the causes are, the more readily they
agitate. In effect, there is nothing on the Faculties part which hinders it
from knowing in an instant, and its no less natural unto it so to agitate, then
it is for light and colors who have no need of time to produce their Species.
Experience evidently shows us this truth in the senses, who know their objects
at the same instant they represent themselves unto them; for if to know things
they must produce the images of them, it is necessary that knowing them in a
moment, they also in a moment must form the images of them. But this appears
not only in the first conceptions of the soul, we will experiment it in the
propositions, and in those designs which it forms in an instant; and what we
have said of dreams, sufficiently declares, that it needs not time to unite
those things which are different, and which have no other natural connection the
one with other. So that all the doubt which may arise from hence seems to fall
on the union of several propositions, and chiefly when they compose a perfect
Ratiocination.

But whosoever would but consult with himself, and mind but his own tboughts,
he will easily believe that there are no things which follow one another with
that swiftness, and that if there be any succession amongst them, its a
succession of order or of nature, and not of time. And if he will not trust to
his own judgment, 2. Poster. 1 de motu anim.
and that he would know what Aristotle's was, and he shall learn from him, that
the Minor and the Conclusion of a Syllogism are known at the same time, since
to know and to make a proposition is the same things; whence we may conclude
that at least two propositions which have connection together may be found in
one moment. Now if this be true as the Schools assure us, its a great
likelihood that the two first propositions of a Syllogism may be known in the
same manner; since it seems there is no reason why the Minor and the Conclusion
are known at the same time more then the Major and the Minor; thus we shall be
constrained to confess that the whole Syllogism may be made at the same time.

But without making use of the force of authority, that of the following Reason
may disanul all doubts, and entirely decide the question. Those who exercise
themselves to discourse on any subject find so great a facility in it, that in
a moment they see all the consequences which may be drawn from thence, and as
they say, know the Conclusions in the principles. In these encounters they of
necessity must reason; otherwise it would follow that through the strength of
reasoning, they should cease to reason. And then the habit which they had
acquired of it, justed to perfect their Ratiocination should wholly destroy it,
which would be a very strange thing, and very singular, since all other habits
do not change the Nature and Essence of their actions, and tend only to render
them more perfect and more accomplished: Now it would neither be to leave
Ratiocination in its nature, nor to render it more accomplished to take it
quite away, as it would undoubtedly happen if it changed to another kind of
knowledge incompatible with it self.

That the Understanding supposes Ratiocination.
It Is to no purpose to say That the Understanding which is acquired in pursuit
is a higher and more noble action then that of reasoning, and that for that
cause the Angels reason not, having no other Knowledge then Understanding as
that which is most perfect and most comformable to their nature; for from
thence it cannot be inferred that the Understanding is not a true
Ratiocination, but only that it is more exquisite, and that it has not those
defects which are met withal in ours.

Of a truth, the time which we employ to form them is no essential thing; it is
an imperfection which happens to them, from the weight and weakness of our
spirit, which hinders it from being able at once to penetrate the nature of
some things, and at one view to see the several relations they have amongst
themselves; but as by exercise and habits these defects are to be corrected; so
this imperfection is to be taken away from Raticionations, and they may be
found with that swiftness, that there can be no interval betwixt the
Antecedents and the conclusions which are drawn from it.

To come back to the understanding; although it be made in an instant, it
changes neither the order nor the connection which things have amongst
themselves: Forasmuch as she makes known the first as first, the second as
second, and so of the rest according to the natural order they observe. Now
this necessarily carries the disposition and the kniting together which is in
the Syllogism. Forasmuch as if we know the connextion which the first has with
the second, and that which the second has with the third, we must at last of
necessity come to know the connection which the first has with the third, since
its the effect of the precedent, and that the effect is ever posterior to its
cause in the order of nature, although it be not always in the order of time.
Let a man not say, that these things present not themselves entire, and that
its the same as with several objects which are seem at the same time; it being
needless for the Soul to join them, and consequently to make any Judgment or
Discourse upon them; besides that these several relations and different
connexions cannot be known without comparing of things, and that they cannot be
compared, but that the mind must alternatively go from one to another to
observe the mutual relations which they have together, which cannot be done
without discourse. That Angels Discourse.
It is not to be believed, that this high knowledge which is attributed to
Angels should be like the first notions of sense, neither is it a simple
conception or apprehension of objects. The order of Nature will have it, that
if there be in us any faculty or action which is to be communicated to such
pure and perfect Spirits, it ought to be the most Noble, and the most
Excellent: Now by consent of all the Philosophers the third operation of the
Understanding is more Noble then the first; and therefore it must be that which
is common to us with them, they must know all things by that: And I even durst
say, that all their knowledge is but a perpetual Ratiocination, because they
know not as we do, the things successively, and by parcels; but seeing all at
once what is in them, and observing all the relations they have one with
another, its almost impossible but in so great a concourse of different
objects, and in the several Returns which their Understanding is obliged to
make on them, but they must uncessantly Reason; It seems even that this
wonderful disposition which God has put through all the Universe, requires,
That since those things which hold the last degrees of Knowledge can never know
their objects, but by simple and primary notions; those which are in the
supreme degree, and which are most perfect of all, ought never to know theirs
but by discourse.

I know well, that in the Schools there are those which say, that Angels have
no simple conceptions and apprehension, and that they know things by making
Affirmations and Negations by a simple Judgment, which they call by
Intelligence: But in this case they must either assemble or divide the Images
of things, because Affirmation and Negation cannot be otherwise found, but by
the union and separation of Images. Now if this be so, they must discourse,
because that in the union of several Images which the relation and comparison
of things requires, the form and contexture of discourse must therein
necessarily be found.

However it be, that Discourse which is thus made, is most perfect, and has
not those defects which are commonly found in others, because its made in an
instant, and that all at once it gives the Knowledge of all the propositions
which compose it.

But what! If this be so, A Syllogism which is made in an instant, goes from
known to unknown things.
the understanding cannot move from things more known, to known to those which
are less known, as we say its always done in Discourse; Certainly, if by the
most known things, we understand that they are to be know some time before the
rest; its certain this progress is not made here where all are known at the
same time. But if we understand that these things are by Nature, and by Reason
more known, because they are as it were the principles and sum of the rest, we
must not doubt but that a progress is made from those things which by nature
are more known, to those which are less: now universal things are by Nature and
Reason more known then particulars, causes then effects; In a word, the first,
then the last, although they may be all known at the same time.

But this is no place to highten the advantage of this matter. Its sufficient
to say, that if in this opinion there be any thing contrary to the common sense
of the Schools, it is that the Schools have not considered Ratiocination in its
nature, but in its species; that it has defined the gender by its differences,
and that at last it stops at the most common way of discoursing which is
observed amongst men, without taking notice of any other, and without observing
that the conditions therein required were defects, and not things essential
unto it.

After all this, could not discourse be made in an instant, its yet true that
its often made so fast, that its impossible to observe therein any sensible and
manifest succession of time: And there is no mind so heavy and stupid, which
cannot make proof in it self of the extreme swiftness it makes use of to draw
certain consequences, and to discourse of those things which the Senses and the
Memory present it withal. Now I will take no other advantage in the dispute I
have with M. C. to stop his mouth, when he so often opposes against me, (p.
137) The great number of propositions and Syllogisms which a beast must be
obliged to make before it should carry it self toward any thing, had it the
faculty of reasoning which we give it. (Page 139) That when it has found any
pleasing object, his appetite provokes him so strongly that he has no leisure
to discourse thereupon. And that at last the precipitation wherewith he
agitates is incompatible with so many Propositions which we make him make. For
if all this may be done in a moment, that is to say, in an imperceptible time,
it is not to be feared but that the Imagination may have time to execute it;
neither can it be contrary to the precipitation wherewith beasts are wont to
agitate. Yet will I not that all Propositions which they make on the same
object are made at the same instant; I know they may see a thing long before
they taft it, and after having tasted it, at the same time they will not have a
desire to eat it, although they find it good to the taste, forasmuch as having
no need to eat, they conceive it not good to eat. But I pretend only to show
by what has been said, that there are some which follow one another very
readily, it being nothing necessary for a sensible space of time to be betwixt
them and others which are formed the one after another in length of time, as it
happens in those we make.

Lets return to the Examen of that Syllogism which has given so much trouble
to M. C. and defend him from the rest of the assaults we give him. He therefore
says, (page 126. The terms of this Syllogism are not Universal.
) That all the terms which compose it are universal, and therefore that its
impossible for beasts to use it, since they are not capable of forming any
universal notions.

Truly I ought to believe that M. C. has a very ill opinion of me, to make me
such a boyish Objection, and to think to trouble me with a slight subtilty of
the Schools, which is not able to stop the meanest Logitian. There is none but
know, that the terms are common and general two ways; either because they may
be applied to several things, or because they signify a Nature which is
conceived common to diverse things; we may apply that of Sweet to all the
particular objects, which the Senses judge Sweet, and yet for all that, without
thinking that sweetness is a nature common to all those subjects; and that in
this the Imagination uses it as all the rest which are in the proposed
Syllogism. But in that sense there they represent no universal Idea, and
therefore M.C. cannot infer what he pretends. In effect were his reason good,
it could not be that a beast should know that a thing were sweet, forasmuch as
the term of sweet, as he says, is an universal term, which supposes an
universal Idea, whereof beasts are not capable: If it be therefore true, that
the Senses know what is sweet, and that sweet is not an universal term, since
the Senses only know singular things, why should it rather be universal in
this Syllogism, then in the Judgment the Sense makes of it! On the other side,
when all the terms of Sweet, of Good, of Thing, should have a more general
signification and more transcendent then they have, they would lose it by the
restriction which the demonstrative Pronoune gives them: For when we say This
Sweet, This Good, This Thing, we figure nothing which is general or
transcendent. But the mind commonly stops at the singularity of the thing which
is expressed by these terms.

To conclude, it is not necessary to know the general connection of terms. He
adds, That this Syllogism concludes nothing, unless we know, That all what is
sweet, is good to eat; and that if a beast does not only know this universal
Proposition, but also its universality, it cannot employ sweetness as a means
to conclude the goodness of the Aliment. This reason was pleasing to M. C. for
he repeats it in the 132 page, where he very much insists on the Knowledge
which a beast ought to have of the universal connection which is betwixt the
sweetness and the goodness of the Aliment, to conclude such a thing good to eat.

Before we enter into the Examen of our opinions, we must both of us agree in
one Truth which cannot be contradicted; to wit, That when a beast eats any
thing which he knows is sweet, its certain he will eat it; and that he would
not eat it, did he not find it good to eat; forasmuch as nothing moves the
appetite but what is good; and therefore he knows the connection which sweetness
has with goodness, since he finds not the thing good, but because its sweet,
and that if it were not sweet, he would not judge it good. The question then is
to know, whether it be necessary for him to know the universal annexion of
sweetness with goodness; or whether it be sufficient for him only to know that
which is to be found betwixt these two particular qualities: And of necessity
M. C. must take the one side or the other, unless he has a design to commence
a suit against Nature as well as against me; if he therefore believes that a
beast knows the universal connection of sweetness with goodness, there is
nothing hinders but that a beast my deduce the proposed consequence, and
conclude, after having known, That a thing is sweet, That the thing is good to
eat, because he knows, that all what is sweet is good to eat. After this manner
would M. C. fall into the opinion which we maintain, that Beasts reason,
although by another way. For we believe it sufficient for them to know the
particular connection of sweetness with goodness, to conclude that such a thing
is good to eat.

In effect, if it be true that they know the connection which those two
qualities have with one another, as we have showed; and that they can conceive
nothing that is universal, that being above the material faculty, it is necessary
they should know the particular connection which these two things have together:
So that since they judge a thing good to eat, because they find it sweet, it
follows that the knowledge of that particular connection is sufficient to make
them conclude that such a thing is good to eat, since that in effect they do
so, neither are they deceived in their judgment. I must confess indeed that
there is an universal connection of sweetness with goodness, which serves for
the foundation of that truth which beasts know; but its in Nature, and not in
the Imagination which is not obliged to know it that it may certainly infer
that such a thing in particular is good to eat; its like those who do things by
rote; For what they do is conformable to the rules of Art, although they know
it not, neither does their ignorance hinder them from doing it as perfect as it
could be done. So the Imagination knows not that all what is sweet is good to
eat, but only that the sweet is good to eat; and with this particular
knowledge it as certainly knows it ought to eat it, as if it had a general
knowledge thereof. Last of all, since what it thus knows is found true, what
need it seek it any other way? And since Syllogisms may be made of particular
propositions which make a good conclusion, Why then may not that which it makes
be good?

M.C. hereupon says, That from that, any sweet thing is good to eat, it follows
not that that is it.

Its true, and I confess that beasts sometimes deceive themselves, neither did
I say their Syllogisms were demonstrative. It is sufficient if they be
probable, and that commonly they make them to know the particular connection
which Nature has placed betwixt those two qualities; for by her they know that
such a thing is good to eat, with as much certainty as all other sensible
things may be known. It is certain, they do not know that they know it; for to
know a thing, and to know that one knows it, are two different things, although
M. C. it seems has confounded them. To know that we know, we must consider the
general Reasons, and the form of reasoning which we use; in a word, we must
make a reflection on that knowledge which Beasts are not capable of. But to
know, and to know a thing simply, this is not necessary, and its sufficient
that the notion we have of it be like the nature of the thing which presents it
self without examining the principles or the means whereby we know it.

That sweetness cannot move the Appetite until the Imagination has judged it
good.
After this M. C. makes me three great questions, and asks me, Who could have
told me, That Beasts did not eat before they made all these fair Discourses;
That sweetness was not sufficient to move the Appetite if the Imagination knew
not that it were good to eat; and that it makes three different judgments from
the two first of which it infers a third? But I shall answer in a word, It is
reason told me so. And I wonder that having made him see it so clear and
evident, it has not preswaded him the same thing. I have much more reason to
ask who told him, That sweetness is sufficient to move the Appetite without its
being necessary for the imagination to judge that the sweet thing is good to
eat? For no Philosopher could have taught him this Maxim, nor could any Reason
have engaged him in a Proposition which destroys the first elements of
Philosophy. All the world is agreed that the Appetite cannot be moved but by
what is good; and that therefore sweetness as sweetness cannot move it, it must
be known as good; but also as good to eat, if the Appetite will eat it. Now the
sense knows not this goodness as M. C. confesses presently after, and
therefore it must be the Imagination, since the Appetite affords no kind of
Knowledge.

Certanly it will endanger those which will perceive how M. C. has abused
himself with such gross errors; to be scandalized with the reproach he makes
me, That I only brought fair words to maintain my opinion, without having
troubled my self to uphold them with solid Reasons. And perhaps some will say,
that he has used neither to destroy them; and as there is more trouble to
build then to ruin, he has done wisely to have established nothing, since he
has succeeded so ill in that which was most easy. For my part all that I can
say in this encounter is, That he ought not to have contented himself to have
learnt from all the men he had converst with, That Beasts did not reason. He
ought also to have informed himself of the reasons which they had to believe
in; and boldly to have produced them for the defense of the Truth, for the
reputation of those with whom he had spoken, and perhaps for the instruction of
those to whom he has not spoken.

But what? Could he have brought a better reason to prove that Beasts reason
not, then the experience which he has made thereof in himself? he has as he
says examined the actions of his sensitive Appetite, and after having found
them all like those of beasts, He concludes very strongly that in his opinion,
That since his Appetite does things without reason, and often against reason,
that of Beasts ought to work after the same manner.

I am ravished, that after having so often showed that M.C. reasons not where
he thinks he reasons, well, he gives me occasion to make it appear, that he
reasons well where he thinks not that he reasons And its there wherein I shall
the more easily take the liberey to tell him that he deceives himself, and that
the most part of actions which he believes to be without reason are made with a
perfect Ratiocination. But he must observe that this Ratiocination is of his
Imagination and not of Understanding. For it is certain, that in the most part
of these actions which he finds in himself, and in all the Examples he brings
of those who are gowry or paralytical; the Imagination always reasons after its
own manner, and forms its ordinary Discourses before the Appetite is moved. So
that we may employ for him and against him, The reason he objects against us
and say, That since bis Appetite which is like that of Beasts, operates but in
pursuit of the Imaginations reasoning, it must be the same with that of the
Appetite of Beasts: And by an inversion of the same proof, since we have showed
that the Imagination of Beasts reasons before the Appetite is moved; it must
needs be that his reasons also before his Appetite moves it self to any thing.
Let him not wonder at the shortness of the time he imploys therein, he need
none at all; and if he will consider what we have before said, he will know
that the Mind is far more ready, and moves far more nimbly then he thinks.

And afterward without doubt he will see, that he used precipitation when he
objected against us; That Reason opposes it self to the motions of the
Appetite, That this undertakes things which Reason would not undertake, and
that Beasts must be more reasonable then Men, and their Appetite must be wholly
subjected to Reason if they expected the Judgments and the Resolutions from
thence, before they moved themselves to any thing. Certainly, before all these
reasons were produced, he ought maturely to have examined whether they could
serve to his cause. For my part who judge them useless, I willingly grant them
without any prejudice to mine, since the word Reason which he uses is to be
understood but of humane and intellectual reason, and not of the Imagination
wherein all our difference consists.

But its to press a man too far who no longer defends himself; let us seek
enemies elsewhere, and go to the releif of the first Experience, which we did
produce to confirm our fundamental Reason.

CHAP. II. Examination of the Objections M. C. has made against the first of
our Experiences.
IT imports that a Dog which would take a thing hung up on high, Wherein
Reason consists.
whereto he cannot attain, after having observed an elevated place whereby he
may rise on another, and from thence catch the thing he desires, ought
necessarily assemble the fantasm of the place where he is with that of the
first step, and and that with the latter, and the latter with the thing he
would have: And that all this would be useless to him unless he reassembled the
first notion which he had found with the last, since its that which makes him
judge that the thing which he did believe impossible, was no longer so.

I have almost a mind to grant M. C. all that he here objects against me; for
besides some few lines, there is nothing in the three great pages which he
imploys to confute what I have said which staggers the opinion I hold; and I
even believe that the greatest part of the inconveniences he finds therein
cannot pass for new proofs to confirm it. In effect what absurdity Is there
that a man who sees a Ladder raised to get up on the top of a house, concludes
before he makes use of it, that otherwise he cannot get up? Why should he not
assemble the image of the place where he is, with that of the first step, and
that with the second, and so of the rest? And after having made as many
Propositions as there are steps, why should he not join the first notion he had
with the last, to conclude that he may clime to the top by the means of the
Ladder? Its so far from any absurdity that it is impossible it should be
otherwise done for the reasons we have deduced in the first Chapter of this
work. M. C. hereupon says, That we every day go up and down, without thinking
on what we do, our reason being then wholly employed about other things, and
that therefore we must not figure to our selves that a Dog reasons, when men
who have a greater facility of reasoning then Beasts do not reason.

But he is not awares that he confounds intellectual Reason with that of the
Imagination, and consequently can from thence induce nothing against me. I with
him confess that our reason at that time thinks not on the action which we do,
but I deny that our Imagination thinks not of it. For neither sense nor
Appetite can operate without it, and when we see the sequel of the degrees, and
how we clime them one after another, it must both conduct our eyes and our
steps; Now I pretend that this cannot be done without reasoning, but it is a
reasoning which is proper to the Imagination wherein the Understanding has no
share.

For the rest I shall not stop at what is pursuit he says, That the
precipitation with which the Dog works in this encounter is incompatible with
so many Propositions, and with the deliberation which Aristotle requires in
these kinds of Discoursings. For we have before showed, That all these
Propositions may be made in a moment; and we shall have occasion hereafter to
make it appear, that he did not understand Aristotle, and that deliberation is
not absolutely necessary in these kinds of discoursings.

But I cannot suffer the consequence he draws from thence to part without an
examen, That the Mason should make as many Syllogisms as there are steps in the
Ladder did he assemble the images thereof, as I have affirmed, because it gives
us occasion to show what the action is, by which the Soul makes the Syllogism
and to speak it in a word. What the form and essence of Ratiocination is, of
which Philosophy has scarce spoken, and which M. C. seems to be ignorant of.
In effect, if to assemble the image of the first step with that of the the
second, and that with that of the third, we should make a Syllogism as M. C.
supposes he must needs believe, that a Syllogism consists in the union of two
Propositions, and that as many progresses as a man can make from one
proposition to another, there should be as many Syllogisms, or else he must
have vainly proposed as an absurdity, that the Mason must make as many
Syllogisms as there are steps of the Ladder.

Wherein Ratiocination consists, and what the Action is which the Soul does in
reasoning.
Certainly as two simple notions make not a proposition, and pass but for the
first operations of the Understanding which is redoubled, two propositions
likewise make not a Syllogism, and cannot pass but for a second operation which
is repeated; and as many Propositions as shall be added a fresh will be but so
many repetitions of the same operation, and will never take the nature and the
form of a Syllogism, if that which makes the difference of the third operation
with the second do not encounter. Now since there is nothing in the Syllogism
which distinguishes it from all other, collecting together of several
propositions but the term Then, it follows that the term is the mark of the
ess^ntial difference of the Syllogism, and for the particular action which the
Soul makes to discourse; For since the simple terms are the marks of the
production of Images, wherein the first operation consists. And that the word
Est designs the union which the soul makes of diverse images, wherein the
judgment consists, the word Then must also mark some action different from the
two others, and wherein the form and essence of Ratiocination is contained. The
question therefore is to know, what that action is which is designed by that
term. And presently a man may imagine, that its the illation and induction
which the Soul draws from precedent notions; But besides that in all
hypothetick and conditional propositions there is illation without discourse;
It must follow that the nature of Ratiocination is wholly shut up in the
conclusion, because that that alone contains all this illation. Some say that
this word designs the cause of the conjunction of terms, and that the third
operation is different from the second, but because it shows the reason of the
conjunction of terms which is not marked in the second: It being true, that
when a man says, Man's is visible, it is not said, why he is visible, but when
the word Then is added, we mark the cause why he is said to be visible, to wit
because he is reasonable. Although all this is true, it is not therefore that
wherein the precise and particular difference consists which we seek; for the
same inconvenience which is found in the illation is herein to be encountered.
Since conditional propositions as well mark the cause of the consequence, and
of the conjunction of terms with the Syllogism. Since that in saying, if man be
reasonable he must be visible, a man pretends to show that he is visible
because he is reasonable. Now if it be true that one proposition has that of
common with Ratiocination to mark the cause of the conjunction of terms, its
certain that its not therein wherein we ought to find the difference which
distinguishes Ratiocination from the second operation of the Understanding,
adding that if the word Then design the cause only, it will not make an action
as we have said it was necessary, unless they would have us say, That he makes
the designation which the Soul makes it self of this cause. But there is no
likelihood that so noble and so great an operation wherein Discourse consists
should be reduced to so slight a thing as this last designation, which would be
to be found even in conditional Propositions, as we have now shown.

To discover then the force and sense of a word, which how small soever it be
comprehends all the extent of our reason; we must consider that when the Soul
binds several Propositions together, it makes a progress from one term to
another, and goes always forward without returning, if we may so say, on the
same steps, and during its march it never makes a Syllogism, having no occasion
to employ the word then: In effect, let a man make a gradation of as many
Propositions as he pleases; and for example sake let it be of these five, as
this is, 1. Peter is a Man: 2. Man is an Animal. 3. An Animal is a body. 4. The
Body is a Substance. 5. Then Peter is a Substance.


It Is certain, that the four first have not the form of a Discourse, because
the Soul goes outright, and passes directly from the one to the other. But
when it comes to return on its first Notion, and that it unites it with the
last, then it makes the fifth Proposition, wherein it imploys the word Then,
which would be useless in all the precedent, and give to all the gradation the
form of Discourse. The same thing^s made in all Caregorick Syllogisms, unless
the Understanding join, as here it does, the first with the last: But sometimes
it joins the third with the second, or the second with the third, as in the
first figure; sometimes the third with the first, as in the second figure;
sometimes the fourth with the second, as in the third figure. For example in
these two Propositions, Man is reasonable, Peter is a Man, There are four
Notions and to draw a conclusion, the Understanding joins Peter which is the
third Notion with Reasonable which is the second, and concludes, Then Peter is
Reasonable. So in the third figure, All men are Reasonable, Some Men are Fools,
the Understanding joins Fools which is the fourth Notion, with Reasonable which
is the second, and concludes, then some Fools are reasonable, and so of the
rest. But however this collection be made, it is always true, that the Soul
makes a return on its first Notions, and this Return makes not only the last
Proposition where the soul stops and reposeth it self, but also it binds
together the terms which were scattered and divided in the precedent; so that
we may say the soul makes a circle when she discourses, and moves conformably
to her nature, since the circular motion is most perfect of all, and which
belongs to the most excellent things. This return therefore is the motion which
properly makes discourse, and which distinguishes it from all the other
actions of the Soul, and therefore it is that which the Term Then ought to
design.

Let it not be objected against us, That Aristotle puts not the conclusion for
any part of the Syllogism, and then to this return which is only found in the
Conclusion, is not that which forms the discourse, for Aristotle considers the
Syllogism as a Logitian, as the Instrument whereby we attain Knowledge, in which
case the conclusion is only the effect thereof; And not as a Physician, as an
operation of the soul distinct from the two others, when he speaks of it also
in his Physics, he expressly says, That the Major and the Minor serve for its
Matter, and consequently the Conclusion of it ought to be the form and the
principal part. And certainly, as the return of the soul principally appears in
the Conclusion, for which reason it has been called the form of the Syllogism,
since the nature of Discourse consists in this Motion. But also as by this
return, the soul retakes the terms of the first propositions, we may say that
the form of the Syllogism is shed abroad through them, and that in that sense
it must be considered as a whole, every Proposition whereof makes an integral
part without which it cannot be entire and perfect.

The return of the Imagination is not a reflection.
Yet must we not abuse our selves on the word Return, as I perceive most men
have done, who take it for a Reflection; for this to speak properly, is made
when the Faculty reflects on it self, and on its proper action considering them
separated from their subject; and it is certain the Understanding only can make
this kind of reflection, because it cannot be without abstraction, of which the
Imagination is not capable, but when the soul retakes an image, which it has
already formed, for to join it with another, it plights not on it self, nor on
on its knowledge, but only on the effect of its action; thus there is no
abstraction, nor consequently no true reflection. And the Imagination may as
well make this return, as the Eye which having seen several objects one after
the other may return to that which it first perceived; Whence we may draw this
consequence, That there is nothing in Ratiocination which surpasses the so^ce
of the Imagination, which is above the Soul of Beasts.

It is time to return to M. C. who says, That the Dog judges not of the
possibility of what he undertakes: Because if it were so, he would not make so
many leaps, and so many unprofitable endeavors, and would not strive to take
what the most stupid reason would show him were too much elevated. And thence
he concludes, that it is not reason which carries him to it, but its the object
which draws him, and which moves his spirits.

As we shall hereafter have occasion to speak of this possibility, I shall
only here say that Beasts as well as Men often deceive themselves in the
judgment which they make, and that both the one and the other do figure to
themselves things to be possible which are not so at all. But this hinders not
but that before they are undertaken they make a judgment of it how false or
deceitful soever it may be, as we shall show. So that this ought not to oblige
M C. in so extravagant an opinion, contrary to all the Maxims of Philosophy, as
that is which he seems to endeavor to defend, when he says, That the Object
draws the Appetite and moves the spirits. For although this may be applied to a
moral attraction, as we speak in the Schools, and such a one as the Good and
the End are accustomed to make: Yet in other encounters he well observes that
he understands a Physical attraction, since he assures that the objects have an
adamantine quality which supposes an action of that kind; I would not
therefore insist thereupon: seeing he would not clearly make it appear what he
thought thereupon. Let Us therefore follow him another way, and see what
endeavors he will make against the crafts which Beasts use in hunting, which we
are assured were the effects of Ratiocination.

CHAP. III. The Examen of what M. C. has said against the second Experience
which we proposed, Touching the wiles of Beasts.
Of the slights of Beasts.
CErtainly we may say of a truth, that here he opposes slights to slights; and
that he imitates those Fishes which cast abroad their ink to hide themselves
from the eyes and snares of the Fishermen; for to lessen the splendour and
evidence of a Reason, with which he ought to be convinced, he casts obscurity
on my words and says, That all the difficulty to be found therein depends on
the ambiguity of the terms of slights and of figuring. For my part, who use
according to the common sense they bear amongst us, I believe unless a man were
Dutch or Welsh he can find no equivoke in them, after all; if there were any
M. C. should have put them by, and afterward have discovered the weakness of
the reason which I have hid, as he feigns, under the ambiguity of those two
terms*

It also belonged to him to propose some of those slights, even he ought to
have chosen amongst them all that which to him seemed most advantageous to me,
that demonstrating that discourse has no share in it, he might render my
reason useless. In the mean time he thinks himself sufficiently sheltred in
saying, That if I had designed any one of these slights in particular, he would
have endeavored to have explicated them But what! since I designed them all,
was it necessary for me to mark any in particular; and since I excepted none,
ought he not to have judged that I did not believe there was any which did not
serve for my cause, and that the first of them which he should have defeated
would have rendered my objection vain and deficient? Truly this makes me
remember those Fanfawors to whom the choice of the combat was offered, and
which afterward excuse themselves on this, that that of the sword they were
not designed to, wherein they vaunt they would have wrought wonders. For my
part I know not what there would have been which M. C. would have made in a
particular examen; but I can say that in general he has wrought no great ones,
and that when he contents himself to assure us in gross, That of all those
slights, some were the effects of instinct, and others of Memory and Custom.
There is nothing therein wonderful, unless he forget some which are neither
made by Instinct, Memory nor Custom.

And that notwithstanding his Induction is not complete, yet he forbears not to
draw an universal Conclusion; for setting aside that Instinct, Memory and
Custom do not exclude Reason, as we shall show hereafter; It Is certain that old
Hares and Foxes are more wily then the young ones, and consequently they have
particular wiles which they have learned from themselves, and which cannot come
from Instinct, since Instinct is a thing which is natural and common to all the
species. This being supposed, when they first of all use these wiles, it is
neither by Custom nor Memory, seeing as yet they never have made use of them,
and that we cannot accustom our selves to actions which we never did. Neither
can we remember those things which are quite new. We must then say that they
come from elsewhere, and that they have no other form but reason, since its
only she to whom it alone can be related.

CHAP. IV. The Examen of what M. C. has said against our third Experience
drawn from the Custom and the Instruction of Beasts.
Of the knowledge of time.
AS the last of our Experiences which is drawn from the Instruction and from the
Custom furnishes us with a most powerful proof of the Reason of Beasts: It
has obliged M. C. to form, as it were a new body of an Army to combat it, and
to afford it a whole Chapter for the pitched field; let us therefore a while
observe these new enemies.

And first of all, I see M.C. sends forth his Forlorn-hope; I call all that
part so which he has said concerning Custom in the pages 145, and 146. which
nothing concerns the question in debate; and after several faines which he
makes to baffle what we have demonstrated concerning the production and union
of Images, at last he comes to the assault and pretends to show, that the
Imagination has no knowledge at all of things past, present and to come,
whereupon is grounded all the strength of his Reason. In effect he well
foresaw, that if he granted that the presence of some objects made some Beasts
remember past things, and made them expect the like from thence to come, he
would be obliged to confess, that they reason as we may judge by what he has
said of Fear, p. 155. for which cause he boldly denies it to be true, and made
all his endeavors to prove that the Imagination knows no difference of time.

But to what purpose serve all these Reasons, if the Experience we have
produced convince them of error. All the world knows, and all the world sees
that Beasts Hope, that they Fear, that they Desire; and consequently it must
needs be that they must know future things, since all these passions are moved
only by the good or ill which is to come. Now if this be so, it is to no
purpose to labor to show that they can know no difference of time. Wherefore
before we examine what he has produced to prove this Proposition, we must see
what he opposes to this experience, and what address he uses to withdraw
himself from so ill a pass.

Beasts hope for things to come.
First he accuses me, Not to speak wholsomly when I say that Beasts Hope,
because I have elsewhere written that to speak wholsomly, there was none but
Man did Hope, and that all other Animals had but a shadow of Hope, as well as
of Reason; Whence he concludes, That since that time the actions of Beasts have
not changed their Nature; And that it does not become a Philosopher to make
that pass for a Truth, which is so only in shadow and appearance.

Certainly it is easy to judge by this Answer that M. C. was very much puzzled
here, and having no reason to destroy the Hope of Beasts, he would charge his
fables upon the Reader, and withdraw himself from the danger by making use of
my words. But without reproaching him as he has done me, that this kind of
proceeding is not becoming a Man who seeks the truth, and that it smells more
of the Sophister then of the Philosopher; He will give me leave to say, that
what I have elsewhere written on the same subject, is not here to be brought in
question, in which happily I may have been deceived; but to know whether it be
true That Beasts Hope, for if it be so, they must hope for the good to come and
know future things.. Were I he alone who held this opinion, perhaps the
contradiction which M. C. observes in my words, might render it suspicious. But
Aristotle, St Thomas, in a word, all the Schools are of that opinion, and there
is no Philosopher of esteem who acknowledges not Hope to be in Beasts, and the
knowledge of the future in Hope. Even M C. cannot but be of that opinion, 9.
Hist. 1. 1. 2. q. 40.
since he believes Beasts are capable of Desire; for Hope is only different
from desire by the difficulty we figure of obtaining the good which we have
not. Now Beasts may desire a good which they may judge difficult to obtain, and
consequently may hope for it. M. C. must therefore confess the truth of this
Experience, or prepare another Answer then what he has produced, since it
satisfies not the common opinion which has no interest in the contradiction
which he has found in my writings.

But should M. C. possibly have believed that true which I said in another
place in the Elogy of Hope, were contrary to what I here affirm? Did he not
observe that it was a Rhetorical Discourse, wherein we give more liberty to
words, and wherein terms keep not to that severity which Dogmatical Discourses
require? But what if he had said, that to speak soberly, true Philosophers only
Reason, and the rest of men have but a shadow of Ratiocination, had he not made
a Proposition which in some sense is most true? and would he not justly have
derided those who from thence would have induced, That other men did not
reason? Does he believe that when Plato asserts that all what is here below is
but the shadow of things which are in their Ideas, did he then bel^eve there
was nothing real or true? They are ways of speaking which all languages have
used to observe, how some things are estranged from the perfection of others;
and it were to deprive them of their fairest ornaments, and of their most
splendent lights, to take away from them their shadows and their figures. When
I therefore affirmed, that Man only did Hope, and that Beasts had but a shadow
of Hope, I meant nothing else but that Human Hope was more noble and more
elevated then that of Beasts, and that in comparison of that the other was so
base and imperfect that it did not seem to deserve the name of Hope, and had
only the appearance and figure of it. But from thence to conclude that I was
fallen into a contradiction, when I elsewhere said, that they did hope, he must
either be a very ill Frenchman, or a very ill Logitian.

Beasts fear the evil to come.
For what concerns fear, there is no great difficulty, as M C. says, there
being two sorts of it; the one in effect is a Ratiocination, and a
consideration of what is not present to our Senses, but which we infer ought to
happen unto us; This is not to be found in Beasts: But there is another which
we call properly Fear or Fright, of which all Beasts are capable; and must not
therefore know what is to come; for we are frighted with present objects, and
even with those which are past, so as the Images be present.

I shall with M.C. acknowledge then two sorts of Fear, and I hope elsewhere to
speak more fully of them then I can do here; but I did not mean to distinguish
them as he does, and to exclude the knowledge of the future from none of them,
because it were to destroy them and confound several passions in one. In
effect, were the evil present, there would be no Fear, it would be Grief,
Consternation, or such like. And M. C. of necessity must take frightfulness for
a kind or species of Fear, which it participates to all the nature of the
Gender. Now Fear in general supposes the knowledge of the evil to come, as
all our Masters and all our Books teach us; and consequently frightfulness
supposes the same thing, since all what belongs to the Gender ought also to be
in the species* Certainly M. C. is herein far from the sense of Aristotle and
of his Sectaries who believe that to form this passion, the ill must not be to
come, but even a man must not be certainly assured that it is to come, or that
we have some hopes to eschew it.

How we are frighted with present objects.
But what says he? we are frighted with present objects. Its true, so as it be
well understood; for this presence hinders not but that the ill we fear is to
come; when we say, That the objects or the present evils cause frights, the
words of Evil and of Object are taken for the cause of the ill, and not for the
effect, which is the true evil. And in this sense it is true, that the ill is
present, and that still the fright respects the ill to come; because it
considers the effect which that cause is to produce, which is properly that
which gives the fright. Since did we not think that it was to produce its
effect, neither would it cause that apprehension; so an enemy who falls at once
upon us, a flash of lightning, a fantasm, and all other things which fright and
terrify us, are but the causes of the ill which we imagine is to befall us;
for although we think it very near (and it is that which makes the difference
of a fright from all other fear) yet it is certain, it is not then so; and were
it so in effect, it would not move us to a fright, but to grief, consternation,
or the like, as is already said. On the other side, the presence of the object
is different according to the several powers to which it relates. That which is
present to the eyes, is not always so to the touch; and so if it be true that a
fright is moved by objects which are present, for as much as they are seen, yet
it also hinders not, but that this fright considers the future, because those
objects are not yet present to the sense of feeling, for the preservation
whereof this passion is chiefly raised in the soul; for as Aristotle says,
those things which are formidable and which cause terror, are those which may
cause a corruptive grief.

What shall we then say to the example which M. C. produces? Of a Man on the
top of a Steeple, and who will be sensible of a fright in looking down,
although he be not in fear of falling, being fenced about with a rail or wall;
for if there be any fear, it is not an effect of his Ratiocination, nor of the
knowledge of future. I shall answer in few words; First, That M.C. seems to
have forgot the subject of our question, for as much as I did not propose these
passions to prove that the Imagination reasons, but to make it appear, that she
knows the time to come; and therefore the consequence he draws, That this Fear
is no effect of his Ratiocination, is to no purpose.

Secondly, He confounds according to his practice the Knowledge of the Intellect
with that of the Fancy. For the assurance which this man has of not falling,
seeing the railes and safeguards which environ him, is an effect of his
Understanding, which hinders not his Imagination from figuring to it self that
he might fall, and so consequently that she considers not the future; as she is
surprised at the sight of a precipice, she minds not that which should reassure
her; and the impression she has received of it is so strong, that
notwithstanding all the advice which the Understanding afterward proposes,
she cannot contain herself, but suffers herself to be carried away with that
Motion which she first gave her self. Even as it happens in others passions,
which often raise some resistance in the mind, which the superior part affords
it, although this fright therefore be vain and ill-grounded, yet the
Imagination forbears not to do the same thing, which she does in others which
are just and reasonable, and consequently she considers the danger of the fall,
as it were truly to happen. In a word, she here repects the evil which is to
come, as in all other kinds of fear.

How past dangers trouble the Mind.
So much concerning the fright, which present objects use to incite. It remains
now to make M. C. see, that when past dangers come back to the Memory, and
produce all the very same effects which fear uses to cause, the Imagination
respects even the ill to come; for although in effect it be past, yet it
considers it in the condition it was when it moved that first fright; Now at
that time it was to come, and consequently she still sees it as to come. That
this may be well understood, we are to observe that the Images of things is
preserved in the Memory with all the circumstances, and withal those
modifications with which it is revested, when it enters into that faculty of the
soul. So when we see an object a far off agitated with some motion, or
situated in such or such a manner, How past things are preserved in the Memory,
the image of this object remains in the Memory with the species of the
distance of this motion, of the situation which the senses observed in it; and
when we come to remember our selves of it, it again represents it self revested
with the same accidents. Now its certain that the differences of time are in
the rank of these circumstances, and when a faculty knows a thing which is to
come, it with the principal thing conceives the difference of the time to come
wherewith it is accompanied; and consequently whether the Image of that object
ought to be preserved in the Memory, it must needs be with the very same
circumstance; and when it reenters the thought, it therein presents its self
as future; otherwise the representation could not be just and faithful. It is
not therefore to be wondered if those who escape a danger can never again think
of it without being surprised with the same fright it had formerly given them;
for as much as having the first time known the danger, as an evil to come, and
whereinto they were ready to fall, the image which they have preserved
therefore can represent it no otherwise then it then was; that is to say, as
ready to come. And fancying it after that manner it ought to cause a fright,
since its a passion which the evil which is ready to befall us is accustomed to
provoke.

But what! A man may say, the danger is really past, and who has escaped it is
not ignorant of it, and therefore he ought to have added this circumstance of
time to the image which he kept thereof. And if he remembers it again, he ought
no more to consider it as a present evil, but as a past evil, since the image
which represents it is modified by this difference of time, which is
incompatible with that which is to come.

To this its to be answered. 1. That images have this privilege, that although
they represent contrary and incompatible things, yet they have no opposition
amongst themselves, and may be compatible together, as both Experience and the
Schools teach us; so that, that of the past, and future time, what contrariety
soever they may seem to have, do not destroy one the other, and the Memory may
preserve them at the same time in one and the same subject.

2. That the circumstances and the modifications which the Mind adds to bodies
of a principal figure, are as so many several beds and different surfaces which
she applies the one upon the other. So that the latter alters not that which
was first applied, neither can any one corrupt the Mistress figure which is
therewithal revested. So when we first see a man who is set, the image of that
man enters into the Memory with that circumstance; and when afterward we see
him stand up, the Mind adds to the man's figure the latter modification without
defacing the former; otherwise she could never remember she saw him fit; just
so it is of the evil, which at first it judges is to befall it; for she
preserves the image with the circumstance of the time to come, and when it is
past it adds to the image of the ill, the latter difference of time, without
defacing the former: Now as these circumstances do not confound themselves in
the Memory, but keep their natural distinction therein, the Imagination which
may consider the accident of a subject without minding others, may link it self
to that of the future, without minding the past; for example, if the object
have any thing which is able to surprise or astonish the mind, as without doubt
a great danger is; for the first sight which the imagination has, may trouble
it so powerfully that it will stop at the first circumstance, wherewith she
finds it revested, and may then see it but as it were to come, although she may
know it as past, did she but afford herself the time to consider the latter
representations which she formed thereof. And its in this sense what M. C. says
is true, That she would not be disturbed with what is past, and was no more to
happen, did she know it as past. But it from hence follows not, That she
suffers the emotions of fear without having the knowledge of the future, as we
have showed.

I shall not stop at what he supposes, Desire respects the good to come.
That the Imagination acts alone in those examples which he produces. Although
I can show him the contrary, it makes nothing to the question. So that there
remains almost nothing for me to say to maintain the proof we have drawn from
the passions. For the distinction he places in the desires, and all what he
says in pursuit thereof, is useless in the point in hand.

Should I grant him, That a man of an amorous inclination needs no
Ratiocination to kindle the desires wherewith he suffers himself to be taken at
the sight of his Mistress, no more then he who is offended to stir up the
appetite of vengeance which takes him at sight of his enemy; And so of the rest
of the examples he produces. And that at last all those desires are the first
motions, which depend not on reason since they prevent it. Should I say I grant
him all this, what prejudice would it do to the proposition I have made? I
should prove that the Imagination may know things to come; and to that end I
produce the experience we have, That Beasts desire, which is a passion which
supposes this knowledge. Is there a word in all this discourse of M. C. which
destroys this proof: Instead that he ought to show that desire requires not the
knowledge of the future, he witnesses that he demands no Ratiocination. But it
is not that which is in question; it is to change the Hypothesis, and M. C.
cannot avoid the blame to have fallen into that error of Ratiocination, which
the Logitians call Ignoratio Elenchi. And if he could defend himself from it,
it is still true that he here confounds the Reason of the Understanding with
that of the Imagination, since he cannot confess it, that when he says that the
first motions do not depend from reason, and that they prevent it, that cannot
be understood but of the superior and intellectual reason; And therefore it
makes nothing against me, who in all this discourse only show, That the
Imagination has its proper and particular Ratiocination, in which the
Understanding has no share.

But to go to the bottom of the question, what ever may be said, There is no
desire which supposes not the knowledge of what we desire, and it is impossible
that it should not be known as a thing which we have not; for did we believe we
had it, and possess't, it would not provoke Desire, but Love or Joy. Neither is
this a Paradox, it is the common sense of all the learned. And it is fruitless to
oppose against it, That we sometimes desire things present; for in seeing them,
we enjoy them not, and they forbear not to be absent to that power for which we
desire them, as we have already said of Fear. And therefore we may safely
conclude, that since Animals Fear and Desire, as M.C. himself confesses its
necessary they should know the good and the evil to come; And if they did know
the things in this difference of time, which is most difficult to know, we
ought from thence to infer that they may know them in that of the past and of
the present, namely being endued with Memory, which is destined for things
past, and of the Senses which judge only of present objects.

How Beasts know the differences of time.
This being well established, all the reasons which which M. C. brings to prove
that it is impossible Beasts should know any difference of time, are useless.
The truth of this knowledge is not to be doubted; and if there be any
difficulty it is to know how this knowledge may be acquired: But the
impossibilities which are found in the manner in which we fancy the things to
be done, cannot be sufficient to destroy the action and the effect, which by
experience we are assured of. It were a strange way of philosophising to
endeavor to prove that the Loadston does not draw iron, because that the
attraction of a body cannot be made by a simple quality. In the mean time M.C.
uses herein no other means, and believes to have proved, That Animals know not
the time, because, as he conceives, there is no image which can represent it.
But what? does he pretend to know all the secret of these images? does he know
what it is, how they are formed, and how they represent the objects? What the
most knowing have discovered herein, is but the least part of what Nature has
kept hid from them; and although they are sure that they are, and that they are
serviceable to knowledge, they have reason to doubt of all the surplusage which
concerns them.

I would fain ask M. C. how he conceives that Motion is represented by the
image which is preserved thereof in the Memory; and how a thing which is fixed
and permanent, can express another which has nothing that is stable, and is in
a continual flux. For my part, I find it as difficult to comprehend how Time
may be represented by any image. And if M. C. grants that there is one of
Motion, although he knows not how it may be represented, he knows not why he
says that there is none of time, because according to his opinion none can
represent it; for there is an equal reason either to receive them for the one
and for the other, on what we experiment, that the Imagination knows them both,
or to refuse them on this, that we know not how to represent them. But we are
more nearly to examine M. C. reasons; otherwise he would believe we meant to
baffle him with these subtilties, and according to his custom he might brag we
had not answered them, what cause soever we had not to stop there for the
reason we have already given.

The Imagination may know the Time past.

M C's first Reason is, That the Imagination knows the absent ill without
discerning that it is absent, because absence has no images no more then other
privations; and so the Memory being unable to represent them, the Imagination
which is a material Faculty, cannot know it.

There are several ways to answer this Objection. First, M. C confouds here the
past ill with the absent ill, although they be two different things, seeing
there are absent ills which are not past; and if we apply these words to Time,
as M.C. does, it is still certain, That to be absent makes not the difference
essential of the Time past; Because the absence is a privation which cannot
enter into the essence of a real thing, such as Time is. And therefore the
time past is not past, in that it is absent, but its absent for that its past.
Whence you may judge that the absence is but an accident which happens to Time;
and that consequently, the Imagination may know the time past, without knowing
it to be absent, since the time past is to be known by its true difference,
which ought to be real and not privative.

But it may be demanded what the difference is, which may come to the knowledge
of the Imagination? Certainly, if Time is the successive durance of motion, or
to observe the terms of the Schools, if it be the number and destinction of the
parts of motion, as that some flow before and others afterward, its certain
that the number of the parts of motion which flow first makes the difference of
the time past; Now there is nothing herein which the Imagination may not know;
for the distinction and the effective number of things which are sensible may
be known by the Senses; So the Senses may know three Men, three Horses, because
Man and Horse are sensible things. If it be therefore true that motion is
sensible, as M. C. avows, the number of motion ought to be so too; and if the
Senses cannot know the motion without knowing the precedent parts, because
Motion speaks Succession; and who speaks Succession supposes something which
preceded; of Necessity, the Senses must know the parts which have flown, and
must therefore know the number of the parts of motion, which did flow before the
rest. Now this is to know the Time past. Without doubt M.C. did not consider
the wrong he did his own cause, when the truth forced him to confess that Sense
knew Motion; neither did he foresee the reason and the consequence which we
have now drawn from thence: But to give him satisfaction in some other thing, I
shall grant him, that absence is a privation and a negation of a being, so as
he will remember the distinction we produced, page 72. where we said there were
direct and oblique negations. For by this means we may both be satisfied, he to
find the proposition which he has produced to be true for direct negations
which cannot be known by the Imagination; and I to have showed that oblique
Negations may at least by accident be thereby known. Thus we may together
judge, that the Imagination knows not the absence and the privation which
happens to Time past; But it knows the Time past deprived of the absent thing,
to wit of the Time present. And that by separating the image of the present,
with that of the time which is run away, it by accident knows, that is to say
by this separation, that the time past is distinct and separate from the
present, and that consequently it is not present; That in fine it forms an
image of that oblique absence, for as much as the separation is a modification
of the images, and that this modification passes for an image, since it
represents the thing separate, as we have more amply shown in the 73 and 74
pages:

M. C's. second is, That the differences of time as abstracted or joined with
the things have no material image which can represent them to the Imagination;
and that as a Man can never say that the eyes see a soul, although joined with
the body, because the soul has no image to join with that of the body, its the
same with the differences of time.

All this Discourse is but a Paralogism which supposes what is in question,
and compares things which are of several genders, and have nothing common
amongst them: The differences of time are sensible, since motion is sensible,
and that the number of things which are sensible is also sensible. Now the
number of motion makes the differences of time, and therefore the differences
of time are sensible; and consequently they have material images, since they
cannot be sensible without having some kind of images; so that the Soul which
is not sensible, ought not, nor cannot be compared with the differences of Time
which are sensible. And M. C. could thereupon conclude nothing.

The Imagination may know the Time to come.
The third is particular for the time to come; for it imports That if the
Imagination knows not the differences of time, but when then are conjunctive
with the things, its impossible it should know the time to come, since it
cannot know with what thing it is to be conjoined, for as much as it ought to
be present; and if it were present, the time to be conjoined to it must also be
present; Being not therefore present, it can furnish no image neither to the
Memory nor to the Imagination.

Observe this for another Paralogism, which is grounded on the word Thing which
M. C. understands of the material and exterior object, instead that it ought to
be understood of the formal object, that is to say of the image, or of the
thing represented; for when we say we know the differences of time conjoined
with the things, it is as much as if we had said with the images of the things;
otherwise the Understanding it self could not know the time past, nor the
future conjoined with the things, for as much in effect, the one are no more,
and the others are not yet: It Is therefore true that the Imagination cannot
know the difference of the time to come, unless she have the image of the
object, to which it adds this circumstance. Let not M.C. insist upon its being
present, because it is present as to the actual existence, and not as to the
manner of representing. It must be truly in the Imagination to represent the
thing to come, even as that of past things ought to be there, to make us
remember that they be past.

But how can it be in the Imagination, since the object it represents is not
yet, and that the copy cannot be before the original? Certainly we are not to
believe that a thing which never was, and which has not past through the
Senses, could ever be in the Imagination, neither that it could be known as
future; the Senses must formerly have made it known to make us judge that it is
to come, and that to the image which the present, object furnishes, the soul
afterward adds the circumstance of the future time. Had the Animal never
resented blows, he would never fear to suffer those to come; and when that
happens his Imagination does only add the difference of the time to the image
it formed thereof when it received them; or to speak home, she forms an image
like to that which she has in the Memory, and adds thereunto the circumstance
of the Time to come.

There is more difficulty to say how she conceives this difference of time; for
although the motion be sensible, and that the number of the parts ought to be
so too; it is certain that there is great reason to doubt, whether those which
are not yet run, and which consequently as yet are not, may beat the Sense
which is only touched by objects which are actually present. Yet this doubt
may be satisfied by saying, that the word sensible is not restrained to the
exterior Senses, and that it also marks those things which are known by the
interior Senses. Now the Imagination may raise it self above the exterior
Senses, and form to it self Images, which these have not suggested. So it
judges that food is good or ill, that a thing is a friend or an enemy, which
are notions which the exterior Sense cannot furnish it withal, and which may be
said to be sensible, since they are of the resort of the sensitive Faculty. As
a man therefore is assured by experience, that Animals which fear and desire,
know the future; It must needs be that if the external Senses cannot afford
that knowledge which in their default the Imagination supplies, and that it
adds this circumstance of time to the object which they represent unto it;
Which is nothing difficult for it to do, if we consider that it may remember it
self of a past motion, and that by consequence the image of that motion is
preserved in the Memory. For it must then be that this image represents the
flux and succession which was in this Motion, which being so, when she sees
that a thing presently moves, it may figure to it self that it may continue to
move; and in this continuation whereof it may form the image, since it has the
model thereof in the Memory are comprised those parts of motion, which are to
succeed, and therefore it may know those parts, it may therefore know the parts
to come.

On the other side, if it be true, That time is nothing but the number of
motion, as it has parts, some whereof are before, and others after; it must of
necessity be, that if the motion be sensible, as all the world agrees, Time
must be so too: Since motion cannot be known but by the parts run out and to
run; now to know them so, is to know the number of the motion, is to know Time
past and Time to come, and consequently the Motion cannot be sensible, but the
Time must be so also. In effect, its the property of those things which are in
a continual flux, that they have no part which is not past or to pass,
otherwise there would be some one of them permanent, against the nature of
successive things; Wherefore all the Schools constantly hold that there is
nothing actually present in Time, nor in Motion, but a point or indivisible
instant, which ties the past parts with those to come; and to speak exactly,
there is no part of Time nor of Motion which is actually present.

But how then can the Senses know them, for they can only be touched by what
is actually present; and there is nothing present but an instant, which being
indivisible cannot be the object of the Senses. The School answers this, That
the instant is not truly sensible of it self, but that it is so by accident;
and that in the same manner, as the points of a line are not sensible of
themselves, because they are indivisible, and are so by accident; to wit,
because they bind parts which are sensible of themselves; the instant must also
be sensible because it binds sensible parts; otherwise if they were not
sensible, that would be no ways sensible.

Let Us then say, since there is nothing in Motion which is actually present but
an instant, and that the instant is sensible, but by the parts of motion those
parts must be sensible: Now as they cannot be known but as successive, and that
as the one goes before and the other follow after; it must necessarily be that
the time past and the time to come must be sensible, since the parts of motion
as they go before and after, make these differences of time; and because these
parts are not actually present, and consequently cannot touch the exterior
Senses, its necessary the Imagination should supply their defect, and that she
alone should not only know the parts of Time, but even that of Motion also,
since Motion is sensible, and that there is nothing which may touch the
exterior Senses.

Time is amongst sensible Objects.
But it may be said, that I lose my time to use all these reasons against M. C.
Let Us therefore go no further, and content our selves to take him from the
astonishment wherein he is, p. 153. For that no body has placed time amongst
sensible objects, and that Aristotle was not advised to convince those by Sense
who denied the existence of Time.

For the first, he must therefore remember, that when the genders of things are
observed, there is no need to specify in particular all what is comprehended
under them. Philosophy has placed Number and Motion amongst the genders of
sensible objects, and consequently it was not necessary to place time in the
same rank, since its comprehended in those genders, and that in effect it is
nothing but the number of Motion. So that we may say, that there is no body
which has not placed Time amongst sensible objects, although no body have
placed it for a gender amongst sensible objects.

As for the second, Aristotle needed not to convince those by sense who denied
the existence of the time present, since he believed it no more then they did;
and it is from him that we have learned, that in time there was nothing present,
but an indivisible Moment, which is not truly Time: For as for the past Time
and the Time to come, there never were any Philosophers which have not
acknowledged them, and there was therefore no need to convince them by the
sense of a Truth on which they were all agreed. And although Aristotle proposed
at the beginning of the Discourse he makes Reasons to prove that Time is
nothing; yet are they not so to be taken for proofs whereon some have grounded
their belief, but for doubts which are usually made before the Truth of things
be established, as his own proper terms witness, (...). After all, had there
been men extravagant enough to have had that thought, and that this great man
had not by sense convinced them, it would not follow that Time were not
sensible, and M. C. who is not ignorant of the Laws of Logic, knows well that
these kind of consequences are not receiveable.

That the Imagination has Images, of which the Senses give it no Knowledge.
We must here forget a fourth Reason produced by M.C. against the time past;
although he has unloosed it from the pursuit of the precedents. He then says,
Page 154. That the Sensitive Memory has no Images but those which it has
received by the Senses, when the Object was present. So that never having had
any of the Time when it was present, it cannot get those of the future.

It is pity this Reason should not be good, having so fair an appearance; but
by mischance it happens that all it is propositions are false. For, for the
first, Animals may remember Dreams and Chimera's which they formed in their
sleep in the absence of objects. And as they are different from the things
which the Senses have represented unto them, it follows that the Memory wherein
they preserved themselves, has other Images then those which it did receive by
the Senses when the object was present. On the other side, the modification of
Images which depends from the Actions of the Imagination, such as are Union,
Separation, and the like, are not furnished for the exterior Senses, in the
mean while they form themselves in the absence of exterior objects, and
afterward preserve themselves in the Memory.

In fine, Beasts remember whether things are good or evil, friends or foes,
although the Senses have not furnished them with the knowledge hereof, nor by
consequence with the Images by means of which they should know them, and
remember themselves. To rectify therefore M.C's. Proposition we must say, That
the Memory has no Images but those it has received from the Senses, or from
the Imagination which may form them in the absence of objects, the Sense
contributing nothing thereunto. But in this case his second Proposition is
absolutely false, and quite useless to our design; for the Memory may receive
the Image of the present time, which the Imagination may have formed, although
even it were not true, that sense knows this difference of time; thus the
Memory may have an image of the time past, since the Imagination furnishes it
with that of the present. Without doubt he will tell me, That Memory is only
for past things, and therefore that the present has no place in it, otherwise
it must at once be present and past. But there is no inconvenience therein
since it is past as to the exterior object, and that it is present as to the
Representation; Forasmuch as the images of the things which the Imagination
has known present enter into the Memory with that circumstance of time, and
this now represents them as present, although in effect they are past. And the
soul must afterward add the circumstance of the time past to remember it self
that they are past. Bur we have sufficiently cleared these difficulties in our
precedent Discourses.

How the knowledge of Time is reserved to the Understanding.
There remains therefore nothing but the taking away of one scruple which he
has on what is said, That the knowledge of Time is one of the most subtle and
most difficult that our soul is capable of, and which for that cause it was
always reserved to the Understanding.

This ought not to stop him quite, since he well knows that the Understanding
subtiliseth on all the most sensible things, and that it considers them
otherwise then the Imagination can. The entire and perfect knowledge of time
comprehends many difficulties, which cannot be decided but by it; and after
having learnt of the Senses that time is somewhat, it is the only one that can
explicate what it is, and how far it can know it: For you are not to imagine
when we say that the Imagination knows the time to come, that it knows the
future through all its extent, nor all kind of things which are to come. This
ought not to be understood but of those which the present object bring back to
the Memory, and which she figures to herself ought quickly to arrive; as we may
judge by the passions in which Animals have need of this knowledge. So when we
assure that time is sensible, we undertake not once the Office or Function of
the Understanding; and to give to the Senses this small knowledge, we diminish
neither the greatness nor the elevation it affords its own, which we confess
with M. C. to be one of the most subtle and most difficult of which it is
capable.

After this M.C. concludes, p. 154. That Sense sufficiently knows the motion
which is made in the present Time, but it knows not the Time wherein its made;
otherwise there would be a sensible knowledge, which could not be made by the
entermixion of Images. 2. That the Images of what is past are truly preserved
in the Memory: but that that represents not that it is no more, because they
cannot represent a negation of being. That in fine its a certain mark that the
Imagination takes no consideration of the time, for that the images of a past
ill produce the same effect upon it, as if it were present.

Although all this Discourse be but a repetition of the Reasons which M. C.
has here before proposed, and that we have already fully answered them: Yet
because he has often taken my silence for a conviction, and that he has
believed in several places, wherein I would not amuse my self, for that they
did not deserve an answer, he had reduced me to an inability of answering him;
I must not stay here without a Reply, and I ought at least to make him remember
cases already judged. For we have showed, 1. That the Imagination might form
Images, which the exterior Senses could not furnish it withal; that the
knowledge which followed those images was sensible, since it proceeded from a
sensitive faculty, and therefore that there was no inconvenience, that there
might be a sensible knowledge, which need not be from the intermission of
species from without.

2. That the Imagination might represent to it self oblique Negations, and that
that was sufficient to know that the objects were no more.

3. That all the differences of Time were sensible, and that even the present
was so at least by accident, whether this knowledge were proper to the internal
Senses, or whether it were made by the exterior Senses. In fine, that the
Images of several differences of time might be preserved together in the
Memory, and that the Imagination might consider them the one after the other,
that thus the past ill might be considered as present or as future; and that
where it caused the same effects it had caused being present or to come, it was
no longer as past, but as present or as to come.

Having taken away all these difficulties which stopped M.C. touching the
knowledge which the Imagination has of things present and to come: Its seems
there is nothing more which can be opposed to the reason we have deduced from
the Custom and instruction which we give to Beasts: For since present threats
make them remember the blows they received with their first lessons, and that
the remembrance of those blows which are past makes them fear those to come,
the Imagination must needs unite the Image of the threat with that of the blows
which they have received, and in pursuit, that they join the image of those
blows, with those others which they apprehend.

And truly I expect from M. C. ingenuity, that after having maturely considered
all these things, he will find some confusion in his Mind for having so
lightly condemned me of error and artifice in the most part of my Reasons; for
he says at the entrance of the Examen which he makes of the precedent, That
there is not in it the least appearance of Truth, and that whereas I do in some
other reasonings insinuating errors by the means of some Truths; herein I have
not used that artifice, but fight only with Arguments in which there is not
one true Proposition to be found.

What! Is it not true then, that Beasts remember the good and evil that is past?
Is it not true, that they desire, and that they fear those which are to come?
Is it not true, that the presence of certain objects, having replaced in their
Memories those which they have formerly received, makes them afterward fear
the like? What will it be thought to conclude ill, that since they do all these
things, their imagination must go from the one to the other, that it must unite
images, and that it must form as many propositions as it makes unions? For my
part, I must clearly confess to M. C. that if those who shall be Judges of our
differences can be of his opinion, I will set my self to write as false against
Philosophy, against Reason, and against Sense, and I will abandon them all as
deceivers, which have abused us, and that instead of serving us as instruments
for the knowledge of the Truth, they corrupt it and hide it from us.

But without running to these extremities into which there is no likelihood I
should ever fall, M.C. is to be excused of the ill opinion which he conceived
against my first Work: I will indeed deal more civilly with him then he has
done with me; and that I may not altogether condemn him, I must confess that he
may have found in my discourse such defects as may have engaged him to that
sense, I having obliged my self to render them the shortest I could possibly;
there are many places wherein I suppose certain knowledges which must be had
from elsewhere, or my Ratiocinations would be must straightened; and in which I
do but cast the seeds of a great many inductions, which may be drawn from them.
And without doubt that briefness did hide from M. C's eyes the greatest part of
the evidence and force of my reasons, and has made Truths appear unto him as
errors, and order as the subtilties of a Sophist. But I ought also to believe,
that after having corrected my self for those defects, and having taken away
all those obscurities which he met withal by long explications, he will no
longer account, as they say, Truth for Injustice, but will ingeniously confess
that he has maintained an ill cause; at least, that I have not ill defended
mine, and that my propositions are not so erroneous, nor extravagant, as he
fancied them.

To wit, whether without Ratiocination the Images of the Memory move the
Imagination as if the objects were present.
To continue therefore the design I have begun, I shall advertise him, That he
should not abuse himself with the experiences he here produces, since they are
neither for him, nor against him. In effect, when he says that by them he will
prove, That without reasoning the Images of the Memory move the Imagination in
the same manner, as if the objects were present; What can he thence conclude to
my prejudice? Should I grant all those experiences, they are but particular
facts, which hinder not but that there may be others wherein the Imagination
confers the present with the past, and from thence draws consequences for the
future. Besides, that its easy to make it appear, that in most part of those,
he produces the Imagination makes the same progress. For when a Child cries
seeing an object like to that which formerly had hurt it, it is fear doubtless
which makes him cry. Now this passion supposes an evil to come, and therefore
the present object makes that Child remember the evil it suffered, and
afterward causes it to fear the like: And when it rejoices at the sight of
the Nurses Breast, if it be from the desire and hope of sucking, his
Imagination does the self same thing. If there be only the remembrance of the
past pleasure which rejoices it, it is a fact no more like ours, since it
respects but the present and the past; and that in instruction the Mind
considers not only present and past objects, but even those which are to come.
Its even so when the remembrance of a good tale makes us laugh, or when the
encounter of a person who has done us ill, gives us a sense of aversion,
because therein there is no express consideration of the future. Yet let not
M.C. for this imagine, that I believe the Imagination reasons not in these
passions, although it confers not the past with the future; it has other means
then that to reason; and if he will well consider the last of my Reasons which
after this, I shall explicate, he will see That the Appetite is never moved but
in pursuit of some Ratiocination.

As for the example of Cassander, Who without shaking could not look upon the
Statue of Alexander; It Is certain, that this proceeded from the fear which the
remembrance of that Princes anger moved in his mind, and that he then
represented to himself the danger he was in at that time when Alexander was
angry with him. That Is to say, he still considered it as ready to come. It
therefore from thence follows not that the Ratiocination he made in these
encounters was like that which is to be found in the instruction of Beasts.
When these hear a threat like to that which they have formerly heard, and which
was followed with blows, they ought rightly to think, that since such a thing
formerly caused their ill, that which presents it self being like it, ought
also to cause them the like ill. But there is nothing in the example of
Cassander which relates to this. Alexanders Statue has not that resemblance
which was necessary to oblige him to conclude after that manner; it must have
been that that must have been angry, that must have threatened, and that must
have been capable to have done him harm; in this case he had had reason to
think, that since Alexander had formerly done him ill, this Statue being like
him ought also to cause the same ill. In fine, in the instruction of Beasts
there is always two alike causes, that which is past, whose effect is also
past; and that which is present, whose effect is to come; and both the one and
the other enter into the discourse which the Imagination makes. But here there
is only the past cause which comes back to the Memory; and although the Statue
be present, it enters not into the Ratiocination of Cassander, it only awakens
the Notions which compose it. M.C. has therefore very ill taken his measures
when he compares these two reasonings together, and very wrongfully endeavors
to oblige us to believe, That that of Beasts is not made as we have said,
because we do not believe that Cassanders was so made.

What he adds of the Scythian slaves, who after having overcome their Masters
in several battles, were at last routed at sight of the whips, which were
showed unto them, when they were ready to reingage. It is so far from
prejudicing my proposition, that it confirms it, and supposes that beasts use
the same form of reasoning when they are instructed: For it is certain that this
surprise made them fear, and that this fear was grounded on the ill to come, by
the remembrance which those rods gave them, that their Masters had formerly
chastised them therewith. So that they judged it fit, that since those rods
wherewith their Masters were armed, were like those with which they had
formerly been beaten, they ought again to apprehend from them the like effect.
And M. C. vainly labors to destroy this Discourse, when he says, That if they
had had the leisure to reason and confer all these things, they had never bin
so frighted, and that the first reasonings they made was to condemn their first
motions which are not submitted to reason. For besides that there needed but a
moment for all this, he according to his custom confounds intellectual Reason
with that of the Imagination, as we have showed him elsewhere. And there needed
no other answer for those panick fears, since he says, That it is the same as
of what happened to these Slaves. But I will add that since it is the same
thing, it follows that they are the effects of a true Syllogism; And that as
the Ratiocination which these slaves made was apparently good, and had no
proposition which was evidenly false, it must of necessity be if what M. C. say
be true, that it must be the same with that which devanceth all other panick
terrors. Let him no more object the Syllogism he makes Cassander make, that
man's fear will never strengthen his party, as we have now showed; and if he
would believe me, he ought to ask help from some other Captain who is more bold
then this.

From all these rare experiences M.C. deduceth mavelous inductions, which
having already satisfied, we will not stay much upon them. 1. He says, That in
all these encounters its neither the present objects nor apprehensions of the
future which moves the Fancy. But we have already showed the contrary.

2. That the Images of past objects residing in the Memory, the Imagination
need form no others, since those are sufficient. All our second part is
employed in consuting this proposition which destroys the nature of Knowledge.

3. That Images which can only come from present objects, can also only
represent them but as present, and that they canaot be again communicated to
the Imagination, but they must needs move it, as they had done formerly, the
same cause ever producing the same effect. And that from thence it follows that
the absent object works on the Appetite as if it were present; and that as
being present it stirs up the Appetite without employing any discourse, it may
being absent do the same thing. For this, we have made it appear that there are
modifications which the soul adds to the images, which it receives from present
objects. That the differences of time are of that kind, and that so a present
object may be considered both as past and as to come; Whence it follows that
one of these Images being again communicated to the Imagination may move the
Appetite after another manner, then when at the first it entered into the Mind.
And that afterward it cannot pass for one and the same cause, since its
diversified by a new circumstance.

As for his first Proposition which imports, That since the present object
moves the Appetite without discourse the ascent may do the same thing. I shall
willingly grant it him in the hypothesis of the time we are in, so as the
object be only known as present or absent; For if the Imagination goes from
the one to the other, and chiefly if it draws consequences from it for the
future, we cannot doubt but the present and absent object must move the
Appetite by means of the discortses which in these encounters the Imagination
makes. Now it is certain that in all the examples which he has proposed the
Soul makes a progress from one difference of time to another and therefore she
reasons; and therefore all M.C's. induction is vain.

But wherefore do we so long insist on those things which we have elsewhere
decided, and what can we do in repeating them so often, but as often we must
afflict M.C. with the remembrance of his first defea^? Yet this is not
generously to overcome him; we must spare shaming a vanquished enemy, and not
use him ill when he has given up his arms. Let us therefore pass to other
matters, and without speaking any more of all these differences of time wherein
M C. has lost himself, let us see whether what he has said of the Custom may
repair his losses, and whether it destroys any of my propositions.

Of Custom, and that it cannot be acquired without Reason.
It is true that I have said, That if one could do such things which one were
accustomed unto, without using reason; yet it is impossible to accustom ones
self thereunto without the use of reason. And that those who say that Beasts do
things out of custom, tacitly confess that they are reasonable. To prove this,
I have supposed that Memory was necessary to accustom ones self to do any thing
and that to reiterate the same actions one must remember ones self of them,
otherwise they would not be like, or at least the first would leave no
disposition for the others to do better. That in fine it was an assured thing
that in the common and ordinary actions which beasts by custom do, they at
first remember themselves of the good or ill which has happened to them for
having done them, and that without that they could not afterward have
accustomed themselves to have done them again; On these foundations I have
concluded that on this occasion they have the same necessity of reasoning which
they have when they are instructed, because they must needs unite the images of
the present objects with that of past things, of which they remember
themselves, and from thence they draw consequences for the future.

Against all these Truths M. C. opposes two things, the one at the end of his
17. Chapter, whereby he pretends to show, That Memory is not necessary for all
kinds of habits; the other is at the head of the same Chapter, where he imploys
a many examples to prove, That we accustom our selves to several things whereto
Reason can no way serve.

Had I to do with a man who were content with a few words, I would in two words
tell him, that all this makes nothing against me, and is contrary to his own
sense; That I speak of the Custom of Beasts which requires the assistance of
Memory, and wherein M. C. confesses himself that it is necessary. And that
without stopping at the rest, its sufficient for me that there may be any one
found which may be acquired without it; Since that alone may maintain the
induction which I made, and prove that Beasts reason, at least on this
occasion. But because its a man who loves contests, and seeks a noise, I shall
sally out of my trenches, and enter the Lists with him, were it but as they say
for the Ladies.

Let us then see what the first assault will be: After having related what I
have said concerning Custom; to wit, that it is formed by several actions which
leave in the powers a certain facility of operating. And that this facility
consists either in a quality which resides in the organs, or in a more perfect
knowledge which the soul may have acquired by more express images, which
afterward makes the stronger impression on the Appetite, and on the motive
virtue of the parts: and that its indifferent to me how the thing be done, so
as we know that the memory is necessary thereunto.

He adds, That he finds almost nothing to gainsay in all that Discourse. And
for my part, I also find nothing to gainsay but that he therein makes me speak
barbarously; For although I do not h^ed his manner of speaking; yet I cannot
suffer him to give himself the liberty to change mine; and as the purity of
language is the only thing which he esteems in my Discourse, I shall have a
very great care to preserve it, since it has had the honor to merit his
approbation. Howsoever I am not so well pleased with his discourse as he is
with mine; for there is not one only proposition which I will not undertake to
gainsay. 1. When he avers That its as indifferent to him as to me what sense
is had of Custom, for if it be swelled species, etc. He confounds the facility
of operating with the Custom, without remembering that Custom makes Facility;
and that the Question is not so much what that of Custom is, but to know what
that of Facility is. On the other side how can he say That its indifferent to
him, since presently after its no longer indifferent to him, having sided with
speculative and practical habits.

2. He adds, That if it be a Species swollen in the Memory with several
knowledges, it may be acquired by simple conceptions without reasoning, etc.
The Question here is not of Reasoning, but to know whether Memory be not
necessary to Custom. Thus against all the Rules of Logic he anticipates his
Answers, and so runs to the Conclusion, without satisfying the first
Propositions. Besides that, if this thickened Species in the Memory may be
acquired without discourse, all Speculative Habits which he places in that
gender, must needs be acquired without discourse; on the other side, who can
oblige to place the nature of speculative habits in their images; for after
that he must maintain, That all Habits are only in the Memory, since these
images are nowhere else preserved: I omit all other inconveniences which
follow this opinion, and what M. C. says in pursuit of the acts because it
matters nothing to our dispute.

To wit, whether Memory is necessary to all sorts of Habits.
Let us now observe the examples he proposes to show that Memory is not
necessary for all kinds of Habits: The first is of Children whose hands are
held to teach them to write; for using to conduct them thus the habit it
imprinted in them to conform themselves to the characters they see, and this
custom is acquired without the Memories contributing any thing thereunto. Its
what he ought to prove, for in fine children have a Memory, and it is not so
easy to persuade ones self that they should so often do the same action
without remembering it. But what! says he, Children form themselves to certain
customs, before they have the use of Memory. It Is what I shall deny him; they
have indeed a weak one, but yet it is true that they use it, and that when
objects strongly touch it, they remember very well, as M C. himself has made
it appear, p. 148

The second is of Porters, whose Memory is useless to them to accustom them to
carry heavy burdens, because, says he, this strength which is but a habit
would remain when even they had lost their Memories.

M.C. confounds here the habit of bearing burdens with strength, although they
be two very different things; such a man may have the one and want the other,
Porters may well have them both, but they have them by several ways; strength
comes to them from Nature, and habit comes from Custom; on the other side,
strength is not in the rank of habits unless we should speak improperly, but
it is a natural power which affords a man the virtue of acting, which habit does
not. But were it a habit, and that it might remain in a Porter after the loss
of his Memory, what induction could he thence draw against me; for I never said
that when a man had acquired a habit or a custom, he had need of Memory, but
only that it was necessary for him to acquire it; and for that cause that
Animals cannot acustom themselves to whatsoever it be without the help of
Reason and of Memory, although it may be that they may afterward without it do
those things which they accustomed themselves unto. Yet for all this, I do not
cease to believe but that all true habits have need of Memory; and that who
ever should lose it, would also lose the use of all other habits he has
acquired, how perfect soever they were. But since I did not explicate my self
thereupon, why will M. C. divine my thought and find inconveniences in things
which I never yet said? Yet do I not insist hereupon, since he at last remits
himself to Reason and confesses, (page 159) That this faculty is necessary for
several actions which Beasts perform, and the good and ill which happens to
them, remains in their Memory, and afterward obliges them to reject the same
actions; for although he denies, that it is on the hope or fear that the same
good or the same ill might happen unto them; It is very likely that after he
has seen the Reasons which we have used to maintain this truth, he will
presently yield up the Cudgels. For my part, I find the proceedings therein
held very equitable, and I very much approve the prudence he had, to expect
till I had evidently made him see that Beasts fear and hope, and that they
confer the time past with the future, before he oblige himself to believe it. I
even maintain that in the quality which he here takes of a Defender, he might
in conscience say, That there was no Ratiocination therein without being
obliged to produce Reasons to the contrary. And that if he did so, it was as he
says, Superabundance of right, and out of pure zeal which he had for the Truth;
But also this same prudence and this same zeal engage him to change his
opinion, now he has wherewithal to satisfy his doubts, and those things which
were obscure unto him now present themselves clear and evident. It Is an advice
which I give him for his own sake; for he may well think that it concerns not
me, and that what part soever he takes, my cause will neither be better nor
worse.

To wit, Whether one may accustom ones self to some things without Reasoning.
Let us examine the other point, where by new examples he would show, That we
accustom our selves to several things whereto reason is nothing serviceable.
For it is here that he triumphs and flatters himself with the advantage he
thinks he has over me, for that I had not answered to those he had formerly
proposed on the same subject; I confess I did not answer to them because I
ought not to have done it. And M. C. wrongs himself to make use of it, since
it is a mark wherein he believes the decisive point of the question we have in
hand is, without perceiving that its therein altogether useless. Nay I shall
repeat it again. I pretend to speak only of custom and habits in which he
himself says, that Memory is necessary; and it is sufficient for me if Animals
have some one of that Nature, to conclude that they could not have acquired
them without reasoning, since they must have conferred the present objects with
those which were past and those which were to come, as we have said. So that if
there were others in which this progress is not made, in good time be it; as I
hinder him not, so it also hinders not my consequence from being good and true.

But what, all these few Observations he has made must they lie on his hands,
without his drawing any advantage from them? no indeed, how slight soever they
be, we must disburthen him of them, and at the same time show him for what they
may be good. Which I will not do as he does out of superabundance of right,
since it matters nothing to our question, but out of the only desire which I
have to make him know the truth But we must first bring them to light that the
Reader may know what we are upon, and that he may give judgment from the
knowledge of the cause.

The first is, Of Children, who accustom themselves to several things before
they have the use of Reason. The second is, From the stomach which accustoms it
self to certain means, and which regulates its hunger at certain hours. The
third is, Of the Liver, which accustoms it self to make the more blood, the
oftener we are let blood. The fourth is, Of the fluxious which accustom
themselves to fall on certain parts. The fifth is, Of the external Senses which
acquire habits, some persons having been found who have accustomed themselves
to the taste of Woormwood, and to the smell of stinking things etc. The sixth
is, From the common Sense which takes a custom of sleeping and waking at
regulated hours. The seventh, the eighth and the ninth is, From the Memory.
from the Appetite, and from the motive virtue which acquires habits; from all
this he concludes, that it not necessary to accustom ones self to any thing, to
make use of reason. Since there is not one of these things which he has
proposed, which is reasonable, nor any of their effects wherein reason appears.

First when he says, That reason herein is not necessary he intends
intellectual Reason, since he acknowledges none other; and in that sense I
grant him all what he says; but our difference is not therein; it consists to
know whether the Imagination reasons not in these encounters. In the second
place, he imploys the word Custom, without observing the several significations
it has, and indifferently applies it to several things, without telling us
that it properly belongs to the one, and improperly to others, which yet were
necessary to induce what he pretends; for I have reason to retort all his
examples, in which this word has not its true and proper signification. M C.
should have remembered that Custom and Habit are active dispositions, and cannot
be properly applied to passives, wherefore when they say, That a Man accustoms
himself to heat and cold that the stomach accustoms it self to certain meats,
that some have accustomed themselves to find the taste of Woormwood pleasant,
etc. This word has not therein its natural signification, because that in all
these kinds of speaking we mean nothing else but that we accustom our selves to
suffer those objects, and that the facility we find therein is a pure,
material and passive disposition, which the use of these things has left in
the organs.

In effect, we accustom our selves to heat, because the impression of heat
remains in the parts, and makes that what comes afterward operates not so
powerfully on the body, which is already imbued with that quality. It Is the
same with odors, favors, and other sensible objects; which by means of striking
the Senses, leave a certain character in them, which renders the organs most
like the objects, and the objects more familiar to the organs; There is not
therefore therein a true custom; No more then when we say, that a fluxion is
accustomed to fall on some place; for it is but a passive disposition which
comes from the weakness of the parts which cannot resist the over-flowings of
the humors which cast themselves on them. Add That it is not the flux which
accustoms it self; for that which is fallen never falls again; But it is nature
which commonly discharges it self on the weakest parts, or rather its those
same parts which out of weakness are more capable to receive those
superfluities wiich they receive from elsewhere. However it be, these are
manners of speaking which are good for the people and not for Philosophers. And
besides its in that rank you must place, The custom which the Liver takes to
make the more blood in those who are often let blood. For the Liver has no
more facility in making of it then, then when a man is seldom let blood. But
it is by this evacuation that the parts empty themselves, and that Nature labors
to make the more blood to fill them. In fine, as we never say, that there is a
true Custom or any Habit in the seasons, and in other inanimate things;
although we say that the Winter is accustomed to be rainy, that the earth is
accustomed to be fertile in such places, etc. We must believe, that when we use
these kind of speeches for the natural actions of the body its figuratively, or
by an abuse; and that a man who cannot distinguish these things deserves not to
enter into the secrets of Nature, nor to take place amongst Philosophers.

After all this, if M.C. would opiniaster himself to maintain that there is a
true custom in all those observations which he produces; Could we not tell
him, that as they are all taken from Animals, they leave the suspicion that the
Imagination concurs thereunto; and that therefore they are not performed
without the Ratiocination of that Faculty. Certainly to have taken away all
cause of doubt, he should have made use of examples drawn from insensible
things, as Stones, Plants, etc. Then there had been no more difficulty, and we
should have been constrained to confess, that Custom needs not the help of the
Memory and of Reason. But since all these parts which he says accustomed
themselves to certain things, are indewed with sense, and that everywhere,
where there is sense the Imagination must agitate. Are we not to believe that
they have accustomed themselves thereunto by Knowledge, and that the images
which form this Knowledge preserve themselves in the Memory, and make the soul
remember the first actions, that it may afterward perform the like, whence at
last comes facility and habit? No, let not M.C. deceive himself, the
Imagination and the Memory agitate not alone in the Head. Although they recide
there as in their Throne, and there perform their most considerable actions,
they spread themselves through all the sensible parts, and perform often
operations of which they give no knowledge to this principal organ, and therein
imitate Princes, who act many things in the several parts of the State without
communicating ought to their counsel. It Is thus that so many sentiments are
made in the Members without our preception: It Is thus, that the Memories
remains in the fingers of a Luthenest after he has forgot all his pieces. It Is
thus that the virtue formatrix forms the images it has received from the
Imagination, when it imprints those wonderful marks on the bodies of children
during the women's being with child, they neither knowing nor remembering
themselves thereof. But we reserve to the third Volume of our Characters which
we are about to publish, the full discovery of this truth. In the mean time
let us conclude this unprofitable Examen of M: C's. examples, since we agree to
what he intends to prove, to wit, That Custom may be acquired without the help
of Intellectual Reason. And that its very likely, that having well considered
the proofs we have produced to show that the Imagination reasons, he will also
agree with us, That the custom he speaks of can never be acquired but by the
Discourse of the Imagination.

CHAP. V. Examen of M. C. Objections against our last proof of the Reasoning of
Beasts.
THe last proof which we gave of the Reason of Beasts was, That the motion of
their Appetite, which ought to preceed all the actions which they perform, is
never made, without being devanced by three Propositions. The 1. That the thing
is good. The Second, That it is feasible. The Third, That it must be done. And
that these Propositions are linked together with common terms, and the one
drawing its evidence from the other, they must form a perfect Ratiocination.

This Reason which we employed to show, that the actions of the Instinct are
all made with Ratiocination pleases not M.C. First in that I suppose that
those actions are motions of the Appetite; and he says, That he is too knowing
in these matters, and too hard to be persuaded to believe it, without its
having been proved to him; Yet for compliance sake he will grant it, that he
may make it appear, that the Appetite needs none of these Propositions.

For my part, I would not have him lose the merit of such an extraordinary
civility, I here accept of the favor he does me, at least until we come to the
Examen of the Instinct; for I then hope to make it evidently appear, not that
these Actions are motions of the Appetite, having never proposed that
Proposition, but that they were preceded by the motion of the Appetite. And how
difficult soever it may be to persuade, I am sure to convince him by the first
notions of Philosophy, or to reduce him to that point as to deny them, and to
fight against common sense. This Article remaining then in suspense till that
time; Let Us now observe what he opposes to the rest, Its sufficient, says he,
if the object he known by the first operation of the spirit to move the
Appetite; for when one that is hungerstarved sees bread, his Appetite without
discourse is carried thereunto; and when we put our hands to the dish our
Imagination discourses not whether it be good. I cannot take it, I must
therefore take it.

It seems, saving the respect which I owe M. C. he quits himself not well of
his promise, for I therein see no proof which makes me know that the Appetite
needs none of these propositions; and does he think it enough to destroy a
thing simply to contradict it without grounding it on any Reason, I said the
Appetite has need of propositions; and he answers, That its enough if the
object be known by the first operation of the spirit; He should therefore have
proved it. For what he adds, That when one hungerstarved sees bread, he carries
his Appetite thereto without discourse; cannot pass for a proof, since its the
subject of our difference and contest. At furthest M. C. cannot disavow, that
before the creature moves to any thing, it must be known unto it as good, and
feasible and he must propose in himself to do it.

Thus the question reduces it self to this point to know whether it forms
these Knowledges by Propositions or by simple Notions: Now it is resolved by us
both, That the Senses do not know things as good and feasible, because they
receive no image of the goodness, or of the possibility, and that that belongs
properly to the Imagination which adds these Notions to that of the senses;
which for that cause are called in the Schools Species non sensatae. If this be
so, the imagination of necessity must have the image of the goodness, and of
the possibility, and unite it with that of the object to know it to be good and
feasible. And consequently she then makes affirmative Propositions, since to
unite the Images, and make these Propositions is one and the same thing, as we
have showed in the second Part.

It Is there where he may find the Reasons, which we had not inculcated in our
first Work, thinking it the best way to treat with understanding persons.
There, I say, he shall find them more enlarged, more clear, and in my opinion
more forcible to persuade him That I did not seem to prove, that the
Imagination makes affirmatives, but that in effect I have solidly proved it on
the Principles and Maxims of the Schools.

Whilst he is busied in consulting this Chapter we shall here observe, Whether
he has reason to be surprised, as he says, That I should persuade my self
that these three Propositions make a Ratiocination: And whether he does wisely
To defy all the Logitians to make of it a reasonable Syllogism. First, I might
answer him in a word, that I never said that these three Propositions made a
Syllogism, but that they made a Discourse, and a true Ratiocination. And as
there are other reasonings beside the Syllogism; it is sufficient for my design
if I prove that Beasts discourse, that they make a Ratiocination without making
a Syllogism. But what! M. C. when he makes an Enthymema, when he makes a
Sorites, does he not reason? Yet he makes therein no Syllogism, at least which
has all the conditions necessary thereunto. On the other side, although a man
cannot form an only and simple Syllogism, of these three Propositions, yet a
man may make a composed Syllogism, which is a true and perfect Syllogism. I
confess that these three Propositions cannot assemble themselves but they must
contain four terms, and that three can but enter into a simple Syllogism; but
this forbids us not but we may make one of the two first Propositions, and that
the last to be added need not pass for a new consequence, which joined with the
precedent would make a composed discourse of a Syllogism and of an Enthymema:
Thus an Animal that would eat any thing may first have discoursed after this
manner, This Sweet is Good.
This Good may be eaten.
Then this Sweet may be eaten,
Then it must be eaten.


But I will not have this to be an entire Syllogism, and that he should
assemble as M C. says, the two first propositions in one, This thing is good
and feasible; and that he afterward concludes Then it must be done. Will he
not then make an Enthymema of three propositions; for it is certain that one
proposition copulative as that is, is worth a double proposition, since therein
is a double union; for so these three propositions would compose a true
discourse. And in this case M. C. was much in the wrong, To defy all the
Logitians to make any Syllogism thereof, and to render them incapable to form a
Discourse which Beasts themselves may make.

But (says he) to conclude the operation, there must be an universal
Proposition made, which must affirm, That one must do all that is good and
feasible.

He is much mistaken; the particular connection of goodness and possibility with
the operation, is sufficient without having an universal, as we showed in
speaking of that which was between the sweetness and goodness of an aliment;
for at last we must always return thither; That the Animal knows the thing to
be good, that he knows also that its possible as the Schools resolves, and that
upon these two knowledges he undertakes to do it; so that if a connection
betwixt these antecedent notions and the operation be necessary, and that the
Beasts must know it to act, it must also know it but as particular, since the
Imagination cannot raise it self to the knowledge of universal things. Its
therefore useless to add any general proposition to the Ratiocination which a
Beast then has, no more then in all the rest which M.C. pretends ought to
follow that.

For says he, page 104. If we were obliged to perform this Ratiocination
before we should resolve to eat any thing, we ought to make a second before we
bring it to our mouths, and so a third chewing of it; and to chew it, one must
make a fourth, to cause the motion of the Muscles; and a fifth to send spirits
thereunto. And so every stroke of the teeth, and every motion of the Appetite
would require as many Syllogisms and universal Propositions, of which the
Imagination is altogether incapable.

Should I answer M. C. but out of universal Propositions, which I do not admit
in all these Ratiocinations, there is nothing herein but might be done; Perhaps
he would be troubled to maintain the contrary, and it were to no purpose for
him to say, that it were contrary to experience; for we should easily grant him
that it is indeed contrary to the experience of the vulgar, but not contrary to
the experience of Philosophers. Or rather we should say, that it is not against
experience, since there is none at all in it, for as much as they are things
which few persons have exactly considered; and as he speaks in one place very
judiciously, Books which have treated thereof furnish so little help for the
Examen of these kind of actions, that he cannot believe that any Philosopher
has deighned seriously to think thereon:

If this be so, how could any experience have been made hereof? and if there be
no experience thereof, how can i^ be against experience? But I will not amuse
my self to maintain things which I do not believe. In two words I shall say,
That it is not necessary the Imagination should here make so many
Ratiocinations as it figures to it self, or at least as he figures to himself?
Let it suffice, that commonly she makes a perfect one for the principal action,
which is the last she proposes to herself. For all the rest, which serve but
as means to arrive thereto, the notions she has thereof are but as many
consequences and shortened Enthymema's, which are drawn from the first
conclusion; such as those are which heat and precipitation of dispute often
oblige us to make in our conversations; Thus when a Dog would catch a Hare, he
ought to know that its a good thing, and believe at the same time that he would
catch it, and last of all that he must catch it; but to execute this design he
knows he must run after it, that he must follow it such a way, that he must
cast himself upon it, etc. So that after the first reasoning which consists of
the aforesaid three Propositions; every of the other which he adds is worth an
Enthymema; and of necessity he reasons so, since if he must take it, he must
run after it; then he must pass such a way, and then he must cast himself on
it, etc.

Yet we ought here to observe, that those actions which serve as means to
attain to a principal end are of two kinds, for some are complete, others are
imperfect; the complete are made by the Members, as when the arm moves, when
the hand takes, when the foot goes, etc. The imperfect are made by those parts
which compose the Members, such as are the Muscles, the Nerves and the Spirits,
etc. all the former come to the knowledge of the Animal which knows before he
move himself, whether he ought to extend or bow a member, whether to advance or
retire his foot; whether he ought to run, or only to go, and so of the rest;
But the latter are altogether unknown unto him. For the soul knows not the
number of the Nerves, and of the Muscles, nor the particular use to which every
of them is destined, although she never deceive her self in the choice she
makes of those which are to be employed, which is one of the greatest marvels
which is to be found in the Animal, as we shall show in the second part of this
Work. This being supposed, we say that complete actions which serve as means to
one principal end are made only by Enthymema's; but that the imperfect require
none, because the Imagination has no knowledge of them, and we must therefore
r^ce out of the number of Syllogisms, which M.C: alleges, those which respect
the motion of the Muscles and Spirits. On the contrary, whatever we have said,
that the Imagination makes no perfect discourses, but for the principal action,
it is to be understood when the means are easy, and that they have no difficulty
or other circumstance which deserves to stop the soul from considering it; it
otherwise makes the same discourses for them, as for the principal action, as
it happens in three Experiences which we have produced at the beginning of this
Chapter. Thus when the Dog sees that the course is not sufficient to catch the
prey, he uses slight; if he finds a stop in the way he considers, and seeks
the means to surmount it; and amongst all this, the remembrance of past things,
and the expectation of those to come, occupy his Imagination, and make him make
at every moment the discourses which we have before mentioned.

In fine, We must judge of all this progress in proportion to what passes in
our Minds, when we form any design and endeavor to execute it. For besides
abstractions and universal propositions which are proper to the Understanding,
the Imagination operates even as that does. And as there are entire
Ratiocinations which we make to undertake a thing, as amongst the means which
present themselves to attain it, there are some which stop us, and others which
are so evident, and so easy that we make use of them without examination: And
as all this is commonly done so readily that it seems there are but moments
employed therein. We must also believe, for the Reasons which we have so often
alleged, That Beasts act in the same manner in those designs which they
undertake.

And now I believe M.C. will be glad to have learnt that he is twice more
reasonable then he thought, and that his imagination makes a number of
reasonings, of which he was not yet awares. For how ready soever the hand be to
write, and the tongue to pronounce what it would express; His Imagination still
goes as fast as that, and beyond all the leisure that is necessary for him by
those Ratiocinations which we have mentioned, to go before the motion of these
organs. We may say its like a Painter who in a moment forms the Idea of what he
would paint; but when he sets his hand to the work, he must have days and whole
weeks. Writing and Speech indeed ask not so much time, but still there is an
infinite distance betwixt the swiftness of the Imagination, and that of the
Hand and Tongue, since that is to be done without any time, and this is ever
done with time.

For the rest, I would willingly consolate M.C. Of the shame he had to stop at
things so far from all appearance of Truth, were I certain of what things he
intended to speak; for I know not whether they are Objections which he makes
me, or the propositions which I proposed which have made him ashamed, the one
and the other being able to lead him into confusion; in any case he ought to
know that the shame to have failed is very good, but that which a man has to
learn is very bad; Let Us therefore go on since this passion also has that
property that she will not be spoken of.

To wit, Whether Animals doubt.
In confirmation of what I have said, That it was necessary that three
Propositions in question must precede the motions of the Appetite, I have
produced the example of Dogs, and Birds of prey, which often pursue not the
game they see, when they judge it to be too far off. I have also proposed that
sometimes they seem to doubt, and are apparently in trouble to resolve whether
they ought to pursue it or no; and that in these encounters although the thing
appear unto them good, yet because they judge it not feasible they undertake it
not; the operation which is the conclusion being not to be done without one of
the propositions, as it happens in all true Syllogisms.

To this M.C. opposes first, That if their doubt be but in appearance, its not
just to make use of it against him; if it be true, it follows that Beasts
deliberate.

But I answer, That he here corrupts my words and gives them another sense then
they ought to have; There is a great deal of difference to say that Beasts seem
to doubt, or that apparently they have some doubt; and to say that their doubt
is but in appearance; the first way of expression excludes not the doubt, but
the second does. And we may say of a man who is truly in wrath, that he seems
to be in wrath, and that apparently he is angry. If it be then true, that
Beasts are capable of doubting, as we shall make it appear, they may in effect
doubt, without our being assured thereof, because we cannot clearly know their
thought; but by actions they perform we conjecture that they doubt. And then we
have reason to say that apparently they doubt, that is to say, That they appear
to us to doubt: But not that their doubt is but in appearance, because it may
happen they doubt in effect, and that a thing which is but in appearance is not
really.

But let us stick no longer in words, let us examine things, and see what the
Nature of doubt is; for after that we may clearly perceive, whether Beasts are
capable of forming it. Aristotle says very elegantly, that he who doubts is
like to a man bound, because both the one and the other are restrained, and
cannot go whether they will; this cannot advance forward in his way, and that
cannot make any progress in his knowledge. In effect, when he finds that the
objects are not clearly represented unto him, when he sees reasons and
appearances contrary concerning the same thing; they are as many chains which
stop him and hold him in suspense that he knows not which side to take; and
whilst he remains in this neutrality, so long time he doubts, and is not
assured of what he seeks. For which cause we may call Doubt a suspension of
judgment which cannot determine on the things propesed unto it. Now because
that to judge is to unite or divide images; this suspention cannot be conceived
but as a restraint which the judicative faculty imposes on it self in its
function, the difficulty and uncertainty wherein she is, not permitting her to
unite or separate those images which she has formed. Yet must we not figure to
our selves this restraint to be as a cessation or rest; otherwise whosoever
would not know the things, and whose spirit were dull and without action, might
pass for a man who were in doubt. But it is to be considered as a motion by
which the Mind restrains it self, and suffers not it self to be born away
whereto it had a design to go. This is to be judged of proportionably to what
happens to bodies that are heavy; when they are in their center their weight
agitates not, and they truly are at rest; but when they are suspended in the
air, although they are there retained, yet they have a secret motion, and make
always some endeavor to fall. It is even so with the judgment; when it seeks
not the truth, its without action, it cease to operate, its at rest; but when
its suspended, that is to say, when it advances not, yet this marks also the
motion it makes to attain to its end.

However it be, this suspension of the judicative faculty comes from the
incertainty wherein she is, whether she ought to unite or separate the Images.
And this incertainty proceeds from that it knows not whether the things are or
are not in effect, as she has proposed them to her self; But whence is it that
she knows it not? Certainly, there are many causes which contribute thereunto,
and we need only consult the Epoches of the Sceptick to find out that this
defect has diverse sources. Sometimes it happens from that the Senses do not
well represent the objects; for he that has a weak sight, or who looks on any
thing through a thick air, or at too great a distance, has reason to doubt
whether what he perceives be such in effect as his eyes figure it to be;
sometimes it happens from that we have not experienced the things, or that we
know not the reason thereof: So a Mathematical proposition how certain soever
it be, may leave a doubt to him who never saw the demonstration; and he who
has not proved the effect of a remedy, may doubt whether what was said be true
or false. But the most evident, and perhaps the most ordinary cause of this
defect is, when the Mind is divided betwixt two reasons, or two contrary
appearances, or between two things altogether alike: for from thence come
almost all the doubts of the Schools, and of the Politics, and the
irresolution wherein we are at every moment in our common and private actions.
In effect, the way presently to determine to know whether a business be good or
ill, when one finds Reasons equally strong on both sides, and when two things
appear equally good, how can a man so readily resolve to choose the most
profitable or the most agreeable!

But it is not necessary to produce all the causes which cause our doubts and
irresolutions; its in question here to know whether there be any of those which
we have mentioned, which produces in Animals the same effect it works in us,
which restrains their Imagination, when it should either unite or separate
images. In a word, which makes them doubt the things proposed unto them.

Readily to decide this Question, those who hold the negative part, must go and
be instructed by that Ass so famous in the Schools, finding himself betwixt two
measures of Oats, without being able to resolve to which of them to go, both
appearing unto him equally good. For they should learn from him that in that
condition he could not determine, that his Judgment was then in suspense, and
consequently that he was in doubt what to do. But if they will not believe him,
let them have recourse to M.C. who in his considerations on Charron in many
places has showed, That the Imagination of Beasts is often restrained in these
actions, and that the combat which hunger and fear of being beaten makes in
their mind, is the cause that she remains unable of performance. For this
restraint cannot be understood but of the impotency wherein she is to resolve
and form the practical judgment, which is the principle of operation: Now this
is nothing but a suspention of judgment, its nothing but doubt, as we have
before showed.

But perhaps they require other Masters besides these, and that there is not
authority enough to persuade them to this truth, should we even use that of
Aristotle, who assures us that Goats are astonished when they see any of them
taken by the beard. And certainly, could this be believed in this particular,
they would be constrained to confess that upon this occasion Goats must doubt,
for astonishment is ever accompanied with doubt, and with suspense, as in
another place we shall make it appear.

Since we must therefore treat with them by the only strength of Reason, I
would have them presuppose what I have demonstrated in the second part of this
Work; to wit, That Beasts judge of things; that is to say, That their
imagination unites and separates the images she has formed of them. They must
further agree with me, that she unites not all kind of Images, but these only
which agree together; for she unites not the Notion of good with bitter, nor
that of ill with sweet; no more then the design of pursuing with what is ill,
or that of flying with what is good: But it joins Sweet with Good, and adds to
this the design of the pursuit; as it unites the Bitter with Ill, joining
afterward thereunto the design of flight. She must therefore know sweet before
she can judge whether it be good, and that its good before she forms the design
of the pursuit. And if she be troubled to know them, she has the same trouble
to make these resolves or judgments; for if she cannot unite the images which
appear unto it to have an agreement together, how can she know the agreement
betwixt good that which is sweet, if she assuredly know not the sweet? How can
she resolve to pursue the good, unless she certainly know what is good? In
these encounters therefore she must suspend her judgment; that is to say, she
must stay to unite the images she has formed until she be assured in her
knowledge; for when an object is very far off, the Animal draws nearer, the
better to discern it; he smells and tastes the food before he eats it, and
although it appear good to him, the fear of being beaten restrains him: He is
not therefore assured in any of these knowledges; otherwise he would not draw
nearer the better to see the object; he would content himself with the sight to
judge of its goodness, without making use of the smell or of the taste; And fear
would not hinder his design of taking it; so that if he is not assured of these
things, his imagination cannot unite the Images of them, and therefore she
contains herself self and suspends her judgment; in a word, she doubts.

Certainly there is no reasonable person who will not consent to all these
truths, after having considered what Beasts do; when they see or when they hear
any thing which they cannot well discern, they stay, they open their eyes and
their ears, and are attentive to discover what in effect it is; for all these
actions are assured marks that they doubt, and that they would assure
themselves of what they do not clearly know. And of a truth, if they knew the
thing to be good or ill, they would not at all stop at it, they would continue
their way, did they think it good, and would fly from it if they thought it
ill. But they retain themselves because their Imagination suspends its judgment
and doubts whether the thing be good or ill, whether she ought to go forwards
or backwards. Certainly when we see a Hare stop short at the least noise it
hears, that it lifts up the head, pricks up the ears, and looks every way about
it, we may assure our selves that its in trouble to know who made the noise,
and that until it perceives the Huntsman, its still in doubt of what it was,
and in an irresolution of what it ought to do. Whence is it fishes strike with
their tails the bait which hangs on the hook, or strike their chops against it
without swallowing it? do they not doubt of the danger which is hid thereunder?
For were they altogether certain that it were, they would not absolutely come
near it; and if they did also believe that there were none, they would be taken
by the bait without any precaution.

Perhaps our adversaries will say, That these examples and an infinite of the
like which may be added to these, are effects of Instinct. But were it so, it
must still follow, that Beasts at least doubt by Instinct. Now it imports not
here after what manner they doubt, so as in effect they do but doubt. For as
the fear which Instinct gives them is a true fear; the doubt also which happens
to them from that must be a true doubt.

But take from them this poor pretext, I will convince them by an experience,
which can have no relation to the Instinct. When a Dog sees his Master come
afar off, he knows well it is a man, although he cannot discern what man it is,
and then he looks fixedly upon him without moving; and as he draws nearer, and
begins to come to some knowledge of him, he begins to wag his Tail and move his
Ears, without as yet quitting his place, but as soon as he quite knows him, he
suddenly gets up and runs away to caress him. For my part, I believe were all
these circumstances rightly considered, they ought to persuade the most opinion
after That the Dog suspends his judgment, before he has a certain knowledge of
his Master; and that he has no way to have recourse to his Instinct, since
Instinct is common to all the Species, and that none of the other Dogs will use
those caresses which this accosts his Master withal.

It follows not that Beasts Deliberate because they Doubt.
Its then resolved that Beasts doubt. But says M.C. if it be so, it follows
that they deliberate. Not at all, there is no consequence from the one to the
other: He should have remembered that Deliberation is only for practical
things, and not for speculative, and that Doubt may meet in either of them. On
the other side we never deliberate of the end, but only of the means we are to
use to attain it; yet a man may doubt of the end as well as of the means. There
is no necessity for Beasts to deliberate because they doubt, since those things
may be doubted in which there is no deliberation to be made.

I know that doubt often causes men to deliberate, but had they not the
liberty to choose, what doubts soever they had, they could deliberate no more
then Beasts, because Deliberation is employed only to choose those means for it
which seem best. Now in those things wherein the Soul is necessitated, and that
it cannot do otherwise, there is no choice nor liberty, nor consequently no
place for Delibe^ation.

I would willingly ask M.C. when he was in doubt of some proposition, and that
after he came to grant those principles, whence its necessarily drawn, whether
he deliberates to know whether he ought to approve it or no, whether he have
the liberty to choose the affirmative or the negative? Certainly should he have
abused himself so highly, all the Schools would side against him and tell him,
That the Understanding is necessitated to approve a demonstrated conclusion,
that it cannot do otherwise. And that should the Will it self with all the
Empire it has over it endeavor to hinder it, it would make as vain an effort,
as if it would constrain the eyes not to see those objects which were before
it; how ever it is, Beasts do doubt, being uncertain of the things proposed
unto them, but the certainty and resolution which they afterward take; comes
from no choice, nor from any deliberation which they make, but from a more
clear knowledge which the objects afford them, which necessitates and forces
them to unite or to separate the images conformably to their nature, to
determine themselves on those points they were unresolved in: In a word, to
assure themselves of the things which they were before in doubt of.

But its to stay too long on a difficulty, which at bottom is indifferent for
the matter in question; for if Beasts were not capable of doubting, the Reason
which M. C. examines here, would still remain in full force, and it would still
be true that Dogs and Hawks do not pursue their Game, how good soever it appear
unto them, if they judge it to be out of reach. It remains now for us to
observe whether he has weakened it by any other Objection more considerable
then that.

He for a second Reason adds, That Dogs often cease to pursue the Game,
although it be not out of reach, their Imagination being diverted: That on the
contrary they do not forbear to pursue what is too far off to be taken; and if
they do stop, its either out of weariness or out of distraction, but also most
commonly because that an object a far off draws not at all. I shall grant him
all what he here says, excepting that adamantine virtue wherewith he believes
objects draw the powers of the Mind; for it is an extravagant opinion which
cannot be maintained by any reason, and which destroys the nature of Knowledge,
and the principles of Philosophy.

Without lying, I wonder that so clear a spirit as is M. C's should not have
perceived that all what he has said makes nothing against what I have
proposed. When I said that Dogs often do not pursue their prey because they
judge it too far off; and that for his part he also assures, That often they do
not pursue it because their Imagination is diverted. We are nothing contrary
the one to the other, and both may have been in the right. Had I said that they
never pursued their prey when it was too far off, and that the distance was the
only cause they ceased to pursue it, he would have reason to object against
me, That distraction often is the cause that they do not pursue it, and even
that they sometimes pursue it when its out of reach. For all this may be true,
although I do not believe they judge it to be out of reach when they pursue it;
for an Animal cannot undertake a thing without judging it possible; yet this
hinders not that often also the only knowledge of the distance is cause of
their forbearance. And M.C. having produced no proofs to the contrary, I see
nothing that diminishes the strength of mine, nor which obliges me to change
my opinion; in effect, why should not the distance hinder a Dog from pursuing
his prey, since he well knows the height of a precipice, and that that only
knowledge is able to retain and hinder him from throwing himself down it* I see
no difference betwixt the one and the other. And if M. C. will grant the
latter, I must also yield to the former, and at last confess, That my Reason is
good, and that he has produced nothing to destroy it.

The End of the Third Part.
Answers to those Objections made against the Reason of Beasts.
THE FOURTH PART.
CHAP. I. The First OBJECTION. Of the difference there is betwixt the
Understanding and the Imagination.
HAving showed you in my first Work, That the Imagination reasons, I would
readily have taken away the suspicion which might have been bred in the Readers
mind, least I had rendered the Imagination equal with the Understanding; for I
have made it appear, that there was a great difference between them two. First,
for as much as the knowledge of the Imagination is bounded to corporal things,
necessary unto life, and commonly restrained to those which are proper to the
nature of every Species, and that that of the Understanding extends it self to
all things whatsoever. Secondly, In that the Imagination forms no universal
Notion, and consequently can make no Ratiocinations but particular ones.
Instead that the Understanding has the liberty to form general Notions of all
things, and to draw from thence universal or particular consequences at its
pleasure.

Whence we concluded, That the Imagination is not only inferior to the
Understanding in the manner of operating, but also in the order of Nature and
Essence. For the power which judges of all things, and which makes universal
Notions cannot be tied to the matter, and ought to be spiritual, forasmuch as
the matter determines and cannot admit of universality That so the
Understanding, reasoning universally, ought to be in the order of spiritual
things, whereto the Imagination cannot pretend being reduced to particular
discourses.

Whence it follows, that speaking generally, Reason is not the specific
difference of Man, but such a species of Reason, to wit universal Reason; and
because its the most noble and the most perfect of all, it retains the name of
the whole gender, according to the example of several other Species, and has
part with this privilege in the definition of Man; yet it is not therefore
that this word Reason, although it should signify the faculty or action of
reasoning precisely makes the essential difference of Man, because, both the
one and the other are pure Accidents, and that the difference of Man ought to
be a substance. But as in the ignorance wherein we are of the last differences
of things, we make use of proprieties and powers, which are nearest their
essence to design their Nature; Philosophy which herein is no less enlightened
then elsewhere, has employed the faculty of reasoning to mark the essential
difference of Man. But to follow his design, and to draw the nearer to the
truth; we must conceive this universal faculty that it may mark the order of
Nature, which distinguishes him from all other creatures, to wit,
Spirituality. And therefore when we define a Man by Reason, it ought to be
understood of the Faculty of Reasoning universally, and not of the Faculty of
Reasoning simply, which is common to him with Beasts.

The first difference which there is betwixt the Understanding and the
Imagination.
I imagined in my self, That there was no reasonable man, who ought not to
content himself with the share I had allotted him in the distribution of
Knowledge and Reason Yet it seems M C. is not satisfied therewith, and that he
will also have that which I have allowed Beasts, and would take from them that
small portion of Ratiocination which God and Nature has given them.

First, He approves not that the Imagination is different from the
Understanding, in that its knowledge is restrained to corporal things which are
necessary to life, and proper to the Nature of every species, instead that that
of the Understanding extends to all things whatsoever. For although at first he
says, That he would not contest thereupon, if I would not make these knowledges
pass by Ratiocinations. Yet without remembering this protestation, he presently
after says, p. 129. That it is not true that the knowledges of the Imagination
are restrained to things necessary for life, and proper to the nature of every
species. If this is not true, why would he not contest it? Is it that he will
contest only things which are true? Is it that he has a right to maintain
right and wrong, and to change his opinion from one line to another?

But he says, page 128. I would make these knowledges pass for Ratiocinations;
every shadow frights a man afraid, and to shun one danger he often falls into
another; I speak not there of Ratiocination, I speak of Knowledge in general,
and he to prevent my thought makes it appear that he knows not how to discern
the things he is to remove; and he easily commits a sophism, who reprehends
what ought not to be reprehended.

He should have considered, that having propoposed an action which marked the
essential difference betwixt the Unde^standing and the Imagination, it was
sufficient for me to show, that this knows only corporal things, and that the
Understanding knows generally all things, it being needless to say, whether
this knowledge were made with Ratiocination or no. For Aristotle w^o would
prove, that the Understanding was not tied to the matter, used the same reason,
and contented himself to show that a power which knows and judges of all
things, cannot be material without saying, whether knowledge was performed by
simple or composed Notions, for that it was unnecessary to his proof, which
were as strong, should the Understanding know things only by simple notions,
as if it knew them by Ratiocinations. M. C. did therefore deceive himself when
he thought I took here The Knowledges of the Imagination for Ratiocinations.
And much more when he thinks to have overthrown my distinction, and all those
which may be produced, in saying that the Imagination reasons not at all: For
whether it reason or whether it do not reason, it still remains concluded, that
since it judges but of corporal things, and that the Understanding judges of
all things, there must needs be an essential difference betwixt the two; and
consequently it can never be equal unto it, although she should have the
faculty of reasoning; which is what I had to show.

M. C. adds, page 128. That this difference is not essential, since its
grounded on more and on less.

He here confounds the means whereby we know this difference: Its true, that
more or less make us know it, but it follows not from thence that it consists
in more or less; we judge of health and sickness by more or less heat, but that
speaks not the essential difference which is found betwixt these two contrary
qualities, to consist in more or less heat. In the same manner we know by the
diverse extent which the objects of those two faculties have, that they are
essentially different, and yet we cannot thence infer, that the difference
found betwixt them consists in the diversity of extent. For it is but en
exterior mark whereby we discover that the Understanding is a power loosened
from the matter, and which consequently is different from the Imagination not
only in the species but in the gender. Now if they are different after this
manner, it necessarily follows that there is an essential difference betwixt
the one and the other, although we do not thereby precisely know wherein this
difference consists; And in all what we can do in this redoubt of the last
differences of things, Our mind being not capable to penetrate so far not
exactly to see all the parts of which their Nature is composed.

The third Reason which M. C. produces, is, That the distinction of a faculty
being rather to be drawn from the different manner of operating, then from the
difference of objects; If the Imagination reasons on corporal things, the
Understanding will have no way operating proper to it self, and consequently,
there will be nothing to distinguish them the one from the other.

If M. C. will take heed to what we have said, he will find the Answer which
is to be made to this Objection. For we did not pretend to show that the
essential difference which is betwixt the Understanding and the Imagination
consists in the diversity of their objects, but only that by that diversity we
might infer, that there was an essential difference betwixt these two powers.
So that without engaging my self in those contests which are in the Schools on
the distinction of powers; its sufficient for me that its a demonstrated truth,
That the Understanding is a power separate from the matter, since it judges of
all things. For it follows from thence, that its object makes us know its
nature is spiritual, and therefore that its essentially different from that of
the Imagination, which is in the order of material things.

After this we shall see that all what he says in pursuit is vain, or out of
purpose, and he might pass without a reply, or without any prejudice to my
cause. But to satisfy him on all what he proposes, I shall first tell him
that although the Imagination reasons on corporal things, the Understanding
forbears not to have an action proper to it self, and which distinguishes it
from the Imagination; for it reasons universally, which is not in the power of
the Imagination, as she shall hereafter show.

2 When he says, That the reasonings of children have no other objects but
corporal things, and yet their reason is not of a different nature from that of
the most speculative Philosophers.

I fear some body will reproach him, that this indeed is the reasoning of a
Child that knows not how to distinguish the act from the power, and s^es not
that the consequences drawn from the one and the other are commonly captious.
We confess that the reasonings of children have only corporal things for their
object; but we also hold that the object of their reason, that is to say, of
the Faculty which they have of reasoning extends to all things, as well as the
object of the Reason of the most speculative Philosophers. And although in the
age they are, the^ cannot judge but of sensible things; yet it hinders not but
they may have in themselves the Faculty to judge of all things which they may
put in practice, when by their years the obstacles of their childhood shall be
removed. But it is not so with the Imagination, which can never raise it self
above corporal things, what help, or what perfection soever it may attain. For
which cause we have had reason to say, that its object was different from that
of the Understanding, and that that marked an essential difference betwixt the
two Faculties, as we have already shown.

In fine, he will prove, That the knowledges of the Imagination are not
restrained to things necessary for life, and proper to the nature of every
species; because that besides that the objects of ours are not easily to be
limited; I have assured that Beasts reason on all what presents it self to
their senses. That they reason on the things which they are taught, That they
assemble all the images of the Memory, and from thence form consequences; That
they know even the time to come, which is a very spiritual knowledge, and one
of the most delicate which our Understanding can form.

Had M.C. been faithful in repeating my sense, I should not have here one word
to say; Besides that, he confounds Propositions which are distinct, and
separate; those which are only particular, he renders universal, and thus
imposes things on me which I never thought of. The Reader may therefore
observe, that when I say that the knowledge of the Imagination is bounded to
corporal things, which are necessary to life, and that commonly she is
restrained to those things which are proper to every Species. He suppresseth
the word commonly which renders my Proposition particular, and makes me speak
universally, as if I had said, that its equally restrained to those which are
proper to the nature of every species, and to those which are necessary to
life, which nevertheless is not true.

2. He will have it that I make Beasts reason on all what presents it self to
their senses, and that I make them assemble all the images which they have in
the Memory to draw from thence consequences. But there is a great deal of
difference to say what I have said, That when Beasts reason, they reason on
what presen^s its self to their Senses; or that they reason of sensible things
which are necessary to life, and to speak as M C. does, That they reason on all
what presents it self to their senses. For I confess that there are some which
present themselves to their senses, which are not necessary to life; whereon
they do not reason, and even on those which are necessary to life, they do not
always reason, being elsewhere diverted. To conclude, they assemble the Images
of the Memory not all, as M.C. makes me speak, but only those which agree
together, and on which they ought to reason.

After this its easy to make it appear, That what he brings to show that the
Knowledge of the Imagination is not bounded to things necessary to life,
proves quite the contrary. For when Beasts reason on what presents it self to
their senses, and on the things they are taught; when they assemble the images
of the Memory and thence draw consequences; In fine, when they know the time to
come, all these knowledges are followed with pleasure or grief, with hope or
fear, and they must therefore be necessary to life, since these passions
respect their preservation, and are never raised in the mind unless to possess
good or she from ill. For the rest, I stop not at the induction which he would
draw from the knowledge of the time to come, which in his opinion is altogether
spiritual. For I have made it fully appear before that it is sensible, and that
therefore is within the extent of the object, which I have assigned to the
Imagination.

The second Difference which is betwixt the Understanding and the Imagination.
The second difference which we have found betwixt the Understanding and the
Imagination, is, That this forms no universal Notion, so that consequently I
can none but particular Ratiocinations: Instead that the Understanding has the
liberty to form general notions of all things, and when it pleases to draw
from thence universal or particular consequences.

I had here given a fair field to M.C. td have exercised his spirit, and I did
believe in the humor he was in to contradict whatever he incountred, he would
not have let pass so important a Proposition without disputing it.

Yet I perceive that notwithstanding it has great Philosophers for its
enemies, and several presumptions repugnant unto it, yet it has escaped his
hands and has received no touch of his Critics. Certainly instead of amusing
himself to mince upon words as he does in this Chapter, and to puzzle the truth
by petty School tricks, as he has done every where else, he should have
examined whether it is a necessity, That because a power is material, it cannot
make universal notions, principally not going out of the resort or precinct of
material things. In effect, when the sense has known an obj^ct, does there not
remain in the soul a general notion, which makes it know all the rest which are
of the same nature? And ^s the great Scaliger says, The Chick, has it not a
universal image of the Kite, whereby it knows every Kite which comes to sight?
And what? If the Imagination has the faculty to judge, as we believe, can it
not judge through all the extent of its object? and since it can know all the
parts of the whole, may it not form a proposition which may comprehend all the
objects it has the knowledge of? For example, can it not judge that all what
is sweet is good, or at least, That all the sweet things it knows are good? And
when a Sheep shall see diverse Wolves together, will it not judge that all the
Beasts it sees are Wolves and enemies to attempt its life? Now these are
universal propositions, and yet the Imagination how material soever she be, is
capable to form general Notions.

But all these Reasons are weak in comparison of those which establish the
contrary opinion, and which show that a material Faculty can never form any
universal Notion; for its certain, That we cannot conceive an universal thing,
but by taking from it the singularity it has; otherwise it would not be
universal; now its singularity cannot be taken away but by separating it from
those things which render it singular, as from the particular subject its in,
and from the other conditions which determine it. Now there is no material
faculty which can separate the forms from the matter, nor from their subject,
because the Act and the Power must be of the same gender, and that the Power
which is material and composed, must have an Action which terminates in
somewhat which is material and composed, as we have showed in the first Part;
And consequently the Imagination which is of that order, can form no universal
Notion, since it cannot separate the forms from their subjects. Besides, an
universal notion supposes an universal power, and an universal power is nor
determined, at least in respect of particular things over which its
universality extends. Now so it is, that all what is material, is absolutely
determined, because its of the Maliciousness of the matter, (...), as Aristotle
says, to restrain all things which participate of it to its nature. And
therefore the matter being absolutely singular and determined, there is no
material power which can raise it self above singularity, or produce any
notions which are not absolutely singular and determined

What shall we then say of those Images which represent so many several
objects? Certainly they are not properly universal; for of three kind of things
which are called so, to wit the causes which produce several effects, the signs
which represent diverse things, and the Natures which are in several
particulars, there are only these latter which are essentially universal,
because they are in no way singular, and that the unity which they have,
hinders them not from being in effect in many particulars. Instead that the
others are effectually singular, and altogether exterior to the things in
respect of which they are called universal; So that the image of the Kite which
is in the Imagination of the Chick, and all the rest of that gender are only
universal, as signs, or as examples, which may represent several objects, but
not as Idea's of a common nature, which the Imagination conceives to be in
diverse particulars. Because there is but one universal faculty such as the
Understanding is which can tan take away the singularity of things, and
conceive in them at once both unity and plurality. And to speak to the truth,
the images which are in the imagination are no more universal then a name would
be which were given to several persons, or then a character in cipher which may
serve to mark several numbers of the same species.

As for the Propositions she makes, neither are they properly universal; for to
make them such, they must contain some notion which must be universal; now as
this surpasses the strength of the Imagination for the reasons before said, it
follows, that it cannot also form any of these Propositions. And if it form any
which seem to be of this nature, we may say according to the language of the
Schools, that they are universal only materially and not formally. For its
true, she may judge that all the objects she knows are good or ill, and this
judgment contains the matter of an universal proposition, but the form is
wanting thereto, to wit, the totality and the union of all these objects: For
the Imagination must know a whole difference from all it parts, and
consequently must make an abstract thereof, which is beyond its power. These
kind of Propositions are nothing but a mass of as many different judgments as
there are objects. And when we assure that the Imagination makes them, its as
much as to say, that she judges this object to be good, that this also is so,
and the other it is also etc. Yet without forming any general notion of all
these objects, nor of the goodness she knows in them. And without doubt in
these encounters she does as when she knows a multitude, for she very well sees
the first, the second, the third; in a word, all the parts which compose it,
are by the senses known unto it. But she cannot form the notion of a number
which contains them all. Not that she knows not the number all entire, but it
is but as we have said materially.

These are the illustrations which it was obliged to give, a Truth which I had
so often presupposed, and which served as a Basis to the most important
conclusions of my Discourse, I doubt not but it has tired M. C. But he must
think that I do not write this for his satisfaction, and that he is like to
find far less in those things in which I shall not be of his opinion, then in
these wherein we agree.

That Reason in general is not the specific difference of Man.
From these two differences which we have discovered betwixt the Understanding
and the Imagination, we have concluded, that speaking generally, Reason is not
the specific difference of Man, but such a species of Reason, to wit universal
Reason, which is the most perfect, and which for its excellency is called
simply Reason.

M. C. produces many Reasons to destroy this consequence.

The first is, That were there to be found a greater perfection in human
Ratiocination, it would not mark an essential difference in the faculty,
because more or less changes not the species, and that the faculties change not
their nature, and do not become specific in a subject, to perform in it more
perfect actions then in another.

One word will answer all this. There are two kinds of perfection, the one is
essential, the other is accidental; this makes not really an essential
difference, but the other makes, or at least supposes it. When we say that the
Angels are more noble and perfect then Man, or that Man is more perfect then
Beasts, this perfection does it not mark an essential difference betwixt them?
M. C. who grounds himself on the maxim of the Schools, that more and less
causes no change in the species of things, should have taken heed to the
restrictions given him; for its certain there are encounters in which this
proposion is false. When Aristotle says that the first substances are more
substances then the second, and that Form is more so then the Matter; when the
Platonic Philosophy teaches us that there is more or less of essence in
things, and that the abundance of being is a cause why some are more perfect
then others; M C believes not that this more and this less makes an essen^ial
difference: And if he does believe it, as he is obliged to do, the more or less
perfection which there is to be found in the reasonings of Men and of Beasts,
may it not make the same difference? After all let him remember himself of what
we have said before, that the essential difference which distinguishes the
faculty of the Understandings reasoning with that of the Imagination, consists
not in more or less, but that its thereby made known; and its the reason for
which we said, That if more or less do not make this difference, yet at least
they suppose it.

The second is, That were there a greater perfection then Ratiocination which
were capable to establish a specific difference, it would not be the knowledge
of universal things, because general notions are the most confused and most
imperfect of our conceptions.

I send back M.C. with this Article to our Logicitians, who will teach him that
universals are to be considered two ways. First, as simple Natures separate
from all particulars. Secondly, As Natures which comprehend all particulars.
This imports confusion, because it distinguishes nothing, and represents the
universal as a whole which contains several parts; But the other is clear and
distinct, and makes things known more clearly, and more perfectly, because it
proposes universal Natures, as degrees and parts whereof the essence of things
is composed. So when we conceive the Animal as a gender, which embraces all
the species of Animals, this knowledge is in some manner confused, and like
that which we have of the whole, without distinguishing the parts; But when we
consider the Animal in Man, or in some other species, we conceive it as a
degree and a part of his essence, and consequently the knowledge is more clear
and exact then if we considered the species in gross. Certainly I cannot
believe that M C. could be ignorant of a distinction so common in the Schools;
But I wonder also that he did not foresee that I made use of it to destroy the
reason which he produced; and if he did foresee it, its yet a greater cause of
astonishment that he should make use of things he knew were useless for his
design.

But, says he, those Men which reason best, and know things most perfectly,
make fewer universal Notions, then grosser spirits which confusedly judge of
all things.

He deceives himself; he would without doubt say that they stay less on
universal notions because they go to the particular difference of things, so
that grosser spirits which cannot penetrate so far are forced to stop at
universal Notions. But indeed a Man had need of less spirit to know
communalties and resemblances, then to discern differences. I confess it, if a
man know not the differences, but he must also confess that he had need of more
spirit to know communities with the differences, then if the communities were
unknown. Now the differences cannot be known unless we know the communities.

He adds besides, That every time that our reason makes a progress from a
particular knowledge to an universal conclusion: The conclusion is more
confused and more imperfect then the knowledge whence its drawn:

Here is a new rule of Logic which M. C. will introduce, which never any
thought before; for it is an unknown thing in a Syllogism to draw an universal
conclusion from a particular knowledge; and without doubt before he establish
this Maxim, he must ruin that which teaches that the conclusion ever follows
the nature of the most imperfect of the antecedent propositions; and if there
be any of these particular or negative, the conclusion ought to be so too. I
know a Man may make Enthymema's where the antecedent shall be particular, and
the conclusion universal. But besides that, this form is condemned as vicious;
there is ever an universal proposition or an induction, which maintains the
universality of the conclusion. Thus to say Peter is reasonable, Then every man
is reasonable, this consequence must be grounded on the Induction which was
made. That Peter, John, James, etc. are reasonable. Now this induction has the
force of an universal proposition, and therefore we need not wonder if the
consequence is universal.

Whether general Knowledges are more confused then the particular?
But put the case that we may draw these kind of consequences, is it true that
they are more confused and more imperfect then the particular Knowledges whence
they are drawn? First, as for confusion, the distinction is here to be used,
which we at first proposed, and we must say, That if we conceive in an
universal conclusion the universality as a Degree of essence, which makes part
of the Nature of particular things, it is so far from rendering the knowledge
more confused, it renders it more precise and distinct. That if we conceive it
as a whole, I confess that in respect of the parts it comprehends, its more
confused, but in respect of the particular thing whence it was drawn, I deny it
to be confused, since it contains all the distinction and evidence which this
can have. As for imperfection, I never heard say that a demonstration whose
conclusion is ever universal, should be less perfect then a Topic Syllogism,
whose conclusion is particular. Yes, but its more confused. Were it true, the
confusion that accompanies the extent of the knowledge, imports more perfection
then the distinction which is restrained to a particular knowledge. Yes, but
the conclusion is but the effect of precedent knowledges. What matters it?
There are effects whose nature is as imperfect as that of their cause, and the
evidence of a conclusion ought to be as perfect as that of its antecedents;
otherwise Science would not be placed in the conclusion where its commonly
placed. After all, I will have this conclusion less perfect, the particular
conclusion which is drawn from general propositions must be less perfect then
they are. In this case M C. would be deficient, and I should even have an
advantage over him for the particular conclusions which he makes upon me on
universal ones. However it be, I leave the rest of this dispute to be decided
betwixt our Divines and M.C. and would advise him to think seriously what he
will answer them on the propositions they make, That Angels have Ideas and
species more universal, according as their nature is more perfect, and that
they are of a more elevated order. For as for what concerns Philosophers, which
hold that universal knowledges are more excellent, more evident in themselves,
and more conformable to the Understanding, and it is to profane them as Plato
says, to bring them down to particular things; I know that M. C. will not
believe in them.

The third Reason imports, That its impossible to reason without making use of
general terms, and without forming universal Notions; and that therefore our
reason has no advantage over that of Beasts, and that in that point there
could not be observed any essential difference.

There is no proposition in all this Discourse but is false, as I have made it
appear in the 99, 123, etc. pages, where I have showed that general terms lose
their generality when they are accompanied with a Pronoun demonstrative, or
with some such like restriction; and that when Logic requires universal
notions or propositions to discours^, its intellectual Logic, and not that
which is proper to the Imagination which has its rules apart, which can form
Syllogisms without employing any universal Notions, and which consequently may
draw assured Knowledges from particular Propositions.

And without doubt, had M. C. foreseen the truths which I demonstrated in these
places, he would not have so lightly hazarded to have said here That my Mind
was diverted when I wrote that a man might draw an assured knowledge of
propositions which are not particular; That the maxims of Logic teach the
nullity of these consequences, and that I would have said singulars, by reason
of certain Syllogisms, which the Schools calls Expositories which from singular
propositions infer a singular conclusion. Let him therefore know that I have
most seriously thought on what I said of these propositions, and that I called
them particulars in the sense they ought, and as they are commonly taken in the
Schools; for when we oppose these propositions to those which are universal, we
under that word comprehend all propositions which are not universal, whether
particular or singular.

In effect, Were this Syllogism proposed to M.C.

Some Man is just.
Peter is a Man.
Then Peter is just.
With reason a man might say, it were to blame, because its all composed of
particular propositions, whence legitimately nothing can be concluded; yet at
his reckoning it would be found, the first is only particular; the second being
singular, it must also be that when we say, That to form an Argument in such a
manner, such a proposition must be particular, it were not such as it ought to
be, were singular, terms used, and that so this Syllogism would not be regular.

Every Man is reasonable.
Peter is a Man.
Then Peter is reasonable.
Because therein are no particular propositions as M.C. says; I shall therefore
advise him to take a review of his Logic, to learn not only that this word of
particular ought often to be taken for singular, but a so that the expositive
Syllogism is more useful, and more easy to make then he imagines; for its so
necessary that it has served for a model to Aristotle to form his third
figure, That it is the first of all the reasonings which Nature teaches us, and
the only one which the Imagination uses. And thence it is easy to judge, that
it is not so difficult to perform, as M. C imagines; and that the Logicians
are not so troubled, as he says, when they are questioned to produce examples
the^eof, since of themselves they have reckoned to the number of 1200 ways to
make this kind of Syllogism.

Yet I well perceive what made him fall into this error, is that he believed
that the medium of this Syllogism which ought to be singular, could be so but
after one manner, although it may be so diverse ways; for it is not only so by
the names which are proper to the things, but by those also which are common,
so as they be restrained by the demonstrative pronouns, or other the like
particles. So when we say this Man, this Thing, etc. they are terms which are
as much singular as if they called them by their proper names. And some believe
that the propositions which are composed of these terms are more exactly called
singulars then the rest, because they carry with them a manifest sign of their
sigularity, and that the proper name is used but for the deficiency of that
mark, in the same manner as propositions which have the signs of universality
are more properly called universals then the rest which want it, although in
effect they equally are so to the sense; for when we say Man is reasonable, its
an universal proposition, and yet in the rigor of the Laws of Logic it is not
so regular as if we should say, Every Man is reasonable, because the word all
which is the mark of the universality is not expressed. We cannot say so much
of singular propositions. But I leave this to the decision of Masters of Arts.
I would only by the way advise M.C. That the Syllogisms in question are not
called Expository, because they only explicate a thing in other terms, but
rather because they expose to our eyes the naked truth, and leave no doubt,
designing and pointing out the things which might be contested, and in this
case they ought to be more useful then M. C. supposed.

But he says, To speak properly, they are not Ratiocinations, since there is
wanting to them what is essential. Because the foundation of all true
Ratiocination is that two things which agree amongst themselves ought to agree
in a third; and that those which have nothing common amongst them cannot agree.

I have made him to see page 99. that this principle takes place in particular
Ratiocinations as well as in universals, and that particular propositions
hinder not this agreement, as may be judged by the expositive Syllogism: But
from thence to infer, as he does, That in every Syllogism there must be an
universal thing which must be drawn from all what is contained in it: I am not
of his opinion, and I hold that this illation cannot be maintained but in
intellectual Ratiocinations, as I have showed in the third part, where he may
again see page 123. after what manner those terms which enter into particular
Syllogisms may be common.

His Fourth Reason is, That since we have no other faculty to know
universalities but the same by which we reason, it must needs be that this
faculty to know universalities is proper to Man, that of reasoning must be so
also, since it is the same thing.

So as M. C. would add to the word Reasoning that of Universality, I shall
grant all what he says; for the faculty of reasoning universally is the same by
which we know universalities, That it is proper and particular to Man, and that
it is incommunicable to Beasts; but without that one word all his Ratiocination
is false; and speaking absolutely of the faculty of reasoning, is not the same
by which we know Universalities, since Imagination reasons which cannot know
them.

He adds, That the Understanding ought to have some action proper unto it; it
must therefore needs be that of the three operations it has the third at
least, which is most excellent, must be particular unto it, and that it cannot
communicate it self to the Imagination.

I should here have made the same Answer which I have so often made, to wit,
that universal Ratiocination is the proper action of the Understanding; but he
prevented me in saying, That this cannot be, because he has shown that the
conception of universality is the most imperfect of all the actions of the
Understanding, and that all Ratiocination supposes an universal knowledge. I
know very well he has labored to show it; but his success has very ill
answered it, as himself may judge, by what we have said here before; So that I
have nothing to add to this point, but that he deceives himself when he thinks,
That Vniversalities form themselves by simple conceptions, and by the first
operation of the Understanding. For it is impossible to form an universal Notion
without considering the communities, without separating from them singular
conditions, without conceiving unity and plurality in the same nature; finally
without comparing one thing with another, and consequently without reasoning. I
know very well that all this progress terminates at a simple notion of
universal nature; but it is the effect of discourse, after the same manner as
Science is the effect of demonstration; for as we cannot say that Science is
acquired by the second operation only of the Understanding, although it
consist in a simple notion, I durst even say, and that the proposition wherein
Science consists, and that the universal notion shut up in them the
Ratiocination by which they were formed. For the Understanding is so prompt, it
sees and does so many things at once, that its Ideas which appear to us simple
are commonly composed. But this is no place to fathom this matter; we must
expect till M. C. has explained himself thereupon, as he has promised. It Is
enough for him now to know, that the Universal forms not it self by the first
operation of the Understanding.

The Fifth and last Reason he brings against the difference proposed p. 127.
is, That the Imagination can no ways form discourse because it is a corporal
faculty which depends absolutely on its organ, and that all Reasoning whatever
it be requires a free and independent faculty, forasmuch as there is no
Ratiocination without Deliberation, nor Deliberation without Liberty: 2.
Because there is no Reasoning without some universal Notion, which supposes an
universal Power. 3. Because that in all Reasoning there is always something new
done which is different from what is represented by the Fantasms. And that
therefore that Faculty which reasons, must be independent of its organ;
otherwise it can only know what is represented to it.

We need not use many words to answer this long Reason, forasmuch as the
principal proof it contains shall be fully confuted by the following Article,
where we shall make it appear that there are many Ratiocinations which are made
without deliberation, and that the other two have been examined here before, we
having showed that we may Reason without making use of any universal Notion;
and that the Imagination although it knows nothing without Phantasms, yet it
forms Phantasms which are not expressed in those Images which the exterior
Senses furnish it withal, such as is the Union or the Division, and those
species which the Schools call non sensatas, as to be good or ill, friend or
enemy, and other such like. For from thence it follows, That that faculty which
reasons, does always something anew by uniting or separating terms and things
which she knew not before in that condition. Neither for all this can any
infer, that the Imagination which does all those things, is independent from
it is organ. Otherwise we must say that she knows neither what is good or ill,
friend or foe; And that she judges not of things, if it be true that those
actions are marked with independency.

CHAP. II. The Second OBJECTION. Of the Deliberation which accompanies
Ratiocination.
HAving satisfied the precedent Objection, we have proposed what our
adversaries say, That all the actions of Animals, which seem to be most
reasonable, may proceed from somewhat else then Reason, and that Nature which
does not multiply causes without necessity, should not have made use of so
noble a Faculty for the conduct of Beasts; since those which are more proper,
and as it were domestic, may alone have satisfied thereunto. For all what
appears most wonderful in their actions, may and ought to have reference either
to Instinct, Memory, or Custom; whereunto we have answered, That with them we
acknowledge all these causes, but that we believe that they do not exclude
Reason, and that all actions which Beasts perform out of Custom, Instruction,
or Instinct, are done with Ratiocination; Which we have demonstrated in pursuit
of our first Book.

But because M C. has forced us to change this order, we have employed in the
Third Part all what concerns Instruction and custom, and we reserve for the
Second Book what belongs to Instinct: So that we have here no more considerable
Objections to examine but only those which respect, the Deliberation and the
language of Beasts.

They say then that if Beasts were capable of Reason, they would also have
power to deliberate, and consequently they must needs be free, indetermined,
and therefore endued with an universal faculty, which always presupposes a
nature independent from the matter. To which we have answered, That it is not
necessary, That to Reason one must Deliberate; since we often employ Reason
where there is no place for Deliberation; forasmuch as we cannot deliberate but
when there are several means found to attain some end, and that we have the
liberty to choose which we please; that therefore there is no necessity that
Beasts should deliberate, because that besides that most commonly they have but
one way to attain their end, as that which their Instinct teaches them; It Is
certain that then when they encounter several means, they presently determine
on that which first presents its self, or on the most efficacious, and that
they have not the liberty of choice, having not an indifferent and universal
Faculty, but altogether limited and determined, as we have so often repeated
it.

Before M. C. began to Examine this Answer, he advertised the Reader, That in
the design he had to speak of the nature of Ratiocination, none ought to
apprehend that he went about to transcribe all what Logic teaches concerning
the three operations of the Understanding. And of a truth this advice was both
very judicious and very necessary. For after having seen the first propositions
he brought forth, it was very much to have been apprehended had he said more,
but that he would have spoiled all what Logic teaches us thereupon.

In effect, all the divisions he here makes are imperfect, and do not contain
all the members which ought to be admitted. He brings only for the cause of
simple affirmations the agreement which appears evident, although there be
another which produces the same effect; for the agreement may be certain
without being evident, as it is in propositions of faith. In the second place
he restrains Ratiocination to a use, which being more manifest is not the more
noble; for although it serve to clear doubtful things, yet is not that the
only employment it has, since it forms the Intelligence of Men and Angels
where there is no place for doubt or suspension of judgment, this action being
performed in an instant, as we have demonstrated in the third Part.

To conclude, he shuts up all Ratiocination in two species; the one which
serves to acquire the Science, whose object is alone Knowledge, and grounds it
self only on unchangeable principles, and is called contemplation; the others
principle is a practical end, and is called Deliberation. But this division is
not exact, and leaves diverse Ratiocinations which can neither be related to
Contemplation nor to Deliberation. For if this be only to be found in
morality, as Aristotle teaches, what would become of all Topic and probable
Syllogisms? What would become of the Councels of War, Consultations in Physic,
in a word, of of all Ratiocinations which are made in the Arts? For it would
not belong to contemplation, since it is principles are neither necessary nor
unchangeable; nor to deliberation, since they have no practical end, as
Aristotle understands it.

But what says M.C? Its Aristotle himself has proposed this Division; is there
any appearance that he understood not what he best knew, and that he had not
studied the nature and conditions of Ratiocination?

We shall never be troubled with this thought, and we know that in his works,
wherein he should have examined the nature of Ratiocination to the bottom, he
has very well made it appear that he had a perfect knowledge thereof. But we
also know that he has not equally everywhere treated of things, and that there
are places where he has examined them with all subtility, and with all the
delicacy of Science; and others wherein he has spoken but superficially, and
in most common Notions. It Is what he says at the entry of his Morals, where he
advertiseth the Reader, that in two sorts of discourse he must not require an
exact perquisition of things, but only that which belongs to the subject we
treat, and that his design was grossly and superficially to touch (...), the
matters which ought to enter into this work. After having so clearly explicated
himself, was it handsome for M. C. in the dispute we have, where it was in
question punctually to observe the nature and conditions of discourse, to use
those passages of the work wherein the Author himself protests he ought not to
speak exactly of things?

Besides Aristotle made not this division, and was far from it, knowing so well
the nature of Ratiocination as he did. He says in the place alleged by M. C.
that the soul which is capable of reason, has two parts; the one which
contemplates those things whose principles are necessary and unchangeable; the
other which considers contingent things, which he has elsewhere expressed by
the words of Speculative Understanding, or Practical Understanding, but he
speaks not there of Ratiocination; neither ought he to have spoken, for besides
that we may consider necessary or contingent things without reasoning, we may
make probable and topical discourses on necessary things, as well as
scientifical and demonstrative, as it has often happened to M. C. and to my
self. It Is true it seems that Aristotle has restrained contingent things to
moral Actions, and Deliberation to that Ratiocination which is made for them.
But M.C. minded not how that wonderful spirit, whom he believed in this
occasion he was to follow, did all at once fall upon a subject, which he ought
not to have handled without going to those things which were nothing to his
purpose. Without this thought he would have said, That of contingent things
which are in our power, and that we can do either good or ill, some respect
manners, others arts; and that we may deliberate on either, since both give way
to choice and to election, which is the principle of Deliberation. For an
Artist may have several ways to attain his end, and to consult on them, that he
may choose that which is most fit and useful for him. For which cause he said in
his third Book, that there is a larger field for consultation in the Arts then
in the Sciences, and commonly the examples he gives of Deliberation are drawn
from Physic, Architecture, and such like.

But without musing on this distinction, which no man was ignorant of, which he
had already touched and served nothing to his Morals, he cuts short and says,
That the contingent things he was to speak of, were moral actions, and that the
Ratiocination employed therein was Deliberation; for deliberation says he, is
the same with reasoning, and not as M. C. imposes it. That Reasoning is the
same with deliberating, for as much as reasoning is the gender, which ever
ought to be distinguished from the species, as Logic teaches; and it is true,
that all Deliberation is Ratiocination, but not that all Ratiocination is a
Deliberation; nor that all Deliberation is concerning Manners, as has been
said. I very well know that this latter is the more noble, and the more
excellent by reason of its use, which respects the Sovereign good and principal
end of a Man. But in it self, it is not more perfect then that which is
employed in Arts, which as well as that of manners possesses all the nature of
Deliberation.

Whether one can Deliberate when there is but one mean.
Let Us now see whether he will prove more happy in destroying then he has been
in establishing. On what we have proposed, that we often make use of reasoning,
where there is but one only way to attain an end, and that consequently we may
reason without deliberating, since we never deliberate but when there are
several means, and that we have the liberty to choose which we please. Hearken
to what he opposes. 1. That experience teaches us that men forbear not to
deliberate, although there be but one way to attain their end; for those who
would go from Rochel to the Isle of The, although they very well know that
there is no other way but to put themselves on the water, they forbear not to
consult those who are expert, and to deliberate on what they should do.

M. C. makes it here appear, that he is no more knowing in the nature of the
means then in that of Ratiocination. For he heeds not that one only thing may
serve for diverse means. First, by several circumstances which follow it. For he
who would pass over into the Isle of The consults not whether he should pass,
it being supposed that he must necessarily pass, but he may whether he should
pass at such a time and at such a hour, in such a ship with such a Sailor, and
so of a hundred other things.

Secondly, Were it diversified by any circumstance, were a man at liberty to
leave or take it, it may afford two several means, and he may deliberate
whether it be good to do it or not to do it. In effect, In his quae sunt
penitus determinata ad unum electio locum non habet. d. Th. 1, 2. q. 13. ar. 2.
Deliberation supposes Election, and Election requires several things; for
where there is but one there can be no choice. So that if we deliberate on one
only mean, it of necessity must be diversified by circumstances or by different
considerations, which may give place to choice and to election.

But what says he? It often happens, that when we have but one means left to
attain our end, we forbear not to consult in our selves to know whether this
means is proportionable to our end.

He here confounds Speculative Knowledge with Practical Knowledge, and
Ratiocination with Deliberation. When one would know whether a means is
proportionable to ones end, one may reason but one cannot deliberate, because
there is nothing there to do, etc. which is in our power, and that deliberation
is but for things which are in our power, and which may be done several ways.
M. C. did not consider that the speculative knowledge always precedes the
practical; and that before we act for an end or by means, we must know there is
an end, and that there are means, and so of the rest, which is not from a
practical Knowledge. After all, if M. C. would ever continue in his error, yet
must he needs confess, that seeking whether a mean is proportionable to its
end, there are two parts to be taken, the Affirmative or the Negative, which
may pass for two means and two things, whereof we may take our choice.

We may say as much of him, who knows the Gangrene will soon run to his heart,
unless he have his arm cut off, and that it is the only way to save his life.
And of a guilty person condemned to be questioned, who knows that to shun
death, there is no means left but for a time to suffer pain.

But what ever M.C. say, Neither the one nor the other of them deliberates
thereupon, I mean on the means to escape death, since neither of them has but
one, and of necessity they must make use of it, supposing they will absolutely
shun death. They may well discourse on this means, examine whether it be
proportionable to its end, consider the difficulty and a hundred other things
which may enter his thought, but all this is not subject to Deliberation,
unless you would say, That they may consult on the means they ought to use to
practice patience in those encounters. But it is to change the Hypothesis,
Patience would lose the quality of a mean, and of it self serve as an end to
the means deliberated on.

The second Reason M.C. produces is, That we often find occasion to
deliberate when the only mean is dangerous and difficult to execute.

I have often sought in what this Reason was different from the former. And how
it was impossible for me to divine it, I at last stopped at this opinion, That it
was the Printers fault who had let pass a new example to confirm M. C's
proposition for a second Reason. He should therefore have a care that so
considerable an error in judgment may not be found in the next Edition. In the
interim I have nothing to answer on this example, but what I have said for the
rest; for if there be no other means to attain an end but what appears
difficult and dangerous, if we must make use of it we do not deliberate. We may
reason on the difficulty, and on other circumstances which accompany it, but
that is noe deliberation; unless on would seek means to take away the
difficulty and the danger, in which case, what is difficult and dangerous,
would in that respect pass for the end, and no more as the means.

In pursuit of this example, here is what M.C. adds, page 113. But when the
connection of a means to an end is evident, etc. we fall to it without
reasoning, that is to say, without consulting. Whereupon I might say first,
That the But which begins this discourse, being but an adversative particle, as
the Grammarians say, and which imports a sense contrary to the precedent
proposition, is not in its place, and produces not here the effect it ought,
because the difficulty and the danger which is found in a means, hinders not
the connection of that means with its end, from being certain and evident. But
as I will not make punctilio's upon words, in imitation of M. C. the things he
proposes furnishing matter enough without inquiring into his manner of
speaking; I answer, That when the connection of a means, and its end has all
the conditions he alleges, it carries one to it without consulting, so as it
be an only Means. For if there were diverse whose connection were such as he
says, as it may often happen, there would be a way to deliberate which were to
be used. And in this case the evidence of the connection would not hinder the
deliberation. So that the Reason for which we consult not in the action
proposed by M. C. happens not from this evidence, but from that there is but
one way to attain the end, and that there must be diverse others to give us
cause to deliberate; so there is a great likelihood that M. C. is fallen into
this Sophism, A non causa pro causa:

But, says he, to what purpose is it to reason on a thing whose conclusion is
more clear, and more conformable to our appetite then the Propositions you
might draw from thence? To what end is it by a Middle to join an End and a
Mean, whose sequel is immediate and evident?

There are here many things to be said. 1. If he takes the word of Reasoning
for Deliberating, as he lately did, the consequence he dedueth is vain for the
reasons we have already given. And if he takes it in general for all kind of
Discourse, he changes the Hypothesis, and from Deliberation he makes us pass
to simple Ratiocination. However it be, if he understands it in this latter
way, let him if he please remember how we have said, That the means enter into
Ratiocination; for they only commonly pass for Enthymema's shortened, and new
consequences added to the conclusion of the Ratiocination which we made for a
principal action; he may well see that the application of the means to its end,
is not so clear nor so conformable to our appetite, as the propositions are
whence it is inferred. For the design to obtain the good wherein the end
consists, is the principle whence the necessity is drawn to employ the means
for its search. Now the end is naturally better known and more conformable to
the appetite then the means, because it is the cause of it, and that it enters
knowledge before them.

On the contrary M.C. imagines, that the Ratiocination which we put in practice
of means consists only in the connection they have with the end, without
considering that this connection makes but one part of it, and that it is the
principle whence the practical judgment is drawn, which is the conclusion of
all Ratiocination. Thus when we know a thing to be good, and that it may be
done by such means, we conclude, that we must make use of such means to do it.
And this conclusion is drawn from the connection of means with the end, which is
comprised in the second proposition of the Syllogism.

Let not M. C. then ask us any more, To what purpose it is to join by a Middle,
the End and the Means, whose sequel is immediate and evident. For we seek noe a
middle to join them together, but to join them with operation, and the
connection which is betwixt them is the Middle, by which we infer that we must
use that means to arrive at that end. But besides, he must consider that the
most part of the means which we use are known by the experience which we have
formerly had of them, and that in that case we make the same Ratiocination,
which is to be found from Instruction and from Custom. For we must unite the
Image of the thing present which we would use to attain the end, with the image
of that we have made experience of, and thence afterward draw a consequence
for the future.

Whether Ratiocination be only to clear doubtful things.
At last M. C. supposes, page 113. 118: That we cannot reason but on things
where there is doubt and obscurity, and that in those which are evident by
themselves, or by the sense, there is no Ratiocination to be made.

I know he is not the only Man of this opinion, and if we were to follow the
plurality of votes, he would have a great advantage over us, who are of a
contrary party. But besides, that in these matters the weight and force of
Reason is to be preferred unto the number and authority of the persons.

M. C. shall bear me witness, That those Philosophers who have treated of it,
give us so little knowledge of it, that it is not likely that any of them
daigned seriously to consider it. If this be so, it can never prevail with the
multitude, which greatens the party; and neither he nor I ought to be overtaken
by those prejudicate opinions which have been received, without having been
seriously examined.

That we may not therefore fall into that neglect which he has justly taxed,
and not suffer our selves to be preoccupied by the sense of other Men, we must
have recourse to the source of things, and see in the Nature it self of
Ratiocination, to what use it may have been destined.

The best foundation we can give to this enquiry is, That all faculties have a
natural inclination to produce those actions which are in their power, that
they tend thither as to their end, and to their perfection, and that they never
forbear to act when all conditions necessary to action occur. From this
principle which is as clear as the light, and which draws its proof from all
things, which are in the Universe, it follows, that all the faculties of the
soul have the same inclination, that they seek but to act, and that those which
have no other action but knowledge cannot hinder themselves from knowing when
their objects are present, and when they are not otherwise diverted. If there
are then the principal actions which form knowledge, to wit, the first
Conception, the Judgment, and the Discourse; It must needs be that the
faculties which are capable to produce them, produce them in effect when the
object of every of these actions are present unto them, and that they are
neither diverted nor hindered. Now the object of the first are those which
present themselves under one only Image: That of the second are those which
present themselves under two images, which may unite or separate themselves.
That of the third are the rest which are of a greater number, and which may be
linked together by a middle which is common unto them. So that in the same
manner, as at the presence of a simple object, that faculty which is not
diverted is necessitated and cannot hinder it self from producing in it self
that image in which the first and simple conceptions consists; And that it is
constrained to unite or divide two different images wherein the judgment
consists; as also when it finds more which linck themselves together, it must
of necessity bind them, and make this return and circular motion, in which the
nature of Ratiocination consists, as we have showed.

From hence we must necessarily conclude, that it is indifferent for this third
operation, for the things to be evident or doubtful, forasmuch as supposing
that there are three terms, or three images; which altenatively may join
themselves together, and suffer this circular revolution we have spoken of; The
faculty must necessarily assemble them, since it is not hindered, and that the
object of its action is present. But yet it follows That Evidence and Certainty
far from serving as an obstacle to Ratiocination, advance and favor it; and on
the contray, Doubt and Obscurity retard and hinder it. For it is certain that if
the connection of terms is evident and certain, the concatenation which
discourse requires will the sooner be made, and more perfectly then if it be
found obscure and doubtful: Forasmuch as time and pains is required to take
away obscurity and doubt, and consequently to encounter this common
concatenation, which ought to unite all the parts of Ratiocination. But this
truth cannot be contested, if it be true That there are Ratiocinations made in
an instant, as we have showed. For all the propositions which compose them
being then at the same time known, there can be not one more doubtful and
obscure then the other; and the conclusion which makes it self as soon known as
the antecedents, ought to be as clear and evident as they can be.

To conclude, Experience and the Schools teach us, That Science and opinion may
be found together for one and the same thing as well as Faith and Science; and
therefore since we cannot prove the conclusions of Science by topical
Arguments, and Propositions of faith by demonstrations, we may reason on things
which are not doubtful: The conclusions of Science, and the propositions of
faith, leaving no doubt, and being most certain and most assured.

Yet we may object two things (p. 113.) The first That the Soul ought then to
go all at once to the conclusion, without making all this progress unprofitable
to its self. But to this we answer, That this progress is natural to the Soul,
that she cannot march otherwise, and that to make her move in another manner
were to violence her nature and to destroy that action which is most proper and
most convenient for us, as a circle which cannot otherwise be moved but by the
turns and circumvolutions it makes about it self: The Soul which in some manner
may be said to be of that gender cannot also move but by discourse, which is a
circular motion. It gives it self some agitation in its first Knowledges, but
if she is not hindered she never stops there, and ever makes its revolutions
entire. Indeed without doubt, whoever would observe the manner whereby the
Understanding knows things, will find that it makes but few motions or simple
propositions, which are not accompanied with a complete discourse; and although
speech makes but one part appear, it forbears not to make it in its self
entire* and to join in secret to the notions, it expresses the antecedents or
the consequences it is composed of. This also is performed with that swiftness,
that it is impossible the Voice and Tongue should follow it, nor that speech
should mark all the thoughts it forms in these encounters.

As much is to be said of the Imagination, and even with more right, because
it is a Faculty which is not free, as is the Understanding, but which is
absolutely determined by the objects, and which operates not but for the
preservation of the Animal. So that we may be assured that she knows nothing
but she makes a practical judgment of it, whether it be to follow or to forsake
it, whether it be to do it, or not to do it; now if this be so, it forms no
Action nor Proposition without reasoning, as has been showed in the precedent
discourse. However it be, the progress which the soul makes by reasoning thus,
is not useless to it, as has been said, for although the conclusion were as
evident unto it as the propositions it makes use of to attain it; yet she
fortifies herself in the certainty she has of it by the knowledge which these
propositions afford her, and she takes them as witnesses which do not discover
to her the truth which she knew from elsewhere, but which confirm her in it.

Neither is it a thing particular unto her on this occasion, she does the same
in all her other knowledges; for although she is assured by a sense of the
object which it represents, yet she enquires the judgment of others, she will
have those truths confirmed by experience, which reason holds indubitable and
that reason shall hold up these experiences which she believes most certain. She
will even reason on mysteries of Religion, and join Science with Faith, as she
often joins Opinion with Science; and herein she follows the intention of
Nature, which to assure Animals in the knowledge of things useful unto them,
will that all the faculties and all the means given to that end shall concur
thereunto together. This doctrine is not unknown in the Schools, who hold that
the first principles how evident soever they are of themselves, which need no
other knowledge but that of terms, and which natural light make us presently
comprehend, yet ought to be known and proved by the Induction. Now it is not
that the Induction gives in the evidence, but it is that it fortifies and
confirms it, as has been said.

The second Objection is, That the Conclusion draws its evidence and its proof
from the antecedent propositions, and consequently it ought of it self to be
obscure and doubtful. But we should say, that the proof of the conclusion is
ever in power in the antecedents, and not always in effect; that is to say,
that were it necessary to prove the conclusion, it might be done by the
Antecedents. But when the conclusion is certain or evident of it self, it needs
none of this proof, unless for the reason before mentioned, to wit, to confirm
the truth which she makes known. So that in this case the conclusion does not
effectively draw its evidence from the propositions which precede it; and this
maxim is not true as to the effect, but for the conclusions which are obscure
and doubtful. Whereto may be added what we have said in the Chapter of the
Third Part, that things are known or unknown by the Senses or by Nature, and
that a conclusion may be known by one, and unknown by another. And then the
Antecedent will serve as a proof, not for sensible evidence, but for natural
evidence. So this Proposition, Peter is risible, is evident of it self by sense
and experience, and were it to be proved by a universal proposition, it is but
to give in the natural evidence, which it has not. After all this, being
evident by the senses, the proof added thereunto, whatever it were, serves but
to confirm the truth which is already known from elsewhere.

We may therefore reason on things which are not obscure nor doubtful, and
consequently the evidence of means, were it as great as that of the end, cannot
hinder the soul from reasoning, not only to apply them to that end, but also
to the operation which ought to follow this knowledge, as we have before said.

That we cannot apply the Means to the End without Ratiocination.
M. C. has then much deceived himself when he assures (page 114.) That all the
error of his adversaries comes but from that they imagine that its impossible
to use means to attain an end without reasoning. For all what I have said makes
it appear that there was no error therein; and all what he says afterward to
show that there is, proves nothing what he pretends.

First, The example he brings of insensible things which use means to attain to
their end without having any knowledge of it, is altogether impertinent. For,
the question here is not to know whether the employment of means in general to
attain an end. require Ratiocination; the question is restrained to things
which operate with knowledge. Now it is certain that Animals know the end, to
which they tend, as we shall show hereafter, and consequently, they also know
the means to attain it. And by the reason before alleged, they ought to reason
to apply the means to the end, and to the practical judgment which they make
before they make use of it.

It Is true, if there were a knowledge to be found by which we could employ
those means without making this judgment which devanceth all the motions of the
appetite, and which is the principle of all animal operation: perhaps I might
confess that Ratiocination would be nothing necessary. But where were this
knowledge to be found, since of all the things which are in nature the Animals
only are knowing; and that to operate they must judge that the things are good
and possible, and that from the goodness and possibility they find in them,
they conclude that they must do them, which cannot be without reasoning, as we
have demonstrated.

In the second place, the example he adds (page 114, 115.) of Children, of
Fools, as those benumbed, of timorous persons, etc. who without reasoning, as
he says, employ means to do a thing; All these examples I say are useless to
our question, for they do exclude but the Ratiocination of the superior part,
which is not here in question, and presuppose the Ratiocination of the
Imagination, which is as much as to say, that they do not employ means without
reasoning.

Yes, I grant, That a Child which reasons not, yet brings its hands to its
face, to take away what troubles it; that falling he opposes them to save
himself; that he casts himself on his Nurses breasts; that he uses more
strength in sucking her as he has more need; and hides it self from one who
has frighted it, and uses a hundred several means for several ends. But
although it be true, that this Child reasons not, yet it cannot yet be
understood but of Intellectual Ratiocination, and not of that of the
Imagination which goes before all these actions, as, we have showed in several
places of this Work.

It Is the same with those benumbed, who how little sense soever they have
remaining, shrink back those parts where they are grieved; for so long as they
still feel, their Imagination must work and move the appetite to these motions,
and consequently make that Ratiocination which we have so often spoken of.

We may say as much of a Man whose appetite prevents all the conclusions which
his reason can make, at the unexpected encounter of some spark of fire which
burns him. Of timorous persons, who without reasoning fly from those things
which appear frightful; and of those to whom the sight of a Serpent, of a
Mouse, or of such like makes them out of countenance, by the antipathy they
have together. For all this may well be without the intervention of the
Superior Reason, but not without the reasoning of the Imagination. In the mean
time M. C. confounds these two things as well as the design and intention,
which are to be found in these two faculties, since he says, That all the
actions of the Appetite are performed without design, that we often laugh
without any intention, and that the apprehension of tickling causes us often
to make involuntary shrugs. Now it is certain that by this kind of speaking we
can say nothing but that these actions are done without the Design and
Intention of the Superior part. And it cannot fall into the thought of any
reasonable person, that from thence one might infer that they were done without
the design and intention of the sensitive soul, presupposing that it is capable
of design and intention, as we have showed.

So that I pity M.C. for having taken so much pains to accumulate reasons upon
reasons, and heaping examples on examples to prove a thing which is besides the
question, and to have forgotten the decisive point of our dispute. Truly had he
fallen into the defect he reproacheth me to have done in some place, to have
made principles according to my fancy, to draw from them conclusions according
to my pleasure: Should he, I say, have here done the same thing, he would have
been more excusable, to have ill proved what he should have proved, as not to
have known what he should have proved; For the first, there is only want of
sufficiency; But for the latter, there is want of judgment.

Beasts know the End and the Means.
I should here finish this long Examen, were it not for the understanding of
what we have said. It Is to the purpose to show, that Beasts know the End and
the Means which they make use of to attain it. I have therefore made one
Article apart for it in my first Discourse of the Knowledge of Animals in
pursuit of an objection, whereby we would prove that if the Instinct were
enlightened by reason, how small soever it were, Beasts would know wherefore they
operated, and although the answer we gave belongs to Instinct, what we have
added to the end respects the Knowledge of Beasts in general; wherefore in fine
to examine it here, that there may be no difficulty left in the precedent
Discourse:

I have therefore said, That no body has yet doubted, but that Beasts knew the
principal end for which they operated. For even those who would take away
Reason from them, have not deprived them of that advantage, and were
constrained to confess, that as all things tend to their end, those that are
insensible are born to it without knowing it, But that Beasts have the
knowledge thereof, although it be not so perfect as that of Men; and certainly
they know what is good and profitable for them, and consequently they have a
knowledge of their end, since the good and the end are in effect the same
thing. It Is true, that they cannot know but under particular reasons, and that
they never form general notions as Men do; But it is sufficient to say that they
know the end they tend to, and consequently they also know the means which are
necessary to attain it; For it were needless they should know the end, were
they ignorant of what were to be done to obtain it. In effect, we cannot doubt
but the Dog known the Hare as the prey which he would take, and that when he
runs after it, and uses so many endeavors and so many slights to catch it, it
is not likely but he knows they are means he must use to attain that end. Who
ever would consider the artifice our domestic Linets use when their meat and
drink is hung in two little Buckets, and when they will get them near they draw
the cord which holds them, and with their foot hold them whilst they continue
to use their Bill, he will without doubt be constrained to confess that they do
all this with knowledge, that they know the thing which ought to be done first.
In a word, that they ordain the means which they judge necessary to obtain the
end proposed. Why should they not have that power, since they have, as we have
showed the faculty of Reasoning to which it belongs, to put things in order, to
compare them together, and to destine them to what use we please.

To all which M. C. first opposes, That he is of Aristotle's opinion, and of
those who followed him, who will have it, That Beasts sometimes have not more
knowledge of the end whereto Instinct leads them, then his pen had of his
writing. And that in other occasions they know the thing which is their end,
but that they know it not as the end, nor as a cause of those means which they
employ to obtain it.

But without touching what respects Instinct, of which we shall elsewhere
speak, I shall advise M.C. before he go on further on this subject, that he
would bring Aristotle in play; for besides that he is a testy Author who will
not be produced by all sorts of people, and who discovers but to few the
secrets of his doctrine: he has already so ill succeeded in reporting his
opinions, that we may with reason doubt he will not prove more faithful to him
here, then he has been heretofore. For my part, I cannot remember that I have
read what he makes that incomparable spirit say; All what I can answer to that
pretended authority is, that whether he or his Sectators should say, That
Beasts know not the thing which serves for their end as the end, and as cause
of the means, which they employ to obtain it, they understood nothing else but
that they make no abstraction of the end nor of the means; neither do they
consider in the things, by a notion separate from the things themselves; and to
speak according to the Schools, they know not the End nor the Good under the
formal reason of the end and of good. However it be, they know the things are
good and useful to them, they bear their desire unto it, and do all what they
can to obtain them. Now if the end be the same, why, or to speak better, for
love of which we act, and that beasts operate but for the love of the good they
find in the things; it must needs be that in knowing this good, and what is
necessary for the obtaining of it, they should also know the end and the means.

So the Dog knows not only the prey when he sees it, but he also knows that
it is good; otherwise he would not desire it. He also knows he must run after it
to catch it, otherwise he would not run; and consequently, he knows the end and
the means, since he knows the goodness of the prey, and that for that's sake he
ought to make use of the course, and those subtilties he knows to catch it.
These truths seem of themselves so clear to me, that I wonder M. C. should
reprehend me when I said, That they were not to be doubted; and that he insists
so strongly to demand of me a proof thereof, I should pardon him, had he had no
tincture of Philosophy, or had he not had common sense; for there needs no more
to judge of the evidence of these propositions.

But says he, Beasts know what is good and useful for them, without knowing
that it is useful. This proposition is false in one sense, and in the other
there is a manifest contradiction in the terms it is composed of. For if he
means, that Beasts know the thing without knowing it to be good and useful;
this is absolutely false, it is necessary it should appear good unto it, since
they desire it and pursue it, even as that for which they have an aversion, and
which they fly, ought to seem ill and hurtful to them. Forasmuch as the
Appetite which is the principle of these motions cannot be moved but by what
appears good or ill to the Animal. In effect, since a good thing may sometimes
be pleasing, and sometimes offensive to them; and that a Dog at one time flies
his Master, whom before he caressed, the same object must be considered two
different ways to cause these two contrary motions; and we cannot figure to our
selves any other considerations but those of being good or evil.

M. C. says of a truth at the end of his fourteenth Chapter, page 117. That
Dogs are sensible of the benefit of fire, without knowing that it is the fire
that does them that good. But thit requires a good proof, for since they fear
to be burnt when we bring the fire too near them, they must needs know that
fire may do them harm; they then fly it as ill; so that it must needs be that
when they come near it they also know it as good and useful; why should they
not have this knowledge since they well know that a man who threatens them and
lifts up a stick against them, is a thing which may mischief them? For there is
no reason why they should rather know what beings them an incommodity, then
what may be useful to them.

Yes, but if Dogs knew that it were fire which did them good, they would learn
to make it. This is not necessary, and there is no consequence from the one to
the other; for there are a thousand things which we judge useful without taking
care to make them. M.C. knows well that pistols are profitable for him, and yet
he takes no care to make them. And to stay on this example, Dogs certainly know
that bread is good; and whoever would prove as M.C. does, that they find it
not good, because they never learn to make it, would render himself altogether
ridiculous. In a word, when we say that Animals know things, we intend not that
they have all the knowledge which may be had thereof; that which they are
capable of has its bounds and limits, and seldom goes to the practice of Arts,
which were invented by reason of a many experiences and Ratiocinations.

Let Us return to M. C's former proposition; which may admit of another far
worse sense then we have now examined. For if he means that Beasts know the
good and the useful, without knowing that it is good and useful to them, therein
is a contradiction: whether he confounds the good and useful, or distinguishes
the one from the other: Because that if they know not what is good and useful,
as he says, they know it not to be good and useful; they then know that it is
good and useful, and that it is not good and useful. If his thought be that
they know good without knowing that it is useful to them: It Is as much as if he
should say, that they know that is good, and that it is not good, forasmuch as
to be useful is to be good, and all that is known as good, is known as useful:
And the reason of this is, that good is not good but as it is convenient, and
all what is convenient perfects, and all what perfects is useful. It is not but
that in knowing that a thing is good, we know all the utility can cause; but
also, we do not know it then, in the extent of its goodness; for if it were so
known, we should know all the utilities it could afford.

Thus much for what concerns the Objection which M. C. made against our first
Example of the Dog which knows the end and means of hunting. For I am not to
stop at what he says, that he believes not That the Dog makes any reflection on
the first knowledge he has of his prey. Forasmuch as if he will speak of a
true reflection, I shall believe it no more then he; but if he means that he
does not apply himself, and stay to consider it, or that he cannot make that
return in which we have showed that Reasoning consists, he is in the wrong not
to believe it, for the Reasons already said.

Our second Example is of Linnets, who with their Bills draw up their meat and
drink which is hung in small buckets, whence we inferred that they knew the end
and the means. For first, they know the meat and the drink, which is the thing
they need, and the first object which strikes the appetite. And afterward they
judge they ought to draw it near, it being far from them, and they therefore
draw the string it is hung on, and stop with their foot what they have drawn, to
get the rest in the same manner; and all this terminates it self in possessing
meat and drink, which is the first thing which enters their knowledge, and for
love of which they use all this Artifice. Now if this is not to know the end
and the means, there are few amongst men which know them, since they do no more
in their ordinary actions.

To this M.C. answers, (page 91.) That since I give this for an example of the
Instinct, he need not trouble himself to explicate it. Meaning to infer that he
has made it appear, That Instinct excludes all knowledge of the end and means;
for it is what is here in question. But without alimbecking the mind on this
question, whereof we shall speak in the Treatise of Instinct, that on the
contrary it is a general proposition which extends to all the actions which
beasts do with knowledge; he would never have thought that I should have placed
the artifice of Linnets for an example of Instinct. Besides that, having
clearly enough explained my self on the nature of that cause which I found
altogether shut up in the natural Images, he could not reasonably have believed
that I related to the Instinct the proceedings of Linnets, whereto so many
artificial things concur, since there can be no natural images of those things
which were invented by art. Neither did he insist thereupon, and part to an
alternative, by which supposing, That I related this example to the
Imagination, without interesting the Instinct, he sends me back to the
explication he made of my other examples which I might apply unto this, and
wherein I shall see that this action whether it be done by habit or by
instinct, may be performed without reasoning. But I shall also send him back to
the answers I have made to those explications, where he shall see that all
things done by custom or by habit presuppose the help of reason. Besides that,
the division which he brings is deficient: for the action of Lin^^ts may be
performed otherwise then by habit and by instinct, it may be done by imitation
and invention; and certainly the first time they draw the string to bring op
their buckets, it is neither by habit nor by custom, neither is it as we have
showed, by Instinct. It must needs therefore be that they must have seen it
done, or invented it by themselves. Now in all this there is Ratiocination as
well as in the actions of men, who draw water out of a Well, or Crane up any
other thing by a rope.

But I am not awares that following M. C. I straggle out of the way; the
question here is not whether Linnets reason, but only whether they know the
end and the means; and had M. C. but taken heed to prove that they have this
knowledge I make use of the Reason with which they are indewed, he might well
have perceived that I intended not thereby to prove that they did reason;
otherwise I should have brought for a proof what now is in question. But as it
is a truth which I had demonstrated, before I might make use of it, to make it
appear that they know the end and the means; because it is for Reason to know
them, to compare things one with another, and to destine them to what use it
pleases. Let not M. C. be scandalized on the word, he takes not away liberty
as has been said already in the first part of this Discourse. For although
beasts choose not the means, and that at first they are determined by what first
presents it self, or is most efficatious, we may nevertheless say, that they
will, that they desire, and that they are pleased to make use of such a means.

Let Us add to these two Objections what he says, 1. That men reason not to
prove the first principles. 2. That by reason they cannot persuade themselves
to what the Senses manifestly show them. 3. Because it is to overthrow the
nature of Ratiocination to employ as a proof what is more obscure then the
things which we would persuade. 4. And that they would laugh at a man who would
discourse to know whether the first-step of a Staircase serves for a means to
rise to the second. 5. That in fine, amongst all the things which are to be
judged by sight only and report which is evident to the Senses, we only make
use of simple conceptions. 6. And that if there be no doubt and obscurity, we
need none of this Examen, nor of this Deliberation, whereby he defines
Ratiocination.

But how easily soever the answer which is to be made may be found to all these
Reasons in the precedent Discourse: Yet for M. C's satisfaction I shall answer
to every one in particular.

First, What he says of the first principles is not absolutely true; for if
they may be proved by induction, as Aristotle teaches us, we must needs reason
to prove them, since the Induction is a Ratiocination. On the other side, were
it true, That we should not reason to prove them, I am very well assured that
we could not know without reasoning. Because that besides that they are
universal propositions, and that the Understanding can form no universal notion
without discourse, as has been shown. To conceive them it must needs compare
the one with the other, and consequently it must reason, since without
reasoning we cannot compare things. In effect, we cannot say nor comprehend
that the whole is greater then its part, not even conceive what the whole or
the part is, without comparing the one with the other; forasmuch as there is a
mutual relation betwixt them, which enters into the essence of either; and that
we cannot define the one, but the other must enter into the definition; it is
the same with all the rest, for when we say that a thing is or is not, and that
nothing is and is not at the same time, we must compare the being with the not
being, and make a many reflections, wherein necessarily Ratiocination must be
involved. It Is true, this is done so swiftly, that it seems as if there were
only simple notions; at least the mind contents it self to express by one only
proposition all the progress it has made therein, and will not any more
explicate a thing which it well knows, that others with it conceive it after
the same manner; Even as to witness that it consents or does not consent to
what is proposed, there needs but I or no; although in themselves they make an
entire discourse, knowing well that these monosyllables will make it
sufficiently known.

As for the second proposition, besides that it is not every way true, and that
there are a hundred encounters wherein reason persuades what experience and the
senses manifestly make known, as we have showed; It Is useless in the matter in
question, if it be not restrained to operation; for I admit not that the
Imagination should reason on the knowledge which the senses have of their
objects, but on the application of this knowledge to operation. So when the
Animal judges such a thing to be sweet or good to eat, I understand not that
it reasons thereon, but only when it from thence concludes that it must be
eaten.

And when he says, That it is to overthrow the nature of Ratiocination to make
use of for a proof what is more obscure then the thing we would persuade. This
is true, when we employ it for an absolute and necessary proof, and not when
it is but to confirm the evidence and certainty we have thereof. This again may
be true when we use this proof by choice and by election, and not when it is by
constraint, and that of necessity we must pass by this middle, to go to the
conclusion, as it happens in most of our reasonings, and in all the reasonings
of Beasts.

So that there is no way left to laugh at a man who would reason to know
whether the first step of a stair served for the means to get up to the second,
p. 117. For besides that he cannot consider the first degree as a mean to
arrive at the second, unless he compare them together; if he apply the
knowledge he has of it to the operation, he must necessarily reason; neither
can he do otherwise. It Is true, that if he expressed by speech the reasoning he
made thereon, perhaps they might have occasion to mock him for speaking a
useless thing, etc. which all the world knows. In the same manner a man might
render himself ridiculous if he would prove to a man that he is a man, and such
like things which he cannot be ignorant of; after all this I shall send back
M.C. to the fifth Chapter of my Third Part, where he may find how the means
enter into Ratiocination.

But must we still stay at the last of M. C's Propositions which we have so
fully refuted? All our second Part is employed to show, that the Imagination
may make propositions of things which are evident to the senses. We every hour
make the like, and every moment we say, That Snow is white, That the Sun is
luminous, That Time is obscure, etc. In the mean time these are not simple
conceptions, since they are true Propositions, and consequently it is false That
in all things which are judged by sight only, and whose report is evident to
the senses, we employ only simple conceptions. To conclude, we have made it
appear in the Fourth Part, that Deliberation is not of the essence of
Ratiocination, and that it ought not to be defined thereby, as M. C. has done.
And truly methinks for the love and respect which he owes the truth, he will
not oppose himself to what I here present him withal; and that since he has so
freely granted That besides Contemplation and Deliberation, Beasts may do all
what the mind of Man can do: He will also then confess with the same ingenuity
that they perfectly reason, after we have showed him that Man may perfectly
reason without any contemplation or deliberation. For although hitherto he has
had cause to rest in those vulgar opinions which have not precisely observed
wherein the nature of discourse consists, and which have not considered it but
in the conditions and in the qualities which are nothing essential to it; it is
to be presumed, that having acknowledged the error in which they are, he will
now forsake them, and join with me to make a more ample discovery of that
truth, which I have encountered, and to give the last touches to perfect what
perhaps I have only dead-coloured.

Yes without doubt if he approve that all the action of Ratiocination consists
in this circular revolution which the soul makes on these images, and that the
Syllogism is not formed but by the return she makes on these first notions to
join them with the latter. Perhaps he will also consent not only that to
reason she needs neither deliberate nor meditate, and that in this knowledge
she may be the Senses slave, and suffer her self to be forced and necessitated
to the first means which presents it self. But likewise there is nothing in
this action which surpasses the force of the Imagination, and that
consequently Children and Animals may perfectly reason if he look on the
perfection which is essential to Ratiocination, and not to that which is
strange and accidental; for if there are perfect reasonings to be found in
which the Soul makes no abstraction or reflection, no universal notion, nor any
deliberation, as it appears in the most part of Expositive Syllogisms, all
these conditions of necessity must not be essential to discourse, and that that
which is made in things purely simple, wherein not one of these circumstances
meet, must to speak properly and exactly, be a perfect Ratiocination. But we
must give time to M. C. to resolve hereupon; in the mean time, let us see what
he objects against the Language of Beasts.

CHAP. III. The Third OBJECTION. Of the Language of Beasts.
IF Beasts did Reason, they would reason not only together, but even also with
men. They would speak with one another, and if they were deprived of speech,
they would at least fancy to themselves as well as dumb persons, some signs,
and significative gestures to make themselves understood; so that it is an
evident token that they want Reason, since they cannot perform any of these
things which are the effects and natural sequels of Ratiocination; but those
who make this objection do not heed that they lend us arms to combat them, and
that if we come to show that all these actions are common and ordinary to
Beasts, they must of necessity confess that they have reason, since they are as
they say the effects and natural consequences of Ratiocination.

Now all the world agrees, That they communicate their thoughts, and without
consulting the Books of the learned, every man of himself may make proof of
this truth; for a man must be extremely stupid not to observe that all Beasts
which have the use of Voice, use it to make their desires known, and that they
have cries and different accents, according as the several designs which
pleasure or grief, hope or fear inspire in them. Do they not intercal
themselves when they are in love, when they want help, when they have found any
food which they may impart to others? For it is certain, that if a Sparrow comes
to a place where there is much corn, he will call the rest unto it; and that a
Wolf having found a Carrion will bring his companions to it: Some even say that
either of them diversifies its voice according to the nature of the thing they
encounter, and that that marks by a particular accent whether it be Wheat,
Barley or Buck which they have found. And this has its different roar when
it is the Carrion of a Horse, or when it is that of an Ass. But without examining
the truth of so curious an observation; can we observe a Dog shut up in any
place presently begin to make long sighings, and afterward change them into
redoubled barkings, and last of all howl out till he is out of breath, without
fancying that he would make it appear by these different cries the several
passions which his captivity causes him? And whoever perceives little Chickens
fly and hide themselves at the instant when they hear the Hen cry, and
afterward return again under her wings; when she uses another, follow and run
to feed, according as she diversifies her voice, will doubtless judge that
there is a communication of thoughts amongst them, and some kind of Language
whereby they make themselves understand one another. And certainly whoever
observes that of all Birds, would make no difficulty to believe that Tiresias,
Melampus and Apollonius have formerly understood it, and if that any man would
apply himself unto it, he might yet learn it. And that its even easy by
imitating it to entertain ones self with them, since in some manner we daily do
it, when we take them by the whistle, and that we bring them whether we please
by counterfeiting their voice and accents. But it is not only by Voice that
Beasts make themselves understood; the Look, the Mind and the Gesture also
serve them for the same purpose; they know as well in one the others eyes the
passions they have, and a Dog will see in the forehead of a Mastiff, whether he
may with security approach him, and whether he be in sportful humor. Does he
not threaten when he shows his teeth, when his hair stands an end, and when he
looks through him who assaults him? In fine, all his corvets and his carressing
postures, all the flattering motions of his Tail and Ears which he makes when
he accosts his Master, are but so many signs and very significative gestures of
the desire he has to please him.

Now if Beasts communicate their thoughts together, of necessity they must
entertain one the other, and even they must reason together, and that the
Discourse must enter their thoughts, as we have declared. And had we brought no
proofs of this truth, we could not conceive that they made their intentions
known, to give or ask help, to or from one another, but we must believe that
they form a perfect Ratiocination; for there are so many judgments to be made
in these encounters, so many consequences to be deduced, so many progresses
which the soul makes from causes to the effects, from signs to things
signified, and from goods and ills present to those which are past and to come;
that it is impossible but we must find the form and contexture of Discourse. I
would willingly ask our Adversaries, if when a Hen having found some grains,
calls her Chickens to impart it to them, when they come to her, and that they
cackle together, and that afterward she only takes the grains in her Bill,
and so leaves them without eating; I would fain I say ask them whether they
will acknowledge no discourse in all these proceedings, and whether they do not
believe that she calls her chickens with a a design to cause them to come, to
show them their food, and to nourish them; and that they themselves understand
the voice which summons them, that they comprehend the thing which she
signifies unto them, and that they hope to find the good she tells them of. Can
all this be done without Discourse, and a man who would do such like things,
would he not be thought reasonable? they will without doubt say, that this may
be true in the most perfect Animals, in whom it is likely Nature has given a
voice for the communication of their thoughts; but that if it have deprived
others, it is a sign they had no need of that communication, and consequently
they have no Reason, since they cannot entertain themselves nor discourse
together. We readily confess that there are many which are dumb, and which by
the voice cannot make themselves understood; but if Nature could not give it
them because they ought not to respire, she has recompensed them in other
things which may supply that defect. The most part of insects, and even some
Fish, have they not a particular sound which they form by moving some parts of
their bodies, whereby they make those passions appear, wherewith they are
agitated? When the Grasshoppers sing in fair weather, do they not witness the
pleasure they receive thereby? When Bees hum extraordinarily in their Hives, is
it not a sign of the division which is amongst them? and that humming noise
which they make being stopped, is it not an evident sign of their anger? On the
contrary, whoever has told them, that these Animals do not make themselves
understood by their gesture, and by their motions? Certainly after the examples
which we have of other Animals, which make use of the same means to discover
their intentions, it were to be very bold to say, that these did not make use
of it for the same design. But what? We are ignorant of the most part of those
which are ordinary, not only in Beasts which live with us, but even in Men,
amongst whom there are but few who has not some particular sign to make
himself understood, and that it is impossible to divine it, but after a long
habit: And should we dare assure, That Animals whose nature and life is so far
from estranged from ours, should have none at all? No, no, most part living
together, and even some keeping some form of Policy and of a Republic, as the
Ants, they must communicate their designs, since it is the only bond which
binds and preserves all societies.

After all, were it true that Beasts performed all their actions by the only
conduct of Instinct, without communicating their thoughts together, what
necessity would there be that for that cause they should not reason? May they
not reason in themselves, and a man who were all alone or deprived of the use
of all the Organs, whereby he might make himself understood, would he be for
that deprived of Reason?

I know very well that there is no body who would censure without passion what
I have here said of the Language of Beasts, but will approve it, and will not
only wonder at the design M. C. has made to confute it, but much more at
those Reasons which he has made use of to that purpose, page 160. For it is
strange that a witty Man, as he is, should not have known that all those which
he uses are useless to the matter in hand, and shake not any of my proofs, nor
of my conclusions? In effect, all what he says is grounded on the definition of
human speech, and on those designs which the Understanding forms, which are not
here in question. So that all the consequences he draws from these two
principles, must needs be vain and impertinent according to the terms of the
Schools; And in defense it were sufficient for me to say, That he supposes
what he should prove, and touches not on the difficulty.

But because he is not of so easy a composition, as I persuaded my self, as in
this Chapter he assures us, and perhaps so short an Answer could not make him
comprehend the defects of his censure; I shall explain my self along with him,
and examine all his Propositions one after another.

But I will not stop at these, at the beginning of his Chapter where he has
more labored the gentility then the solidity of thoughts, and where he rather
endeavored to show the beauty of his mind rather then the truth of the things
in dispute. For when he says that to persuade him, That a Beast Reasons, the
Beast it self must tell him so, I find that to be as pleasantly and gallantly
imagined, as he is weak to prove what he pretends.

Neither is there any likelihood that he would believe a Beast upon its bare
word; he particularly who is so hard to be persuaded, and would not suffer
himself to be touched with so many important Truths as have been proposed to
him. For my part were I of his opinion, should all Beasts together tell me,
That they discoursed, I would not believe them; neither should they any more
persuade it me, then all the Fools I know should, did they assure me they were
wise. But if it were possible that M. C. in earnest thought to have thereby
proved That Beasts did not reason; those also of China or Malabare, to persuade
him that they were reasonable, must tell it him themselves, and he must needs
fall into that inconvenience, that until he could understand their Language,
he must still be obliged to doubt of it. For it were to no purpose to say, that
the figure of man would sufficiently clear it, since there have been Beasts
discovered which are so like men, that there is scarce any difference as to the
outward form. After all, there would be but one only answer to make hereupon,
That Animals have often told him that they had Reason, and if he understood
them not, it was his fault, and none of theirs.

But says he, they ought then to tell it him in the Language of Men, and learn
to speak as we do.

This is neither just nor necessary; why should they be more obliged to learn
the Language of Men, then Men are to learn theirs. And ought not M. C. to have
imagined, that they might say the same thing of him as he does of them, and
that they have reason to doubt whither he Reasons, until they have learnt his
Language, and that he has assured them of it in the same terms, as they use
amongst themselves.

He adds, That if they cannot learn to speak, it comes from no indisposition
which they have in their organs, as might be imagined; for their organs differ
no more from ours, then ours do from theirs; and therefore since the most
stupid amongst men may so easily imitate what we call the Speech of Beasts,
there is nothing which can hinder them from learning of ours.

All this Ratiocination confirms what I have said before, That this is but a
pastime for M. C's spirit, to divert it self before it enter into a more
serious Examen. For besides that he believes not that all Animals have proper
organs to imitate the Language of Men, and that there are only Parrots and
Pies, and some others, which have this privilege, for those Reasons which are
known to all the world; It is not likely that he should approve the way of
argument he here uses, since that if it were good in his way, we might prove
things most false and most extravagant. On the model he makes, might we not
say, that the Dogs paw differs no more from the hand, then the hand differs
from the Dogs paw; and that therefore since the most stupid amongst Men may do
with his hand whatsoever a Dog can do with his paw, nothing can hinder a Dog
from doing with his paw, when men do with the hand; That is to say, that
nothing hinders but that he may write, play upon instruments, and do what Art
executes with the hands. By this wonderful way of reasoning we might also prove
that a Fool is a very able Man; That an Ignorant is very knowing; That men are
as intelligent as Angels; And even that they are as powerful as God, and a
thousand such like extravagancies.

At least, says he, p. 191. those Birds which learn our Language should make
use of it to discourse with us, and to demand from us their necessities; and
since they do it not, it is a sign that they do neither speak nor reason.

It is to exact from them things we would not exact from M. C. had we taught
him to speak as we do them. For when we teach them, we design only to make
them learn the sound of the words, without minding to make them comprehend the
sense. And in the way it is taught them, it is almost impossible that that they
can conceive what is signified by them, because we never repeat a word but the
circumstances and objects with which it was at first accompanied are changed,
and that there is no place to fix their thought on one only signification,
seeing so many different things whereto the word they learn might be applied.
For my part it were nothing difficult for me to believe, that if in teaching a
Parrot the word bread, were only presented to it principalement when it had
need to eat, that at last it might comprehend that that word wherever it were
would signify bread; and why might it not be capable of this knowledge, since
Dogs not only do very well understand the names imposed on them, but all other
words which use to make them do so many several things as they have been
taught? For all the words we give them are signs by which we make them
comprehend the intention we have that they should do what we require them; so
that in doing them, they comprehend the sense we meant by these words.

Yet because we will no longer insist hereupon; it is sufficient to say that
M.C's Reason is not concluding, since children which we teach Latin, are not
obliged to use it to entertain themselves with others, nor to demand their
necessities. Birds which have been taught to speak, have as they have another
Language, which they use for such things as that which is more familiar, and
consequently more easy: And certainly we may be assured, that it is with Men
and Beasts when they speak together as it is with two Strangers, which
entertain themselves every one in its natural Language; for a Man speaks to
them in his Language, and Beasts also speak in theirs; and it happens also to
them as to those strangers, that they often understand one another, and that
often they not at all understand, having not a full knowledge of the Language
which either of them make use of.

But it is to study too much on M. C's divertisement, which from sports of the
mind, by a long examen might become the plays of children, and provoke the
Readers wrath to see us so ill employ both ours and his time; it is sufficient
for him to know that I have had a care of his honor, when in my first Discourse
I discharged his Objection of all its weakness, and that I should never have
thought to have spoken of them here, had he not reproduced to light, and ranked
them at the entrance of his Chapter: Let us now go to more important things,
and see how he has weakened or baffled the Answer we made to this latter
Objection.

Beasts communicate Thoughts.
On what I proposed, That we could not doubt but that Beasts communicated their
thoughts not only by the voice, but also by the gesture, mind look.

He ^ests agreed; But says he, page 162. that we cannot infer from thence that
they speak together, all communication of thoughts being not speech, and speech
being not all what the thought marks. Which he proves, 1. Because speech is not
a natural sign, but a sign of institution, which has no signification but that
which is imposed on it by the agreement and consent made amongst those which
use it. 2. For as much as to make use of speech, and to be able to say we
speak, we must have a design to express our thoughts by it, and know that it is
a sign to make our selves understood. Whence he concludes, That Beasts do not
speak, forasmuch as the diversity which is in their voices comes from Nature
and not from Institution, and that they express their thoughts by this
diversity, without having intention to express them, and without knowing that
it is a means to make themselves understood. But not to foil M. C. at the
beginning of the Examen we intend of all these propositions; and to let him
know that I am a tractable man, who will not use him rigorously; I shall
consent to two of his Reasons, so as he will give me leave to deny the
consequences he draws from them.

For as for the first, I hold with him that speech is a sign we make use of to
make known our thoughts, which is not natural, and is introduced by the
agreement and consentment made amongst those which use it; but I hold also,
that this ought not to be understood but of human speech; so that all what he
can infer from thence is, That Beasts do not speak the Language of Men, and use
not humane speech to make their thoughts understood; which I will not contest
with him, the point of our question consisting not therein: Ours is to know
whether Beasts have a Speech different from that of Men; Now it is to reason
ill, to say that Beasts have not a Speech different from that of Men, because
they have not that of Men. To make this consequence good, he must first show
that there is no other speech but that which Men use: Thus M. C. cannot here
excuse himself from having fallen on a Sophism which supposes what he should
prove; and which Logic calls Petitio principii; But it is not sufficient to
have told him, he has straggled, we must also show him the right way, and make
him see what the Nature and Essence of Speech is; for after that he himself may
judge that he was in the wrong to take it away from Beasts.

Speech is an Articulate Voice.
Although Speech be an Accident which is not capable of any true essential
composition, yet we forbear not to figure therein several parts, whose nature
is in some manner composed; for we thereby do not only find out its gender and
its difference, but we even find out its matter and its form. The Voice is the
gender and the matter, as the Sound is that of the Voice, forasmuch as Speech
is a Voice, but has somewhat more then Voice, and in this more consists the
difference and the form of the Voice. In effect, it is a sound as the Voice; its
formed by the organs of respiration, as that is, and as that it also serves
Beasts for a sign, and as the means to make known the motions of the Soul. But
what it has above it, it is that its production depends on a greater number of
organs, and that it signifies more things then the Voice does simply alone. And
to speak it in a word, its Articulate. For the use of several organs is the
cause of Articulation, and Articulation which diversifies the Voice, serves to
express the more things by this diversity. All the Philosophers are also
agreed, that exactly to define Speech, we must call it An Articulate Voice, and
that all articulate Voice is Speech.

But that we may well explain wherein this Articulation consists, we must first
know what the Voices are we call articulate; for there are those who do not
acknowledge it in the vowels and in the consonants, which are the first
differences of the Voice, but even who maintain that diverse vowels joined
together, can form no articulation unless they are accompanied with consonants.

And certainly there is reason to doubt for the vowels and consonants as they
are simple, because the elements of a thing are not the thing it self, whereby
they are elements; and therefore the vowels and consonants cannot be words
since they are the elements of Speech, as all the world acknowledges. Now they
were words, were they articulate, because they would be articulate voices. On
the other side, cryings and exclamations, wherein simple Vowels commonly do
only enter, which grief or some other passion extends and lengthens, are not
placed in the rank of articulate voices, no more then whistlings and all other
voices which are made by semivowels all alone. And consequently it seems that
articulation only belongs to a voice composed of vowels and of consonants.

On another side, since all words which are parts of discourse, should be
articulate, the Interjections, Adverbs and Prepositions, and even some Greek
and Latin Verbs, which consist but of one vowel only, must be articulate
Voices. Add that we have examples in Greek Poets of some verses which are made
of one only continued vowel, even to the length the verse requires; and
therefore these kind of vowels are articulate words, since they are only
articulate words which may enter into the composition of verses.

In the second place, as articulation requires some constraint in the voice
which makes it bend, and hinders it from going forth in an even thread, and
with freedom. It seems that several vowels entering into the composition of the
voice without consonants, can make no articulation, because the voice finds no
hinderance when it forms vowels, and runs all in one course along the tongue,
instead of which, consonants in passing strike on their organs, and turning
from the direct way which they would have taken without that obstacle. Whence
it follows, that vowels whether they be all alone, or whether they follow one
the other, render not an articulate voice, and it is the reason for which the
most part of Beasts have not an articulate voice, forasmuch as they do not form
consonants, and that all the diversity of their voices consists in the bringing
together and in the sequel of different vowels. But also we may hereunto
oppose, that in all Languages there are many words which have a perfect sense,
and which are composed of several syllables whereunto none but vowels enter; as
eo which signifies I go, (...) which signifies Eggs, and the like, which we
dare not place in the number of voices which are not articulate. And that
consequently articulation may be found in the bringing together of several
vowels, and the precedent Reason is not capable to banish it from the voice of
Animals.

Wherein the Articulation of the Voice consists.
To get out of these doubts, we must observe, that as the articulation of the
voice has taken its name and origin from the articulation of the bones, It Is
impossible exactly to know what it is, but by the relation it has with this;
and that we must necessarily suppose as a most certain foundation that both the
one and the other are made proportionably in the same manner, and for the same
end. So that the joints being destined to make the Members bend, and move,
distinguishing them one from another, and yet uniting them together; the
articulation of the voice must also serve to bend and turn it, and make the
distinction of its parts appear, although it bind them the one with the other.
This is manifestly seen in those words which are most perfectly articulated,
where the syllables are as the joints which make all these several reflections
of the voice, which are to be observed in words, and which consequently
distinguish the parts, and bind one with another to make whole words of them.
But we must yet observe that as there are several kinds of articulations in the
bones, some where most is most apparent; others where it is less so; and some
where it is altogether obscure: There are also several articulations of the
voice, wherein its more or less sensible; for in the Vowels all alone it almost
appears not at all; when they are joined together it is more manifest; but it is
most evident in the consonants; and the more there are, whether in one or in
many syllables, the more the turn and inflection of the voice is therein
remarkable.

The better to comprehend this, we must consider that the nature of the voice,
as of all other sensible qualities is to dispense it self on all sides in
straight lines: And that when it finds any obstacle which bereaves it of the
liberty of thus extending it self in length or breadth, it bends and bows it
self several ways; and if we may so say, it in some sort complains of the
constraint which it suffers.

So that in general there are two inflexions, or different articulations of the
voice, the one when it is hindered to enlarge it self, and the other when it
cannot run in an even thread. The first is, when coming out of the throat,
where its principal organ is, it comes to encounter the mouths cavity, which
obliges it to restrain it self, and in some manner to assume the figure it
finds in that part; for according as the opening is great or small, round,
square, or otherwise, the voice conforms it self to all these figures, and
takes these different sounds, which are observable in the five Vowels, A, E, I,
O, V. Now we need not doubt but that there is therein a true articulation,
since there is a right inflexion, the voice which seeks to extend it self being
in that straight which it is to pass forced to lessen it self. Otherwise we
must say that words composed of pure vowels are not articulate, because they
are not formed by any other kind of articulation, but that which we have here
observed.

The second is, when the parts of the mouth oppose themselves to the voice, and
strike on it as they pass, interrupting the equality of its course, and forcing
it to turn it self out of its right way: as it happens to waters which run
through pebbles and other such like obstacles; and this interruption forms all
the consonants; the voice rendering it self soft or dry, sweet or sharp, clear
or obscure, quick or slow, according as the stroke is made, and according to
the nature of the organs, which in some manner imprint on it the qualities it
has. But as there are parts which cause a greater hinderance to the voice,
some then others, there are also Consonants wherein articulation is more or
less sensible, which for this reason are divided into Mutes, Demy-Mutes, and
Demy-Vowels.

The greatest obstacle is to be found in the Mutes, because the Voice finds the
passage quite stopped, and that endeavoring to get out, its oppressed, and as it
were stiffled, it beating against the organs through which it passes. Now
there is nothing but the Tongue and the Lips which may cause this hinderance,
because there are only those two parts of the Mouth which truly move, and whose
motion serves to form Speech; and as they strike the other parts more strongly
or more softly, they produce two sorts of Mutes; if it be by the Lips the
passage is stopped, the voice issuing out forms P or B. If by the Tongue, either
it is by its Basis which strikes the Palate, and bring forth C and G. or it is by
its point, which strikes against the Teeth, and makes T and D. Amongst the
Demmutes, the passage is truly stopped, as in the Mutes, but the voice is not
stifled as it is here, because it engages not it self altogether betwixt the
organs, which resist it so that it returns back, and seeks turns to fly out.
Wherefore they are called liquids, because they make a reflux, and have a
waveing recourse like the water, which returns back to its source, when its
stopped. When the voice is therefore hindered from going out of the lips which
shut themselves, and that it returns toward the Nostrils it changes it self
into a kind of bellowing, which makes M. If the hinderance happens on the
Tongue which with its end strikes on the roof, then either the voice takes the
same tune back, and produces N, or else escapes by the sides of the Tongue in
the to cavity of the Cheeks, and forms L.

To conclude, in the Demi-vowels, the passage is not absolutely shut, as in the
rest of the Consonants, but it is very much streightened, so that the voice is
constrained to fortify it self by a greater breath, the more easily to issue
out of so straight a passage: Now the breath at its going out is pressed either
by the teeth whence comes S, or by the Tongue whereby it makes R, or by the
Lips which produce the consonant V, or by the Lips and Teeth together which
make F, or by the Tongue and foreteeth which form the Z, or by it and the Teeth
which we call dog or eye teeth, whence is the consonant J. Or again, by it and
the great teeth whence comes the Shin of the Hebrews, and our Ch in French, to
which we hitherto have given no simple Character. All this would require a
longer Examen then we can here afford it; but it is sufficient for our design
to know that the voice is therein articulate, because it suffers inflexion, and
that it sensibly turns and binds it self. Yet we must confess that these two
kinds of articulation which are in the vowels and consonants are simple, and
that in comparison of those which are composed of them, they are neither so
evident nor so perfect; and as commonly the most accomplished things carry away
and reserve the name of all the gender, although in effect it appertain to all
the rest; it also happens that the most composed voices, and where there is
most articulations, are for their excellency called articulate, the simple and
the less composed being not placed in that rank, although truly they ought to
be so as well as the rest. And thence it comes that in comparison of humane
speech, which is without doubt the most diversified in all kinds of inflexions
and motions, there are none but that to whom the common use of Tongues would
give the name of articulate, all the rest being so little to its proportion,
that unto it they always seem as if they were not so at all.

But Philosophy and Truth which do not subject themselves to so extravagant and
unequitable a Judge, and which preserve the name to all things, which belongs
to their nature, acknowledge that all voices which have an inflexion are
articulate, and that they ought to be called so: So that on this ground, to
take away those doubts which are proposed at the beginning of this Discourse:
for the vowels and consonants are not called elements but in respect of the
composed word, and not of speech in general; every one of them being a word
which has no elements, and is indivisible, even as when we exclude out of the
rank of articulate voices, Groanings, Exclamations, Whistlings, and the like,
it is by comparison with speech which is diversified by diverse syllables, and is
used in the common commerce of men; for those are true articulate voices which
are composed of several vowels, or redoubled or continued demi vowels; but
which are not so much so, as the words which enter into our language, wherein
the consonants and vowels are diversely mixed together, and make a many different
articulations.

From hence it is easy to judge, that all the essence of articulation consists
in the only inflexion of the voice, and that all the rest is exterior and
strange to it, for although it be destined to express the motions of the mind,
its its end and not its essence, the end nor the efficient cause never entering
into the essence of things. So that the assembling together of diverse vowels
and consonants, which signify nothing, forbears not to form articulate words,
as the Blictri of the Schools, and the words which our Parrots learn have all
the smoothness and all the variety of pronunciation which we give them,
although as to them they signify nothing, no more then those Latin discourses
which are taught children; and as we may not say that these latter are not
articulate voices, and true words; we must needs also confess that the words
which birds learn are of the same nature.

But I shall say more, holding to this restriction, the cries and accents of
all Animals, which have the use of voice, must of necessity be articulate
voices, although even it should not serve them to express the motions of their
mind: Because there is not one wherein is not only some vowel which is
continued and lengthened, as in the bellowings of Bulls, and howlings of
Wolves, or cut and repeated, as in the barking of Dogs, or mixed with several
others as in the Nightingales singing, as in the warbling of Birds; But even
also wherein some consonants may be observed which makes the articulation
thereof; which is particularly observed in the bleating of Sheep, in the
crowing of Cocks, in the meawing of Cats, and in the hissing of Serpents, where
the B, and the C, the M and the S, which are of the order of the consonants,
are distinctly understood, as we have showed; and we are not to wonder if there
are consonants which Beasts do not pronounce; for besides that, they have not
all the organs which are necessary thereunto, there are even also whole Nations
which cannot form some of them; the Arabians use not the P, nor the Greeks the
J and V consonants, nor the Italians the V vowel: otherwise always employ the T
for the D, the C for the G. and History observes that anciently the Alphabet
was composed but of twelve Letters.

The Voice of Animals is then articulate, but it is far less so then that of
men, of which there are two principal reasons; the first is drawn from the end
for which it was given them, and the other from the cause which affords the
means to attain that end; for as the voice is destined to make our thoughts
known, and that the diversity of articulation serves to express the diversity
of thoughts; it was necessary that Man who is more fruitful in thoughts then
Beasts, should also have a greater diversity of articulations in his voice.
Besides, because it is Nature alone which gives to the voice of Animals the
faculty to represent the thoughts, and that it is the Will and not Nature which
has given it to that of men: The means which are therein employed must be
proportionable to these two causes, and that those which Nature furnishes must
be more simple, and in less number then those which part from the Will, because
Nature ever determines herself to a few things, and that the Will is a power
without bounds, and whose capacity is infinite.

In effect it were not possible that the language of Man should be purely
natural, as is that of Beasts; not only because he has the liberty to form an
infinity of thoughts, whose original is not to be found in Nature; and whose
nature consequently cannot give him the marks and signs which are capable to
represent them to him; But also because his knowledge being to be acquired but
by little and little, and time ever adding something thereunto, he ought to
have a language which might suffer the same changes, nor which needs either be
fixed nor tied to its birth, as that which comes from Nature is: It remains
then that he should form one himself, which depended on his choice, and which
might be augmented, diminished and altered according to his pleasure. Such is
that of all Nations who have tacitly agreed together, that they would use
certain words to signify such and such things, which without this connection
and consent would signify nothing at all.

To terminate therefore this long enquiry, since its resolved that the voice of
Beasts is articulate, and that it is significative of their thoughts, as that of
Man's is, we must of necessity conclude, that its a true speech which beasts
speak together, and that every species has its particular language even as
every Nation has a proper one; it matters not that the causes which render it
significative be different, because the diversity of causes and of means
changes not the essence nor the species of the effect which it produces. And
as there are Animals which engender by generation and by putrefaction, and
things which Art and Nature produce, which forbear not to be of the same kind:
So the articula^e voice which is significative by nature, cannot be of a
different species from that which is by the institution, and by the consent of
Men; Or the interjections, and some other words which enter into our discourse,
and which naturally signify the motions of the mind, of necessity must not be
placed in the rank of the words.

But I shall say more, whoever shall well consider the cries and several
accents of Animals, he will find that they are by institution as well as the
speech of Men. For they do not signify of themselves the passions they
represent. Otherwise it must needs be that Beasts who have all the same
passions, must also all have the same voices, and that that cry which signifies
such a passion, must be a like in all the kinds of Animals, at least as much as
the diversity of organs could suffer it, which is contrary to experience. But
the difference found therein comes from the institution of Nature, or rather
from God himself, who has imposed to such and such accents such a
signification as it pleased him, and which of themselves they could not have
had. So that we may say and it is true, That the Language of Beasts is in that
point like to that which man received from God at the birth of the world. For
even that signified of it self nothing, no more then theirs: Neither did it
come from the choice or institution which Man made of it, no more then that of
Animals; but it was instituted by God, who gave to those words which were to
compose it, the sense he pleased, even as he did in the other. So that as the
first language of Man is not of a different species from that which Men have
since invented, although the one is from divine institution, and the rest from
humane; It necessarily follows, that the language of Beasts is not different
from ours, in that it comes from the institution of God and of Nature, and that
ours comes from the institution of Men.

That the Voice of Beasts is made with design and intention to express their
Thoughts.
But we must return to M.C. who being of the humor I know him to be will not
consent to all these truths, and who without doubt will maintain that all these
Reasons cannot persuade him that Beasts speak; forasmuch as to say, that we
speak, we must have an intention and a design to express our thoughts by the
voice, and know that it is a sign and means to make us be understood; So that
Beasts having no design nor intention to express their Thoughts by the Voice,
and not knowing it to be a means to make them understood, although it were even
articulate and significative, it would not be a speech, and we could not
properly say they speak.

This is the second Reason which I have already touched, having answered to one
part of it already; for I hold with him that the Thesis of it is true, and that
to speak we must have a design to make known our thoughts by the voice, and to
know that it is a sign and a means to make us understand: But I also hold that
the Hypothesis of it is false, and that the proofs he brings to maintain it are
pure Paralogisms, and conclude nothing which may either hurt or serve me. For
to show that Beasts have no intention or design to make known their thoughts by
their cries and by their accents, he produces only examples of voices, which
passion makes some persons send forth without any design or intention of
theirs. Now it is undoubted that in there encounters the words of design and of
intention can only be applied to the Understanding and to the Will, and that
this signifies no more, but that passion sends forth those voices without the
Understanding or Wills contributing thereunto. And therefore he can from thence
infer nothing but that Beasts have not a design and intention which proceed
from the superior part.

Now I consent, page 163. That a man that feels grief feels himself also forced
to complain, although even he should have no design to make himself understood,
That there are persons, who by their sighs and unvoluntary groanings have
discovered what they had a long time hid; That there are some who being alone
break out into open laughter, and cannot even hinder themselves from it in
company, what intention soever they have to fain themselves sad; That in fine,
diverse will cast forth cries in a surprise, who would not cry at all, had they
but time afforded them to form some design. But I also hold, that this also
concerns not our question, because these complaints and these sighings, these
cries, and these laughters, which in truth devance all the motions of the
Intellectual Reason, exclude no other resolutions nor other designs, but those
of the Understanding, which is not the thing in question. To give some force to
these examples, he should have proved, that the imagination concu^s not to all
these actions, and that they are done without their having any design or
invention of doing them; but truly to have performed it, he must have destroyed
all the most assured Maxims of Philosophy, and the most certain order which the
soul keeps in the ordinary operations.

For it is undoubted that all those motions of Animals which we call voluntary,
come from the emotions of the Appetite, which is the principle thereof; and
that the Appetite never moves it self without the Judgment of the Imagination,
which proposes and ordains what it is to do. Now it does not only order it
to make it more in members, because it is but one means to attain its principal
action; But it self proposes the action it self, which is the end and aim the
Animal tends to. If this be so, since the voice forms it self by means of the
muscles, the judgment of the Imagination must needs precede their motion; and
that this knows that the voice ought to form it self by their means, and that
it orders the Animal to cry; Now if she knows, and if she ordains, she has a
design and an intention to form a voice; because the design is nothing but the
judgment and the proposition which the faculty makes to execute what she finds
good. As the intention is nothing but the motion which forms it self in the
appetite in pursuit of that judgment; And consequently in all the examples
proposed by M.C. the grief non^ he surprise excites no sighing, cries, or other
voice, which the mind had not a design and an intentention to form.

Let no man object, That it is true, the Mind has a design and intention to
form the Voice, but none to make it self be thereby understood. For if she has
an intention to form the voice, she must have it as of a thing good and
profitable to it; for as much as the intention always respects the end, and the
end is ever considered as good. Now if from the voice we exclude communication
and design of making it self thereby understood, there will therein be neither
goodness nor profit, and consequently the mind would not have the same
intention of forming it. And why should not an Animal have a design to make it
self understood by its cries, and by its accents, since it very well comprehends
the thoughts of others by those which they form; and if it sufficiently
understands them when it calls for their help, when it imparts to them the
posture it has found, when they advertise them of the danger which threatens
them, why should they not make use of the same voice to give them the same
knowledge?

Yes; but says M.C. page 164. These are the immediate effects of passions, and
he could never have believed that any man would have made use of those effects
to have inferred a Reason from them. Let him not wonder at this; there are
infinite many other most true illations, which he as yet knows not, and which
he believes may not be drawn from many propositions which he knows: And without
seeking them further he minded not the consequences which I have drawn from the
objection he made me; for I necessarily from thence conclude that he has here
forgot the Laws of Logic, and the Maxims of Philosophy:

First, we dispute not here about Reason, neither will we infer from the
diversity of the voices which Beasts have, that they reason, but only that
they communicate their thoughts together, that they have a design and an
intention to do it, and that consequently they speak together. So that it seems
M.C. has forgot the state of the question which himself stated, and that
according to his custom he falls into the sophism, that he raises what he
ought not to raise; For although in pursuit of this, we may conclude, That if
Animals speak, they must needs have reason, yet we are not yet there; it is a
consequence which supposes we proved that Animals speak, and it is to pervert
the order of Ratiocination, and precipitate matters to descend to this
conclusion, without having cleared the preceding difficulty. In the second
place, p. 164. when he wonders that from the immediate effects of passion, I
should infer the design and intention of the mind; He knows not that those
principally are the effects which are performed with design; for as there are
two sorts of them, the one of which are made for the end which passion
requires, and the rest which are done out of necessity; the first are only made
by design, and pass immediately from passion, the rest necessarily follow
those, without the souls having any intention to produce them. So when anger
makes a man cry, run, and strike, when it raises a man's brows, look through
and shake his head, which pass immediately from the passion, and which are also
done with design, because they serve to the vengeance it proposes to it self.
But when it renders the voice hoarse, the eyes staring, the lips full and
trembling, and such like, which we have elsewhere observed, these are effects
which the soul has no intention to produce, because they serve for nothing to
that end, they of necessity follow the former, and proceed not immediately from
choler. From thence it is easy to observe, that the cries and accents which
Animals form in their passions are the immediate effects thereof; we have had
reason to infer the design and intention which they had to do them.

But we shall here observe another of M.C's errors hid under the word Passions;
for if he is of the opinion of the Stoics, and that with them, he will reduce
the nature of the passions to those vehement troubles which are made in the
soul, and are called Perturbations, as the examples he produces make it
suspicious; it is not true, that all the cries and accents of Animals are
effects of the Passions, since there are a hundred encounters wherein they form
several sorts of them, without resenting those violent motions wherein the
perturbation of the Mind consists. Does he think that a Dog is very much angry
every time he barks at any one; and that the transport in which he is
constrains him to throw out all the cries he makes in the same manner as Grief
lets sighs and complaints escape? and that the surprise, or anger, or grateful
things, robs from the Soul those great endeavors of the Voice which it causes?
Does he think that a Hen which calls her Chickens to eat the corn she has
found, is not moved to form all those several accents she imploys for that
purpose, but by the excess of the pleasure which transports her, and that it is
but as many cries of joy and forced exclamations, wherewith we sometimes
observe the violence of passion discharges it self. If this were so, we must
imagine that a very vehement perturbation is necessary to furnish the
Nightingale with so long and opinionated a warbling as it has; not only in
the Spring when they are in love, but also in the midst of Winter when they are
kept tame, and that there is no thought of suspecting that love should be the
cause thereof.

But if he takes the word Passion, as does the wholesomest Philosophy, for all
kind of motion which the Appetite suffers; it is true that all the cries of
Animals are the effects of passion, because the emotion of the appetite is
principle of the action which the organs perform to form the Voice. But in this
case the examples he produces conclude nothing against me, since they only
respect perturbations and vehement passions. And that there are of another kind
which produce effects of which we speak, others then those. For I know that a
man may say that complaints, and sighs, and laughings are done out of
necessity, as is the voice moved by a cough: But were it so, it follows not
that all other voices should perform it after the same manner; and M.C. has no
more reason to prove that Peasts form their voice without design, because there
are men which make complaints and groans without any intention of doing so,
then I have to show that they form them with design, because there are men
which groan and complain with design and intention. For this proof would be
equivalent with his; and should he have any thing to say against it, it would
be that the men which groan and complain with design, do it out of
Ratiocination, and that Beasts cannot use it; but it were to suppose what is in
question. And therefore I see nothing hitherto in M.C's Examen which destroys
those truths which I have established: Let Us see how he has succeeded in the
rest.

He says then, That if to diversifie the Voice were to speak according to the
diversity of the passions, all dumb men would speak; for by their voice we know
whether they are sad, merry, or angry. And yet they know not whether they have
a voice or not, and by consequence cannot know that the express compare
themselves thereby. This reason is like the former, and is but a particular
fact which concludes nothing in general. For were it true, that dumb men should
discover their passions by their voice without any design of theirs, would the
consequence be good for all others which are not dumb? And this example were
better applied to Beasts then all the contrary examples which we have from the
rest of Men which make use of the voice, with design and intention by it to
make their passions appear. On the other side, it is no way to judge of the
manner with which an action ought to be done to produce by way of example those
defects and irregularities which sometimes happen. We inquire how Animals make
use of their voice and M. C. sends us to dumb persons, who are born deaf, and
consequently know not whether they have a voice, nor the use of it; Should I
then grant him the thing he proposes, it would be neither to his advantage nor
to my damage. I shall go yet further, and shall consent to the last consequence
he draws from this Ratiocination, That since a dumb man makes his passions
known without design, and without knowing the means he therein imploys, Animals
may also do so; But it therefore follows not that they effectually do it. There
is a great difference that a thing may be done, and that in effect it is done;
Perhaps Nature might have made in Animals, what according to his opinion she
has made in dumb persons; but we find that she has not. Thus neither are we
of a contrary opinion since he speaks but of the possibility of the thing, and
that I consider it as it is truly.

Whether dumb persons speak, and how.
But without stopping at forms, and at M.C's manner of proceeding, we must make
it appear that in conclusion all the propositions which comprehend
Ratiocination are not absolutely true.

First, When he supposes That mute persons do not speak, That in some sense is
false: Indeed they do not speak the common language of men, but they speak the
language which Nature has taught them as well as Beasts, and that is sufficient
to say, that they are not absolutely mute; for to be mute, is in respect of the
voice, and in respect of humane speech. Fish and all creatures which have not
the use of the voice are called dumb in respect of the rest which have it, and
not because they cannot speak the language of men. Even a Dog whose nerves,
called the Recurrens, are cut which serve to form the voice, is after that
manner dumb. So that for a man to be absolutely dumb, he ought not only to be
deprived of Speech, but even of Voice; and if he makes use of this to express
his passions, we may say that he speaks, since even all tongues will have it,
that he speaks by signs.

But what says he? These damb persons can have no design to express their
passions by their voice, since they know not whether they have a voice
Certainly, they know not distinctly that they have a voice, since they are
deprived of hearing, which can only give them a clear and distinct knowledge
thereof. But they know it confusedly; that is to say, that they know that the
action of the organs they employ, terminates at something which may express
their passions; and evidently, to show that that is sufficient to be able to
say, that they speak. We need but consider the effects of that wonderful act,
which teaches dumb persons to speak, whereof we have proof in the person of a
Prince, who is one of the most illustrious Families of Europe, and in that of a
Spanish Lord, who spoke and writ intelligibly. For both of them being born
deaf, they know not what Voice is, nor whether they have any; yet they speak
the language of their Country; they make their thoughts understood by it, and
have a design to express them by the words which they pronounce; it is not as we
have said that they discern the sound of the words, but they know that there is
I know not what, which forms it self by the motion of their tongue, and that by
it, they make known their thoughts. So that they have the design and intention
is to form the voice without distinctly knowing it, they make the organs move
and know that from their action there will infallibly spring an effect, whose
nature they are ignorant of, but whose utility is not unknown unto them. In the
Arts there are a hundred examples, and in natural things, which may confirm
this truth; but I shall give M. C. leave to divine them; and I shall content my
self to ask him, if when he makes Theriacle, or such like an Antidote, his
design is not by the mixture of the Drugs which compose it, to cause a secret
and specific virtue to come in, which separately is not to be found in them;
yet he knows not what it is, and knows it only by its effects. He therefore
has a design to do a thing which he knows but confusedly. It Is the same with
dumb persons, who have a design to form a voice without knowing it, and who
know only that it is a thing which may express their passions.

Now if dumb men have a design to form the voice which they know not; why
should not Beasts who know it, and discern all the varieties thereof, have a
design and intention to make use of it to express their thoughts? M.C. had
therefore reason to have recourse to another example, which was more proper
then all that to clear all the difficulties which in this matter are to be met
withal. Let Us see what it is.

He says, p. 165. That a child at its birth cries without having any intention
to communicate its thought; that a while after it laughs without any design of
imparting to us its joy, and that consequently there are very different accents
of the voice before we come to speech. This is that great example of a little
child which ought to persuade us that Beasts speak after the same manner as he
does, and that they groan like him when they are sensible of ill, without
thinking to cause any passions to come to their help.

But truly we may rest assured that M.C's child is not strong enough to
maintain the consequences he builds on this comparison; a man need but blow to
cast it down, and after all, what we have before observed, it is sufficient to
say, that indeed he has not the design and intention which proceeds from the
Understanding and from the Will. But that he has those which are made by the
imagination and by the Appetite. And that he also has not the speech which is
from the institution and common use of men; but that he has a natural speech
whereby he makes known his passions. With this modification I shall consent
that M. C. may compare the voice of Beasts with that of children. So as he will
also be obliged to confess that this comparison is altogether useless to prove
what he pretends.

It matters not, Whether Beasts, Children, or dumb persons groan when any thing
hurts them, without meaning to make any person come to their help. For besides
that I have not said that Beasts groaned for that purpose, and that it is
sufficient for me if they have an intention to groan, and by their complaints
to make their grief known, there is a great deal of difference to think of
doing of a thing, and to have a design to do it. A man in anger speaks all
alone, strikes what he encounters, walks wiih large spaces, without thinking
what he does, yet he has the design of doing so, since these actions cannot be
done with the design and intention of so doing. But he makes no reflection
hereon, or to speak better, his thought fixes not on it, nor strongly applies
it self elsewhere; and it is thereby that he thinks not of doing all those
things, and that afterward he does not remember that he did them. So Beasts,
Children and men which g^oan, have a design to make known the grief they
resent, and the need they have to be succored, but they think not of it, not
only because the violence of the passion hinders them from staying their
thoughts at ought else, besides the evil they feel, but also because the
knowledge which they have of the end for which they groan, comes from Nature.
And that this knowledge is so present, and so familiar to the soul, and forms
it self so quickly, and so secretly, that it demands, nor respects no attention
principally when there are other things which might employ it. Wherefore when
we fall, or when we see a blow come, we sooner bring our hands before it then
we are aware of it. It is not that the soul conducts not the hands, and
consequently that it has not the design to oppose them against it, to lessen
the greatness of the fall or blow; but both the danger which so strongly
possesses her that she cannot apply her self to the things she does but by
stealth, and the knowledge she has of the end for which she acts, are so
natural to her that she is moved thereunto not without design, but even without
any attention.

However it be, we cannot set rules to the common voice of Beasts, according to
the cries they make, when they are agitated with some vehement passion. M.C. is
not ignorant that the trouble they cause precipitates all the designs of the
soul, and often perverts and corrupts them. He knows that Speech which is
destined for society, escapes those who are alone when they suffer any great
motion of joy or displeasure; That a man in anger revengeth himself untimely,
and strikes without cause whom he first meets; That violent desires cause the
mouth to water, when notwithstanding it is unnecessary; and a hundred such like
examples, which all the passions furnish. Without doubt there is a great
difference betwixt the groanings of a Dog when he is sensible of a strong
grief, or when he would enter into a Chamber which is shut; in the first he
scarce knows why he complains, but in the other he knows that it is to be let
in, and undoubtedly he thinks to call some one to let him in. For we do not say
as M.C. would have us believe, p. 166. That his design was to address his voice
to other dogs to open it to him, because he has no experience that dogs open
doors, but that it is men which open them.

To clear this truth, I would counsel him to come to Paris to consult with
famous Montdory's Cat, which is so discreet that she never means to come into
the Chamber when she finds it shut, she only draws a little bell which hangs at
the door, and if at first sounding they come not, and open it, she redoubles it
until she be let in. I doubt not but that after having known, that no body
troubled themselves to teach her to draw the bell, and that of it self this
wise Beast did learn to imitate those persons which she had seen do the same
thing; I say I doubt not but he will judge either that the Cat it self would
answer him, if he would interrogate her thereupon, that she had no design to
call other Cats to open her the door, but those persons which were wont to do
it. After all should a Dog or a Cat address its voice to other creatures, as in
several incounters without doubt it may, and that they would not come to its
aid, as M. C. says: what consequence could he draw from thence, but that it
were deceived in its design, as it happens to many who unprofitably demand
succor from those who either cannot or will not give it them?

This is all what I had to say on what M.C. proposed concerning the language of
Beasts, and which will also serve for an answer to what he objects against the
other actions which they perform to make their thoughts known. For confessing
that the gesture, the mind, and the look do it as well as the voice, he says as
before, That its without design, and that there are the effects of their
passions, of which Reason and design do not participate. But it is easy thereby
to see that he confounds the design of the Understanding with that of the
Imagination, as he has done before. Wherefore I shall send him back to what we
have already answered.

Since Beasts Speak, they must needs Reason.
After all these proofs which evidently make it appear that Beasts communicate
their thoughts, and speak together, had we not reason from thence to infer that
they did reason? Not only because M. C. finds this consequence necessary, but
also because they cannot make their intentions known to demand help the one of
another, with out forming a perfect Ratiocination. Seeing that there are so
many several judgments to be made in these encounters, so many progresses which
the soul makes from causes to their effects, from signs to things signified,
and from goods and evils present to those which are past and to come; that it is
impossible but we must find it in the form and contexture of discourse. All
what M. C. opposes hereunto, is, That he has shown how Beasts communicate
their thoughts, and how this communication may be made without Ratiocination.
But if my memory be good, all his proof reduces it self into two Reasons which
we have destoyed; the one that they have no speech; and the other, that they
have no design or intention to make known their thoughts. In a word, we have
proved the contrary, and consequently according to M. C's Maxim, had we no
other marks of their Ratiocination, it must follow that they reason, since we
have made it appear that they speak.

As for the example which we produced of a Hen which calls her Chikens to
impart unto them the grain she has found, and that it must needs be that she
had a design to make them come to show them their food, and to nourish them;
And that they also must understand the voice which summons them, comprehend the
thing which is signified by it, and hope for the good which it announceth. He
answers only, That all this is done by instinct. But this is not to take away
the difficulty; the question is to know whether all these actions are done with
knowledge* For if it be so, we must also confess that there is a Ratiocination,
since so many progresses of one knowledge to another, cannot be without
discourse. And it matters not whether it be done by instinct; for as fear which
comes from instinct is a true fear, and is of the same species as is that which
comes from elsewhere; the Ratiocination which precedes the Instinct must needs
be a true Ratiocination, and of the same nature with the other. Now it is not
to be contested but that there is a knowledge in all the actions which the Hen
and Chickens do in the example we brought, design and intention being therein,
as has been demonstrated. The Intention, forasmuch as it is the motion of the
Appetite which tends toward good; and that the Hen and Chicken will do the
things they do, and consequently form the design thereof, which is a motion of
the Appetite whith tends toward the good. The design because it is a proposition
which the faculty makes to execute what it finds useful, which ever goes before
the intention, and which consequently precedes the desire of the Hen and of the
Chicken; They agitate them with knowledge; that is to say, they conceive the
things which they judge good, and that they from thence draw those consequences
which we have observed; all the difference which the Instinct brings thereunto,
is, that the senses furnish them not with all the things which they know, and
the greatest part of the objects of their knowledge must come from elsewhere.
But whence soever they come, they form images thereof, and afterward unite
them together, wherein all knowledge consists: And were there any exterior
thing intervening amongst these actions, it would be as a help, and not as a
principle, because they are vital actions, whose faculties which are born with
the Animal, are the first and last causes. But we shall more carefully examine
this in the Discourse of the Instinct. Let Us then conclude and say with M. C.
that as Reason is but an internal word, external Speech is inseparable from it;
and if nature has given to Animals internal speech, she must also have given
them external speech. But yet since external speech is inseparable from the
internal, it must needs be that if Nature has given them external speech, she
must also have given them internal speech, which is Reason. Now Animals have
the thought as M.C. confesses, and thought is nothing but internal Speech, as
all our Masters consent, and therefore Animals have reason, since reason as M
C. says, is but an internal speech, Besides, since we have demonstrated that
they have external speech, it follows that if it be inseparable from internal
speech, of necessity they must have Reason. Yet do not I ground on this all
this ratiocination, and have only produced it to make it appear that M.C. has
as weakly established his own opinion, as he has destroyed that of another
man's. For to show you that Beasts do not speak, he makes use of a paralogism,
which may be retorted against him, and proves quite the contrary to what he
pretends. It Is true, that Reason is an internal speech, but it is not true that
all Internal speech is Reason. And had no Beasts Reason it would not follow
they might not have external speech, because external speech expresses as well
simple as composed thoughts. But I shall say further, That although they have
the internal speech, it is no consequence that they must have the external
speech, since there are Animals which are dumb which forbear not to have
internal speech. Thus internal speech is not inseparable from external, as he
says; thus the consequence which he draws from so ill a Ratiocination cannot
but be very ill.

Beasts which run to the cry of others, know it to be a means to call them.
The examples he produces in pursuit to prove That when Beasts run to the cry
of others, they know not that this cry is a means, or that its used to call
them; These examples I say, do not conclude better then the rest of his
Reasons. For besides that they are drawn from another gender of things then
those we speak of, and which consequently cannot decide the matter in question;
some do suppose that Judgment and Ratiocination cannot be made without time;
which we have already demonstrated, is not always necessary. And from the rest
we can infer nothing but that the judgment and the discourse of the
Understanding concur not to the actions of Beasts, which is a useless and
ridiculous consequence, since all the world knows that they want Understanding.

In effect, the first example is, of a man who going to see his friend, with an
intention to laugh with him, finds his eyes in fire, and his face awry for this
sight surpriseth and stops them, before he has time to discourse and so much
as to judge that he is in wrath. But he presupposes, as we have said, That
such a man must have time to judge and to reason, which is nothing necessary;
for at the very moment he sees the marks of anger, he may judge and conclude
that his friend is angry. Indeed he may doubt whether those marks proceed from
that passion, and so may suspend his judgment; bu it would still be true that
he reasoned; forasmuch as to doubt, a man must reason, and have reasons on both
sides which must hold the mind in suspense.

The second is, Of those who knowing the sweetness of some persons minds,
forbear not when they accost them to resent some straint which the severity of
their countenance causes. For says he, this constraint is not an effect of
their judgment, no more then the respect which at first we have for a man of a
good mind, or well apparalled, although we know that his inside is not
answerable to his appearance, nor to his cloths. It is not indeed the
Understanding which judges and concludes upon the occasions; it is the
imagination which lets it self be won by appearances, and thereby judges of
things. For since that seeing a man of a good mind, we find our selves as it
were obliged to be civil to him; It Is a consequence drawn from what appears to
our eyes. Now it is not the Understanding which judges so, as M. C. will have
it, it must needs therefore be the imagination. So that this example serves for
nothing but to show that Beasts perform aims, which the Understanding does not
contribute unto, because it excludes not the judgment of the imagination, but
only that of the superior part which is not here in question.

The third is of a child which cries when the Nurse shows it a sour look,
without judging thereby that she is in an ill humor, and threatens it; its
sufficient that the gesture is extraordinary, and that all that is
extraordinary astonisheth the imagination, and angers it. But it is not
sufficient thus crudely and indigently to advance things. He should prove that
this Child makes no judgment; for I hold absolutely the contrary; For that he
cannot cry without resenting the motion of some angry passion, and that passion
never forms it self but the soul must have the knowledge of the object which
excites it, whether it be true, or whether she imagine it to be so; and in
pursuit that she does not the actions with the circumstances, we have observed
in several places of the third part of this Work, which she can never do
without reasoning, as we have showed in those places; and therefore it must
needs be that the child which cries must not only make judgment, but also must
needs reason. For although M.C. says, That it is sufficient if the Nurses
gesture be extraordinary to this child, and that all what is extraordinary
astonisheth the imagination, and angers it; I shall confess although this
require a restriction, there being many things which are extraordinary to
children which anger them not. But this is to fall again on the same
difficulty, because there extraordinary things anger not the imagination, but
that she must make a Ratiocination, as elsewhere we have declared.

And this Answer ought to serve to what he has added, p. 171. That the
Passions are contagious; than there need but one sad person in a company to
make them all of the same humor; and that as joy makes a man sing and dance
without design, so also singing and dancing makes a man rejoice. For says he,
that all these things are done without discourse, and without Ratiocination
that all troublesome or pleasing objects move the Appetite without the intention
of Reason; and that it is so that we make little children laugh when they laugh;
that sighings and groanings, and even musical tunes make such an impression on
our minds; that to conclude, we make children, and even men themselves turn
their heads when they are called, before those have the use of reason, or those
the time to reason, and often even against their intention. All this I say is
only to be understood or the superior and intellectual Reason, and does not
enclude that which the imagination may and ought to form in these encounters.
Wherefore all the consequences he draws from thence, and which he applies to
the actions of Beasts, are vain, and concern not the difficulty in hand.

I leave what he says, page 173. That there is no likelihood that Beasts
should not move themselves unless by the force of Syllogisms; and before they
should be drawn by a voice, they must make at least twenty five Ratiocinations.
For besides that his calculation is not very just, we have answered to these
kind of objections in several places of this work, and principally in the third
Chapter of the third Part. And as for what he maintains, That there follows no
inconvenience to say, That this mutual intelligence which is to be found in
Animals of the same Species, proceeds altogether from the Instinct: We consent
thereunto, so as he will but be better instructed concerning the nature of the
Instinct then he is, and remember himself of what we lately said. That Instinct
hinders not but that actions might be done with knowledge, and that the Animal
is not the principal and immediate cause thereof.

Let Us conclude with that fair Observation M.C. has made p. 173. upon what I
have said, That he that should well mind the language of Birds, would make no
difficulty to believe that Tyresias, Melampus, and Apollonius has formerly
understood it. For he has unlinked this observation out of its place, that he
might take the liberty to make on it the longer a censure, and has placed it
at the end of his Chapter, as a Morrer-peece of his munition, and of his
address. And truly I confess, that he is not ignorant in Fables, and that he
very well knows the adventures of Tyresias, and the genealogy of Melampus. And
I also profess he makes as ill use of the Artifice of an Orator, who seeks to
render odious or ridiculous what is proposed by his Adversary. For who is
there, who knowing that I speak of Tyresias and Melampus, which are names only
to be found in the Fable, as M. C. assures us, would not with him say, That a
cause has very great need of help, when it makes use of such base authorities?

But to defend my self from his Artifice, and to disabuse those he might have
persuaded, I have nothing else to say, but that although I have spoken of
Tyresias, of Melampus, and Apollonius, I have not made use of their authority,
neither did I assure that what was spoken of them was false or true. It was
also a thing which to me ought to be indifferent, and whatever it were, I
might reasonably say that who would well observe the language of Birds, would
make no difficulty to believe that they had formerly understood it. There are
but few things in Fables, whence as much may not be said, when a truth is
discovered which has relation to it. Why may we not say after the experiences
we have seen in our time, some Girls that have changed Sex, that there were no
difficulty to believe what the Poets have related of Iphis? Yet its a name to
be found only in the Fable, no more then that of Tyresias. And no man will say
that in this encounter we use the authority of Poets, and the example of Iphis
to prove that this change may be done naturally, since on the contrary it is the
experience we bring which gives a likelihood to what they have said. So far
from it is from it that my cause should need so idle an authority, and the
example of Tyresias and Melampus which are only to be found in Poets, that its
that which authoriseth them, and which of fabulous which they were, renders
them credible; and any equitable person may judge, that its a consequence which
I draw from the truths which I have established, and not as M. C. says, that
its a proof and an authority with which I would maintain them.

This is all I had to say on the third Objection which was made against the
reason of Animals. There remains yet one of the Instinct, which should
terminate this discourse; But indeed it deserves an entire Volume, and there
are so many things to be examined, and there are so many things which rob me of
the time I need; that being not able so readily to put my last hand to it, I
thought that M C. might no longer languish in the expectation he had I ought to
divide my answer, and give him that which concerns the Raciotinacion of Beasts,
till I could end that of the Instinct. And indeed had it been ready, it would
have troubled my conscience to have afflicted M C. with the sight of so great a
Volume. Nay, even I should have had the same apprehension to have kept off our
Judges by the length of our indifference, and with so great a number of pieces
which were to be examined. After all, the retrenchment I make of that part of
our contest will not wrong this which I now present. For were it true, that
Beasts did not reason in those actions which they do by Instinct, there are
several others enough in which Instinct has no share, which evidently make it
appear that they reason, as those acts which they do out of custom by
instruction, and generally all those which they do with knowledge. So the proof
of their Ratiocination remains all entire, although we speak not of the
Instinct, and what ever might be said of it.

FINIS.

