A LETTER OF ADDRESS FROM THE OFFICERS of the ARMY IN SCOTLAND, DIRECTED To
the Honorable, the Speaker of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England
sitting at Westminster.

Wednesday the 18th of May 1659.

ORdered by the Parliament that this Letter be forthwith Printed and Published.

Tho. St Nicholas Clerk of the Parliament.

London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament.

And are to be sold at the seven Stars in Fleetstreet, over against Dunstans
Church, 1659.

For the Honorable the Speaker of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England, Sitting at Westminster.
Right Honorable,
THat a Nation may be born in a day, is a Truth which this days experience
witnesses unto us against all the Dictates of humane Reason; and that a
glorious Cause, whose Interest was laid low (even in the Dust) should be in one
day restored to its life and luster; when almost all the Assertors of it had so
manifestly declined it, by a defection of many years, cannot be imputed to less
then the greatest and most powerful manifestation of the Arm of God, that ever
this, or former Generations saw or heard of. In the sense of this (the greatest
of our Temporal Mercies) we now come to Address to your Honors, as those whose
presence we have so long wanted, that had you staid but a little longer, it
might have been left to be inquired what England was; we mean, what was become
of that People, by whom God for so many years filled the World with so much
Admiration and Terror. But though this great Work be (as most justly it ought
to be) wonderful in our eyes; yet when we consider its Author, who calls
things that are not, as if they were, brings down to the Pit, and raises up
again; we see that nothing is difficult to Faith, and the promises of God are
sure and stable, even then, when in the eye of man no less then impossible. We
cannot but acknowledge to our exceeding great sorrow and shame, that our
selves, though we hope most of us, through weakness and frailty, (not out of
Design) have very much contributed to those provocations, which have caused God
to depart from our Israel; and we could heartily wish that even amongst those
that help to make up your own number, there had not been an helping hand to
this sad and deplorable work. But we see when Gods hour is come, and the time
of his Peoples deliverance, (even the set time at hand) he comes skipping over
all the mountains of sin and unworthiness that we daily cast in his way. We are
not willing to detain your Honors too long upon this Subject, and therefore
beseeching the God of all our Mercies, to heal the backslidings of his People,
and not to charge unto their account, in this his day of their deliverance,
their miscarriages, whilst they were wandering in dark and slippery places,
after the imaginations of their own hearts; We with all humility and affection
in the first place congratulate you in this your happy Restoration to the
Government of these Nations, which God was once pleased so to own in your
hands, as to make you both the Praise and Wonder of the Earth, the Glory and
Rejoicing of his People, and the Terror of your adversaries; and we
acknowledge it a singular condiscention in you, in this day of so great
difficulties, to take upon you so heavy a burden. And seeing his late Highness
has been pleased to manifest so much self-denial and love to his Country, in
appearing for the Interest thereof against his own: We humbly entreat, That
some speedy care may be taken for Him and His Family, (together with Her
Highness Dowager) That there may be such an honorable provision settled upon
them, and such other Dignities as are suitable to the former great Services of
that Family to these Nations.

And in the next place, we cannot but humbly beseech you, now you have an
opportunity, then which a fitter your hearts did never pray for, to finish the
work of Reformation that has been so long upon the wheel, and met with so
great obstuctions, that you would not heal the wound of the Daughter of Gods
people slightly, but make so sure and lasting provision for both their
Christian and Civil Rights, as that both this and future Generations may have
cause to rise up, and call you blessed; and the blackest of Designs may never
be able to cast dirt in your faces any more, and as helpful to these two great
concernments, Religion, and Liberty, we humby propose unto your mature
Consideration these two desires,

First, That you would be pleased to countenance Godliness and all the sincere
professors thereof, encourage an able and laborious Ministry, and suffer no
other yoke to be imposed upon the Consciences of Gods people, then what may be
agreeable to the word of God; and that you would be a terror to all impious,
profane and licentious people whatsoever.

Secondly, That you would so vindicate and assert the native Rights and
Liberties of these Nations, in and by the Government of a Free State, that
there may not be the voice of an oppressed one in our Land, but that all may
enjoy the blessed fruits of your Righteous and Peaceable Government. And for
the prevention of all possibility for Ambitious spirits ever to work their ends
against you, we humbly desire you to be very careful, as well what persons you
entrust with the management of the Armies and Navies of this Commowealth, as of
the measure of that Power and Authority you depart with to them, or substitute
in them. Touching the Qualifications of the persons, we desire they may be
truly Godly and Conscientious. Touching the measure of their Authority, that it
may be adequate to the nature and being of a Commonwealth.

And whilst you are thus pleading and asserting the interest of God and his
People, you may rest assured, with greatest confidence, that we shall appear in
your defense, and the vindication of your Authority, against the opposition of
all Arbitrary Powers whatsoever.

And to that blessed and All-powerful God, who is able to spirit you for this
Great Work, you are and shall daily be recommended in the the Prayers of,

Your most Loyal and most obedient Servants, George Monck. Thomas Read. Ralph
Cobbet. Timothy Wilks. Robert Read. John Cloberrey. Abraham Holmes. Henry
Dorney. Daniel Davison. Richard Heath. Mi. Richardson. John Hubbelthorn. Thomas
Johnson. P. Crisp. Henry Brightman. Philip Watson. Thomas Dean. Jeremiah Smith.
William Davis. James Wright. Joseph Wallington. William Helling. Ethelbert
Morgan. Robert Winter. John Paddon. Anthony Nowers.


FINIS.

