A Letter from HOLLAND: BEING A true Relation of all the proceedings of THE
Northern Armies.

UNDER The Command of Duke Hamilton, the Earl of Lendrick, the Lord Calander,
Monroe, Sir Marmaduke Langdale, Sir Thomas Tilsley.

AND The rest of the English in the Northern Parts.

Sent from a Gentleman in Holland, to his friend here in England: Which has
set down all the Passages of the Armies. Sept. 23.

Printed in the year, 1648, October. 12.

HAving continued with the Scottish Army, till the disbanding at Vtoxater in
Staffordshire, (it being impossible, for those, who were so busy about plunder
and booty, not to have some of us escape) I made shift, by the benefit of the
English tongue to come to Boston, where after some stay for wind, I embarked
and arrived here the of the present.

During our former correspondence from Edinburgh, I advertised you of my
incapacity of employment in the Scottish Army, in regard of my former
activenesse against those of the Covenant; yet retaining still some hopes of
command, either there, or with Sir Marmaduke Langdale, (at least my affection
constrained it) I marched along, frequenting (the most I could) the head
quarters, as well to solicit my own advancement, as for observation, which
has enabled me for the ensuing relation, being truly set down, without favor
or any private interest or consideration; for satisfaction of all his Majesty's
Subjects, and especially your self, who is so great a lover of truth, although
malice, ignorance, or lying spirits may suggest otherwise, yet not to be
credited.

I have likewise acquainted you (weekly as it did occur) with the great
opposition, made both in the Parliament of Scotland, and otherwise against the
preparation and leavy of the late Army, proceeding not from any Piety or
Religion, as those opposers pretended, nor from any affection to the Parliament
or Army of England, but from mere self ends, unwilling to admit of any
equallity, or let go any part of the power and sway, which for many years they
had carried in that Kingdom, and fearing they should want the command and
ordering of this Army, and so disabled for want of interest therein to convert
the same to benefit, and for serving their own turns as occasion offered: the
which, being strongly backed with the daily papers, preaching, and diswasion of
seditious corrupted Ministers (though at last frustrated by the great
dexterity, and diligence of the well affected party) protracted so much time
before things were brought to a head, as gave no small advantage to the
contrary Armies of England, but was a great cause of the ill success that
happened afterward to the late Army, as is obvious to any indifferent judgment.

About the middle of June, there appeared in the West of Scotland, for
obstruction of the leavy, about 3000. men in a hostile manner, which did
necessitate the drawing thither of most of the horse, that was in readiness,
(which lay at a great distance, dispersed through the kingdom, and had no small
toil to come together) with some foot for their suppression: which under the
conduct of the Earl of Calander, L. Genesis of the Army, and Middleton Lieu. Genesis
of the horse, was achieved, and at Machlin Moore, those rebels were routed and
dispersed.

Within few days after, the Genesis receives order from the Committee of Estates,
that all the forces of horse and foot, that were raised, should speedily march
to the English borders, as well to prevent such incursions, which Major Gen
Lambert (being there with his Army) might make upon Scotland, as for securing
of Carlisle (then possessed by the English) which was reduced to no small
extremity by Lamberts forces, the preservation or loss of which in the
consideration of Scotland, was of great concernment.

Accordingly, upon the 4. of July about 2500 horse and 2000. foot rendezvouzed
at Annan, which being so small a number, occasioned our stay there for four
days, to expect more forces, and without any great increase we marched into
England, on Saturday following, July the 8. and that night quartered at
Roclifle four miles short of Carlisle.

The next day, the Lord Genesis receiving from Sir Philip Musgrave the keys of
Carlisle Castle, we marched to Thuresby, four miles on the other side that City,
where the Infantry is quartered, and by this time a few Regiments more of foot
was come to us, but the whole not considerable to run the hazard of a
re-encounter with Major Genesis Lambert, then about Penreth (sixteen miles
distant) with a great force, by report, it was thought fit we should remain
some time at Thuresby to receive a greater strength, and that the Duke might
settle the garrison of Carlisle, which few days after was accomplished, as
likewise the soldier have some refreshment, after a wearisome march, through
abundance of rain and waters.

On Friday the 14. we advanced with the whole, being about 3000 horse and 4000
foot toward Penreth, fully resolved to possess that town, or fight with Major
Genesis Lambert; but by reason of the length of the way, most of our horse
quarters being above twenty miles from thence, and some narrow passes, (which
much retarded) we were benighted three miles short of Penreth, and therefore
quartered in the field that night, not exposing our selves to the disadvantage
of making an onset at a time so unseasonable.

The next morning at five a clock, the Cavalry advanced to Penreth (the foot
following after) where we found, that Lambert with his Army, had marched away
about midnight toward Appleby, (a garrison of theirs) and having advanced two
miles beyond the town, our horse intending to pursue him, the intelligence of
the countrymen, did assure his being by that time at Appleby, whereto there
was about eight miles, and several waters unpassable betwixt us, by means of
the great rain that fell in such abundance, the which occasioned our quartering
that saturday night, and sunday, at and about Penreth.

Monday morning, notwithstanding of the great deluge of waters, it continually
raining, we marched for Appleby, and approaching near unto it with our horse,
we discovered a great body of Major Genesis Lamberts Cavalry, which some of ours
presently charged, and put to their retreat into the town of Appleby; Colonel
Harrison who commanded the enemies party, was there wounded with diverse others,
and some slain, the rest escaping by means of the barricado on the bridge,
which was strongly manned with musketeers, and could not possibly with our
horse be forced, all our foot being far behind us; here our Cavalry staid in
expectation of the foots coming, and to try if it was possible to go on the
other side of the river, where Lamberts Army was, (a great part in sight) it
was found altogether infeazible, so great was the inundation that no place
within ten miles was fordable: In the evening some foot came to us, who during
the small remnant of the day endeavored to gain the bridge, which by the night
was prevented, some of each side being slain, and wounded, of ours one taken
prisoner, of theirs Lieu. Sheares, and five others, which next day without any
exchange, were by the Genesis freely discharged and sent to Lambert. Our Cavalry,
all that night remained in the field near Appleby, and the foot for the most
part three miles short of it at Kirby Thure, being unable to pass there, a
river (which at other times very small, but) now so swollen, as that no horse
could come through it without great peril: That night likewise Lambert
(leaving the garrison still at Appleby) marched away with his Army over
Stainemoore, into the confines of Yorkshire, and the Bishopric, and the next
day our horse were disposed into several quarters.

At Kirby Thure we staid a fortnight, which though it may seem long, yet was it
necessary and requisite, in respect we still wanted the main materials and
sinews of the Army (occasioned by our sudden and unready departure from
Scotland, and afterward by the unpassablenesse of the way with the deep
waters) there being in store with us no more then ten barrels of powder, other
ammunition proportionable, no artillery at all, no meal, but a little for the
soldiers subsistence some days on the way: they were to march hence, the
Country being unable and unwilling to furnish any, and the Irish and the most
considerable part of the main Army it self, as yet not come out of Scotland,
all which was conceived (upon a very deliberate consultation) had we
precipitated, our advance might have become useless, if not lost by the
interposition of enemies or some other incident; Nevertheless, so soon as a
few Regiments came to us, (though many still behind of horse and foot) and
that we had got a little more meal, with a fitting proportion of ammunition: we
marched forwards, though the Cannon, a great part of the forces, and the Irish
were still far short of us; by our stay here, we reaped another advantage, the
reducing of Appleby, of great importance, standing on a pass very useful and
necessary, for going to, and from the Army.

Before removal from Kirby Thure, in a full council of war, after much debate
and many arguments, pro and con, it was carried that the Army should march to
Lancashire, and not Yorkshire, which afterward was supposed to be
disadvantagious.

From thence, in two days we marched to Kendale, where it was thought fit,
before going too far, to abide few days for Major Genesis Monro, his nearer
coming to us; as also some more of the Scottish forces, and before his
conjunction with the Army (few Regiments more being come up) or that we well
knew how far from us was the Cannon: we went from thence to Hornby within
Lancashire, where after a little abode, more of our forces (though not the
whole) did overtake us. On the 13. of August, most part of the Cavalry, by the
resolve of most of the chief officers at a consultation, advanced beyond
Preston in that County, an inevitable necessity so to do, being concluded for
enlarging of quarters, the Country about Hornby distitute of provision for
horse and man (the Army by this time being grown more numerous) and for
avoiding of the inconveniences, we must infallibly have been exposed unto, had
the horse and foot, marched at one time through such continued straight lanes,
as that Country does abound with, which were then exceeding deep and myrie, it
was no small difficulty to persuade the Duke to consent to this resolution; for
incontinently after the council was dissolved, a great officer of horse,
speaking concerning it, and joyful with the hopes of better quarter, said that
the General was very unwilling, that the horse should so far separate; but
told me further, he knew not what prejudice it could any way produce, and that
if it had not been granted, a general discontent would unquestionably have
followed amongst the Cavalry: At Hornby the Genesis stays after the horse had
marched, for conducting of the foot, and taking care to provide carriage for,
and sending along the ammunition, as his manner was in all other places, which
I thought was such a drudgery to a General, considering the unwillingnesse of
the Country every where, to send in horses, as few men in such command would
have undergone.

Upon the 14. Monroe with his forces came to Kirby Lansdale, within ten miles
of us, where he received the Generals order to stay there, till the Cannon and
the rest of the Ammunition came to him, and then to bring all to the Army: On
which day the Duke marched away with the Infantrie, and Ammunition, and without
staying any more then one night in a place, came to the Moore near Preston on
the 17. in the morning, where the foot was drawn up, no knowledge of any enemy
to be near us as yet, only some intelligence came the night before, that part
of their forces were quartered within less then twelve miles, the which, in
less then an hour after was contradicted by an eminent person, and so the
former discredited: that night two of our Colonels of horse had their quarters
beaten up, one man killed, and diverse constrained to save themselves by
swimming of the river, yet were they all so negligent, as to give the Genesis no
advertisement of it: After a small stay on the Moore, the foot had order to
march to their quarters appointed for that night, being on the other side of
Preston bridge, where the Duke himself as he was accustomed, went before hand,
with some other officers to view the place, who presently returning toward the
Moore, receives notice, that some small parties of the enemies horse were
discovered on the other side of the Moore, which his Grace finding to be true,
and that they were skirmishing in a narrow lane, with the rear of Sir Marmaduke
Langdales foot, though not suspecting that the whole strength of the enemy was
so near hand; he presently dispatched order, that Lieu. Genesis Middleton, who was
about ten miles beyond us, should with all expedition march there to us, with
the Cavalry, and gave command to Baylie Lieu. Genesis of the foot, to draw them
all in order on the Moore, and not to pass the bridge, intending to fight with
the enemy, if need required it; there being as yet no horse come to us, save
the Generals own troop; such Regiments of horse as were not sent with
Middleton, being still in their quarters, not knowing anything of this
occasion* Lieu. Genesis Baylie causes the foot to stay accordingly: which the Earl
of Calander perceiving, he earnestly advises, that it was safest the foot
should forthwith march to their quarters, where they might the sooner receive
succor from the Cavalry, which was on the same side of the river; that the
enemy (probably) had but an inconsiderable force there, wherewith Sir Marmaduke
Langdales forces would be able to deal with the help of part of our horse, that
was beginning to advance toward us, (not those with Middleton) that if in case
the enemy had there his whole force, he might easily with his horse come about,
and overrun the foot, if they staid on the Moore, they wanting our Cavalry to
assist them; but if they passed the water, not only they would be in safety,
but also Sir Marmaduke (whether the enemy had his whole strength there or not)
would by degrees, be able to draw off his men to our foot, on the other side,
and then both forces might join to make good the bridge and foordes, till our
whole horse came thither: These reasons being so weighty, and proceeding from a
Commander, of such repute and long experience in war, and Lieu: General of
that Army, were assented to by the Duke; so the foot passed the river, and for
a good while after, Sir Marmaduke his soldiers assisted with some of the
Scottish horse, seemed hard enough for the enemy, who several times were glad
to retreat, but at last being overpowered by the enemies whole horse, foot,
and dragoons, both Sir Marmadukes and ours, were driven to quit the ground in
disorder. The Genesis seeing this (who was still on the Moore expecting the
residue of the horse (which was on that side of the river) to come to us for
their succor, who were in fight: and finding that the enemy had there his
whole Army, and stopped all the passages betwixt us and the bridge, on such a
sudden, that it was impossible for our Infantrie to come to us, or we to go to
them by the bridge) gave order, that the few horse which was on the Moore,
(considering they were able to execute nothing, nor yet recover the other side
of the water) should march to Monroe, which they did accordingly: To the Duke
was then represented, an impossibillity of his getting to the foot, the enemy
being so enterposed, and that it was safest for him to retreat also in his own
person, toward the forces from Ireland; but he expressing more care of their
preservation, who were under his charge, then of his own, and therefore willing
to incur any danger, rather then not be with his Army, rejects this counsel,
and so through a narrow gap and over hedges, came into the town, from whence he
thought to find away unto the bridge; but instead thereof, found it full of
the enemy, in pursuit of such as were escaping away, and diverse shooting
through the windows: yet nevertheless, the Duke made twice a stand in the
town, and with few officers and gentlemen, beat back the enemy; where, I heard
Sir Marmaduke Langdale tell him, that he was sorry to see his Grace there,
exposing his own person to so great a hazard, which he thought was very
improper. The enemy coming on at last so thick, both with horse and foot, there
being not power to oppose them: The Duke although again he might easily have
gone to the horse on the Moore, by another way, yet most unwilling still to
leave his Army, chose rather to undergo any peril, and therefore found way to
the river, which he intended to swim, not knowing of any passage; where being
come, he accidentally came to a deep foord, through which he passed unto the
Infantry.

For defense of the bridge, several Brigades of our foot was drawn to it,
which, for three hours time, was maintained with much resolution and courage,
but longer to keep it was impossible, considering the great advantages of the
enemy, who on his side of the bridge had a high ground, with the shelter of
hedges and houses, on our side a descent (at the very end thereof) and then a
plain, without so much as a bush to favor us: so after hard disputing, it was
lost.

About a quarter of a mile from the bridge, on the top of a hill, we staid with
our foot, and about a hundred horse: In the beginning of the night, by the
advice of the Lieu. General Calander, and the major part of the officers that
was there, it was resolved to march toward Wiggin, which accordingly was done,
the Cavalry being that way, from whom there was no return as yet, of any
messenger that we had sent, and therefore it was uncertain to us, had we staid
never so long, we might have wanted their assistance: Here we lost our
Ammunition, and baggage, and in that nights march, many of our foot were lost,
the way being dark and exceeding dirty, and narrow.

That night Middleton, by another way, marched with such part of the Cavalry as
he could get together in so short a time, and the next morning came therewith
to Preston bridge, where he found the enemy was, and that we were gone toward
Wiggin; so immediately he made after us, being very hotly pursued by the enemy,
with whom he fought all the way till he came near us: in which action, our men
expressed so much gallantry, as that the enemies were forced again, though they
had great bodies of horse to make use of, their dragoons being within the
hedges, yet they lost many men, namely Col. Thorney, whose death they much
lamented: On our side was Colonel Hurrey ill (but not mortally) hurt, and
diverse troopers slain.

About eight in the morning next day, being the eighteenth, we drew up in
battalia, all our horse and foot, on Standishmoore (two miles short of Wiggin)
expecting the enemy would give us battle: We stood in that posture above four
hours, till at last (there being no appearance that the enemy would encounter)
we marched toward Warrington; the rear to be brought up by Vandrusck which was
performed with as much care and valor as was possible, (Middleton being with
it also) Yet what with their dragoons, the deep straight lanes, and the
darkness of the night, many of the foot (who had scarce eaten any thing for
two days before) were lost then, and next morning, before they came to
Warrington.

Being come to that town, Lieu. Genesis Baylie received order (by advice of the
Officers that were there) to capitulate for the Infantry, no other way for
their preservation imaginable, being destitute of ammunition, a great part of
their arms lost, they wearied with the former marches, and diverse wounded; so
Baylie accepting of the best conditions he could procure from a victorious
powerful enemy, parted with the foot at Warrington.

From thence that morning, being the nineteenth, the Genesis and Lieu. Genesis
marched with the horse, and at night came to a place near Malpas in Cheshire,
where Middleton was also, having brought up the rear of the Cavalrie, Vandrusck
and diverse other officers of horse being hurt and taken prisoners; here it fell
into consideration, what course was best to steer for the safety of the
Cavalrie; some advising for one place, and some for another; after much debate
upon the whole, and all conveniences and discomodities fully pondred, it was
the opinion of the major part of the officers, that the best expedient in that
condition was, to fetch a little compass, endeavoring to get to Pomfret, and
so more northward, as occasion offerred, and this was resolved upon. Here was
the Duke himself strongly persuaded to leave the Cavalrie, and preserve himself
by withdrawing to Anglesey, or some other place of safety, which easily might
have been effected, but he contemned it with indignation, as he did diverse
times sithence, upon the like advice, he still hoping to carry through the
horse, which does evidence much worth, and the great care he had of those that
were under his command. That night diverse Colonels, and other officers
privately forsook us, which was some disheartning to the soldiers. In pursuit
of the former resolution, we marched from thence betimes next morning, and
quartered in the field at night, about a mile beyond Drayton in Shropshire:
From Drayton we removed before day next morning, being the 21. for Utoxater,
where the last catastrophe was acted, but on our march that evening, Middleton
who had the charge of the rear, more gallant, then like a wary commander, with
a few men and himself, charged two troops of the Governor of Stafford his
horse, and so near Stone was taken prisoner, which did too much contribute to
our last misfortune, for this, and what formerly had happened, took most of the
soldiers with a panick fear, which by no art could be dispossessed. Upon this
news, and that the enemy was much stronger then those of our rear, The Duke
retires with the Army a good way, and upon a Moore draws it up, where we staid
about two hours till the rear came to us, and by that time it was night, and
before we came to Utoxater, near eleven of the clock, our horse tired, and the
soldiers exceedingly disheartened. Yet notwithstanding of the soldiers
dismaiednesse, and averseness to march, most of them itching with a desire of
capitulation, The Duke with diverse officers, persist in the former resolution
of going Northward, therefore after that nights stay in Utoxater, which was
spent with most of the horse standing in the streets and about the town, by
reason of the continual alarums that were taken, by misapprehension of the
soldiers, we marched next morning toward Darbyshire, and being a mile from
the town, a stand was made on the top of a hill, and before the Duke was come
thither, who was in the rear, the Earl of Calander happened on some occasion to
say (being ready to set forwards) those who have good horses, let them follow
me, so went on, and many with him, the which left an impression in the minds of
most that his Lordship intended to be gone, not caring what became of them.
Presently after the Duke came to that hill, where he found all in a great
discontent, and mutiny, not only having desire, but a positive resolution, to
march no further, and to return to Vtoxater, there to treat. The Duke
exceedingly disliking it, commanded them to march on, and at Ashburn in the
Peak, upon further intelligence, what was fit to be done might be taken into
consideration, and that if necessity required a treaty, the field would procure
better conditions then such a town: So the Duke did lead forward, thinking they
would follow, but none did, unless few, and some officers. The Duke seeing
this disobedience, and the most part staying behind in disorder and confusion,
many officers pressing earnestly that the Lieu. Genesis might be desired to come
back for further consultation, the Genesis told them, that if they pleased they
might recall him, which presently they did. The Li. Genesis returning, he
immediately pasled to his Nephew the Lord Levingston, who was appointed to
bring up the rear, and sent him therewith to Vtoxater, staying for the Duke on
the former hill, to whom he said, that he had sent his Nephew back into the
town, to prevent the enemy his coming thither: here, after some pause, it was
found, that the pulse of the soldiers did altogether beat back for the town,
plainly declaring they would not march; and thereupon the Genesis Lieu. Genesis and
the whole, went to Vtoxater, the Duke hoping that by refreshment there of
themselves, and their horses, that day, they might perhaps come to a better
temper, and be content to advance in the evening; but instead thereof, they
being generally possessed with an unalterable opinion of an impossibillity to
go through, in regard (as they said) of such multiplicity of forces that was in
the way, nothing could satisfy them but a capitulation. The Duke his
determination of advancing Northward, not at all abated, perceiving how they
werebent, told them that he feared ere long they would repent their obstinacy
and refusal to march on, which in his judgment was feacible: and for a
treaty, he knew not with whom they could conclude any, that might assure
performance of conditions, there being none of the enemy near, for ought he
knew, that had sufficient authority for that purpose. There we staid, and that
night a great part of our soldiers fearfully mutined, being so many as filled
all the spacious Market place, and round about the Generals quarter, where
every door was fain to be strongly guarded, lest they should violently break
in; in this unruly disorder they continued most part of the night, having once
taken away the Lieut. General his horses, their pretense for the whole, being
that the officers intended to leave them, (as the Lord Kenmore had done that
day, who was gone away with diverse horsemen) whereas, (as they thought) good
conditions might be obtained, if looked after: The Duke assured them for his
part he would not leave them, nor be wanting in any thing that tended to their
preservation, which gave them satisfaction, yet were not fully appeased, till
the next morning.

This detestable mutiny, gave no small advantage to the enemy, but proved the
very bane and breakneck of our intentions, and as it was very disobliging to
the Duke, and full of discomfort, so must I needs praise his goodness, in
continuing his care of the soldiers; (though most of them very unworthy)
whereas undoubtedly as yet, he might easily have compassed his own safety, and
not become prisoner, could he have been willing to desert them. Our going
forward, being thereby rendered hopeless, and some officers continuing their
importunity for a treaty, the Duke gave way (when no other remedy was left)
that they should treat with Col. Stone, Governor of Stafford, and some
Committee men, who undertook to the Commissioners our officers had chosen for
to treat, being three Colonels, Lockhart, Fowls, and Turner, that whatsoever
they should there agree to and promise, should be ratified both by the
Parliament and Army, and that no part of the conditions should be unperformed.
So the treaty began in the afternoon, on the 23. and the next day Major Genesis
Lambert, being come near with his forces, joins in it.

That day 23. the Earl of Calander with his Nephew, and diverse other officers
and soldiers, to the number of 200 or 300. went privately away (without
aquainting the Duke) having first caused a false alarm to be made, the better
(under color of going to repel the enemy) to get out of town unsuspected.

On the 24. about two in the afternoon in the time of the treaty, the Lord
Gray, approaching near with his forces, sends a summons for all to yield to his
mercy: The Duke acquaints him, that his officers had a treaty, and withal,
sent him to peruse a letter from Lambert, approving of the cessation in order
to the treaty, which was to continue till six in the morning, on the 25. and
that assuredly our officers would be glad his Lordship would send some for his
part likewise to treat; to this there was no reply, but another summons sent
about midnight to the same effect as the former, requiring a speedy resolution:
Whereupon the Duke sent a Gentleman, by whom he expected the Lord Gray his
consent to the treaty, not doubting but his Lordship would have observed what
should be condiscended to therein; The Gentleman returned not till about five
in the morning, and with him came up to the Dukes chamber, Colonel Wait,
Master Peter's, and the Lord Gray his Secretary, who (as they alleged) were by
the Lord Grays direction going to the treaty: The Duke was lying upon the bed
by reason of an excessive pain in his legs (which diverse other officers were
ill troubled with) by the wearing of hard boots, unput off, for diverse days
and nights together; after some expression of civility had mutually past, M.
Peter's asked the General, if he would be my Lord Gray his prisoner, he
answered; (without any the least trouble, dismay, or appearance of care of
himself, though questionless much grieved at the condition his Army was
reduced unto) that in regard of the treaty, he knew nor whether he was to be a
prisoner or no; but if so necessitated, he had rather become my Lord Grays
prisoner, with whom he was well acquainted, then another? Then Master Peter's
offered the Duke to preserve what things he had of value, if they were
delivered to him: The Duke thankfully answered, that he had lost all at
Preston, and therefore had nothing he would trouble him with; and so for that
time they parted.

Much about this time the treaty was concluded, which was no otherwise
performed then as if never any such thing had been in agitation.

Whereof one Article was, that neither officer nor soldier should be plundered,
or have ought taken from him, except arms; Yet before nine a clock that
morning, the Lord Gray, Major Genesis Lambert, with their forces, and the Country
Moorelanders, came thick upon us: Lambert taking some pains, by beating off his
soldiers, to restrain their violence; nevertheless, he, with the Lord Gray,
were imediately pleased, notwithstanding the agreement, to share betwixt them
the horses of the Duke and his servants; not leaving one for the Duke himself
to ride upon. I will spare to tell (after the Duke was gone away with the Lord
Gray,) what cunning was used, First, with fair promises, to procure confession
what money we had hid, or given others to keep, and how afterward they
dispoiled us: and thus was our measure of unhappiness, in what was wanting by
the disobedience, and mutiny of our own soldiers, made full, with the
nonperformance and too hard usage of our adversaries.

I conclude, as the prologue to our misery, was the necessary and unavoidable
length of time protracted, before the Army could be prepared in Scotland, by
means of the great obstruction of the adverse party and the Ministers, which
thereby gave way to the overthrow and utter disenabling of our friends in
England, and to the strength and uniting of our enemies to make head against
us: So at Vtoxater, the mutiny of our soldiers, with their and some officers
refusal to march, or obey any order, was the cause of this unfortunate
Epilogue, in the delivery of our Cavalrie.

And for our march to Lancashire, and there dividing our forces, some out of
prejudice, malice, or partiality, will perhaps descant upon it, although it was
done upon such mature deliberation, and reasons, as would then have
sufficiently satisfied their judgments who now do censure it, according to the
event, without considering, that the wisest Counsels and decrees of men, are
not infallible, but subject to errors: Nor could any ascertain us of better
success, had we gone to Yorkshire, or framed our proceedings after all the
ways that man's wit can now fancy had been to our advantage, and declined these
we followed.

This Army, I confess, was considerable, but not so numerous as I understand
report makes it, by the enemies devise (a customary trick) to acquire the more
honor in vanquishing, by how much the greater we were in number: For it, and
Sir Marmaduke Langdales, had they all been together, (as there was of both a
great part from us) would have amounted to no more then five thousand horse,
and ten thousand foot, besides baggage men, and pedees, of which there was too
too many, and whereof we have certain cause to repent.

I must needs say, that too much liberty of plundering was permitted in the
Scottish Army, (though not the third part of what has been rumor'd) and I
cannot but blame the Commanders for impunity: Yet I am confident the General
himself knew little of it, for I am sure he exceedingly abhord it; And at Kirby
Thure did cause proclamation to be made (against plundering) through the whole
army, thereby denouncing death, for the smallest offense in that nature, and
shortly after some were hanged accordingly; so far was he from desiring
grievance, or burden to the Country, that nothing in provision, or otherwise,
was taken for him and his servants, but was paid for to the full value; and
when a composition of a sum considerable was offered unto him, he said he
would have nothing to do with it; Upon which, discoursing, I heard an officer
of quality much discommend the Duke for refusing, in regard of the vast expense
he had been at. I wish others had been so free from avarice, surely it had been
happy.

Yours of the which I received just now, gives me notice a relation made at
London, few days after our disbanding, so false, as that I wonder how malice
it self could invent it: both times when Colonel Wait came to the Dukes
Chamber, at Vtoxater, I with diverse officers were present, and till his
departure there continued, using that as our sanctuary from the soldiers
violence, so long as the Duke remained in it, though afterward it was the
place of my plundering. It is true the Duke was upon his bed till near the time
of his going away, for the cause before mentioned, and a little while before he
went out, one of the enemy took his sword, which was over the beds head, which
the Duke seeing, did desire him to give it to the Lord Gray; whereupon (his
Lordship not being present) that party delivered it to Colonel Wait, for that
purpose; it hung in a torn black stitched belt, not worth five shillings. At
the same instant, I saw Lieu. Colonel Hamilton give him the blue rich
embroidered Scarf, (which diverse times the Lieu. Colonel had worn, for six
years before) in hopes to obtain Colonel Wait* his protection from further
pillage, which was promised, but I fear neglected; for I saw the Gentleman,
within an hour after, with scarce clothes to cover him: But nothing more untrue
then that the Duke desired Colonel Wait, or any other person, to rescue him
from the soldiers, or that he discovered any fear, by words, looks, or
actions, and probably he was free from any; for I heard him wish most
earnestly, both there, and since our coming from Preston, that his life were
lost, before he saw his Army come to ruin, which abundance of officers are
able to justify. Neither had Colonel Wait from the Duke any Scarf or Georg,
at that time, for the George he wore it when I last saw him at his going on
horseback, and I am credibly informed, by a Gentleman from Leicestershire
lately come hither, that he saw him wear it above a week after, in Leicester,
when Wait was returned from London.

I understand, that many false and unworthy aspersions have been cast upon this
Army; as that diverse members thereof had brought in their Wives and Families,
purposely, to plant and inhabit in England, and that it was usual amongst the
soldiers, to carry away little children, which the parents were constrained to
redeem for money, then which (as diverse things else reported of this Army)
nothing more untrue, and were merely invented to incense England, and bring the
greater odium upon us.

Thus have I laid down the truth, without any dress, varnish, or partiallity,
which you or any other upon doubt, may have justified by many hundreds, if you
please to make further inquiry.

In regard I have been so tedious (till the next occasion) I shall say nothing
of my own particular, and the post is ready to depart, my self going to Gorcum;
when I am returned from thence expect again to hear from

Your, etc.
Roterdam, Sept.
FINIS.

