VINDICIAE CHRISTI, ET Obex Errori Arminiano: A Plea for Christ, AND
OBSTRVCTION To the first PASSAGE, Whereat the Errors of ARMINIVS Steal into the
hearts of MEN: Showing Christ's satisfaction in his Humiliation, to be the sole
price of our Redemption; and evidencing faith in that satisfaction, no
instrumental cause of our Justification in the sight of God, nor condition
given us for life.

Delivered in three Sermons: By Richard Lewthwat Master of Arts, of Caius
College in Cambridge, at his Parish of Wigston in Norfolk.

London, Printed by R. W. for Nath. Webb, and William Grantham, and are to be
sold at the sign of the black Bear, in Saint Paul's Churchyard, near the little
North-door, 1655.

To the Honorable, Religious, and Learned, Col. ROBERT WILTON, My dear Friend.
Honorable Sir, should I be silent of the causes moving the publication of
these less then weekly meditations, saving to your self, and some few, I should
be rendered indiscreet, if not presumptuous, and more. I shall therefore hint
the motives, (which duly considered) to a little charity, will justify the
action. I have in this Treatise couched together the ground, yea and the most
of my positions, desired by many to be public, which have drawn much ill
Will, and dissatisfaction toward me; and made me condemned, not only in
private, but in public also, as the most erroneous and destructive to truth,
that speaks. O my God for give them, for I hope they know not what they say.
Sir, it is well known to you, that I having delivered most of this Treatise in
the Pulpit, the Minister desired the Congregation to stay; upon which request
they did, and he had Christian-like attention from all: He endeavored to
possess the people that there was error in my Sermons; but before the picture,
or sign of his confutation (I can call it no more) he granted the whole, and
more then I fully affirmed; for Sir, you may remember, that at his beginning,
he said I had given the just and true sense of what was then my text, in my
Exposition of it, which I said I had done, in the opinion of some few and late
Divines; but not of the Jesuits, and some others. After this, he said my
doctrine gathered thence, was sound and good Divinity; after all, he denied
faith to have any instrumental efficiency, as to our Justification in the sight
of God; this being done, and a quarter of an hours discourse: he moved for a
reply. The sum of what I returned to him, was a commendation of his zeal, and
care to keep his people from error; promising him a Copy of my Sermons, that he
might be better able with the assistance of his side, and the advantage of
time, to confute me, if feasible. Now then Sir, is it not time to publish?
should I not, how should my public scandal be removed? my friends satisfied?
or my promise to the Minister with convenience made good? Such is my confidence
of the truth of my Positions, that should these Sermons come to a spiritualized
soul privately, they would bemone me (laden with such reproaches, as they have
heard me) as David did Abners death by Ioab; dyed Abner as a fool dies? for as
David said of him, I may say of my self; my hands were not as yet bound, nor my
feet put into fetters: I remember not as yet my self ever shackled, either
privately, or publicly, about these things, save with reproachful terms, which
God has ever made fall from me, like the chains of Peter. It Is not unknown to
your self and many more, how vehemently and generally I have been opposed in
these, and such like Positions, by inferior Judgments; and they being
silenced upon their attempts, though not converted, I have desired I might
argue them, for their better satisfaction, or my own conviction, with men of
war from their youth, with the most eminent men, both for learning and piety.
There have been returned to this my request, that the times are not safe for
opposition of them. I have minded them that brought the answer with the
security of Mr. John Goodwin, publicly opposing this way of salvation; I have
also assured them, that I would not in the least divulge what they should
deliver, as to this purpose, or questions under debate. All this, and much
more, have gained nothing of discourse from them, but by a proxy, by Mr.
Platers appello Evangelium: which was commended to me by some, to set me right
in my judgment; which book indeed has wrought nothing upon me to that intent:
it being a groundless condemnation of the opinions about predestination, of Mr.
Perkings, Whitakers, Beza, Piscator, the Synod at Dort, and many more: and a
closing with Arminius, and others of that strain, as being in the way of truth.
See page the 60. Of his appello Evangelium.
The distinction of the knowledge of God, dividing it into the knowledge of
pure understanding, and the knowledge of vision; being as himself confesses,
the ground and basis of his judgment; which if duly considered, is like many
more of the School distinctions, (even more nice then wise.) Nay it has rather
been a means to confirm me in my former Positions; because that in Doctor
Potters letter to Mr. V bound up with Mr. Plater; See Dr. Potters questions, in
that letters in page of the book, 425.
he has in his questions there mentioned, asserted Positions, which can beget
no less in my judgment, then all, or my present positions at least are.

I confess that sometimes there are strivings in my heart betwixt these and the
opposite opinions: sometimes when I consider the multitude of men that way, the
eminency of the persons in respect to learnings natural abilities, strictness
of life, advancement to dignities in late past years, and other becoming
conditions: as also having my thoughts sometimes, taken wholly up about some
places of Scripture setting forth God, providing future glory upon even terms
of obedience here, not at that time minding the Free grace of God in Christ,
nor heeding the power, dominion, and sovereignty that God in equity has over
his creatures, which speaks him right, just, and holy in all his ways; neither
blameable by, nor accountable to any, however he shall please to deal with his
creatures, raised by him, of nothing, to what they are, or at his pleasure
shall be: why, I confess I say, that whilst it has been thus with me, I have
almost said as they. Now to end Sir, and Christian Readers having knowledge of
my condemnation for these Positions; and finding none of those Judges so just,
as to hear me plead for my self before my sentence: nor finding any so
religious as to pity me, or do good to themselves, so far as to endeavor my
conversion, from those opinions, by them called damnable and devilish: I am I
confess the more willing to expose my Judgment (in these plain Sermons) to
public view: to this end, that if my principles be truth, and the way to
truth, there might more be brought in to my judgment: as also, that if they be
erroneous, I might be dealt with for conversion, by them that are spiritual. If
I can be anointed with their eye salve, so as to be cured of this men think
blindness, I mean by conviction; (I speak as in the presence of God) I will be
as ready to desist, as Paul was from persecuting Christ, at the heavenly
vision. I will as publicly, zealously, and frequently retract and recant what
I have published, and preached: neither shall I miss (I hope) Paul's blessing,
even the obtaining mercy; for as he said, I shall then say truly, namely, I did
it ignorantly, being carried amain down with the unresistable stream of the
principles inserted in the following discourse; but Sir, till then I desire you
to be as you are, and to defend truth, and me both, is being the end of this
Dedication, as (I thank you) you have very strongly done, I shall no sooner
discover my self to be in error, but I shall break off from it, with abundance
of tears, both of sorrow and joy, and shall speed to you, with my reformation.
Sir, I have no more at present, but to crave your pardon of my boldness, and to
let you know that I shall never cease to Petition the great God, for the both
spiritual and temporal welfare of your self, your sweet and virtuous daughter
Mrs. Hanna, and the rest of your hopeful branches, till I shall be

RICHARD LEWTHWAT.

A word to the Reader.
COurteous Reader, and dear fellow Christians, especially you of the Ministry.
I have met with many of the Ministers of God, that do consent to the truth of
what I have laid down in these Sermons, but think that in the manifestings
thereof, there may ensue just inference of the uslessness of the Ministry, and
other inconveniences. Brethern, if ye be of that judgment, (in your opinions
the assertions in this Treatise being true) I pray let me be employed to show
the necessity of the Ministry; notwithstanding they save not men from eternal
damnation, I Will show their work so useful, that they deserve of men far greater
valuation and reward, then ever they yet had from any.

2 Cor. 5. the latter part of the 20, and 21. verses. We pray you in Christ's
stead, that ye be (or be ye) reconciled to God.

For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made
the Righteousness of God in him.


IN my Exposition upon Romans 1.17. The just shall live by Faith, I laid down the
Nature of Faith; wherein I showed you what was meant by Faith: I there also
declared in part, the benefit of Faith: but withal limiting it in its bounds,
in respect to eternal life; showing that its virtue and benefit in that
respect, was to give a comfortable hope and assurance here of future life, to
souls sitting in darkness, and in the shadow of death; beyond which, (in
respect to life and salvation) faith works not, is not available, is not
useful, is not serviceable.

After this done upon that of Isaiah 40.1, 2. where God charges us of the
ministry, to be free in proclaiming pardon of sin upon the pangs and passion of
Christ Jesus, in our stead; and does also command us to set before our people,
the fullness that is in Christ thereby for our Redemption. I showed you likewise
that our duty was chiefly, though not wholly, to contemplate for ye upon Gospel
tidings upon the means by Christ for your Redemption; that spiritual Manna,
loathed by many of us, whilst in the wilderness of sin; whilst utterly
destitute of all other means, and conditions for life or salvation held forth
in the word.

Upon these two subjects I insisted long, to prepare you with willingness to
attend me and other Ministers, whilst laboring in the Gospel, the word of
Grace; which I conceive (under favor) to be the only means under God, to work
in man's heart the precious Grace of faith; and the only way for me, and all
Ministers of the Word, to perform the trust imposed by God upon them.

After all this I went about the work of the Gospel, to bring you good tidings,
to give you, if happily I might, a glimps and sight of life, where you might
cast out the anchor of hope, laying thereby sure hold upon salvation. And as to
this achievement, I sailed after Saint Paul's compass: I first battered down
and carried away the rotten foundation, which too many (to the great dishonor
of Christ, and indignation of God) do rest upon, at least in part, for
salvation: which is the foundation of obedience, and legal, or penetential
performances; I showed as to this, that all had come short of the glory of God,
that there was none that had done good, no not one, as to the gaining of
eternal life, but that our best righteousnesses, as the Prophet says, are but
as filthy rags: things that cannot cover our spiritual deformities, cannot help
to justify us, cannot make us amiable in the sight of God. This I did at large
and plainly for you, out of that of the Apostle, Romans 7. ver. 9. I was alive
once without the Law, but when the Commandment came, sin revived, and I died:
Upon this text, I endeavored to set forth the Law, so as it might serve you,
as Paul says it was mainly intended by God, to be a Schoolmaster to send us
to Christ, to seek our life and salvation in him, and to rest upon him in hope
for it.

After this done, I went to open Christ to you, to show you the worth of his
blood, the fullness of his satisfaction I held forth to you (according to the
Ability and Grace given me of God) the power and virtue that is in God, and
Christ for our Redemption; I showed how sure it lay, in the will, or purpose of
the father; and in the performance of the Son Christ. And this I did from that
of the Apostle in the second Epistle to Timothy, chap. the 1. ver. the 9. who
has saved us, and called us, with an holy calling, not according to our works,
but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus
before the world began.

Having thus showed the goodness and kindness of God and Christ to us, in
saving us, in being at peace with us; in being reconciled to us, through the
blood of the Cross; I go on a step further, and that is to show what God
requires of us, what we ought to be to him, what we ought to render to God for
all this mercy and goodness; and this I shall do first in the general, before
I descend to the particular duties; and for this I have pitched upon the
present text, very fitly leading me to it, We pray you in Christ's stead, etc.

I may term my text Heavens petition to Earth; Division.
or Gods supplication to redeemed man. In which words we have considerable
three particulars: first the Petitioner, and that was Christ himself; though
the matter was driven on by Paul and other Ministers of the Word, yet the
business was Gods and Christ's: God did beseech by them, they prayed in Christ's
stead. Secondly, here is considerable the Petition it self, the thing requested
and treated for, and that is, that man would be at love, peace, and friendship
with God, that he would be obedient to him; the request is, that they would be
reconciled to God.

Thirdly, here is considerable the argument or reason that the Ministers are to
use, and urge, as to make them successful in their Embassy, to make them
prevalent with men for reconciliation: and it is an argument of great force,
aptly able, by Gods assistance, to work the deadliest hatred, and enmity that
ever was against God, to friendship and reconciliation; for says he, he who
knew no sin, Dicitur Christus no^ novisse peccatum phrasi Scripturae; quia
peccatum nullum Fecit; id est, adeo fuit a peccato alienus, ac si prorsus
peccatum ignoraret. Estius.
i. e. that never sinned; was made sin for us, Was made sin for us. 1. As he
was made a sacrifice for sin, For the sin offerings in the old Testament were
called sin. 2. By imputation, because our sins were charged upon him, but he
had not sin in his nature.
i. e. under-went the punishment due to us for all our sins; that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him, i. e. that we through him, through his
sufferings, might be quit and freed from all our sins we were about to commit,
and that were then present with, and foreseen by God. For he has made him to
be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God
in him Righteousness of God. 1. Righteous by such a righteousness as God
requires. 2. He says in the abstract we are righteousness it self, that is,
perfectly and fully righteous. 3. We are made so in him, not in ourselves
inherently. Not the essential righteousness of Christ, that is infinite: that
were to make a creature a God; but the righteousness according to the Law, to
which the Godhead of Christ [though it was wrought in the humane Nature] gave
an efficacy or excellency, Legh. in loc.
.

The words thus divided, and expounded, the general doctrine is this. Gener.
Doct.
The great concernment and duty of men, more especially of them that hear the
Gospel; but most especially of them that have tasted, or do profess they have
tasted the goodness of God in Christ, I say their great concernment and duty is
to bear themselves loving, and friendly toward God, that is, walking in all
obedience and holy conversation, here is ground for it; the Apostle says, that
this is the main business that God and Christ have with their Redeemed: for
this is the whole employment of the Ministers, says the Apostle, we pray ye in
Christ's stead, that ye be reconciled to God.

This doctrine being at large proved, and diverse ways applied, we looked over
the parts of the text for particular observations, and out of the two first
particulars was gathered this Lesson: That man,

Here is ground for the observation, God and Christ do send Ambassadors to
treat with them for reconciliation, they solicit and w^o them to be at love and
peace with them, which necessarily implies an enmity, a distance, We pray ye in
Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. Upon this doctrine I insisted long, and
handled before the general proposition, as being somewhat preparatory to it.

This done, I went to peruse the last branch in the text for particular
observations, contained in these words. For he has made him to be sin for us,
who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.

And as to this I considered the words two ways, either absolutely or
relatively Considered absolutely and in themselves; I gathered these doctrinal
conclusions.

First, that Christ Jesus our Savior, truly man as well as verily God, he who
knew no sin: this was passed over untouched.

The second doctrinal conclusion was this. Christ Jesus in the time of his
humiliation and abasement, lay under so much wrath and misery, for it, He was
made sin for us: this was passed over untouched, because I had not long before
spoke at large to this.

I observed a third conclusion, and it was this.

Christ's undergoing the wrath and vengeance he did in his humiliation, that we
might be made the righteousnese of God in him. There lay upon me in my
Judgment at that time, pressing necessity to follow home this doctrine; and to
vindicate the truth of it, in a full refelling the main-objection, seemingly
against it; and by Gods leave shall now publish it; and the rather, because
containing the foundation, and ground of my condemned positions.

The first proof I bring to back my doctrine, is out of Isaiah, chapter the 53.
ver. 11. He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied. In
this Chapter, the Prophet sets forth the Passion of our Savior, and the virtue
of it; In the words recited, he gives as it were an abridgement of the whole,
and shows how valuable it is with the Father, and satisfactory to him, for us.
It Is that which satisfies and answers the whole demands of God for our
Redemption; observe the words, and we shall find it; he shall see, who shall
see? That is, God the father; for it is he among the persons, and in the trinity,
and of the Godhead, that as to the Scripture expressions, and our capacity,
was to take satisfaction of us, or for us: shall see of the travel of his soul.
What is that, shall see the travel? It Is a Metaphor taken from the pangs of
women in childbearing: of his soul, that is of Christ's soul; a Synecdoche, the
part is put for the whole; the soul of Christ, for whole Christ. So then, shall
see of the travel of his soul; that is shall see, behold, or look upon the
sufferings, damage, and detriment that Christ was to undergo; and it follows,
he shall be satisfied: that is, shall have his whole demands for our Redemption
and salvation; he shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied.
What I have laid down last, I find to be the sense of this place, in the
opinion of some late writers, but finding another exposition given of it, by
the Jesuits, and some others; I insist not upon it as a sufficient proof, and
therefore intend to look further; and first, to that of Christ himself, as
tending to the present purpose, and that in the last words he ever spoke before
the expiration of his soul upon the Cross. John the 19. ver. 30. when Jesus had
received the vinegar, he said, it is finished, it is finished; what is that is
finished? Why that was the satisfaction demanded by God, for the sins of the
Elect: the Redemption and salvation of the Elect was finished: the matter,
means, ransom, or price required, or accepted by God for man's Redemption was
finished: was finished, what is that? That is, was fully performed, according
to the Metaphor, there was nothing more to be done for it, or to it, for its
accomplishment; a thing is not finished till then; well, it was finished, but
whereby? I answer, by those bitter pangs, and sufferings then upon him, even
then ready to have an end, his ghost being even giving up, there was no thing
more to be done for their Redemption; when Jesus had received the vinegar, he
said, it is finished. The world is full of Antichristian spirits, I mean, of
men against Christ's full satisfaction to Divine Justice in our stead; against
his alone saving us by the price of his blood, against his finishing our
Redemption thereby: I will therefore back this last place, and my gloss upon
it, with some other Scriptures: And first, with that of John the Baptist, John
the 1. ver. 29. Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the world;
which takes or bears away the sin, as the original will bear it, nay, as
some do use the word, Tollo, which does abolish or blot out. The words are all
very significant: the Baptist does say, that Christ does abolish or blot out
the sins of the world: things abolished or blotted out, are not visible,
discernable, or legible; or he says that Christ takes them or bears them away:
ye know that things taken or born away from a place, are not there to be seen
or found: so that see then Christ takes and bears away our sins, so as that to
our capacity, and apprehension, God sees them not in us, or upon us, as to
punish them. And if so, then Christ finisheth our Redemption, brings about our
salvation; for if our sins be blotted out, be taken or born away from us: why
then, Divine Justice cannot deliver us to death, cannot commit us to the prison
of hell; cannot thrust us from the blessed presence of God: if thus, then
Christ finisheth our Redemption. But now see to make all before spoken, plainly
true, consider by what means the Baptist says, Christ does all this; the means
whereby he does it, is implicit, in the tide he puts upon Christ; he says he
is the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world: mark it well, he says
that Christ bears and takes away, or blots out our sins; and it is by virtue of
his Passion, and sufferings, it is as he is the Lamb of God: now ye know Christ
is the Lamb of God, in respect to his sufferings, as he was the sacrince upon
the Cross for man's Redemption: and therefore Saint Peter in his first Epistle
Chap. 1. ver. 18. says, that we were Redeemed with the blood of Christ, as of
a Lamb without spot. See he takes away our sins, as he is the Lamb of God: that
is, by virtue of his sufferings; so that see Christ finished our Redemption in
his humiliation, in his detriment.

Upon these words in John, chap. the 19. ver. 34. one of the soldiers with a
speer pierced his side, and forthwith came there out blood and water: upon
these words Beza's Annotation is this. Christ being dead upon the Cross,
witnesses by a double sign, that he only is the true satisfaction, and the
true washing for the Believers. Let me put it home for my purpose, thus, and
say, he is all that for the Elect of God, in and by his suffering, by his
death, in that both these signs flowed forth from him, whilst upon the Cross,
whilst made a curse for us, by death. the places of Scripture for this purpose
are various: I Will allege but one, and it is that of Paul, Col. the 1. ver. 20.
having made peace through the blood of his Cross: the blood of Christ, made our
peace, brought it about, reconciled God to us. Now then if God be at peace and
reconciliation with us, by means of the blood of Christ? If as the Lamb of God?
If as sacrificed? If as suffering Christ takes and bears away our sins, and
blots them out? If upon the Cross Christ finished our Redemption, and
salvation? as doubtless all is truth; why then I may conclude that my doctrine
is true, namely Christ's undergoing the wrath and vengeance he did, in his
humiliation, abasement, and sufferings, was and is the whole, and
all-sufficient satisfaction to Divine Justice for us: was and is the whole, the
sole, the full, and all-sufficient matter, means or price to God for our
Redemption and salvation.

The useful inference I make of the doctrine is this, Inference.
That there is nothing in all the world but Christ, but Christ crucified, but
Christ's sufferings, agaonies, and travels of his soul, that was, or is, the
matter, means, or price to God, for our Redemption and salvation: that was or
is the condition of the father with the Son, for our eternal life and
Redemption.

Give me leave to back this inference but with one place of Scripture; I Will then
lay down the main doubt or objection about it, and seemingly against it, as
plainly and faithfully as the talent God has lent me will enable.

The place I allege to back my inference is that of Saint Peter, Act. the 4.
chap. ver. 11, 12. This is the stone which was set at naught of you builders,
which is become the head of the corner; neither is there salvation in any
other; for there is no other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must
be saved.

Give me leave to open the words, that ye may see the meaning of Gods Spirit.
If my gloss be not convincing, I shall be thankful to you, that I and it may
be consulted with, by persons of your highest esteem, for knowledge and piety.

In the 11. verse the Apostle affirms, that he whom the Doctors of the Jewish
Church had looked upon, as a wicked one, and therefore had delivered to death;
was the promised Messiah, and he that was the Redemption both of Jews and
Gentiles; this stone, says he, set at naught of you builders, that is, not
looked upon as the Savior of the world; is become, says he, the head of the
corner: that is, he that joins together, both Jews and Gentiles in one way,
infallible hope, or foundation of eternal life: or again, he is become the head
of the corner: That is, he is become the proper support, and only true
foundation of the hope of all men's salvation: as in the first of the Cor. chap.
3. ver. 11. For other Foundation can no man lay then that is laid, which is
Jesus Christ; he is become the head of the corner: And now see in the next
verse further for my purpose, the Apostle says that this Christ is the sole,
and whole virtue, means, and matter of man's salvation or Redemption; neither
says he, is there salvation in any other? that is, means and help to life
eternal, lies no where but in this Christ, this crucified Savior, this corner
stone set at naught of you Jews, or Jewish builders, neither is there salvation
in any other. Look yet a little further, and we have yet more for our purpose
in the reason the Apostle there brings for confirmation, for says he, there is
no other name under heaven, given among men, whereby we must be saved. Let me
give ye the meaning of the word name here, and then the place is an invincible
fortification for my inference, and need not capitulate with the Adversary
about surrender. The word Name, as it refers to God or Christ, in the
Scriptures, is often taken for the powerful aid, help, and virtue that is in God,
or Christ to us, and for us. Thus it is used as attributed to God, Psa. the 44.
ver. 5. Through thy name will we tread them under, that rise up against us:
That is, through thy power, aid, assistance, or virtue, we shall tread them
under; Thus, under favor, it is taken in the words I have quoted for my
purpose: there is no other name under heaven whereby we must be saved: That is,
there is no other thing, nature, essence, virtue, power, matter, means, or
help, whereby, wherefore, or for which we must be saved. See brethren, every
thing in the world but Christ, shut out from being the matter, means, purchase,
or condition of, or for our Redemption, or salvation: yea the perfectest
obedience, the deepest repentance, the truest charity, the devoutest prayers,
yea the strongest faith, all these, and any of these, are shut out from being
matter or means, whereby we may be saved; the reason is plain, because they are
none of them this Jesus Christ of Nazareth: This is the stone which was set at
naught of you builders, which is become the head of the corner, neither is
there salvation in any other; for there is no other name given under heaven,
among men, whereby we must be saved.

I confess there are many arguments and allegations brought against this
doctrine, and my last inference, by the Antichristian party, within the sound
of the word, yea and profession of the Gospel; some plead for good works,
obedience, alms-deeds, charity, and such like graces in man, to share as causes
or means in the work of our salvation, as the Church of Rome; others, that
faith and repentance, become mainly, if not solely, the matter, means, or cause
of our Redemption, or salvation, in that they are a condition exacted by God,
to be performed by us for life; ^s Mr. Plater and the Arminian faction, and the
most of our present Divines watching over the flock of God, if they be such in
all England, as here about us. Tenants if duly poysed, as now held, that be
fully opposite to the free grace of God in Christ, contended for by the
Apostle, in Romans the 11. ver. 6. and in many places elsewhere; yea and further,
they are Tenants, if duly poysed, baneful and destructive to that comfortable
hope held forth to us in the Gospel of Christ.

Perhaps the Adversary to my position, rather then to skirmage in the several
particulars, will desire to try the victory with me, as the Philistines did
with Israel in the first of Sam. chap. the 17. namely with their Goliath, by the
valued and reputed help and aid that is in the grace of faith, as to life and
Redemption. My brethren, for brevities sake, I am content to do it, as also,
because I know that the ruin of this will be the dispersing of all the other
adverse arguments; if this falls, there is not one can stand. And now I Will meet
this their Goliath faith, as David did that of the Philistines; even clad with
its whole, or best armor, with its helmet, graves of brass. Romans, and the
first is in the fourth Chapter, ver. 3. For what says the Scripture; Abraham
believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness: from hence ye will
plead, that the act of faith, Abraham's believing the promises, his resting upon
Christ for salvation, by or through whom the promise of eternal life was made,
I say ye will say that this Abraham's believing of God, and resting upon him for
life eternal through Christ, was partly, if not wholly, the means or cause of
his now enjoying life eternal: was the means or things, for which or whereby,
at least in part, he stood approved, just, and perfect in the sight of God, as
to Eternal life: it is evident ye will say, it was counted Abraham's
righteousness; and again in the 28. ver. of the foregoing Chapter, the Apostle
says, we are justified by faith, that is, by the means of faith, because of
faith, or for faith, Look upon both Doctrine and Inference.
and then consequently ye will say my doctrine, and inference is false; I have
made the objection so strong as I can, and that from the most opposite places
in all the Scriptures. I shall endeavor to give as full an answer, I pray mark
it well.

It is to be known, that God may be said to account or reckon a thing to us for
righteousness two several ways: righteousness, in a proper sense, which becomes
the cover of our sins, as in the Psalmists phrase: or that takes and bears away
our sins, and blots them out; as that God sees them not in us, as to punish us
for them; remembers them not against us. That may be said to be our
righteousness properly, that does either partly or wholly, so quallifie us, as
that for, and because thereof we are just, and justified in the sight of God,
absolutely, perfectly and completely, so as God or Divine Justice cannot except
against us, cannot charge a sin upon us; cannot deny us our Redemption or
salvation: in this respect Christ, Christ crucified is our righteousness, not
our faith in that Christ crucified: In this respect, in this proper sense, we
are not righteous (in the sight of God) for our faith sake, but for Christ's
sake only, the object of that faith. This I take to be sound and good Divinity
or doctrine: this I take to be the opinion of the learned Doctor Potter at the
time of taking his Degree, when he affirmed that the act of faith (as Abraham's
here mentioned) is not counted to us for righteousness in the proper sense:
this is also the opinion of Sharpius the Sco^th man; he says, That the work of
faith in us, is to be considered two ways; either absolutely, or relatively;
absolutely, as it is such a work, or a gift infused into us of God, and a
quality inherent or sticking in our hearts, and in this sense it does not
justify; against that the Papists contend for (as I may say, does not become,
or is not counted our justifying righteousness, or that which acquits us, or
for which we are acquitted or discharged of our ^^s before God) then secondly,
this faith is considered relatively, as it applies and apprehends Christ and
all his benefits; and in this respect he says we are said to be justified by
faith with at the works of the Law: with this caution yet he comes in: yet so
says he, are we justified thereby, as that it is so without ^aith it self, as it
is a work: the reason he there renders for it is this, because that faith does
not justify for, or because of its inexistency, in being, inherence, merit or
dignity thereof, but only by its instrumental efficiency or application Onus
f^d^i dupliciter, conside atur primum ab^olute, ut est tale opus, and Donum
nobis a deo infusum, and qualitas inhaerens; and hoc sensu non justificat,
contra id quod volunt pontificii: secundo relate, ut Christum cum suis
benesiciis apprchend^t, and applicat; and hoc sensu dicimur sola fide, sine
operibus junificari, ita ut sine ipsa fide, quatenus, opus est, justificemur,
quia non propter inexistentiam inhaerentiam, meritum aut dignitatem, sed tantum
propter instrumentalem efficientium and applicationem justificat. Sharp symph.
Prophet. and Apost, council. 142.
. So then I think I may conclude, that the Apostle when he said that faith was
counted to him for righteouness, he did not mean it was counted to him for
righteousness in a proper sense, as God counts the undertakings, and suffering
of Christ to man for righteousness; that is as the means or things by which,
for which, or because of which he stands just, perfect, and quit from sin in
his sight; as that Justice cannot sentence him to death. And my further reason
for this, is, because the Scripture expressly says, that God has saved man, is
at peace with man, is satisfied, has his demands for our sins, has justified
us, that is, has pronounced us just, has absolved us from our sins; even
before we be endued with the blessed grace of faith; it cannot be therefore
that Abraham's faith should be counted to him for righteousness, in that proper
sense, if he were righteous before; cannot be said to justify him, or that he
should be justified thereby, in a proper sense, if he were justified before;
but those things are, as ye shall see more plainly afterward; and now also if
ye consult but with these places of Scripture, my last text, the second Epistle
to Timothy, chap. 1. ver. 9, 10. Col. the 1. ver. 20. Isaiah chap. 53. almost
in the whole, especially ver. 6. and part of the 11. and Romans the 4. ver. 5.

Well, but then ye will say, if Abraham's faith was not counted to him for
righteousness in this sense, and we be not justified by faith in this proper
sense, ye will say in what sense then? why as to make further progress in my
answer to the objection, I say thus: God accounts the grace of faith in us, our
righteousness; faith may be said to be our righteousness before God in the
Scripture, but it is but improperly, or in an improper sense, and that two
several ways. First, in respect to Gods acceptance, and approbation of it; and
Secondly, in respect to its isntrumental efficiency in the comfortable
application of Christ, and all his benefits, to a disconsolated soul in this
life: First, God may be said to count the grace of faith in us, our
righteousness, in respect to Gods acceptance, and approbation of it: in respect
to his being pleased with it, and with us for it: in respect to Gods present or
future testimony of that acceptance, displaying it self, either in the future
augmentation, or degree of glory: or else in Gods present bounty, goodness, and
kindness, in temporal blessings, following that our faith, or blessed quality:
in this sense, thus improperly, ye shall see that not only our faith, but also
our works, are counted to us for righteousness in this sense; Phineas his zeal
to Gods glory, or his speedy execution of Justice^ was counted to him for
righteousness, Psalm 106. ver. 30, 31. Then stood up Phineas and executed
lustice, etc. Give me leave to to gloss upon the words, And that was counted to
him; What was counted? why that was his zeal to Gods glory; or his execution of
death upon Zimry and Cosby for their sin: this was counted to him for
righteousness unto all Generations: That is, God gave such a testimony of his
acceptance of that work, of his being pleased with it, by ending the plague
upon it, and for it; and by ensuring the Priesthood upon him and his, that all
that law the passages then, and should read them after, should look upon God as
well pleased with the work; should look upon the work, as approved and
accounted by God a righteous work. In this improper sense, that is, in respect
to Gods displaying his approbation and acceptance of that work of Phineas, by
the following mercy; it is said to be counted to him for righteousness, but not
in the forementioned proper fense: not as any thing tending or helping to his
Redemption or salvation in the life to come.

One place more we have helping to this purpose, and it is that of John in his
first Epistle, chap. the 3. ver. 22. whatsoever we ask we receive of him,
because we keep his commandments, and do the things that are pleasing in his
sight: Look upon these words, and the verse that follows, and John says, that
not only our faith, but also our obedience is pleasing in his sight.

We must not think that these works in the judgment of Saint John were
pleasing unto God; were looked upon, or counted by God to us for righteousness;
were pleasing to him in the forementioned proper sense, that is, as becoming
like the precious blood of Christ, or with it, the matter or means of our
Redemption, or freedom from the wrath of God, due to us for our sins: were this
the sense of it, then we must all back again to Popery, attributing merit to
our works; ye a and destroy all the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles. No,
they are pleasing in Gods sight, or if ye will, are accounted to us for
righteousness in an improper sense, as being acceptable to him, as being his
delight, having here great reward, being followed with all the bounty, and
kindness that God vouchsafes his beloved ones in this life; with the abundance
of blessings, yea with spiritual, with the comfortable hope and assurance of
enjoying the future happiness purchased by Christ. My brethren, under favor,
if I should say that in this improper sense, the Apostle meant Abraham's
believing God to be counted to him for righteousness: if I should say he meant
there that it was the grace most pleasing and acceptable to God; that it was
the joy and delight of God: I say, if I should say thus, I do not see how I
should be injurious or detrimental to the purpose of Saint Paul, whose main
drift is in this Epistle, and in most of the rest, to take men off, from
resting upon legal performances, in the least, for Redemption, and to set forth
Christ the sole and all-sufficient salvation of man, and so thereby to work in
man's heart the grace of faith, most eminently profitable, and comfortable to
him in this life, and most transcendently pleasing to the father himself.
Sharpius in the forecited reconciliation, glossing upon that of our Savior,
John the 6. ver. 29. where he says, this is the work of God, that ye believe
on him whom he has sent; I say glossing upon those words, and showing in what
respect faith may be there termed the work of God; amongst other respect, he
says it may be so called, because it is the work that does most especially
please God; and for that purpose he quotes the very place of Genesis quoted by
Saint Paul, which is in Genesis chap. the 15. ver. 6. the words, And he believed
in the Lord and he counted it to him for righteousness: So that see Sharpius
gives the same gloss in effect upon the Apostle that I did last; namely, that
it is not our righteousness properly, but improperly, it is the grace, the work
that is most pleasing and acceptable to him.

And indeed this esteem and valuation, I do from my heart believe that the Lord
makes of this grace of faith in us, as is apparent: First, because it is faith
that makes every work a man performs, acceptable with God: so Hebrews chap. the
11. ver. 4. By faith Abel offered a more acceptable sacrifice then Cain; if a
work arises from any other principle then faith, the cause of love, which
constrains us to obedience; it is not possible for that work to get the least
acceptance with God. So Hebrews the 11. ver. 6. Without faith it is impossible
to please him. So then seeing it is faith, and that grace only that makes our
works pleasing unto God, it must evidently follow, that it is that, that is most
pleasing to him, and holds the preheminency in his esteem. Propter quod
unumquodque tale illud magis tale.

Secondly, this high valuation of faith by God, is probable to me upon this
consideration, that Gods and Christ's temporal blessings, vonchsafed to men,
have been gained by nothing so much as by faith, nay, by a faith far inferior
to the faith in hand, the faith of Christ; I mean that faith which has but
given a man to rest and wait upon God and Christ, as able to bring about the
temporal blessings desired by them, or promised them of God. If we peruse the
Scriptures, we shall find that this kind of faith, never returned empty or
unsatisfied, by either God or Christ, it ever sped, as did the faith of the two
blind men, in Matthew, chap. the 9. ver. 30. who believing that Christ was able
to cure them had their desire, even their eyes opened. See what watchful
experence in David had found as to this purpose, Psalm the 18. ver. 30. He is a
buckler to all those that trust in him. Faith and trust in Gods power, never
wants defense; so pleasing to God is this inferior kind of faith: seeing then
this faith is so pleasing to God, I cannot but see the other faith, that which
gives a man to rest upon God and Christ, for salvation; to be of most high
esteem with him: for mark; it duly prizeth, and valueth the blood of Christ,
it infinitely declares the honor and glory of God and Christ, it speaks them
infinitely, and incomprehensively, loving good, just, powerful, merciful, the
attributes of Gods delight and honor: so that though I denied Abraham's faith
to be counted to him for Righteousness in a proper sense, yet improperly it
might be termed his righteousness, and that first in this respect, as being the
work, the grace that is most pleasing unto God, and making us acceptable to him
in our obedience: Thus much dear brethren I dare speak for faith, and attribute
to it; further, as to the present distinction and consideration of Gods
counting Abraham's says his righteousness, or our faith, ours, no man ought to
go: not a right principled Christian, endued with the fear of God, but would
tremble to value faith above this, to value it man's righteousness in a proper
sense.

But then again Secondly, faith may be counted our righteousness, may be said
to be that which justifies us, or by which we are justified in an improper
sense, and that in respect, or out of consideration to its instrumental
efficiency, in the comfortable application of Christ and all his benefits, to a
soul in this life: giving the soul here, sure hope of a real possession, of
unspeakable glory in the world to come, because of Christ. In this respect we
are said to be justified by faith, without the deeds of the Law; our faith and
not our legal performances, being the instrument, or means whereby the spirit
of God conveys the righteousness of Christ to our apprehensions, and the hope
of salvation therefore. Out of this respect in a Metaphorical, or metonimical
expression, we see in the Scriptures, things often transferred or carried to
what they do not properly belong; in this respect we find the doctrine
concerning Christ, styled the word of life, Phil. the 2. chap. ver. 16. and the
Gospel of our salvation, Ephesians. the 1. ver. 13. the word of life, that is, as I
think, not the word that works, or causes our eternal life; but the word
that manifests and discovers to us, where that our life lies; and by whom
it is wrought, effected, and accomplished. And so the Gospel of our salvation,
not the Gospel that works, or brings about our salvation, but that
manifests to us, that our salvation and eternal life is purchased and brought
about for us by Christ, by his blood. This my gloss on these words, seems to me
right and good, thus expounded, they being so consentaneous to other
Scriptures: as first, that of Isaials speaking of the Ministers of the Gospel,
and quoted by Paul, Romans the 10. chap. ver. 15. How beautiful are the feet of
them that bring glad tidings of good things. He does not say, that brings
good things, save but by way of tidings, by way of intelligence, or as Isaiah,
from whence the Apostle has it, chap. the 52. v. 7. that publishes these good
things, which he there calls peace one while, and salvation by and by; now ye
know, that to publish, is but to proclaim, or make known abroad, by way of
voice or writing, things past before, as do the Ministers of the Gospel. A most
notable one we have for this purpose in the end of my last text, the second
Epistle to Timothy, chap. the 1. ver. 10. where the Apostle says, that Christ
has brought life and immortality to light, through the Gospel. He does not say
that the spirit has brought life by the Gospel, as if it had done that for us
by the word of the Gospel, was not done or accomplished for us before; no, he
says he has brought it to light, that is, he has made it apparent and visible
before us, that was not so before. Take the sum of this last in a word; the
doctrine concerning Christ is called the word of life, the Gospel of salvation;
yea, but life and salvation is transmitted to the word and Gospel, but in a
figurative speech, but improperly, that is, as being manifested, and made known
to us, by that word and Gospel, that they are accomplished and wrought for us,
by the undertakings and performances of the Son of God, not that they are
thereby, verily and really procured for us; so in like manner, our faith is
said to justify us, or we are said to be justified thereby, thus, figuratively
or improperly, as being the means whereby tht spirit of God gives us sight,
assurance, or hope of our future enjoyment of eternal life through Christ.

So then in a word, to show how far we are gone in the answer to the objection.
Abraham's believing God was counted to him for righteousness; but not in a
proper sense, as being like the precious blood of Christ, for which we are
redeemed from death; but in an improper sense, and that two several ways;
first, in respect to Gods being highly pleased with that grace, and with us for
it. And secondly, in respect to its instrumental efficiency, in the comfortable
application of Christ and all his benefits, to a disconsolated soul in this
life. And this being taken to be the extent of Gods counting Abraham's faith to
him for righteousness, or of our being justified by faith, my doctrine and
inference stand firm and unshaken, and its this; There is nothing in all the
world but Christ, but Christ crucified, but Christ's sufferings, agonies and
travels of his soul, that was, or is the matter, means, or price to God for our
Redemption and salvation: that was or is the condition of the Father with the
Son for our eternal life.

Well, but brethren, as we are not to handle the word of God deceitfully; so
neither the glosses, or opinions of men upon it. I Will therefore put the matter
home.

Ye will say perhaps that Abraham's faith was counted to him for righteousness,
and we are justified by faith, though not in the forementioned proper sense;
yet in an improper sense, though in another respect then I have yet mentioned:
and that is in respect to its instrumental efficiency in the real application
of Christ's righteousness to us, as the cover of all our sins, from the sight of
God: till which time, ye will say as the holy spirit of God has brought Christ
to us, and applied him to us by faith; we are not looked upon by the father, as
just in his sight, or before him: not as justified by Christ, not pardoned by
the father, not absolved by him from our sins: not beloved of God for Christ's
sake; in this respect ye will say our faith is counted our righteousness, and
we are justified by faith, as being the instrumental means or cause, whereby
the Spirit of God covers and hides the polluted soul from the sight of God, by
the pure garments of Christ's righteousness; whereby it brings a sinner into the
love and favor of God, who was out of it till then, and in his hatred.

In refelling and confuting the objection, as last pressed and urged. I suppose
the Adversary will no more take the field with the former forces: I confess I
must now grapple with their faith, as David with Goliath of the Philistines, I
cannot go against it begirt with any former armor, composed by either
preceding or contemporary fellow laborers in the word of Christ; I find
nothing in all their works fits me for the combat. I confess I find many like
the second Son in our Saviors parable, who to his father bidding him go
labor, said, I go Sir, but went not. I meet with many, laying down Gods Love,
Election, Free grace, and Justification so absolute, as if they would deny
Faith any instrumental efficiency, or any conditional means, as to the
procuring of our future glory; but weigh their future progress, and there is no
such matter; so becoming false to their principles, and to the trust reposed in
them by God. I therefore descend to the battle, as David did, namely, with my
staff in my hand the word of God; and some smooth stones (I mean reasons)
gathered out of the brook, or clear fountain of Gods word.

Now that faith is no instrumental efficient cause of a real application of
Christ, as the cover of all our sins from the sight of God, as that whereby the
holy Spirit brings a sinner into the love and favor of God, who was out of it,
and in the hatred of God, til that grace of faith came into his soul, it is
evident first from Scriptures, which affirm us justified, and in the love of
God, before the income of faith into the heart. Secondly, because if it be so
granted to faith, as before mentioned, comfortable and plain pla^es of the
Scripture are destroyed; yea and Gods own nature and being, as described in the
Scriptures, is also destroyed.

I Will to the work according to this platform; and for the better success herein,
let me admonish ye, that love in God (as Dumouling says) is not an affection,
passion, or desire in God: for God cannot be touched by passions, as being
impassible, and not subject to affections; but as God is said then to be angry,
or to hate, when he will punish or destroy: so love in God is a certain and
sure will, of doing good to the creature; whence it comes to pass, that he may
rightly be said to be loved of God, to whom he has given, or has decreed to
give more and better good things; so that see love in God, is to give, or to
will and decree to give good things: so then his premised, I declare first from
the Scriptures, that it is evident, That faith is no instrumental efficient cause
of a real application of Christ, as the cover of our sins, from the sight of
God; as that whereby the holy spirit brings a sinner into the love and favor
of God, who was out of it till faith came into his heart; and this I prove,
first, from that of Jeremiah, chap. the 31. ver. 3. I have loved thee with an
everlasting love; love in God, as before declared, is nothing else but will,
purpose, or decree in God, of doing good, or giving good things: so that then
the sense of the words is this: first, God did will, purpose or decree good to
them, he there spoke; the good things there promised, were it temporal
deliverance, as some, or eternal Redemption, as others; what ever good thing it
was, yet God did will, and decree it them, with an everlasting will and decree.
The word Everlasting must be a little cleared, and then the place is most full
for our purpose. A thing is said to be everlasting, especially three several
ways; First, when a thing is to continue a long time, though not for ever, as
Leviticus the 16. ver. the 34. this shall be an everlasting statute. Secondly,
when it shall never have end, though it had beginning, as the future glory of
the elect, and the misery of the reprobate, as Mat. 25. ver. 46. Thirdly, a
thing is said to be everlasting, when without beginning or ending, as God: To
be King everlasting. In this last acception and respect, Wilson says, that the
purpose and pleasure of God, to save the elect, them that shall possess eternal
glory through Christ, is said to be eternal, or everlasting; which will be
evident, if ye consult with Ephesians. the 3. ver. 11. or with my last text, in the
second Epistle to Tim. chap. the 1. ver. 9. and indeed we may justly say, that
both love and hatred in God: that is, his purpose, will, or intendment of man's
evil, as also of his good, and that of both sorts; either temporal or eternal,
are everlasting, or eternal, especially as being without beginning in God.

For it is impossible, yea inconsistent with the nature of God, as described in
the Scriptures, that any purpose, will, or intendment in God, of either evil or
good to us, should take beginning in God in time, and not be coeternal with his
being. So that the meaning there is this, God declared love there to Israel,
being nothing else but his will or purpose, that they should be redeemed
through Christ, from death to glory; I say, the meaning is this, that God
willed, or decreed to them, he there spoke the good and happiness of their
Redemption, with an everlasting will or decree; that is, with a will or purpose
coeternal with the being of God, not adventitious, or coming to him in time:
which thing being granted, it is not possible for faith to have any hand, as an
isntrumental cause of Gods spirit, so to apply Christ to us, as that then our
pollution should become hid from God, which were before open to him: should
then bring us into the love of God, who before were in his hatred; the reason
is, because to make faith an instrumental cause of Gods favor, or will to
save, is to make the cause infinitely coming after its effect in time; what
greater absurdity ever heard of?

Again, that faith is no instrumental efficient cause of applying Christ, as
the cover of our sins, from the sight of God, etc. as before, it is evident from
that of Ezekiel, chap. the 16. ver. 6. and 8. if ye look upon the contents of
the five first verses of this chapter, ye shall see that in the opinion of the
Translators of the bible, appointed to the work, (as I presume) by King James;
under the similitude of a wretched Infant, was showed the natural state of
Jerusalem: that is, as I presume, under favor, how spiritually polluted they
the elect were in themselves, and in respect to their own personal and natural
condition: now at the 6. and 8. verses, the Prophet shows what they were then,
in respect to Gods will, and fight, through the satisfaction of Christ, even
whilst in that natural condition, before spiritualized, or endued with faith;
and that was pronounced just through Christ; the sentence of eternal life was
then gone forth for them, from the mouth of Gods decree, verse 6. when I passed
by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own blood, I said unto thee, when thou
wast in thy blood, live: etc. Again, God looked upon them as in Christ, and
redeemed by Christ, whilst in their natural condition, before the faith of
Christ was in their hearts, for ver. 8. it was the time of love, of Gods loving
them in his Son: and therefore also impossible, (if this place be rightly
expounded) that faith should be any isntrumental cause of applying Christ to a
soul, as the cover of its sins from the sight of God, as being that whereby the
spirit brings a sinner into the favor of God, who was in his hatred till then;
the reason is the former, because to make faith an instrumental cause of Gods
favor, or will to save, is to make the cause infinitely coming after its
effect in time; and so fully opposite to Ezekiel.

I Will allege but one place more for this purpose, and I have done; and it is
that of Saint Paul, Romans the 4. chap. ver. 5. But to him that works not, but
believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted to him for
righteousness. Hence I may infer two things, the latter comes home to the
present purpose: the first is Gods acceptance, and approbation of our faith:
his delight or pleasure that we should rest alone upon him, and his Christ for
our salvation; so accounting our eternal redemption to be of grace or favor,
not of due or debt, because of any thing done or performed; or to be done, or
to be performed by us; his faith, sales the Apostle, is counted for
righteousness, cast your eyes once again upon the words: but believes on him
that justifies the ungodly. Me thinks, from these words, the spirit of God
does whisper (as it were) the time of Christ's real satisfaction to the father
for the elect; and of the fathers acceptance of Christ in their stead; that is,
the time when Christ is imputed, and counted our righteousness, and we beheld
and looked upon, by the father, as interested in Christ, to be benefited by
Christ, absolved from our sins because of Christ: and that time of all this, is
a time before the income of grace, yea of the grace of faith into our souls.
The Apostle says plainly enough, that he justifies the ungodly, that
believes on him: that is, on the father: that justifies; that is, that
pronounces not only guiltless, but also perfectly just through Christ; It
follows, That justifies the ungodly. The ungodly; the word ungodly here must
be restrained to the number of the elect, or ransomed through Christ, whose
falvation was covenanted for, from all eternity, with the father, by the Son,
upon the price of his blood and abasement; to be undergone in the fullness of
time, at the time appointed by the father, and promised by the Son, to be
performed at the time appointed. Now these elected or ordained of the father to
eternal life, through the Son; are in the Scriptures one whle, and in one
respect termed ungodly; another while, and in another respect styled Saints,
and termed godly: these elect are styled ungodly, children of wrath, and
enemies to God, whilst in their natural condition of blindness, ignorance, and
disobedience, before illumination, new birth, or regeneration by the Spirit of
God; before they be wrought to the faith of Christ, or the faith of Christ be
brought to them. But now these elected ones after regeneration, after faith be
conveyed into their hearts, they have their name changed by God; they are
termed Saints, they are called godly and righteous. So that now see the elect
of God, the redeemed through Christ, do stand just before God through Christ,
are pronounced perfectly just through Christ; by the word of the fathers will,
or decree, even whilst in their natural condition, before they be endued with
faith, though the elect hear it not till then; it is so, The father Justifies the
ungodly: therefore we are not Justified by faith, it is not counted our
righteousness, as being the instrumental efficient cause of a real application
of Christ, as the cover of our sins, from the sight of God, because Justified
before, even whilst ungodly, before endued with faith. Secondly, faith is not,
cannot be in this wise, (as last mentioned) instrumental, because that granted,
many places of the Scripture are destroyed; for brevities sake, I Will allege
but one, it is that of Isaiah, chap. the 40. ver. 1, 2. if ye weigh the place
well, ye shall see that the Ministers command, or commission, is to proclaim
the pardon of the elects sins, upon the bare consideration of Christ's pangs and
sufferings in their stead.

Cry unto her, that her iniquity is pardoned, for she has received at the
Lords hand double for all her sins: See now brethren, Isaiah and my self, are
in the same error in the Judgment of the Adversary; Isaiah tells ye, and bids
all the Ministers of Christ tell their people, as I have told you, that the
bare pangs and sufferings of Chist, are the adequate and full means, and cause
of the absolution, and pardon of our sins by the father; the Prophet bids us
proclaim peace, and pardon to Jerusalem, to the elect, to this person, and to
the other, to whomsoever we preach; barely upon the Sons eternal covenant, to
dye in the fullness of time for us, and the fathers acceptance thereof in our
stead. So that see Christ is an elected soul is every believer in the eye and
purpose of the father, by imputation, before the holy Ghosts comfortable
application of that Christ by faith. Cry unto her, that her iniquity is
pardoned, for that she has received at the Lords hand double for all her sins.
See now a plain destruction of the direction to the Ministers by Isaiah, upon
the adversaries opinion. Had the spirits of these times been living in the
Prophets days, to hear his last recited doctrine, they would have styled him
an Antifidian, and termed his words a doctrine of Devils. They would have told
him, no man is acquitted, or pardoned of his sins, because of Christ's
satisfaction in the eye, or by the will of God, till the soul has actually
owned Christ, as his Savior, by faith: that no man is just, or Justified
through Christ in the sight of the father, till he be actually believing on the
Son. I do most willingly receive faith to be a most blessed signal means; but
dare not receive it as an instrumental cause, whereby the spirit of God does
bring a soul into the favor of God, who was out of it till then: and secondly
for this reason, because it alters and destroys the meaning of many comfortable
places of Scripture, this plainly of Isaiah, containing the Ministers
commission.

Thirdly and Lastly, faith cannot be isntrumental to the application of
Christ, as the cover of our sins, from the sight of God, as that whereby the
spirit brings a sinner into the favor and love of God, who was out of it, till
that grace came into his soul, applying Christ comfortably to the heart:
because that this being granted, the very nature, and being of God, as
described in the Scriptures, is consequently destroyed, and denied.

There be many places in the Scripture, tending to the description of our God:
I shall insist upon the places describing him, especially as to the present
purpose; and that in Exodus, 3. ver. 14 is very considerable as to the present,
when Moses would be instructed by God with his name, to answer the Israelites
enquiring it: God sets forth his name by his nature; thou shall say, I am has
sent me unto you. God in his first answer to Moses, in the beginning of the
verse, where he says I am that I am; God holds forth his absolute independing,
and eternal subsistency, and being. I am that I am; that is, of my self, not
taking my being from the power, pleasure, or help of any pre-existing cause, or
thing: this speaks the eternity of his being. Now in these words of God, I am
has sent me unto you; God sets forth the manner, or nature of the being of
things in him; of their being in his love, will, or purpose, and consequently,
as to our capacity; in his sight and knowledge, as I may say they do set forth
the nature of love, will, decree, knowledge, sight, and other attributes of
God. This name shows that his love of any man, his will and purpose to have any
thing come about, or to pass; his sight, and knowledge of all future events,
and things to happen in time, as to us, were all eternally present with God;
not taking beginning, or being in him, in his sight or knowledge, in time: God
loves not the man to day, that is, does not will, purpose, or decree to him to
day, that good thing, be it either some temporal happiness, yea, or future life
eternal; that he did not purpose, will or decree to him, from all eternity: he
does not see, or behold a man to day Justified through Christ, that he did not
behold so, before the foundation of the world was laid; I am, says God, that
is, as if God should have said; I am now at this time what I was from all
eternity; in respect to will, decree, sight, knowledge, power, etc. Again, I am
now at this present, what I shall be to all succeding times, to eternity; in
respect to will, decree, sight, knowledge, power; for all things to come are as
present with me. I am (says God) has sent me unto you. That place of Peter,
in his second Epistle; chap. the 3. ver. 8. which backs my last gloss as a
truth in it self, may very well be used to expound the meaning of the former
words in Exodus, where he says, that one day with the Lord is as a thousand
years, and a thousand years as one day; A thousand years or eternity, a part
past, that is yet to succeed; cannot alter the knowledge, decree, will, or
purpose that is in, or with God this day: cannot bring to God a new purpose, or
decree, a will in him of doing any thing for any, that was not in him from
everlasting. A thousand years, cannot bring one soul to be clean, through the
blood of Christ, in the eye or view of God, that is not, or was not so in his
eye, this present time, or from everlasting. That God sees all things together,
and at once; with one act, view, and inspection; was held sound Polemick, and
School Divinity till of late; and certainly was their couclusion, from such
places, as I have looked upon last, to see the description of God, as to the
present purpose. Now to bring all this to my present purpose. Last, faith
cannot be looked upon as an instrumental cause of the application of Christ, as
the cover of our sins from the sight of God, as that whereby the spirit of God
brings a sinner into the favor and love of God, through Christ, who was out of
it, and in his hatred, till that grace came into his soul, applying Christ
comfortably to the heart: the reason is, because that this being granted, the
very nature and being of God, as described in the Scriptures, is destroyed and
denied; that being granted, God can no longer say of himself, as he did to
Moses; namely, I am: that is, I am, but now, what I have been from eternity;
because that being granted, time has brought something to him, which was not
with him from everlasting: then a day and a thousand years, are not all one
with God: God is not the same in the day, that he is in the end of a thousand
years after the day. When the grace of faith comes into a soul, makes it an
instrumental cause of our righteousness before God; grant it, that thereby we
come to be justified in the sight of God, not justified in his sight before;
not righteous in his sight through Christ before; and then a thousand years,
future time, add much to God, that he had not before: his knowledge and sight
of justified persons is increased over it was: his love, that is, his will or
purpose to save such, and such, from eternal death, is now come to God, which
was not in him, or with him before: his act of pronouncing this man just, or
quit from sin, through Christ, is now done and acted by the father in time,
which was not done, nor acted by him from everlasting. See brethren, grant
faith an instrumental cause of our righteousness, of our being justified
through Christ, in the sight of God; and then his nature, and being, as
described in the Scriptures, is destroyed and denied. God can no longer say of
himself I am. Peter erred, when he said, that one day with the Lord is as a
thousand years, and a thousand years as a day. How is God without variableness,
and shadow of change, if the adversaries opinion be true? I could say much more
to refell the objection, to evidence the impossibility of faith, being
isntrumental to our Justification through Christ, in the sight of God: but
judging I have said enough to prevail with ingenuity; with hearts not possessed
with obstinacy, I shall give yea breviate of my long answer, and so go on.

Faith must not be received as an instrumental cause, or means of our
righteousness before God, of our being justified in his fight through Christ.
First, because the Scriptures affirm us plainly just in Gods sight, before the
income of grace into the soul. See the places before quoted, Ier. 31. ver. 3.
Ezekiel. 16. ver. 6. and 8. Romans 4. ver. 5. Secondly, it must not, it cannot be,
for if it be received, it destroys many places of Scripture, especially that of
Isa. 4. ver. 1, 2. Thirdly, it must not, it cannot be, because so held, as
objected, the nature and being of God, as described in the Scriptures, is
destroyed and denied, especially as described in Exodus, chap. 3. ver. 14. and
in 2 Pet. 3. ver. 8. and elsewhere.

Well, but perhaps the Adversaries will yet reply for grace, especially for the
grace of faith: that it is the conditional means for life: that the Gospel
promises life indeed, but it is upon condition of our faith; and therefore the
matter, and means at least in part of our salvation.

Mr. Perkins shall make answer to this in his Commentary upon the Galatians,
page 157. as Mr. Saltmarsh quotes him; where he thus says, That the Gospel
has in it no moral condition of any thing to be done of us: Indeed faith is
mentioned after the form and manner of a condition, but in truth it is the free
gift of God, as well as life eternal; and long after that, he goes on and
affirms, that our salvation stands in this, not that we know and apprehend
Christ, but in that he knows and apprehends us first of all. So to this
purpose, 1 Ioh. chap. 4. ver. 10. Herein is love, not that we loved him, but
that he loved us; and therefore I may say, can be no conditional means for
life, Mark the 12. ver. 41. the treasury was open for the poor to cast in their
small sums, as well as for the rich to cast in much; and in Exodus the 35. At
the making of the Tabernacle, the offerings of Goats hair, and Badgers skins,
were accepted as well as gold and silver, and the rich materials; let me cast
in my mite, my courser matter, to the destruction of the present objection. The
Ministers that hold forth faith, as a condition to be performed by man for
life, as without which done by them, they cannot inherit the future glory: if
they come to heal wounded spirits, and to quiet disturbed souls with this
salve, or means, and otherwise can give them no hope for life; faith being not
in their power, to work into the heart of the diseased: they may prove (if Gods
concurrence be not speedy) like Jobs friends, even miscrable comforters. I
think that that Minister, that makes faith in Christ the condition for
salvation, and do deny man life, unless upon that term; this Gosspel Minister
(for so he will be termed) considered duly, with him that denies life, unless
upon performance of the whole Law, by and in himself: me thinks this man does
to the Church of God, as Rehoboam said he would do to Israel, complaining of
his father Solomon's Taxes: who said his finger should be thicker then his
fathers loins; if faith be given us as a condition for life, in the New
Testament, why then the old killing letter of the Law, which granted life upon
Do this, and but upon that condition; is to be termed Gospel, that is, good
tidings, rather then the New Testament. Then indeed the Law is a Solomon, heavy
to Israel; I, but the Gospel is a Rehoboam, far heavier. For as Mr. Bridges, in
his Sermon upon the Canaanitish woman (whose memory I shall ever honor, and
bless God for the unvaluable comfort I received thereby:) it is harder to
believe, then to keep all the commands of God; it is harder for man, barely
considered as man, (for so it must be put) I say it is harder for him to believe,
to rest upon Christ faithfully for salvation, then to keep the whole Law. This,
if time would permit, were easily evidential; but yet however it is granted by
all, that faith is beyond, and out of the reach of any man: and that unless the
spirit of God shall vouchsafe to work it, at his pleasure, by an inward
operation (unbound to do it for any) no man is able to gain: all the Ministers,
and means in the world, are not able to furnish one soul with it: these things
premised, and received; I leave the world to judge, how improbable it is, that
faith should stand as a condition for life: the Ministers that make faith a
condition for life, ex consequenti, do make the Gospel no glad tidings, but sad
tidings: they set out our life, and escaping death at harder terms then the Law
did; which was yet impossible for man to observe; or if not so, yet they put it
upon a condition, non penes nos, that is, out of our power. O miserable and
wretched times, that mount Sion should be turned to mount Sinai! that the
blessed signs, seals, and tokens of our salvation by the Lord Christ, should be
turned to a Law and Covenant with us, impossible to be performed by us, save at
the pleasure and assistance of Gods spirit, blowing and breathing this sweet
gale of faith, and other graces, but where it lists. Upon this subject I
might increase into a volume, and as the times are, it were not unnecessary;
but I almost forbear: give me your ears to a word or two more. I confess
sometimes I quote and allege the opinions of men, especially of our modern
Divines (with whom I have even solely conversed) but yet this I do not,
desiring to work ye to believe the things in hand, because they have said it,
that respect I give only to the holy Scriptures; no, I do it to prevent
prejudice to the truths in hand; I Will therefore conclude all with that of Mr.
Greenham, in his tractate of Blessedness, in his works set forth by Mr.
Holland, siding much (methinks) with what I have held forth to ye, in these
last Sermons; speaking there of salvation, the true blessedness of man, he
says, that our future salvation, it is purposed by the father, the son performs
it, and the holy Ghost ratifies it to us. So that see, the work of the holy
Ghost is confirmation in this life to a soul, of his future happiness: granted
by the father, upon the purchase of the Son, eternally, before the ratification
thereof by the holy spirit in time, by faith. And under favor, this I take to
be the most is attributed to the work of the spirit in all the Scriptures, as
concerning our salvation: namely ratification, confirmation, assurance, or
manifestation; of what in respect to our future condition has been from
everlasting, gained by the son, granted by the father, and irrevocably
concluded by both, in their mutual and eternal covenant for the elect. In
respect therefore to illumination, and faith conveyed to our souls, which gives
sight, and hope, of future glory through Christ, which was promised to be
wrought in the hearts of his disciples, and Church, by the holy Ghost; he is
called the Comforter, not a Savior; John the 14. ver. 26. his work of faith,
upon the hearts of men, is in Ephesians the 1. ver. 14. termed the earnest of
our inheritance; the earnest money ye know gives a man to hope and expect the
full pay at the appointed day, according to promise or bargain; faith is the
earnest, not the price of our inheritance. And in another place, we are said
hereby to be sealed unto the day of redemption; so that the work of faith, is
to give or work in us the hope, expectation, and assurance of the already
concluded and accomplished salvation for us: all which amount up to that
description of faith by the Apostle: Hebrews the 11. ver. 1. Faith is the
ground of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen.

Let me add that of Mr. Maxey, before the King at White Hall, Tuesday the 8. of
January, 1604. in the conclusion of his Sermon upon that of the Apostle, Romans
the 8. ver. 30. Moreover, whom he has predestined, them also he has called,
etc. he has these words: Thus in predestination we behold God the Father
choosing of his love; in calling we hear God the Son teaching by his word: in
justifying, we feel the comfort of God the holy Ghost, sealing by his spirit.
By and by after, he says thus to our purpose; calling inlightneth the mind
with spiritual knowledge: justifying goes further, and seals up the heart
with heavenly comfort. Yet more for our purpose presently after, and alleged
out of Bernard, Every one of us after this life, desire and hope to enjoy
eternal glory. Behold, says he, Conceditur in praedestinatione, promittitur
in vocatione; ostenditur in justificatione, percipitur in glorificatione. In
praedestination there is the first grant: in calling, it is directly promised:
in justifying it is plainly showed: in glorifying there is livery and seisin,
the full possession of all.

Thus ye may see, that in Queen Elizabeth's days, and in the immediate
succeeding times, my opinion and Judgment, which was, that faith was but a
blessed sign, seal, or pledge of Gods eternal favor, purpose, or dercee, to
save us: not a cause, or means to work God thereto, not bent to it before, was
admitted the presence of the Court it self, and the most of the Nation. But now
this illegitimate, this child of Hagar, the offspring of shallow humane reason
(I mean the Arminian Tenants;) I say that now they have so long been favored,
and countenanced, that small parishes will deal by Christ's doctrine, I mean free
grace, as the blinded and perverse Jews did by our Savior himself, pelt him,
and stone him with reproaches; at him that shall preach it, as they dealt by
our Jesus, say he is mad, or has a devil, at least most fiercely oppose it.
Now to draw to an end; perhaps ye will say, I set too too little price, or
value upon faith, obedience, or, repentance; and do account so slightly of
them, as that man will hardly long after them. As to this, I shall need say no
more, then what has been often spoken in your hearings, as to this purpose. I
prize faith as Saint Peter did, I call it precious faith; though it becomes not
his salvation, yet it brings about invaluable blessings; it gives light to them
that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death; it takes off the heaviest
burden can be laid upon man in this life; it cures the wounded spirit, that
cannot be born; it brings peace external, the blessings of this life; it brings
peace internal, the peace of conscience, by giving him hope and assurance of
his peace eternal, accomplished for him by Christ; faith brings sanctification
with it, it outs sin and Satan; being in the heart, it keeps Satan from
re-entrance, Ephesians. the 6. ver. 16. Take the shield of faith, whereby ye shall be
able to quench all the fiery darts of Satan: without faith all our works are
inacceptable to God, little or no difference betwixt transgression of the Law,
and conformity to it, as to the subject matter.

Many more are the benefits of faith; so precious it is, that I say to God in my
wishes daily, as the woman of Samaria, to Christ concerning it, or the water;
Lord evermore give me this; this, though thou strippest me of all things in
this life whatever: and O Lord give me obedience and due conformity to thy
will; though it will not save me from eternal destruction, it will keep the
doctrine of Christ from being evil spoken of, from being blasphemed: it will
stave off the temporal wrath and vengeance of God from me, it will keep thee
from Gods becoming to thee as an enemy: or Lord if I lapse to disobedience,
then grant me the renewing grace of repentance and conversion; for then that
shall become my sanctuary and City of refuge, that I may be safe from the
destroyer, from the temporal vengeance of the Almighty.

FINIS.

