A LETTER TO A Member of Parliament, Showing, that a RESTRAINT ON THE PRESS Is
inconsistent with the Protestant Religion, and dangerous to the Liberties of
the Nation.

The Second Impression.

LONDON, Printed by J. Darby, and sold by A. B. at the Cross Keys and Bible in
Cornhil. 1700.

A LETTER TO A Member of Parliament.
SIR,
ACcording to your Command, I here present you with those Reasons that oblige
me to oppose the Restraining the Press, as inconsistent with the Protestant
Religion, and dangerous to the Liberties of the Nation: Both which I undertake
to show. And in order to prove the first, I beg leave to premise,

First, That which makes a Man to differ from a Brute, wholly incapable of
forming any Notion of Religion, is his Reason; which is the only Light God has
given him, not only to discover, that there is a Religion, but to distinguish
the true from the many false ones. He therefore that employs his Reason to the
best of his Ability to find out Religious Truths, in order to practice it, does
all that God desires: For God, who will not command Impossibilities, can
require no more of him, than that he impartially searches after, and endeavors
to discover Religious Truth, by the use of that Reason which was given him for
that end. He that does this, may have the satisfaction of doing his Duty as a
rational Creature, and may be sure, tho he misses Truth, he shall not miss the
Reward that is due to him who obeys his Maker, in following as well as he
could, and no more could be his Duty, the only Guide God has given him to judge
of Truth and Falsehood. On the contrary, he that neglects to do this, is
disobedient to his Maker, in misusing his rational Faculties; and tho he should
light on Truth, the luckiness of the Accident will not excuse his Disobedience:
For God will judge us as we are accountable (that is, rational) Creatures; and
consequently our reward from him, whether we hit or miss of Truth, will be in
an exact proportion to the use we make of our Reason: And if God has obliged us
to use it as the only means to distinguish Truth from Falsehood, that alone must
be the way to find the one, and avoid the other. Now the way that a Man's
Reason does this, is by examining those Proofs, Arguments, or Mediums, that
either himself or others have found out, and by comparing them with his common
and self-evident Notions, by means of which he finds out the agreement or
disagreement of any proposition with those Standards and Tests of Truth.

Tho this is the only way to discover Truth, yet if a Man was left wholly to
himself, without any to inform his Judgment, he would make but a very small
Discovery in Religious, or any other Truths: Therefore it is Men's mutual Duty to
inform each other in those Propositions they apprehend to be true, and the
Arguments by which they endeavor to prove them; which cannot be done so well
as by Printing them, ten thousand Books, after the Letters are once set, being
sooner Printed than one Transcribed: By the Advantage of which, Men, tho at
never so great distance, may, with a great deal of Ease and little Charge, be
exactly acquainted with each others Sentiments. And it is wholly owing to
Printing, that Knowledge is become, not only much more diffusive, but that a
great deal of more useful Knowledge has been discovered, in a short time since
that Invention, than in many Ages before. And if it has not had as great effect
in most places with respect to Religious as to other Knowledge, it can only be,
because the Liberty of Printing, as to the former, has been more restrained;
for Men have the same way of judging of that, as of all other Matters.

This being premised, it is clear that the Press ought not to be restrained.

1. Because it tends to make Men blindly submit to the Religion they chance to
be educated in: For if it is once supposed unlawful to publish any Arguments
against that Religion, it cannot be denied but that it is as unlawful to read
and examine those Arguments, that being the sole Reason of forbidding the
Printing them; which necessarily supposes they are to take their Religion on
trust, without any trial, which is the greatest Fault that can be, next to
having no Religion at all: For I cannot see any ground a Man has to hope to go
to Heaven, that will not be at the pains to examine what it is that God
requires of him in order to his coming thither.

2. Because it deprives Men of the most proper and best means to discover
Truth, by hindering them from seeing and examining the different Opinions, and
the Arguments alleged for them. I can see no Reason why it is more necessary
for him that judges for others, than it is for him who judges for himself, to
see the Arguments on all sides; this being the only evidence by which any Man
is to judge. The suppressing the Evidence in a Cause where Men's eternal
Happiness is concerned, is (I take it) much more criminal than in a Cause of a
temporal Interest. So that a Law to oblige the Judges to hear the Proofs but of
one side, is not as bad as to trust the Clergy of any one Sect with the Press;
who, to be sure, will suffer nothing to be printed but of their own side; and
who too, in all probability, will misrepresent their Adversaries, and their
Opinions, more than a Pleader will the Party or Cause against which he is
engaged. And are not the People (for instance) amongst the Papists, where the
Press is effectually restrained, as ignorant of what can be alleged against
the Popish Doctrines, as a Judge that has heard but one side can be of the
Defense the other is to make?

3. Because it hinders Truth from having any great influence on Men's Minds:
which is owing chiefly to Examination, because the more rational That makes an
Opinion appear, the greater power it will have on the Affections; which are not
moved without some sensible connection between the Cause and Effect; for what
does not convince the Understanding, will have but little or no effect on the
Will: Which is one reason why Men are obliged to try all things, because when
they see the reasonableness of any Opinion, it will oblige them to act
according to it more heartily than when they take it on trust: and nothing more
endears Truth to us, than that its discovery is the effect of our own Industry
and Observation.

4. Because it tends to make us hold the Truth (should we chance to light on
it) guiltily: for that (as I have already proved) will not be accepted, if it
be not the Effect of an impartial Examination; which makes Error it self
innocent: for if any thing in that case be a fault, it must be the Examination,
because That might have been prevented; but the Opinion that is caused by it
could not, That being a necessary Consequence of the other. Men when they are
left to themselves without any Clergy at all, are more likely not only to judge
for themselves, but to make a truer and a more impartial Judgment, than when
they are permitted to know the Sentiments of the Clergy but of one Sect, who
then may impose on them what ever out of Interest they think fit.

5. One Reason why God has so formed Mankind, that each alone without the help
of others cannot well subsist, is to oblige them to mutual love and kindness,
and to contribute to one another happiness. And they want each others
assistance for things of the Mind as well as of the Body. For a Man would be in
a miserable state of darkness and Ignorance, were it not for the Light that
others afford him: and therefore they are obliged to increase as much as they
can each others Knowledge, especially in Religion, which they can no otherwise
do, than by communicating to one another what they think is the Truth, and the
Reason by which they endeavor to prove it. To oblige Men to do this, God has
not only implanted in them a strong desire to find out Religious Truth, but as
great an inclination to teach others what they apprehend to be so; and there is
no Man who believes a Doctrine to be true, but would be very glad to get it
owned by others. Whosoever therefore endeavors to hinder Men from
communicating their Thoughts, (as they notoriously do that are for restraining
the Press) invade the natural Rights of Mankind, and destroy the common Ties of
Humanity. If we must, early and late, according to the Wise Man's direction,
seek after Wisdom as after a hidden Treasure; I cannot see how it will become
the Wisdom of a-Nation to endeavor by a Law to hinder us from knowing more
than the scanty Measure a Party-Licenser will afford us.

Not only the Light of Nature, but the written Word ( Levit. 19. 17. 1 Thessalonians.
5. 14. Heb. 3. 13.) obliges every one, Lay as well as Clergy, to exhort, warn,
rebuke, and use all means possible to bring his mistaken Brother into the right
way; which he can no otherwise do, than by first judging himself what is right
and wrong; and then by using Arguments to persuade him whom he judges in the
wrong, to desist from it. And if, as the Scripture supposes, no Man can
neglect to do this without hating his Brother; every one has a right to print
his Sentiments as the best, if not the only way to exhort, rebuke, reprove
Myriads of Brethren at the same time.

In short, in all Ages the greater Men's Zeal has been toward God, and the
more inflamed their Love to their Neighbors, the more they have thought it
their Duty (tho with the hazard of their Lives) to communicate to others what
they judged to be the Truth. And all Sects, how different so ever in all other
things, do agree in thinking themselves bound thereto, as to the greatest Act
of Charity; and consequently there is no Sect that hinders others from
publishing what they believe to be Truth, but sins against the natural and
revealed Law, and breaks that golden Rule (the Foundation of all Morality) of
doing as they would be done unto. For tho they look upon it as impious and
tyrannical for any to hinder them from imparting to others those Doctrines they
judge to be true, yet they themselves would hinder all others, who have as much
right to judge for themselves, and are as much obliged to communicate to others
what they judge to be a Religious Truth.

What can be more inhumane, as well as ungrateful, than to punish that Person
who out of love to Truth, and charity to the Souls of his Brethren, bestows his
Time, perhaps to the detriment of his Health and Fortune, in publishing what he
judges to be for their eternal Good? If this be a just Reward for such an
Undertaking, I cannot see how the Clergy can deserve such Riches and Honors
for doing but the same thing; that is, for instructing others in that they
judge to be true.

Nothing can be more unbecoming the Dignity of a rational Nature, than to bar
up the way to religious Knowledge and Wisdom, which Men have no way to
propagate, but by offering one another Reasons and Arguments: And there can be
no Pretense to hinder Men from doing this by restraining the Press, but what
will as strongly forbid them doing it any other way. In a word, Men have the
same right to communicate their Thoughts, as to think themselves; and where the
one is denied, the other is seldom used, or to little purpose: For,

Men as they are more or less hindered from communicating their Thoughts, are
more or less stupid and ignorant, and their Religion more or less corrupted:
And this is not only true with relation to Mahometans and Pagans, who suffer no
Printing at all, except the Chinese, (whose Knowledge above other Eastern
Nations seems to be owing to that Art, tho among them wonderfully rude and
imperfect) but with respect to Christians, amongst whom one would think it
almost impossible, considering what Light and Knowledge the Gospel brought into
the World, that any should be so grossly ignorant and superstitious as the
Papists are, or that the Christian Religion should be so much depraved as it is
amongst them: and what is this owing to, but the denying the People the Liberty
of the Press, and all other ways of freely debating matters of Religion? And
had it not been for this Invention, whereby men had such an easy way of
communicating their Thoughts, nothing but a second Revelation could have freed
them from that mass of Ignorance and Superstition the Christian World lay
under; and which was every day increasing, and does still remain in a very high
degree in those Countries that groan under Restraint, as Portugal, Spain,
Italy; which last, sutably to the Freedom once it enjoyed, abounded with Men
eminent in all Learning and Knowledge, as well as Virtue and Bravery: and that
it is so much degenerated now (the Climate and the make of their Bodies being
still the same) is owing to nothing but that Priestcraft which forbids all
Freedom; contrary to the practice of ancient Rome, where to think on what one
had a mind to, and to speak ones thoughts as freely as to think them, was
looked on as one of the chief Blessings of a Free Government.

It Is not only in Popish, but in Protestant Countries too, that according to
the Restraint Men lay under, Ignorance, Superstition, and Bigotry does more or
less abound. Denmark, Sweden, and several other Countries, are undeniable
Instances of this; and it cannot be otherwise, for there is little difference
between having no Reason, and not exercising it. And it is evident that the
Clergy themselves are not only more knowing, and reason much better, but are
much more sober, careful and exemplary, where Liberty of Debating is allowed,
than where denied. From what has been urged, I think I may safely conclude,
that Men, if they regard the employing their rational Faculties as God
requires, and (the Consequence of it) the discovery of Truth in Religion, and
their being influenced by it as they ought to be, are obliged to allow one
another an entire liberty in communicating their Thoughts, which was never
forbidden but where Interest supplanted Religion.

6. There Is no medium between Men's judging for themselves, and giving up their
Judgments to others. If the first be their Duty, the Press ought not to be
restrained, because it debars them from seeing those Allegations by which they
are to inform their Judgments. All the Arguments that are or can be urged for
the regulating the Press, have no other Foundation than that of People's being
liable to mistake, and subject to be imposed on by fallacious Arguments and
specious Pretenses: which in stead of proving what they design, only shows the
greater Necessity for the freedom of the Press; for the more apt Men are to
mistake and to be deceived, the less reason there is for their relying on any
one Party, but the more to examine with all care and diligence the Reasons on
all sides, and consequently for the Press being open to all Parties, one as
well as the other. So that those that are for allowing Men the liberty of
judging for themselves (if any such can be for regulating the Press) are very
unhappy in their Arguments, because they all make against themselves, and out
of their own Mouths they are condemned.

But if Men are to give up their Reason to the Clergy, of whatsoever
Denomination, there is nothing, I confess, more inconsistent with that blind
Obedience than the Liberty of the Press, because it gives them an opportunity
to see what can be said against that or any other Darling Notion of the
Priests; and then it is a great odds but that rational Creatures will be
governed by their own Reason, and no longer endure the Clergy to be Lords of
their Faith.

7. In fine, if it be unlawful to let the Press continue free, lest it furnish
Men with the Reasons of one Party as well as the other, it must be as unlawful
to examine those Reasons: for if the last be a Duty, the first cannot be
unlawful, because it is only a Means to the last in providing those Reasons
which Men are bound to try and examine; except an implicit Belief be a Duty,
which must necessarily bring Men back again to Popery. For if it be now
unlawful to examine the Reasons on all sides, for fear of having other
Sentiments than those the Clergy approves, it was no less unlawful at the time
of the Reformation, which was wholly built upon this freedom of examining the
Opinions of the Priests, and rejecting them if they judged them false. This the
brave Luther did singly and by himself in defiance of the whole Church, and
this any Man now has the same right to do: So that it is evident the Freedom or
Restraint of the Press depends on this single Question, Whether we ought to be
free, or Slaves in our Understandings? or, in other words, Protestants or
Papists? If the first, there cannot be the least color for leaving the Conduct
of Religion so wholly to a few Priests, that nothing shall be published about
it but what they think fit, than which nothing can savor more of a Popish,
slavish, and prostitute Compliance.

What, Sir, could be more surprising to that Honorable House, whereof you are
a most worthy Member, than a Motion to this purpose; That because making of
Laws is a thing of great Consequence, and Country Gentlemen are subject to
mistake, that therefore the House ought to be regulated, by appointing a
Licenser to judge what should be spoke in it? As ridiculous as such a Motion
would be, I would willingly know why it is not as unacountable to hinder a whole
Nation the freedom of debating Matters of Religion, which (since they are not
able, like their Representatives, to assemble in one Room) cannot well be done
but by letting the Press be open to every one to publish his Reasons; which
ought not to be denied, as long as every one in the Nation has as much a right,
not only to judge for himself in religious, as any Legislators can have to
judge for him in Civil Matters, but is as much obliged to use all possible
means to inform his Judgment; and consequently there is as little reason to
deny Liberty of debating in one Cause as the other.

8. The Reformation is wholly owing to the Press: For tho there were several
able Men who, before Printing was known, most vigorously opposed the growing
Errors of the Western Church; yet all they could do was to little or no
purpose, because they had no easy and ready way to communicate their thoughts
to any great Number: But no sooner was the Invention of Printing made useful,
but a poor Monk who discovered at least the grosser Cheats of the Priesthood,
was made capable of imparting those Notions, which drew almost a Moiety from
the Romish Superstition, which lost ground every where, as the Press was either
more or less free. Therefore it was not strange that the Popish Clergy, since
they could not confound the Art of Printing, should endeavor to turn it to
their own Advantage, not only by hindering any new Book from being printed, but
by expunging out of old ones whatever did not serve their turn: And herein they
acted consistent with their Principles, which allows no Liberty of examining,
and consequently denies all Freedom of the Press, which of all things does
engage Men the most to do it. But what Pretense can the Protestants have for
restraining it, who as they owe their Religion to its Liberty, so they cannot
hinder it without destroying that Religion which has no other Foundation than
that of every ones having a Right to examine those Reasons that are for or
against any Opinion, in order to make a true and impartial Judgment? which can
never be Justified, if it be unlawful to permit the Press to be open for all
Men to propose their Reasons to one another, in order to their examining them.

And it cannot be denied, but that the Protestant Clergy, who are as ambitious
for the most part as the Papists themselves to impose on the Consciences of the
People, have by Persecution, Restraint of the Press, and other such methods,
given the Papists (who have scarce any thing to plead for themselves but the
Practice of their Adversaries) too just an occasion to insult them, who are
(they say) no other than a pack of Hypocrites, in doing the very same things
they so loudly condemn; and that it is little less than a Demonstration, that
the Principles by which ^hey pretend to justify their Separation, are very
absurd, since hey are forced to Act contrary to them in every point. And what
was it in truth but these shameful Practices, that put a stop to the
Reformation, which at first, like a mighty Torrent, overwhelmed all that
opposed it, but has ever since gone back both in esteem and interest, and at
least, if Men do not change their conduct, will be quite lost? For how can it
be otherwise, since that method (Protestantism and Popery being so opposite)
that preserves the one, must necessarily destroy the other?

The taking a contrary method not only hindered the further spreading of the
Reformation, but was the cause that where it did prevail it was no more
perfect: For tho the Reformers deserve just Condemnation for what they did, yet
being bred up in so much Ignorance and Superstition, they could not remove
those vast loads of Corruptions which had been so long a gathering. But if
those that succeeded them had taken the same liberty in examining theirs, as
they did their Predecessors Opinions, it is impossible but that time must have
discovered the Truth, and made them agree at least in all matters of moment.
But instead of this, they became as guilty of a blind Obedience as the Papists;
and it was a sufficient proof of any thing amongst the different Sects, if
Luther, Calvin, Church of England, said so: Nothing more common than that I
submit all to Mother Church, and such like Phrases; which that Men should
effectually do, there were Penal Laws enacted to force them, and no Printing or
Preaching allowed to those that durst see further than the first Reformers
(whose Eyes at the best were but half open, tho they saw very well for those
times of Darkness, and in respect of the Papists who may justly be reckoned to
be quite blind) the consequence of which was, that the Differences between the
several Sects were widened, and they all run daily farther and farther into
Uncharitableness, Ignorance, Superstition, and Fanaticism.

9. Whosoever observes with what Zeal our Divines condemn the Popish Clergy for
not suffering their Laity to read Protestant Authors, would hardly think it
possible for them to be so disingenuous as to appoint some spiritual Dragons to
watch the Press, lest any thing should steal from thence that is not for their
turn. Let us hear only (for they all write after the same manner) the learned
Dr. Clegget, who in his Persuasive to an ingenuous Trial, p. 28. tells us, They
that have a good Cause will not fright Men from considering what their
Adversaries say by denouncing Damnation against them, nor forbid them to read
their Books, but rather encourage them so to do, that they may see the
difference between Truth and Error, Reason and Sophistry, with their own eyes.
This is the effect of a well grounded confidence in Truth, and there is this
sign of a good Cause apparently discernable in the Application of the Clergy of
this Church (of England) both to their Friends and Enemies, they desire the one
and the other to consider impartially what is said for us as well as against
us. And whatsoever Guides of a Party do otherwise, they give just cause to
those that follow them to examine their Doctrines so much the more carefully,
by how much they are unwilling to have them examined. It Is a bad sign when Men
are loath to have their Opinions seen in the day, but love Darkness more than
Light. If the Church of England will own this to be a just Character of them,
they ought to be so far from endeavoring to obtain a Law to restrain the
Press, that they are obliged, did they apprehend any such design, to oppose it
to their utmost, and to encourage their Adversaries to print their Sentiments,
and the People to read them, that they may see the difference between Truth and
Error, Reason and Sophistry, Orthodoxy and Heterodoxy, Dissenting and
Comforming, with their own eyes. Taking a contrary method only affords a new
Argument for the Liberty of the Press, because they give their Followers a just
Cause to examine their Doctrines so much the more carefully, by how much more
unwilling they are to have them examined. It Is a bad sign, etc. In a word, did
the Protestant Guides act as such, instead of frighting Men from considering
what their Adversaries say by denouncing Damnation against them, they would
tell their Auditors the great sin of being biased by them in the choice of
their Opinions, and that the more important any Controversy is, the more Reason
there is for the Liberty of the Press, that they may examine with all the
diligence imaginable the Tenets of their Adversaries as well as of their
Guides; and that the more they heard the one Party, the more they should read
the other; and that if they should fall into any Error by so doing, they would
not be accountable for it. For tho there is not (as the Papists vainly imagine)
such a Guide as would infallibly lead every Man into every Truth, yet that
every ones Reason as a Guide is infallible, because God that designs that all
Men (if it be not their own fault) should be for ever happy, has given them no
other Guide but their Reason to bring them to that Happiness; and therefore as
sure as God himself is infallible, the following that Guide must bring them to
that happy state God designed the following it should bring them to. And on the
contrary, that God, who is the Rewarder of those only that diligently seek him,
would condemn them as unprofitable Servants, who instead of using their Talents
to find out his Will, did abandon themselves to the uncertain chance of
Education and the Religion in fashion, which varies with every Age and every
Country. As thus they ought to preach to the People, so they should as little
scruple to tell the Magistrate, that by permitting an entire Liberty, he did
nothing but his Duty; but by a Restraint of the Press, he did not only show
himself guilty of a blind Obedience, but did endeavor to make a whole Nation
so, and was to answer not only for all the Errors, and other ill Consequences
himself caused by a Restraint, but likewise of abetting all other Magistrates
that think themselves in the right in doing the like; and that tho he should
chance to be in the right himself, yet he could not know how many he was the
caufe of being all their Lives in the wrong, who might be so only, because, not
having liberty to publish the Reasons they had to embrace such Opinions, they
could not meet with any that could give them Satisfaction; and in truth,
writing against any Opinion where Men have not the liberty to show the Reasons
why they hold it, is but writing at random, because Men's Reasons cannot be
confuted till they are known. Such Arguments as these a Protestant Clergy,
that is true to their own Principles, ought to use both to the Prince and
People, and not prevaricate with God and Man, and talk backward and forward
just as it serves their turns. If Baal be God, serve him; if not, serve the
Lord.

10. I can see no reason why they that are for tying Men to that Interpretation
of Scripture a Licenser shall approve, and therefore put it in his power to
hinder all others from being published, can with any justice condemn the Popish
Clergy for not licensing the Bible it self for the Laity to read it. For if the
Bible is to be translated into the vulgar Tongue, to what end is it, but that
the People by reading it may judge what is their Duty in the most obscure and
difficult places? Ought they not then to see the different Translations and
Explications? If they are to be denied this, lest they apprehend it in a Sense
different from that of the Licenser and his Party, the same Reason will
restrain the People from promiscuously reading the Bible, because they may, and
frequently do apprehend it in such a Sense as their Guides do not approve; and
if that be a Crime, all the means that are necessary to hinder it must be a
Duty; and therefore if it cannot be prevented without hindering the Laity from
reading the Bible, it is Crime to suffer them to read it.

11. This Restraint gives a great handle to those that believe only Natural
Religion to argue against the Christian; for, say they, it is no small
Presumption that the Clergy themselves are conscious of the Falseness of their
Religion, because they dare not suffer it to undergo a fair Trial, but do what
they can to stifle all the Reasons that can be urged against it. The Clergy,
say they, are so learned, and withal so numerous, that amongst them they could
not fail to expose and confound any thing that is writ against them, had they
but Truth on their side, which they know is, next to the Almighty, strong, and
therefore needs no licensing Tricks, or Stratagems, to make it victorious:
These are the mean Shifts that Error is forced to use against its Power. These
Men further add, That if Christ and his Apostles obliged Men to try all things,
how can they that pretend to be his Successors (did they believe the
Scriptures) hinder a fair Trial of any thing relating to Religion? And can
there be a fair Trial when all Parties have not the liberty to publish their
Reasons, that the People may compare and examine them by their common Notions,
those Tests and Standards of all Truths? Has the Protestant Religion a fair
Trial in Italy, where nothing can be heard in its defense? Thus it is that some
Men expose our Religion on the one hand to the Insults of Unbelievers, and on
the other of Papists; which can never be avoided but by granting to all Sects
an entire Liberty of the Press. All other methods equally serve to promote
Error as Truth, and consequently can never be the way that God ordained to
distinguish the one from the other.

12. It may be objected, That by such a latitude as this People may be seduced
into false Religions, or into Heresies and Schisms. None can profess a
Religion, but either, because upon examination he judges it to be true, or,
that some by Interest makes him do so contrary to his Judgment, or else,
because he takes it on trust without examining it. As to the first, If two
Persons profess different Religions, one the true, the other a false one, yet
if they have been equally sincere in their examination, they are equally in the
way to Heaven; because in following their Reason, they both have done what God
requires; so two Men that equally act against their Judgment, the one
professing the Truth, the other not, are alike guilty: so also are they who
equally take their Religion on trust; and such perverse holding of a Religion,
whether true or false, is Heresy, as the other is Hypocrisy: and according as
Men are more or less partial in examining, they are more or less heretical. So
that it is not what a Man professes, but how, that justifies or condemns him
before God. And there would be few, either Heretics or Hypocrites, were there
not Bribes annexed to some, and Awes to other religious Tenets; for then Men
would not be afraid to examine Those for fear of finding them false, nor These
lest they should be true, nor to own or disown either, according as they judge
them true or false. And an entire Liberty of the Press would by degrees
establish religious Truth, because that is supported by better, plainer, and
more cogent Proofs than any false Opinions are; which are either mischievous or
burdensome, or at the least useless, whilst the other by its Excellency and
Usefulness carries Evidence and Conviction with it.

As to Schisms, they are caused by Men's imposing their own Interpretations,
instead of the express Word of God, as necessary terms of Communion: which
makes Protestant Imposers not only Schismatics but Heretics, because having
laid down as a Fundamental of their Religion, that every one is to interpret
Scripture for himself, they most obstinately and perversely (not to say
knowingly) act against that Fundamental.

13. The most material Objection against the Liberty of the Press is, That
without Licensers, Atheism, Profaneness, and Immorality, as well as Sedition
and Treason, may be published. The Commonwealth has the same reason to punish
Men for those as for these, because they are all alike pernicious to humane
Societies. And it is all the reason in the world that whoever asserts any such
Notions, whether in Discourse, or from the Pulpit or Press, should be severely
punished. But this can be no more a reason to appoint Licensers for the one
than for the other; nor would it hinder the printing things contrary to Law,
for none will be so mad as to desire an Imprimatur for them: so that such
Pamphlets, whether there are or are not Licensers, will come out only by
stealth; and it is evident there were more of them printed when the Law for
regulating the Press was in being, than since. To make the Laws against such
things severer, and to oblige either the Printer or Bookseller to set his Name
to all Books whatever, will take away all pretense for appointing Licensers,
and will be the most effectual way to prevent publishing such Books.

But before I leave this Head, I cannot but remark that they are no way guilty
of Profaneness who out of Conscience (to which Profane and Atheistical
Persons have no pretense) worship God after a mistaken manner, because all the
honor Men are capable of giving an Almighty and Alknowing Being, consist in
the Intention of Design; and therefore to punish those, who out of a holy
Intention and pious Design worship God aster that manner they judge acceptable
to his Will, as profane Persons or Blasphemers, is the greatest Crime next to
Blasphemy, because it is punishing Men for no other reason but for expressing
their Zeal for the Honor of God, which they can no otherwise do than by
worshipping him as their Reason dictates, which they must either do, or not
worship him at all, or else but with a mock Worship. And they that by force are
made to break the ties of Conscience, tho never so erroneous, cannot be good
Subjects neither to God nor King: so that Profaneness and Immorality cannot be
destroyed but by all Sects doing as they would be done unto; which must
establish an entire and universal Liberty, since they have all the same right
to judge for themselves, and are equally obliged to act according to that
Judgment, and to communicate to others what they judge to be true: which
perhaps was the reason that the House of Commons so unanimously threw out the
Bill for restraining the Press immediately before their addressing the King
against Profaneness and Immortality. But to return,

If it be once thought unlawful to have nothing printed but of the side of the
Church in fashion, the same reason will at least as strongly hold against any
thing being preached but of that side; because if any thing is printed against
that Church, there are ten thoufand Clergy (whom one would think a sufficient
Guard for Truth) to expose its Folly and Weakness, but it is not so easy for
them to know, and consequently to apply an Antidote to what is preached against
them: wherefore they who are not for destroying that just and righteous Law
that follows Liberty of Conscience, ought to be very careful of the Freedom of
the Press, as the only means to guard and defend the other; and both being
built on the same Foundation, cannot (as has been already proved) be destroyed
but by stricking at the Foundation of the Protestant Religion. And,

Therefore it cannot be supposed that the chief Support of it, the Honorable
House of Commons, will ever consent to the one or the other, especially
considering how much the Popish Interest increases, and what Advantage of late
it has got in France, Germany, and Savoy* And if the Popish Princes (as it is
supposed) have entered into a Confederacy among themselves to extirpate the
Protestant Cause, ought not all Protestants (and all that are not for a blind
Obedience deserve that Name, that being the essential difference between it and
Popery) instead of using restraint on one another, unite against the common
Enemy?

Besides, let it be considered, it is not certain we shall be always blessed with
the Government of a Prince so entirely a Protestant as our Great and Glorious
Deliverer. And if the Papists should pervert one, and by that means get the
publishing their Doctrines without contradiction, they might by degrees
confound the Protestant Religion, so much weakened already by its Professors
acting so inconsistently with their own Principles. But were that Scandal
removed, by allowing as entire a Liberty as the Protestant Principles require,
there could be no danger of the prevailing of the Popish, or any other
Superstition. And it is remarkable, that nothing has been writ in behalf of
Popery since the Expiration of the Act of Regulating the Press, so little is
Liberty a Friend to that Superstition.

14. But if, after all, there must be some appointed to determine the Fate of
Religious Books, the Clergy, of all Men, ought not to be trusted with this
Employ, because they (not content with the Right they have from the Society of
exercising the Ecclesiastical Function) do claim Power and Government distinct
and independent of it, which they pretend is sounded in Scripture; and
consequently they have no way, as Clergy, of gaining any Dominion, Power, or
Riches, more than what the Society will give them, but by wresting the Holy
Writ: And if, besides the Pulpits, where they may preach what gainful Doctrines
they please, without contradiction, they do so far engross the Press, as to
hinder any thing from being printed but what favors their Design; What may not
such a body of Men, (well versed in all the Arts of persuasion by their
frequent Opportunities in displaying them, impose on the too credulous People,
especially when all the ways to disabuse them are stopped up?

And if the Clergy in the more easy and primitive times, perhaps ever since
they were forbid to lord it over the Heritage of God, have made it their
business to pervert Religion to advance their own Power; what reason is there
to imagine that they would not do the same in these latter and degenerate Ages?
How, I pray, did the Clergy, who at first subsisted by the Charity of the
people, arrive to such immense Grandeur and prodigious Riches, but by a
constant Confederacy from time to time, carried on at the Expense of Religion?
which (as their own Historians show) was proportionably corrupted, as they
increased in Power and Riches, the one being made a step to the other; and it is
as evident where they are now most potent, their Religion is most perverted,
and the People most enslaved.

The chief way they effected this, was by persuading the People to a blind
Obedience, the consequence of which was, that they must take the Clergy's own
Word for all the Powers they thought fit to say the Scripture had given them,
and to submit to whatever they would determine in their own Cause, and for
their own Interest. And there never was a Synod, whether Orthodox or not, but
were for imposing on the Laity, not only by Excommunicating, Anathematizing,
and Damning, but by making the Magistrate use violence on all that would not,
contrary to their Consciences, comply with their Determinations; by which means
they at last arrived to such an excess of power over the Magistrate as well as
the People, that one was no better than their Hangman, and the other than their
Slaves. And have not the Protestant Clergy (from whom one ought to expect
better things) taken the same method to make People blindly submit to their
Determination? Nay, have they not outdone the Popish Clergy, in wresting the
Holy Writ to destroy the English Constitution, and enslave the Nation, and in
preaching up the Doctrine of Absolute Obedience, than which nothing can be more
inconsistent with the goodness of God, and the happiness of Humane Societies,
as knowing the only way to secure Tyranny in the Church was to get it
established in the State? So that if the Protestant Clergy do not keep the
People in as vile a Subjection as the Popish do, it is not owing to their good
will; and therefore none that have any value for Religion, or any kindness for
their Liberties, will trust those that lie under such Temptation to pervert the
Scripture, with the sole licensing Books of Religion. As we pray not to be led
into Temptation, so we should avoid leading others into it, especially such as
in all probability they cannot withstand.

15. The Discovery of Printing seems to have been designed by Providence to
free Men from that Tyranny of the Clergy they then groaned under. And shall
that which was intended by divine Goodness to deliver all from Sacerdotal
Slavery, be made the means of bringing it in again? And if our Ancestors could
not defend themselves from more than Egyptian Bondage, which the Pulpits
brought on them, without the assistance of the Press, it is scarce possible that
we should be able to secure our Liberties against both, when by the help of the
latter the Clergy have got better Abilities, as well as Opportunities, to
impose on the Understanding of the People: And when Men are once enslaved in
their Understanding (which of all things ought to be most free) it is scarce
possible to preserve any other Liberty.

The trusting not only the Pulpits but the Press in the hands of the Clergy, is
causing the Blind to lead the blind, because the generality of them are more
likely to be guilty of a blind Obedience than the Laity, since they are
obliged, as they value their Subsistence, right or wrong, to assert those
Religious Tenets they find established by Law; the truth of which they cannot
any more be presumed to have impartially examined, than a mercenary Soldier the
Justice of the Cause he is engaged in; being sent by their Friends to the
Universities not to try the established Religion, whether it is right or wrong,
but to prosess it as a Trade they are to earn their bread by: and lest they
should examine it, they are, even before they are capable, shackled with early
Oaths and Subscriptions. Which is the reason that the Priests are wondrous hot
in every Country for the Opinions to which their Preferments are annexed; in
one place fierce Calvinists, in another violent Lutherans, in a third bigoted
Papists; which could not so universally happen, did they in the least examine
those Opinions they are engaged to profess. And therefore there can be no
reason to trust the Press in hands of men so biased and prejudiced, who cannot
but be highly affronted to see the Laity do, what they durst not, judge for
themselves, and not be blindly guided by them, who (poor men) are not trusted
to guide themselves. Yet for all this extraordinary precaution to keep the
Clergy right and tight, and the great disproportion of numbers between the
Laity and them, it is evident that almost all the Errors and wrong Notions in
Religion have had their rise and chief Support from them. So that upon the
whole, if the Press should be trusted with any, it ought to be with Laymen,
who have no Powers, Prerogatives, or Privileges to gain by perverting the
Scripture, since they pretend to none but what they receive from the Society.
Tho I cannot but presume that our Legislators, were there no other reason, yet
out of respect to the Clergy, would not enact such a Law as supposes the
greatest and most learned of them not fit to be trusted with the printing but a
Half-sheet in Religion without consent of a Lay Licenser, who is to have an
arbitrary Power over their Works. And there is no doubt but the Clergy would
highly resent such a Law; tho I cannot see but the appointing Licensers,
whether of the Laity or Clergy, equally reflects on their Body, because it
equally supposes they are unfit to be trusted. But if they are content with
that Disgrace, it must be because either they cannot defend themselves against
their Adversaries, or that they have a mind to give themselves up to Laziness
and Idleness, and not trouble themselves with the laborious work of
controversial Divinity. But I shall say no more on this Point, having already
sufficiently showed how destructive the restraining the Press is to Religion,
which it cannot be without being in general prejudicial to Civil Societies, for
whose good it was instituted, but especially when it is perverted on purpose to
enslave them: and there never was a Nation which lost their religious Rights
that could long maintain their civil ones, for Priestcraft and Slavery go hand
in hand. Therefore I shall be the shorter on what I have to say on a civil
account, especially considering that most of those Reasons that show how
destructive a Restraint of the Press is to Religious, will equally prove it to
be so in Civil Affairs.

16. The greatest Enjoyment that rational and sociable Creatures are capable
of, is to employ their Thoughts on what Subjects they please, and to
communicate them to one another as freely as they think them; and herein
consists the Dignity and Freedom of humane Nature, without which no other
Liberty can be secure: for what is it that enables a few Tyrants to keep almost
all Mankind in Slavery, but their narrow and wrong Notions about Government?
which is owing to the Discouragement they lie under of mutually communicating,
and consequently of employing their Thoughts on political matters; which did
they do, it is impossible that the bulk of Mankind should have suffered
themselves to be enslaved from Generation to Generation. But the Arts of State,
in most Countries, being to enslave the People, or to keep them in Slavery, it
became a Crime to talk, much more to write about political Matters: and ever
since Printing has been invented, there have been, in most places,
State-Licensers, to hinder men from freely writing about Government; for which
there can be no other Reason, but to prevent the Defects of either the
Government, or the Management of it, from being discovered and amended.

17. Fame, Reputation, and Honor, as they are the greatest Incentives to all
good and virtuous Actions, so they as much terrify Men from committing base and
unworthy ones. And it cannot be reasonably presumed, considering the general
Corruption of Mankind, but that the rich and powerful would frequently oppress
those beneath them, were they not afraid of losing their Reputation, and
exposing themselves either to the Contempt or Hatred of the People: for this
Law of Reputation (if I may so call it) influences Men more than all other Laws
whatever. But if there were a Licenser of the Press, he might be prevailed on
not only to hinder the injured from appealing to the People by publishing their
Grievances, but to license such Stories only as mercenary Scriblers would write
to justify the Oppressors, and to condemn the Oppressed: which, as it would be
the greatest Encouragement for those Men that are above the ordinary Remedies
of Law to crush whom they please, so it would be the highest Injustice to deny
the injured the last satisfaction of justifying their innocence to the World,
which would be sure to pass a just Censure on the Oppressors; and this they
would the more dread, because if once they lose their Credit with the People,
they will be very unfit Instruments for a Court to use. Therefore it is no
wonder if all that make an ill use of their Power, especially those who have
cheated the Government as well as abused the People, do endeavor with all
their might to have the Press regulated, lest their Crimes being exposed in
Print, may not only render them odious to the People, but to the Government. In
a word, All sorts of Men whose Interest it is not to have their Actions exposed
to the Public (which I am afraid are no small number) will be for restraining
the Press, and perhaps will add Iniquity to Iniquity, by pretending they do it
out of Conscience to suppress Immorality and Profaneness.

18. But this is not the worst that may happen, because the Press may be so
managed, as to become a most powerful Engine to overturn and subvert the very
Constitution: for should a Magistrate arise with Arbitrary Designs in his head,
no Papers that plead the Rights and just Privileges of the People would be
stamped with an Imprimatur: Then the Press would be employed only to extend the
Prerogative beyond all bounds, and to extol the Promoters of Arbitrary Power as
the chief Patriots of their Country, and to expose and traduce those that were
really so; which would be the greatest Discouragement not only to all brave and
virtuous Actions, but would be apt to make the People mistake their Friends,
when they had not the Liberty to publish a Vindication of their Principles or
Actions, for their Enemies. In a word, if the Pulpits and Westminster Hall (as
we have lately seen it) should chime in with an Arbitrary Court, what can warn
the People of their Danger, except the Press? But if that too be wholly against
them, they may easily be so blinded as not to see the Chains that are preparing
for them, till they are fettered beyond all power of Redemption; for there can
never be wanting a thousand plausible Stories, and seemingly fair Pretenses, to
amuse and divert them from perceiving their real Danger. And if we look into
the History of Europe, we shall find more Nations wheedled than forced out of
their Liberties; tho Force afterward was necessary to maintain what was got at
first by Fraud.

19. It Is so far from being impossible, that a People may be thus imposed on to
their utter ruin; that it is probable another Generation seeing nothing but the
Royal Prerogative highly magnified, may be bred up with the Opinion of being
born Slaves. And were we not almost brought to that pass in the late Reigns?
when nothing came out with Allowance but what was to justify such Opinions; and
if some good men (not to mention the Prince of Orange's third Declaration)
especially about the time of the Revolution, had not had the Courage privately
to print some Treatises to undeceive the People, and to make them see the fatal
Consequences of those Doctrines which by the Restraint of the Press passed for
divine and sacred Truths; the Nation had tamely submitted to the yoke. And as
it cannot be denied but that those Papers in a great measure opened our eyes,
so it may justly be hoped that none that saw the miserable Condition that the
Act for regulating the Press would have brought us into, will be instrumental
in reestablishing that Law. No, those Men sure who so much exclaimed against it
in the late Reigns, will take all care imaginable to prevent it now. But if
these very men who may justly be said to be written into their places, and owe
their Preserments to the freedom of examining those slavish Doctrines of the
former Reigns; if these Men, I say, can so far forget themselves as to be for a
Law which till themselves were uppermost they thought tended only to inslave
us, there cannot be, I think, a greater Argument for all others to oppose. We
are, God be thanked, blessed with the Government of the best of Kings, who as he
hazarded every thing to rescue our Liberties when in the extremest Danger, so
he places the Glory of his Reign in preserving them entire, and transmitting
them so to Posterity. And therefore none that love his Glory can be for
restraining the Press, which now as it can serve to no other end than to create
Jealousies in the People, who cannot forget what former Reigns designed by it,
so it may hereafter hazard all our Liberties, Under a good King we may justly
expect such Laws as will not expose us to, but secure us from the Oppressions
of an ill one. The best things when perverted become the very worst; as
Religion it self, when it degenerates into Superstition, so Printing, which in
it self is no small Advantage to Mankind, when it is abused, may be of most
fatal consequence. Secure but the Liberty of the Press, and that will, in all
probability, secure all other Liberty; but if that once falls into the hands of
ill designing Men, nothing that we hold dear or precious is safe. And
experience manifests, that wheresoever That of the Press is denied, there no
other is preserved. Most Countries in Europe maintained their Freedom tolerably
well till the Invention of Printing; but when that was suffered to speak
nothing but Court-Language, People were by degrees gulled and cheated of their
Liberty. Had not the late King tacked Popery to Slavery* he might with the
greatest ease imaginable have enslaved us; and methinks the danger we have so
miraculously escaped, should fright us from ever enacting any of those Methods
into a Law that so much contributed to that danger.

20. That which alone would engage me, were I a Senator, to oppose the
Restraint of the Press, is, that a Parliament is to take cognizance of all
sorts of things which some Men of Gentlemen-like Education may not have much
considered; and therefore the perusing what those without doors, who have made
such things their business, have writ, may be none of the worst means of
informing themselves; but a Restraint of the Press may in a great measure
hinder them from receiving this Satisfaction, because Licensers might be
prevailed on to suffer but one side to publish their Sentiments even in Matters
of the greatest Consequence. I have met with some Members who have frankly
owned that the incomparable Argument against the Standing Army gave them great
^nsight into that grand Point, which, said they, had not the Press been open,
would never have appeared, nor any thing on that side, tho a number of
Pamphlets on the other, which, with the noise of self-interested Perfons, would
in all probability have carried things quite otherwise: And seeing they could
not foresee how frequently such things might happen, this alone, said they, was
enough to convince them of the necessity of the Liberty of the Press, since
they could not be too secure of that inestimable Jewel Liberty, which, if once
lost, was scarce ever to be recovered, especially if seized by a domestic
Power.

21. I doubt not but there are several well-meaning Men for regulating the
Press; who, did they consider how subject all things are to change, could not
be apprehensive that this Engine of their own contriving might be turned upon
themselves, and made to ruin those very Designs they thought to promote by it.
For the Press (as a witty Gentleman observes) is like a Jackanapes, he who has
him in his hands may make him bite whom he pleases, and therefore it is their
fasest way to keep their Jackanapes in their own hands. And it cannot but show
a great deal of hardiness to make such a Law as may produce very fatal
Consequences even to the Makers themselves, who will then deserve no pity,
since they are scourged with Rods of their own providing; And it is the more
probable this may happen so hereafter, since even at present such a Law has but
an untoward Aspect upon most Parties; for one Party, tho he is pleased with it
in religious, yet dislikes it in civil Matters; another thinks the contrary to
be his Interest; a third is satisfied with having such or such Sects restrained
from Printing, but would be glad that others had that Liberty; a fourth, who
cares not how all the Sectaries are dealt with, is yet afraid that if the Press
be in the hands of moderate Churchmen, none will be suffered to write any more
Letters to a Convocationman, or a Manicipium Ecclesiasticum, or such like
Books; a fifth is afraid lest this power should get into the hands of the rigid
ones, for then the others will be run down as Trimmers, Latitudinarians and
what not. The same may be said with respect to other Religious Opinions, about
which Men of the same Church are divided, and the like may be as well observed
in civil Matters, but I leave every one to make that Remark for himself; so
that if all Parties cast up their accounts, there are very few of them but will
find a Restraint of the Press to be against even their present Interest.

22. I might add a great number of other Reasons, because as many things are
worth knowing, so many Arguments there are for the Liberty of the Press; what
can be more useful than History, and the Knowledge of our Ancestors Actions? A
faithful account of which can scarce be expected in a Reign that has a design
to disguise Truth, and to keep us in ignorance of those noble and generous
Notions our Ancestors had of Liberty, and how they asserted theirs upon all
occasions. As for what concerns the present time, I shall only say, that for my
own part I should be glad, especially when at a distance from London, (and I
suppose other Country Gentlemen may be of the same mind) to divert my self with
some other New-papers besides the Gazette, which would hardly be permitted if
the Press were regulated. As for Books of Philosophy, and of other Arts and
Sciences, I can see no reason why there should be any Restraint on them, or why
the licensing them should be entrusted with the Clergy, as by the late Act,
except it be to hinder such Books from being printed as tend most to inform
Men's Judgment, and make them reason clearly, things very dangerous to a blind
implicit Obedience Besides, an excellent discovery in Nature may be hindered
from being published, on pretense that it is inconsistent with Religion: for the
time has been when asserting the Antipodes has been no less than Heresy; and
the Motion of the Earth a Crime worthy the Inquisition, and with as little
Reason (not to mention Dr. Burnet's ingenious Tracts) has the most useful Book
that ever was written in Philosophy, the Essay of humane Understanding, been
condemned as inconsistent with the Articles of the Christian Religion. As for
Physic, tho the licensing Books therein were wholly trusted with some of the
College, the most useful Piece in that Science, either because the Licensers
were engaged in another Method of Practice, or because it may take from their
Advantage, by prescribing a cheaper and easier way of Cure, or out of Envy, or
a thousand other Reasons, might be hindered from seeing the Light, to the no
small detriment not only of the Present, but future Ages. As to Law, I shall
only say, If there are any Abuses crept into it, the likeliest way to have them
reformed is not by restraining the Press.

23. Were Licensers unbiast, incorrupt, and infallible, there might be good
Reason to trust them with an Arbitrary Power to pass what Sentences they
pleased on Books: but if we are to judge of the future by the past, they are
almost as likely to be one as the other, Men of Sense, (and others ought not to
be trusted with it) without being resolved to make the most of it, will not
care to be condemned to the drudgery of reading all the Trash that comes to be
printed, nothing but necessity will make such Persons submit to it, and that
necessity will make them less able to withstand Temptation. So that the
appointing Licensers will be as bad as laying a Tax on Learning, since by
delaying to look over Books, especially those that require haste to be printed,
and by other tricks (for there are Mysteries in all Trades) they may make
People pay what they please for their Allowance.

24. But this is not the worst, it will be a great hindrance to the promoting
of Knowledge and Truth, by discouraging the ablest Men from writing for such
Persons, especially after having once had the liberty of publishing their own
Thoughts, will not be content to have their Works lie at the Mercy of an
ignorant, or at the best of an unleisured Licenser, who upon a cursory view may
either condemn the whole to perpetual Darkness, or strike out what he pleases,
perhaps the most material things. And tho a living Author may subject himself
to this, yet none will be content that the Labors of a deceased Friend should
be so served; so that the Works of such a Person, tho never so famous in his
Lifetime, shall be lost to all Posterity. Besides, is it not intolerable, that
every time a Man has a mind to make any Alteration or Addition between the
licensing of the Copy, and the printing it off, that he must as often hunt
after the same Licenser to obtain his leave, for the Printer could not go
beyond his licensed Copy, when in the mean time the Press, to his no small
damage, must stand still?

In short, tho there might seem to be some reason to condemn a Person that upon
a fair Trial had been found guilty of writing immoral things, or against the
Government, to the Punishment of never writing again but under the Authority of
an Examiner; yet what reason can there be that those that never offended, nay
that the whole Commonwealth of Learning should be subject to so severe Usage,
which too is the way to have none but Fools and Blockheads plague the World
with their Impertinence, and make an Imprimatur (as it did formerly) signify no
more than that such a Book is foolish enough to be printed?

It Is objected, that without Licensers any one may reflect on whom he has a
mind to, so as that most People shall be sensible whom he means, tho he mention
but two Letters of his Name, or uses some other Description, by which means he
is out of the reach of the Law.

This may be an Argument for the forbidding all Printing, but none for
appointing Licensers; for it is much more reasonable for all to have the Liberty
to vindicate themselves the same way they chance to be aspersed, than to let
the Licenser's Party abuse all others, and the Press not open for them to
justify themselves. But if any one reflects upon another after this manner, let
him make appear whom it is he means, or else let him be esteemed in Law to
intend that Person that takes it to himself.

This I think is all that can be objected as to Civil Matters, except what
relates to Sedition and Treason, for an Answer to which I refer the Reader to.
13.

I have no more to add, but that my greatest Ambition next to serving the
Public, (which here I have endeavored to do without so much as once thinking
how it may affect me in my own private Concerns) is to approve my self to be,

SIR, Your most faithful and devoted humble Servant.

