AN ANSWER TO A LETTER SENT To a Gentleman of the Middle Temple.

CONCERNING The late various and strange changes of the times, together with
certain Queries not unworthy the consideration of the High Court of Parliament;
and of all honest and Religious men, that tenders the Peace and welfare of the
Church and English Nation.

And also a clear way discovered whereby at least a Million of Money may be
brought into the Public Treasury for the use of the Commonwealth.

Lege and perlege,

Read, re-read, and understand.

By Tho. Le White. Esquire

LONDON, Printed by J. Clowes, 1659.

AN ANSWER TO A Letter sent to a Gentleman of the Middle Temple.
SIR,
I Have seriously considered the contents of your Letters, and the admiration
wherewith it seems you are surprised on the various revolutions, and late
strange changes befallen the three Nations, within these twenty years past. In
answer whereunto according to the mode of the times, I have herein sent you
some few Queries which concerns us all to remember, that nothing in the world
is stable and permanent, but transitory and uncertain, variable and unconstant,
which ought to put us in mind of our Celestial rest, and eternal happiness. At
present I shall only point out unto you, such changes and alterations so lately
befell us in England, as they relate to some other more ancient and foreign
presidents, in changes of Governments. And first,

1. Whether the Athenians (those greedy news-mongers) were more safe and happy
under the Government of one single Tyrant, than in their choice and change of
thirty persons, that took upon them the power and Government of their Republic.

2. Whether the Senate of Rome some times consisting of 200 choice persons,
were not in process of time curbed, and controld in their power and
transactions by the Tribunes of the people.

3. Whether again, both the Power and Authority of the Roman Senate and
Tribunes, were not overpowred by their Dictators more especially, after that
Julius Caesar, became Perpetuus Dictator, and assumed to himself the Supreme
power in the Government.

4. Whether then after all these changes of power amongst the Romans, their own
Armies at last did nor alter all their former frames of Government, from and
after their cutting off Tarquius Superbus, their last Tyranr King until
Augustus time, and made choice of such Emperors, as they pleased to elect, and
in the conclusion, whither that vast Empire fell not in pieces? (I omit to
remember you of the period and change of those three foregoing Monarchies of
the Assirians, Medes, Persians and Greeks) whence you may find, that all
changes, and alterations of powers and Governments, are no new things or to be
wondered at; but to come to our own case.

5. Whether this present Parliament was not from their very first sitting down,
lessened in their number by the late King, and after that* disrobed of much of
their Power and number by their own Army* (...) Army Officers, on which
consideration it rests yet question, ^ Whether on any quarrel or discontent of
the present Army, the like may not be attempted on these that now sit, for that
they which have the sword in their hands, will* or may (on any occasion) be
Masters of the Powers in Government?

6. Whether the Parliament in the beginning of the late War, did not make
choice of the Earl of Essex and the Lord Fairfax successively in their Order,
to be their Commanders in chief, over their Armies, (only in England) and in
May 1650 made choice of Oliver Cromwell before all others, for their General and
Commander in chief over all their Armies both in England, Scotland, and
Ireland; in which great trust and Command, how he behaved himself, in stopping
that wide orifice of blood, which prodigiously ran throughout the three
Kingdoms, and reduced them all into peace and quietness, (as we may say in a
moment of time) to the admiration of the World, all the three Nations have just
cause to remember, and not forget that Almighty God assisted him, and made him
instrumental in that great work, beyond common Expectation?

7. Whether Oliver Cromwell, on his assuming the Supreme Power of Government,
between himself and a Parliament, had not good reason to induce him, if not
necessitated so to do, if he intended to save his honor, and the reputation
whith deservedly he had gotten with the people, and all Christendom?

8. Whether on due consideration of the great and strange changes of these
times; we may not yet fear more strange and tragical changes then we have yet
seen; if we take the great and crying sins of this Nation into our serious
consideration, more especially that intended interview between the Kings of
France and Spain at Bayoon July next, which promises no very good Omen to
England?

9. Whether on that probable conclusion of peace and amity between those two
Potent Kings, another single Persons claim and interest may not therein be
tacitly included, which may unhappily turn the scale of our success, together
with the present Government in this green, unsettled, and distracted republique
into another Sceen of blood and desolation, by the Invasive forces of sundry
united and confederated Princes?

10. Whether then in such a case, all honest hearts may not have just cause to
wish again for Oliver Cromwels Head-peace, his courage and conduct, and that
henceforth his worth, merits, and memory may be no longer ingratefully blasted
by idle and licentious Libellors, his name and fame, kindred and friends
defamed, when as this too frequent abuse is so difusive, that it dilates with
boldness to the defamation of most of the particular Members that now sit at
the Helm: sat sapientibus, only it is wished that they would seriously take this
good old sentence into their consideration; Istud est sapere non solum eaquae
ante pedes videre, sed futura prospicere, and speedily endeavor to make all
things more safe at home then they are, and to remember to make good the
public Faith, cherish their old friends, least they enforce them to turn new
foes, neither to slight their Petitions, and such of their Proposalls, without
hearing or inspection, as would readily and legally both right them for their
loanes losses, and sufferings, and pay the public debts, save themselves the
labor of borrowing, and in giving ear and countenance to some Petitions, that
are needless and reasonlesse as for instance?

11. Whether they that press them so much for liberty of conscience, do
understand what Conscience is; and whether on grant of their desires the
public liberty shall not in some short time be laid in the dust?

12. Whether on grant of their desires, they will submit to any other
regulations of Parliament, then such, as may suit with their own perverse wills
and fanatic opinions?

13. Whether, as now the case stands in the various, and multitudinous Sects
Schisms, and brainsick opinions of the times, there ought not to be enacted
some coersive Law that may enforce conformity to such Parliamentary Ordinances
as shall be thought fit for all men to submit unto, as for instance the 39.
Article of our Church, etc. least we all run headlong into Sects. Schisms and
confusion?

14. Whether such as so much press and molest the Parliament, that Tithes may
be taken away, will in that case be so much guilty of so much charity, as to
allow some compitent yearly stipend toward the maintenance of some Godly,
Learned, and paynfull Minister to instruct them in the way of their Salvation?

15. Whether, that Ancient, Just, and Customary way of paying Tithes, from all
antiquity, ought in reason, policy, or Religion be taken away?

16. Whether the Consequence, that necessarily will follow the taking away of
Tithes, can be conceived an advance, either to the Church, or Learning, when
the Inhabitants of every Parish shall be disrobed of their settled Ministers,
and spiritual comforters ought not to be timely thought on before any
alteration be made therein, which otherwise may so discontent the religious
people of this Land, and in future trouble the Parliament to resettle things as
they were, and themselves found guilty of the late Kings tax, that they undid
that which before was well done?

17. Whether those Commissioners designed by the Parliament for ejecting of
deboist and scandalous Ministers, have done well, wisely, or conscionably to
eject so many, Pious, Learned and Orthodox Divines (amongst others of ill
conversations) before they were provided of more able and pious ones in their
places, and out of favor or affection to retain sundry Malignants in their
livings as it may be proved?

18. Whether it has been handsomely carried on by those trusted Commissioners
to rent themselves, the most considerable livings in a clandestine way, or to
let them to their Sons, Friends or Servants, at the third or fourth part of
their yearly value, and to leave 300 Churches in Wales unfurnished, more then
once in a quarter supplied by some few, illiterate, headdy and ignorant
mechanics; and as yet no just account given to the State, or the poor ejected
Ministers paid their fifths?

19. Whether it be not requisite that some honest Gentlemen of those parts be
forthwith commissioned to examine this most notorious abuse, whereby 100000.l.
at least may justly be brought into the public Treasury?

20. Whether it be not expedient, that a Register be ordained in every County
forthwith to Register all bargains and sales of Lands, in Fee, Leases for
lives, or years, etc: at the Natives own doors for the tenth part of the
charge, they now usually pay for their Inroowlments at London, and that none be
admitted to such places, but losers and lenders to the Parliament in the late
Wars, (left hitherto without any reparation) and that good security be given by
such for the faithful discharge of their trust, as not above seven years
since, it was resolved to be done in Parliament?

21. Whether in case a probable and ready way may be demonstrated, how to turn
the hearts of the people (so much devoted to Kingship) to comply with the
present Government, may not be acceptable and embraced by the Parliament that
now sits?

22. Whether it be not fitting that Doctor Chamberlens Proposals in his Printed
papers, for payment of the Armies, and advance of Trade, etc: without
Assessments on the Natives) be forthwith recommended to the consideration of a
Committee of Parliament?

23. Whether it suits not with good reason, that the Parliament should look
back on their Acts for the confirmation of the Estates of Purchasers, in as
much as sundry of them, what by their own craft or fraud of the Surveyors, have
surreptitiously gotten their Lands for little or nothing, very much under the
rates set down by the Parliament; and that an Act of resumption be thought on
when the fraud is visible, whereby not so little as 10000000 l. at least may be
brought into the public Treasury?

24. Whether it stands with the honor of the Parliament, that an Act
fraudulentyl procured, to the loss of 100000.l. which might have been advanced
for the benefit of the State, should within one month of its enacting be
frustrated in the intents thereof; witness the Act or Ordinance of Parliament,
made in the behalf of the Gentlemen of South Wales, for their bearing Arms
against the Parliament, only paying 20000 l. as a mult for their Malignancy?

Thus Noble Sir; I have sent you the conceptions of your Friend, which are no
other then the opinions of many more able Judgments, with my hearty Prayers to
Almighty God to bless all their honest and prudent consultations, both in
redressing all such things that are amiss, and in enacting such good Laws as
may farther conduce to the better settling of this unsettled Church and
Commonwealth, only I appeal to your more mature Judgment, whether in these sad
times of distractions, Schisms, Sects, separated Congreations and
Conventicles, parties, factions, public and private discontents, variety and
dispariety of affections in opinion; Whether I say again that unity and
agreement be not the only way, and means to fortify and uphold this new
republique, and render it impregnable, against all Plots, practices, either
from abroad, or at home; but I fear that under the umbrage of supporting the
good old cause, the new cause may fall to the ground through such incensed,
numerous, and discontented parties risen up in addition to the former
malcontents, and through the present and frequent abuse of the two late
Protectors, their whole Family and Friends, doubtless this is not the way to
our safety and security, or for the advance of the Church and State, sed
frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per pautiora, so rests

Your very loving and most affectionate friend, T.L.W.

FINIS.

