A LETTER Sent from those LORDS, whose Names are underwritten, to the Right
Honorable the Lords and Commons assembled in the High Court of Parliament,
June the 4. 1642.
WE whose names are underwritten, have each of us received an Order, signed by
the Clarke of the House John Brown; commanding our appearance as Delinquents,
at the Bar (the eight of June instant, to Answer an high Contempt against the
House, contrary to our Duty and our breach of privilege of Parliament, which
by Oath we are bound to maintain.

We are very sensible to hear a style, as the name of Delinquency should be put
upon us; and so great a disgrace as coming to the Bar, which we conceive to be
contrary to the dignity and privilege of Peers: the particularity of the
Crime not at all notified. And we do further conceive, That it is the apparent
usual, and inherent right belonging to the Peerage of England, That in the
highest misdemenour whatsoever, no Pecre is to Answer to the first, but in his
own person, and not upon the first Charg to come to the Bar. And as we are
ignorant of the Nature of this Contempt, so are We not informed by the Order
wherein We have broken any Privilege of Parliament, much less violated any
Oath.

The Cause of our coming being to pay a willing obedience to his Majesty's
command, signified by Letters under his own hand; And we shall be much
comforted and satisfied (when his Majesty's occasions shall permit us) to
return back to the House to sit with the liberty and that condition that the
Peerage of England formerly have done, secured from all menaces, or demanding
any account of our particular Votes, and from tumultuary assemblies. My Lords,
we hope that as in our hearts reside a great reverence and duty to the House,
so we are confident those H(...)norable Lords that are present there will not
afflict any character (...) our persons and actions, but as may become Men of
Honor to bear, (...) so We rest

Your Lordships affectionate friends and servants, Northampton. Devonshire.
Dover. Munmoth. Rich. Andever. Gray of Ruthen. Coventry. Capell.



