THE LEVELLER: OR, THE Principles and Maxims CONCERNING GOVERNMENT AND
RELIGION, Which are Asserted by those that are commonly called, LEVELLERS.

LONDON, Printed, for Thomas Brewster, at the Three Bibles, at the West End of
Paul's, 1659. 8

THE LEVELLER: OR, The Principles and Maxims, concerning Government and
Religion, which are Asserted by those that are commonly called LEVELLERS.
WHen the Sect of the Christians first arose, the Tyrants wrapped them in
Beasts skins, to provoke the Wild Beasts to rend them in pieces; and when
Christ their Lord descended to Earth, the Priests and Pharisees, (finding his
Doctrine and Holiness against their Intrest) cast upon him all the dirt of
Blasphemy, Drunkenness, and Confederacy, with the worst of Sinners; and to make
sure of his life, they rendered him an Enemy to Government, and told Pilate,
that he was no friend to Caesar, if he let him go: It has been the common
practice of all Tyrants, to cover the face of honesty with the mask of scandal
and reproach, lest the People should be enamoured with its beauty; it is a
Masterpiece in their Politics, to persuade the People that their best friends
are their worst enemies, and that whosoever asserts their rights, and
liberties, is factious and seditious, and a disturber of their peace; did not
the Grachi in Rome by such policy perish by the Peoples hands, whose liberties
they sought to vindicate. And do not some English men now suffer deeply upon
the same account, from the Peoples hands for whose sakes they have prodigally
hazarded their estates and lives; are not some lovers of their country defamed
and esteemed prodigious monsters, being branded with the name of Levellers,
whilst those that reproach and hate them, neither know their principles, or
opinions concerning Government, nor the good they intend to their very enemies;
those that have designed to prey upon the Peoples estates and liberties, have
put the frightful vizard of Levelling, upon those men's faces, and most People
are aghast at them, like children at Raw-head and Bloody-bones, and dare not ask
who they are, or peep under their vizard to see their true faces, Principles
and designs; doubtless if the People durst but look behind them upon the
Bugbear from which they fly, they would be ashamed of their own childish fear
of the Levellers Designs, to make all men's estates to be equal, and to devide
the land by telling Noses, they would easily discern (if they durst consider
it) that no number of men out of Bedlum could resolve upon a thing so
impossible, that every hour would alter by the birth of some child, if it were
possible once to make out equal shares; nor upon a thing so brutish and
distructive to all Ingenuity and Industry, as to put the idle useless Droan
into as good condition, as the laborious useful Be: Neither could the people
think that any number of men, fit to be feared (rather then scorned and
pitied) could gain by Levelling estates* for they can never have power and
interest enough to disquiet the nation, unless their estates be much greater,
than they can be possible upon an equal devision; and surely it is a Bugbear fit
for none but children, to fear any man's designs, to reduce their own estates to
little better than nothing, for so it would be, if all the land were
distributed like a threepenny-dole.

But to satisfy such as desire to know, what they are, who are now for
destruction sake (though formerly by their enemies scandalously) called
Levellers, and what their designs are; I shall tell you their Fundamental
Doctrins or Maxims, concerning our Government, and from thence you may make a
true Judgment of all their Plots, and either fear them, or favor them
accordindly.

I. First, they Assert it as Fundamental, that the Government of England ought
to be by Laws, and not by Men, they say, the Laws ought to be the Protectors
and preservers under God of all our persons and estates, and that every man may
challenge that protection as his right, without a ticket from a Major General,
and live under that protection and safely, without fear of a Red-coat, or a
Pursevant from White Hall; They say, that English men ought to fear nothing but
God, and the breach of the Laws, not to depend upon the will of a Court and
their Council, for the security of themselves and their estates: They say, the
Laws ought to Judge of all offenses, and offenders, and all penalties and
punishments to be Inflicted upon Criminals; and that the pleasure of his
Highness, or his Council, ought not to make whom they please offenders, and
punish and imprison whom they please, and during their pleasure.

They say also, that the Laws ought to decide all Controversies, and repair
every man's injuries, and that the rod of the peoples supreme Judicature, ought
to be over the Magistrates, to prevent their corruption, or turning a side from
the Laws; but that the Magistrates for executing the Laws should not hold their
offices at the pleasure of a King; or Protector, lest the fear of displeasing
him perverts Justice. In their opinions it is highly criminal, that a King, or
Protector, or Court, should presume to interpose by letters, threats, or
promises, to obstruct the due course of the Laws, or countenance and abet, or
discountenance and brow-beat any man's cause whatsoever; In fine, they say, the
Laws that are incapable of partiallity, interest, or passion, ought so to
govern, as no man should be subject to the crooked will, or corrupt affections
of any man.

II. The Levellers second Maxim or Principle about Government, is, that all
the Laws, Levies of Moneys, War and Peace, ought to be made by the peoples
deputies in Parliament, to be chosen by them successively at certain periods of
time, and that no Council Table, Orders, or Ordinances, or Court proclamations,
to bind the peoples persons or estates; it is the first principle of a Peoples
liberty, that they shall not be bound but by their own consent, and this our
Ancestors left to England as its undoubled right, that no Laws to bind our
persons or estates, could be imposed upon us against our wills; and they
challenged it as their native right, not to be controuled in making such Laws
as concerned their common right and intrests, as may appear by the Parliaments
Records in the time of Edward the 2d. and Richard the 2d. The Levellers say,
that those whose intrests are in all things one with the whole Peoples, are the
only proper unintrested Judges of what Laws are most fit to preserve and
provide for that common interest, such are the People in Parliament rightly
constituted and methodized, and they may be depended upon, to provide remedies
for the Peoples grievances, because they themselves are sharers in every common
grievance, and they will be naturally led to study the common good, because
they shall share in it; but if a Monarchs pleasure should control the Peoples
Deputies in their Parliaments, the Laws must be fitted for the interest of the
Monarch and his family, to keep him in a condition to overtop the People, not
for the common and equal good of the whole Nation; and then the Monarchs fears
on the one hand, lest the People should be able to diminish his greatness, or
that he should hold his greatness at their mercy; and the Peoples fears on the
other hand, lest the Monarch should be able to make them slaves, and they come
to hold their estates and lives at his mercy: These I say would set two
opposite interests, always at contention, in the composing of Laws; and the
wisdom and industry of the Peoples Deputies, that should be spent in
contriving the advancement of the Peoples common good in the Laws, would be
taken up, endeavoring to defend and preserve the Peoples interests, against
the Monarchs: Therefore say the Levellers, it is equal, necessary, and of
natural right, that the People by their Deputies should choose their own Laws;
yet they conceive it would be of much greater good to our Country, if out
Parliaments were molded into a better form, and some Deputies were chosen by
the People, only to give their consent or dissent unto Laws proposed; and other
Deputies were chosen for Senators, that should consult and debate of the
necessity, and convenience of all Laws, Levies of Moneys, War, and Peace, and
then propose all to the great assembly of the Peoples Deputies, to resolve;
that so the proposing, and resolving Power, not being in the same assembly, all
faction and private Interests may be avoided, which may possibly arise in a
single Council, vested with the sole sovereign Law-making Power. This second
doctrine of the Levellers, had been fit for all England to have asserted some
years since, and then so many Fatherless and Widows had not now been weeping
for their lost Husbands, and Fathers in Jamaica, and other foreign Countries,
nor had so many families been rnined, nor England impoverished by the loss of
Trades occasioned by the Spanish War, begun and prosecuted upon private
interests or fancies, without advice or consent of the People in Parliament.

III. The Levellers assert it as another Principle, that every man of what
Quallity or Condition, Place or Office whatsoever, ought to be equally subject
to the Laws; every man say they, high and low, rich and poor, must be
Accountable to the Laws, and either obey them, or suffer the penalties Ordained
for the Transgressors; there ought to be no more respect of Persons in the
execution of the Laws, then is with God himself if the Law be transgressed; no
regard should be had who is the offender, but of what kind, nature, and degree
is the offense; it is distructive to the end of a Government by Law, that any
Magistrate or other, should be exempt from the obedience or Justice of the
Laws; it dissolves the Government, Ipso facto, and exposes all the People to
Rapine and Oppression, without security of their Persons and Estates, for which
the Laws are intended; therefore say they, great Thieves and little must alike
to the Gallows: and the meanest man as readily and easily obtain Justice and
reliese, of any Injury and oppression against the greatest, as he shall do
against the lowest of the People; and therefore say they, it ought not to be in
the power of any single person, to defend himself from the impartial stroke of
the Laws, or to pervert Justice by force; and that brings in their fourth
Principle, viz.

IV. That the People ought to be formed into such a Constant Millitary posture,
by and under the commands of their Parliament, that by their own strength they
may be able to compel every man to be subject to the Laws, and to defend their
Country from Forrainers, and enforce right and Justice from them upon all
emergent occasions. No Government can stand without force of Arms, to subdue
such as shall rebel against the Laws, and to defend there Territories from the
Rapine and Violence of strangers, and the People must either hire Mercenary
Soldiers to be the Guardians of their Laws and their Country, or take the care
upon themselves, by disposing themselves into a posture of Arms, that may make
them ready and able to be their own guard: Now say the Livellers, it is neither
prudent nor safe, that the Peoples Arms should be put into Mercenary Soldiers
hands; what reason can induce any People to believe that their Laws, estates,
liberties and lives, shall be more secure in the hands of Mercenaries, than in
their own? who can think his estate, his liberty, or his life in safety, when
he knows they are all at the mercy and will of Hirelings, that are led by no
other motive, then that of profit or pay, to serve them; and may be led by any
proposal or temptation of greater profit or pay, to dissert them.

All ages have afforded sad experiments of trusting their strength in the hands
of Mercenary Armies; most Nations who have kept them, (at lest in their own
bowels) having been devoured by them; did not the Egyptian King by trusting the
Arms in Hirelings hands, lose both his Crown and life, and brought the People
to be slaves to the Mamulakes for near two hundred years? Was not the famous
Commonwealth of Rome, ruined, and Inslaved by their negligent permission of
Julias Caesar, (upon his advantage of long continuing Genneral,) to form a
Mercenary Army? Did not the Inhabitants of Rhegium, perish by the hands of the
Roman legion left to be their Mercenary defenders? And were not our neighbors
of Amsterdam lately very near the loss of their estates and liberties, by their
own Mercenary Army? And say the Levellers, the people have less reason to trust
to Mercenaries to defend their Country from Forraigners, then they have to
preserve their estates and liberties from Domestic Oppression; How can their
valor or fidelity be depended upon, when a small stipend only obliges them to
either; and if they be Conquered one day, they are ready to serve the Conqueror
next day, it being their professed principle, to serve where they can have
best, and most certain pay. But say the Levellers, when the People which are
owners of a Country, are disposed into a Military form, they fight Pro aris and
focis, they are sensible that they have more at stake then a daily stipend, and
are in no hopes to better their conditions, by division amongst themselves, or
by betraying their Country to Forraigners, Thus say they, is it prudent and
safe for the People to be masters of their own Arms, and to be commanded in the
use of them by a part of themselves, (that is their Parliaments) whose interest
is the same with theirs.

These four foregoing Maxims, contain the sum of all the Levellers Doctrine
about our Government in externals; (whose Principles without naming one of
them, have been rendered so prodigious, and of such dangerous consequence) but
let the reader judge, whether the liberty, happiness, and security, of every
English man be not sought in the endeavors, to establish those Foundations of
equal Justice and safety; neither can they be charged herein with novelty or
unconstancy, the same Fundamentals of Government, having been claimed by our
Ancestors as their right, for many hundred years.

And the late long Parliament proposing the same to the People, as the things
to be defended by the late War; alleging that the King had set up Courtiers
to govern instead of Laws, by Imprisoning at pleasure, and during pleasure, and
that he had attempted to make proclamations, and Council Table Orders, to be as
binding as the Laws, that the People made by their Parliaments; and that the
King had exempted himself and others from subjection to the Laws, and pretended
a right to the Militia, to command the Peoples Arms without their consent; and
in confidence of the Parliaments real intentions and fidelity in what they
proposed, the People neither spared, neither treasure nor Blood to preserve
themselves, and their declared native rights. And therefore those called
Levellers, do now challenge their Principles of Justice and freedom as the
price of their blood; and however, many of the Parliaments friends and
Adherents, have since disserted their first pretenses, yet the Levellers say,
they can give no account to the righteous God of the blood they have shed in
the quarrel, nor to their own Consciences, of their duty to themselves, their
Families and Country, to preserve their Laws, rights, and liberties; if they
should not persist in their demands and endeavors, to establish the Government
in what form soever, upon the Foundation of the Principles herein declared; and
therein they would acquiess, humbly praying the Father of all wisdom, so to
direct their Lawmakers and Magistrates, that all Gods People might enjoy their
spiritual Christian Liberties, in worshipping God according to their
consciences; and they heartily wish, that such a liberty may be settled as
another Fundamental, or Cornerstone in the Government.

But the designers of oppression, having also thrown dirt in the faces of
those, whom they have named Levellers, in the matters of Religion, and aspersed
them sometimes as Jesuits, sometimes as Notorious Heretics, and sometimes are
licentious Athiests, men of no religion; it is necessary that I should acquaint
the reader with their Principles that relate unto Religion; I do not mean to
give an account of their faith, for the men branded with the name of Levellers,
are and may be under several dispensations of light and knowledge, in spiritual
things, in which they do not one judge the other; yet they are all professors
of the Christian resormed Religion, and do all agree in these general Opinions
about Religion, and the power of men over it.

First, They say, that all true Religion in men, is founded upon the inward
consent of their understandings and hearts, to the truths revealed; and that
the understanding is so free, that it is not in the power of men to compel it
to, or restrain it from a consent; nothing but the irrefistible evidence of a
truth, can gain a consent, and when the evidence is clear to any man's
understanding, he himself, (much less another howsoever potent) cannot so much
as suspend an assent. Therefore no man can compel another to be religious, or
by force or terror constrain the People to be of the true Religion.

Secondly, They say, that the last dictate of every man's understanding in
matters of faith and Gods worship, is the last voice of God to him, and
obliges him to practice accordingly; if a man be erroniously informed, yet the
misconceptions he has of truth, binds him to practice erroniously, and
should he resist that seeming light, (though it should be in truth darkness)
his sin would be much greater, and of worse consequence, then if he follows by
his actions, his erroneous conceptions: Therefore the only means to promote the
true Religion under any Government, is to endeavor rightly to inform the
Peoples consciences, by whose dictates God commands them to be guided; And
therefore Christ Ordained the preaching of the Gospel, as the outward means for
converting souls: Faith coming by hearing; and he also Ordained spiritual
Ordinances for the Conviction, Instruction, and punishment, of Erroneous and
Heretical Persons; the Scripture commanding the Erroneous to be instructed with
the Spirit of meekness, and admonished privately, publicly, etc. And Christ
never mentioned any penalties to be inflicted on the bodies or purses of
unbelievers, because of their unbelief.

Thirdly, Levellers say, That there are two parts of true Religion, the first
consists in the right Conceptions and Re^^ptions of God, as he is revealed by
Christ, and sincere adorations of him in the heart or spirit, and the
expressions or declarations of that worship outwardly, in and by the use of
those Ordinances, that are appointed by Christ, for that purpose. The second
part of it, consists in works of righteousness, and mercy, toward all men,
done in Obedience to the will of God, and in imitation of his Justice and
goodness, to the whole world.

The first part being wholly built upon the Foundation of revealed truths, does
in its own nature absolutely exclude all possibility of any man's being Lord of
his Brothers faith, unless the understanding or faith of a Magistrate could
constrain the faith or understanding of others, to be obedient to his, or
rather to be transformed into the likeness of his: And therefore therein every
man must stand or fall to his own Master, and having done his duty rightly to
inform his neighbor, must give an account to God of himself only.

But the second part of Religion, falls both under the Cognizance or Judgment
of man, and the Lawmakers, or Magistrates power. Christ has taught his
followers to judge of men's Religion by their works, by their fruits, says he,
ye shall know them, for men do not gather Grapes of Thorns. Whosoever (be it a
Court, or an Army, or a single Person) pretends to Religion, and yet remains
treacherous wherein they are trusted, and continue in the breach of their
promises, and are not conscientious to do to others as they would that they
should do to them, but can without regard to Justice, seize by force of Arms
upon the Peoples rights, due to them by Gods Law of Nature, and their Ancestors
agreement; and subjects their Persons, and estates, to their wills, or their
ambition and covetousness, and make themselves great by Oppressions out of the
Peoples purses; those men's Religion men may clearly judge, being in vain by the
Scriptures judgment, yea their prayers, and their preaching, as abominable in
Gods eyes, as were the Fasts, New Moons, and Sabbaths of the Jews, (which were
then also Gods Ordinances) whilst their hands were defiled with blood, and
oppression, and the works of Righteousness and Mercy neglected.

It properly belongs to the Governing Powers, to restrain men from Irreligion
in this second part of Religion; that is, from injustice, Faith-breaking,
Cruelty, Oppression, and all other evil Works, that are plainly evil, without
the devine light of truths that are only revealed; and it is the duty of
Governing Powers, to compel men to this part of Religion, that is, to the
outward acts of Justice and Mercy; for the inward truth of men's Religion, even
in these, is beyond the Mastgistrates Power or Judgment.

Fourthly, They say, that nothing is more destructive to true Religion, nor of
worse consequence to humane Society, than the quarrels of Nations or Persons,
about their difference of Faith and Worship, and the use of force and
punishments, each to compel the other to be of his belief. It cannot be denied,
that God in his infinite secret wisdom, is pleased to cause his Spirit to
enlighten men's minds with several degrees of Light, and to suffer many to
remain in darkness, which be afterward also enlightened; and therefore their
Faith and Worship, if it be sincere, must necessarily and unavoidably differ,
according to the different root of Light upon which it grows. Surely Babes in
Christ, and strong men, differ much in their apprehensions and comprehensions
of the Objects of Faith, and much more those that are not yet born in Christ,
though appointed unto Regeneration, and it may be instructed like Cornelius, in
some things.

And, as to Opinions about Worship, the thoughts of men must naturally be
different, as the mind of one exceeds another in clearness of Light, and
capacity of Judging; Now when the most powerful party, seeks by force and
punishments, to constrain the Governed or Conquered, to subscribe to their
Faith and Opinions, without regard to their own Light or understandings; does
it not (as much as is in man's power) banish all dependence upon the Spirit of
God for light, out of men's minds, and constrain them to put out the candle of
God within them, that is the light of their own Understandings, and induce them
for their worldly respects and safety, to profess a Faith, and practice a
Worship, which they neither do, nor dare understand. And by continuance to
contract a blindness of mind, and hardness of heart; And is it possible to
practice a design more opposite to true Religion, and the propagation of it?
And it is evident that those of false Religions, under a pretense of honoring
God, by forcing men to be Religious, have blinded Millions of thousands with
false Worships. And also, that such as have professed the true Religion in
substance, have wickedly opposed the further inlightning work of the Spirit of
God, and caused thousands for fear of punishments, to rest satisfied in the
profession of a Faith and Worship, which they understand not, and therefore can
have no true Religion in them. And Histories will tell plentifully, how
pernitions the quarrels grounded only upon difference in matters of Faith, has
been to mankind, an honest pen would tremble to relate the Murders, and
Massacres, the dreadful Wars, and Confusions, and the Ruins, and Desolations of
Countries, that have been upon this account; and the same must be to the worlds
end, if difference in Opinions about Religions, Worship, and matters of Faith,
should be admitted to be a sufficient ground of quarrels; Errors and
differences in men's Understands, are from natural unavoidable infirmity, which
ought not to be the objects of punishments, or men's angers; it is not more
likely, that God should make all men's understanding equal in their capacity of
Judging, or give to all an equal means or measure of knowledge, then that he
should make all men's faces alike. Why then, say the Levellers, should any man
quarrel at another, whose Opinion or Faith is not like to his; more then at
him, whose Nose is not like to his; therefore say they, let us be unanimous in
seeking an establishment of equal freedom and security to the whole People, of
the best provisions for commutative and distributive Justice, without
partiality; and of the best means of Instructing the whole People in the Spirit
of love and meekness; and then true Religion will increase and flourish.

I have now faithfully related the sum of their Principles about Government and
Religion, who have been usually called Levellers, and Scandalized with designs
against Government and Religion, and Plots, to bring the Nation into Anarchy
and Confusion; Let the reader Judge, what color there is, to suspect those
that are thus principled, of such ill designs; or rather, whether freedom,
justice, peace, and happiness, can be expected in our Nation, if these
Fundamentals of Government be not asserted, vindicated, and practiced, and made
as known and familiar to the People, as our Ancestors intended the great
Charter of the Liberties of England should have been, Stature of 25. Edw. 1. C.
1.
when they provided that it should be sent to every City, and every Cathedral
Church, and that it should be read and published in every County, four times in
the year, in full County.

I have only mentioned the Fundamentals, because they claim these as their
Right, and humbly submit the Circumstantials, as to the number whereof
Parliaments should consist, and the manner of their Elections, and the order of
their debating and resolving of Laws, etc. to the wisdom of the Parliaments.
But the reader may well enquire, how those that have asserted these Principles,
came to be called Levellers, the People believing generally otherwise of them,
then these Principles deserve. Truly the story is too tedious to relate at
large; but the sum of it is, that in the year 1648, etc. the Army having been
in contest with some members of the long Parliament, they constituted a general
Council of Officers, and Agitators for the Soldiers, and then fell into debate
of Proposals to be made to the Parliament for a settlement, and then some of
that Council, asserted these Principles; and the reason of them, quickly gained
the assent of the Major part; but being contrary to the designs of some that
were then Grandees, in the Parliament and Army, (but most of them since dead)
and had resolved of other things at that time even with the King, who was then
at Hampton Court; it fell into debate in a private Cabinet Council, how to
suppress or avoid those that maintained these Principles, and it was resolved,
that some ill name was fit to be given to the Asserters of them, as persons of
some dangerous Design; and that their reputations being blasted, they would
come to nothing, especially if that general Council were dissolved; then was
that Council dissolved, and an occasion taken from that Maxim, that every man
ought to be equally subject to the Laws, to invent the name of Levellers; and
the King, who was to be frighted into the Isle of Wight from Hampton Court,
with pretenses that the men of these Principles in the Army, would suddenly
seize upon his person, if he stayed there, he was acquainted with those men by
the name of Levellers, and was the first that ever so called them in print, in
his declaration left on the table at Hampton Court, when he secretly (as was
thought) stole away from thence, and thence it was suddenly blown abroad, with
as much confidence, as if they had believed it that first reported it, that a
Party of Levellers designed to Level all men's estates; and since then, the
late Lord Protector, knowing these Foundations of Freedom, to be inconsistant
with his Designs, has often mentioned the Levellers Plots, with malice, scorn,
and scandal; and now of late generally, whosoever afferts the Peoples Liberties
and right of Government by Law, and not by Will, is branded as a Leveller, by
the Flatterers.

Now I heartily wish, that my Countrymen, may not be mistaken in my candid
intentions, in giving them this account; I mean not to Court them as Absalom
did his Fathers subjects, to make them believe, that those called Levellers,
would use them better then others, if power were trusted in their hands; for
our age has given me experience, that power to inslave the People, ought not
to be entrusted in any men's hands, upon the fairest pretenses, and most solemn
oaths, that that power shall be used to establish their freedom. And it is the
Levellers Doctrine, that the Government ought to be settled upon such equal
Foundations of common Right and freedom, that no man, or number of men, in the
Nation, should have the power to invade or disturb the common Freedom, or the
common course of impartial justice; and therefore that every Authority ought to
be of small continuance, and the several Authorities, to be so balanced each
by other, that without such an agreement of men, against their own interest, as
humane prudence, cannot think possible, the People cannot suffer any common
Injury; but my meaning in this, is, only to prevent the division of my Country
men into parties, with Animositles each against others, by the couzenage of
names or scandals, when it may be they would otherwise join hands and hearts
for their common Rights and Liberties, if they understood each others minds,
and could converse each with other without prejudice, because of the names
whereby each has usually called the others. It Is a thread bare plot of Tyrants
to divide the People into parties, that they may the more easily master them;
but I wish that my Countrymen would unite in the equal Principles of common
right, and hearken to reason with clearness of mind, whosoever offers it, not
regarding whether he that speaks it, is called a Leveller, or a Sectary, or an
Anabapitst, or a Presbiter, or a Cavileir, bu^ considering what he says; and
then the number of hands to defend our Liberties, and properties, would be so
numerous, that the ambition of one, or a few, could not hope for success in
attempting a Tyranny over us. And if this poor Paper may have such an effect,
that my Country men be not deluded with the idle scandal of Levelling, cast
upon honest men, into an opposition of their own welfare, I and many that agree
in the publication of this, shall have our ends.

Consider therefore what you here read, and the Lord make you understand the
things that conduce to your Peace, and Freedom, and the glorifying his Name in
righteousness, in this Nation.

FINIS.

