A LETTER TO S C. M. a Member of Parliament, FROM AN Inhabitant of the Island
of BARBADOS.
THO I have not the Honor of being personally acquainted with you, yet I am no
Stranger to your Character: your great Capacity and fervent Zeal to advance the
Interest of England, has appeared upon many seasonable Opportunities; and it is
that which has encouraged me to make Application to you, in behalf of the
Island of Barbados. I knew to do good to any set of People under the English
Government is a sufficient Motive to animate you, without any other
Consideration: But in this Case the Interest of England is highly concerned,
for it is well known to all People, who have made any Inquiry into the Trade of
England, and the English Constitution, how beneficial the Sugar Colonies, and
especially Barbados which is the Key to all the rest, have been to the Kingdom
of England: the great Number of Ships that have been yearly employed, by which
means many stout Sailors have been bred; the vast Export of the Manufactory,
which gives Employment to many Thousands of Families in this Nation that would
otherwise lie idle, is an undeniable Proof of the great Advantage the Sugar
Colonies are to this Nation.

Now Sir, that which I would offer to your Consideration, is, That this Island
is fallen to great Decay, and must dwindle to nothing, if not prevented by the
Wisdom of this Government; and this will not only be destructive to the
Inhabitants there, but will prove of bad Consequence to England.

The Imposition laid in the late King's time, gave the first Stroke to that
Island; and since that the Soil is become so poor, that it requires very great
Charge and Labor to improve it; especially seeing the Seasons of late Years
are so uncertain, that there is not near one half the Sugar made now that used
to be made 18 or 20 Years ago, and the Island sensibly decreases yearly in that
Manufacture.

But that which threatens Barbados extremely, is the Male Administration of
the Government there. The Governor of that Island has the Disposal of all
Offices both Civil and Military, a few Patent Places excepted; and even these
are subjected to great uneasiness, if they do not comply with his Terms, and
some of them have been rendered ineffectual, notwithstanding the Grants were
immediately from the King.

And that which is of worse Consequence, the Governor is or may be either the
primary or ultimate Judge in all Cases that relate either to Life or Property.
He is Captain General and Vice Admiral, Chancellor, chief Judge of the Court of
Errors, chief Judge of the Court of Grievances, and Ordinary of the Island,
chief Judge of the Court of Grand Sessions, by which means the Inhabitants find
themselves obliged to run to him with Gifts, especially such as have Causes, or
suspect they may have Causes depending before him; and the Governors that have
been hitherto sent, have chiefly aimed at making their Fortunes, so that they
seldom refuse what is given to them: and this throws the People into endless
Suits, and incourages Debtors and many ill-designing People to go to Law,
expecting good Success from the great Presents they generally never fail to
make.

But there is another Mischief, which is paramount to all these already named;
and that is, by this great Power lodged in the Governor, he is enabled to
influence in the choice of the Assembly, which is the Representatives of the
People chosen two out of every Parish Annually, who in conjunction with the
Governor and Council have a Power from the King to make Laws, raise Money, and
the like. Now the Money Bills arise first in this Assembly, and if the Governor
has so great Power in the choice of them, then he can never fail to accomplish
his Ends; which plainly appears if it is considered, that in little more than
three Years a late Governor has had presented by the Assembly near ten thousand
Pounds.

These great Gifts are so far from being an Indication of the Riches of the
Inhabitants, that they are rather Marks of their Slavery; and I hope no body
will have the Assurance to deny this, if it is proved, that at the same time
the last 2000 l. was presented to the Governor, there was a Proposition to lay
a Tax upon the Inhabitants to raise one thousand Pounds for the Support of many
poor Families, that were dying and going off the Island for want of Food, this
last Motion was disregarded, but the Present to the Governor past with very
little Contradiction.

The King gives the Governor a very good Salary, the Perquisites of the
Government are considerable, the Inhabitants have lately found a way to bear
the Charges of his living; and yet all this is not thought sufficient: But the
People must be either cajoled, frightened, or both, into these great annual
Presents; and at such times when the Inhabitants are in a starving Condition:
And it is not thought enough to precipitate into this unparalled Slavery more
and more every Year, but they are brought over to make Public Justification of
their Actions, by giving General Applauses and Encomiums of their Governors,
tho such be even against matter of Fact and Record, when they should be
spending their Time in the more necessary and essential Affairs of the Island,
which are generally neglected.

However tho it may be necessary to restrain an unthinking People from
exceeding in those annual Gifts, yet the limiting so as that they may have
nothing left in their Power to oblige a Governor may be prejudicial; but then
the proper Care will be to keep them within Bounds.

There are many Instances may be given, more than have been named, of the
Corruption of Governors, which will appear if examined into; therefore I
forbear to take up your Time in mentioning them here.

Sir, I lay these things before you, that as they are all certain Truths, and
upon Enquiry will be found so, you will be pleased to give your helping Hand
for the Removal of such Grievances, when they come to be complained of in a
proper Place. For as the People in the Plantations are because of the Distance
and great Charge discouraged from appealing to the Government here; and indeed
none can appeal for less than 500 l. So the Complaints that have been made have
met with little Success, it being shrewdly suspected some Great Men here share
with the Governors in their Depredations, that they may be the better supported
in their unjust Administrations there. And it seems very unaccountable that the
Plantations should continue so long neglected, especially seeing they are as it
were under the Guardianship of an Establishment, the Members whereof are
sufficiently paid for such purpose. But I wish the question may not be properly
put whether the Honorable Members of that Body have hitherto taken care to
qualify themselves, to understand the Constitution of the Colonies, and whether
they have yet made any one Advance toward the Promotion of the
Plantation-Trade, and whether the Money bestowed on them might not be better
laid out on the Plantations or otherwise, unless they give better Proofs
hereafter both of their Care and Understanding.

It Is true it may be alleged, that there will be both great Hazard and
Difficulty in subverting or altering a Constitution that has been of so long
standing in the Island: And if this upon Consideration should be found so, yet
I hope no body will deny but that it is most consistent with Reason and Justice,
that seeing so great Power is lodged in Governors, that such as shall be sent
hereafter ought to be Men of pure Hearts, clear Heads, and clean Hands,
experienced in Business, and Men of Interest, who, as they will scorn to pervert
or delay Justice, so they will be under no necessity of squeezing the People.

There is another thing that is very Essential to the Preservation of this
considerable Island, that I cannot omit offering to your serious Consideration,
which is putting of it in a suitable Posture of Defense, if a War should break
out. I do not think it convenient to say any thing here of the State of it at
present, seeing that may be easily known when examined: But this I may affirm,
That, morally speaking, if 120000 or 140000 l. were laid out upon
well-contrived Fortifications, with a few well-disciplin'd Regular Troops, no
Prince in Europe could have hopes to attack that Island with Success, even with
a Force of 10000 men; and such a Force I hope no body will suppose can be
transported so many Leagues.

This then would not only render Barbados impregnable, but would be a great
Security for the rest of the Sugar Islands, which otherwise may be in great
danger; and if the Plantation. Trade should be lost, especially if a War
happens, which will shut up a great deal of our other Traffic, I appeal to all
thinking Men how many English Ships would lie by the Walls, and how many People
in London, and other Cities of England, would blow their Fingers, to say no
worse of it, for want of Employ. It must then be manifest Imprudence not to
look forward, or to run such a Risque, as for the want of laying out 140000 l.
to put even this Island to any hazard, which pays the Crown near 40000 l. and
imports about 400000 l. into the Kingdom per Ann. which is so much Treasure
laid up in the Nation, unless so much of it which is yearly exported in
Manufactures, which is still a greater Advantage.

But if it be objected, That the Nation is at great Charge in sending Ships in
time of War, etc. and that the Inhabitants ought to be at the Expense of
fortifying the Place themselves: I have two very clear and plain Answers ready.
In the first place, the People of Barbados are in no sort of Capacity of
raising such a Fund as will be required for such purpose: For tho three or four
Men have been fortunate in Trade and otherwise, to get indifferent good
Estates; yet I may affirm, That there are not twenty Men in that Island worth
700 l. Sterling per Annum, of which they pay more than one third annually to
the Public, in England and in the Island; and for the rest, many of them do
not come near the aforesaid Value, and others are in a very low Condition. For
this is the Misfortune of a Barbados Estate; it is so subject to Casualties,
that one Year it may be worth 4 or 500 l. per Annum, and the Loss of Slaves,
Fire, the Incertainty of the Seasons, etc. will reduce it next Year to less
than 200 l. The next Answer is, That if the Inhabitants were capable to raise
such a Fund, yet they are not under any sort of Security that it would be truly
applied; and this Suggestion is grounded upon the following Instance. Above
thirty Years ago, in the Reign of K. Charles the Second, the Island of
Barbados, by a Law there, laid an Impost of 4 per Cent. upon all the Product
of the Island for and toward the defraying the public Charges of the Island,
such as building and repairing the Fortifications, building a Prison, paying
the yearly Expense of holding the Grand Sessions, as will appear by the Act.
Now as soon as this Duty was laid on, Officers were appointed by the King to
collect it, and it has ever since been paid in to such Officers, and has not
been applied to the Uses in the Act.

It is said, that the Money arising from this Duty is amongst the Funds that
are appointed for the Civil List by the Parliament. But when those Funds are
examined, it will be found they were all raised by Act of Parliament, this only
excepted. Then the Question naturally will be, How that Money comes there? The
Answer is ready: It was Money raised by the Inhabitants of Barbados for their
own Use; but has been ever since it was raised taken from them. Certainly this
Answer would sound better in Turkish or French Language than in English; and
that some other Fund ought to be in its place, will be found more agreeable to
Justice: For it has been always esteemed in England a very great Injustice to
misapply any Fund, and no doubt the same Liberty and Justice extends it self to
the Colonies. The People of the Plantations have very calmly submitted to the
Duties laid upon them by the Government here, tho they have no Representatives
in Parliament, which is directly against the English Constitution.

But when they raise Money in the Colonies for their own Defense, and for their
own Use; to have that transmitted from them to England, seems to be very hard,
and altogether repugnant to the Freedom that every Englishman is born to.

And as the Governor then in being, when this Duty was laid, had his own
particular Ends in the first Misapplication, so it is to be hoped, that the
Continuance of it has been chiefly for want of Enquiry, and that upon due
Examination it will run in its proper Channel, that the People may have at
least, that Money, to put themselves in some Posture of Defense which was first
raised for that purpose; and if the Government here lay out the aforesaid Sum
of 140000 l. it will be Money well laid out, and but refunding part of that
Duty which has been paid by the Inhabitants of the Colonies in their own wrong
for so many Years past, which England has no more Right to than a Stranger has
to any Planter's Estate there.

Sir, your coming in with your Interest to save a People under such Hardships,
and in danger upon so many Accounts, in which good Work all Impartial and Just
Men will join with you, will carry its Reward with it, and will be very
acceptable to all good Men, especially those concerned.

ADVETISEMENT.
IN a former Impression of this Sheet, there was a great Mistake committed,
viz. in Page 6. line 23. where instead of 7000 l. per an. it must be only 700
l. per an. Those that have any of that Impression are desired to rectify it.


