The LEVELLERS INSTITVTIONS FOR A GOOD PEOPLE, AND A GOOD PARLIAMENT, According
to this their present Declaration, and the Gallant Rights and Christian
Privileges of this NATION.

Together with their Summons to all gallant common Soldiers serving under the
Excellent FAIRFAX, and faithful CROMWELL, to stand to their Colors.

London, Printed for W. B. in the Year MDCXLVIII.

The Levellers Institutions for a good People, and a good Parliament, etc. The
first Institution.
TO all true cordial English Souls, inhabitant or dispersed through Europe,
Asia, Africa and America; To Jew and Gentile, Freeborn and Slave, to whom
these our ^nstitutions shall come, Greeting. Be it by these Presents made
known, published and declared, That We, the legitimate Princes of the Earth,
Justice, Freedom, and Honesty, having for a time, times, and half a time, by
the Tyranny of unjust Monarchs and Arbitrary Lords, been forcibly exiled, and
from our Native Rights debarred; are now, at the time of the end, come down
into the World to chastise Injustice, to settle Peace, and to reassume the
Scepter in our own hands, as our proper due, against Emperors, Kings, Armies,
Councels, mauger Men and Devils; Commanding all other Princes to lay down their
Scepters at our feet, and Greatness to come under the command of Goodness: for
this is the first Fundamental Right of the Seagreen Order.

Secondly, Be it next declared, That We intend to advance our Royal Standard,
first in England, this present year of King Jesus 1648: and this by Commission
from God our King, and the Parliament of Heaven, unalterably, uncontroulably;
and have for that purpose made choice of the deep Seagreen for our Flag and
Colors, and do hereby ordain and authorize it to be worn as the lively badge
of Constancy, Sufferance and Valor in grain, the cognizance of Justice, and
the mark of Freedom and Deliverance.

Thirdly, Be it by us ordered, That whatsoever noble heart shall abhor the yoke
of Prerogative-pleasure, the Chains of Slavery and Tyranny by Princes, the
Agents and cruel Instruments of Princes: Whosoever shall detest the Arbitrary
Power and Voice Negative: Whosoever shall abominare the self-wil'd pomp and
dominion of Lords temporal and spiritual, the juggling of bribed Judges, the
devilish inextriable mares of the Law-Courts, and their petty-fogging sitting
Dogs, (Pleaders, Officers of Court, Attorneys, Solicitors, perjured Sergeants,
Bailiffs, Undersheriffs) with all their quirks, demurs, and quillets: Whosoever
is seeing and sensible of the late bloody Plots, and still raging designs of
Antichristian Christians: Whosoever groans under the present Extortions,
unequal Taxes, unjust Levies, inevitable Monopolies, new Charters, Plunders and
avarice of Committees, bondage of Prison under inhumane Gaolers, oppression of
Landlords, all Wardships, all Hardship^; Let them upon sight hereof, take up
the Cross, and follow Christ their King; take up our Colors, and follow us
their Leaders; and in so doing, the Seagreen shall be the badg of their
warrant and protection.

Fourthly, be it hereby instituted, That every one so wearing our Colors in
hatband, cuff, garment, hilt, bridle, mayn, or sail, in relation to Equity,
Freedom and Honesty shall from henceforth, according to our noble Order, be
entitled the Freeborn Assistant of Justice, (but according to the Order of King
Charles, Levellers) his is new, ours is old.

Fifthly, be it further instituted, That every Champion of the Seagreen Order
shall vow a sacred vow, in all his prayers and endevors, to level first the
mountain of his own heart, pride, ambition, avarice, self-hopes, self ends,
self-revenge; for this is the true level of the internal Antichrist.

Sixthly, it is decreed, That every such Assistant of Justice, shall fearlesly
resolve, promise and assent to his utmost power, to level to the earth all the
unequal knobbiness -- and uneven risings -- of injustice, pomp, tyranny and
oppression, as the very causes of this War, and things abominated in the eyes
of an angry God, Saints and Angels; be it in Prince, Peer, Prelate, Judge,
Magistrate, and that without difference or exception of persons, parties,
Religions, relations, titles, dignities, indifferently and indistinctly; for
this is the Level of the external Antichrist: So help him Christ, and the three
Machabean Princes.

Next, it is hereby concluded, That Honesty among the Levellers shall be
counted for the best Policy, and Simplicity shall bear up the Buckler against a
whole Junto of Machavil, and politics Woodbee.

Be it also hereby known to all the gallant common Soldiers, serving under the
excellent Fairfax, and faithful Crumwell, That however their Grandee-Masters
have ill repaid their labors, yet we their Captains have from time to time
carefully enrolled their valor, sufferings, scorns, nakedness, and losses in
the Register of Equity, man by man; and do by these presents engage our Honors
for a full requital, far above Indemnity, with money, bays, and thanks,
according to the degrees of each man's desert in War; provided that the said
Soldier go on as he has begun, stand to our Colors, and appear at our
Summons, according to the Rights of the SEA GREEN ORDER.

Lastly, be it enacted and Declared, That whosoever shall jeer, baffle, or
vilify our Colors, or reproach the Wearer -- shall be censured an Anti
Leveller, a Malignant Revolter, Grandee Creature, or Dammee Varlet, and to be
registered by the SEAGREEN Scout, in the Roll of Justice and Revenge; but
whoever shall constantly and habitually affect us, and our Colors, shall be
admitted into our favor, whether gallant Cavalier, or valiant Reformadoe.

Signed by Captain Mordocai Love-Right,Secretary-General to the three Machabean
Princes, and the noble State of Levellers.

FINIS.

