A Letter sent to the Right Honorable, the Lord Mayor of the City of London,
by Lieutenant Colonel Kiffen, Captain Gosfright, Captain Hewling, and
Lieutenant Lomes, touching the seizing of their Persons, and searching their
houses for Arms; and also showing the forgery and falsehood of a scandalous
Pamphlet, Entitled A Manifesto and Declaration of the Anabaptists, and other
Congregational Churches, etc. published Febr. 28. 1659.
May it please your Lordship,
THe very much unexpected, undeserved, and Illegal usage which we lately found
from the hands of some Officers and Soldiers, (they declaring for just
liberty) has enforced us to make this application to your Lordship, as the
Patron of this City, from whom we hope we may justly expect common freedom and
safety with other the Citizens thereof: In order whereunto we crave leave to
acquaint your Lordship, That the other night about midnight, several parties of
soldiers came to our dwellings, who (without any VVarrant from the Parliament,
Council of State, your Lordship, the Magistrate of this City, or any other
civil Authority, (A president not to be paralleld that we know of in the City,
in all our late sad intestine wars) demanded admission; And to the great
affrightment and astonishment of our wives, children, with other relations,
apprehended our Prrsons, being quiet in our habitations, and some of us sick in
our beds, searched our houses, carried, and detained our persons as Prisoners
at the Guard at Paul's, till that day noon, and then no otherwise suffered us to
be removed from thence, but as being still under confinement, and to return at
their pleasure, giving us to no account of the reason of this action, but said
they had Order from General Monck, which they refused to let us read: we
desired to know our accusers or accusations, but could not understand the least
crime laid to our charge. Being thus used as evil doers, exposed to scorn and
reproach, hindered in our Callings, and prejudiced in our Credits, We cannot be
so injurious to our selves (with other Citizens) as to suffer this wrong,
without endeavoring our just vindication and reparation. We are not willing to
conclude that this has befallen us in reference to our judgment and practice,
in matters of Religion, which we are not ashamed to own, as being agreeable to
the mind of God revealed in the holy Scriptures; as also within the liberty
that the General himself has held forth to be enjoyed by us, equally with
other persons, truly fearing God, Why then should we thus suffer, having to our
utmost in all our capacities, endeavored the common peace and welfare of this
City and Nation, and nothing to the contrary? Surely my Lord, as the President
it self is of most dangerous consequence to the Inhabitants of this place, so
will it sound very harsh in the ears of other people in the Nation, who may
reckon themselves exposed to the like usage, if this and such like actions pass
without due observation; and therefore for their sakes (as our own) we cannot
be altogether silent; Besides that even now when most men are seeking for
settlement, such undertakings, how greatly they tend to dissettle men's minds,
and fill the Land with disturbances and distractions, we leave to your Lordship
to judge. My Lord, We sue to your Lordship for nothing, but that right may be
done us; If we have done any thing contrary to the Laws of the Nation, or the
City, we refuse not, but seek a legal trial; But if otherwise (as indeed we are
not conscious to our selves, that we have (in the least) offended against this
City or our Rulers) We do claim our right, and humbly conceive your Lordship
engaged to endeavor that we may be set at liberty from our confinement; But if
your Lordship shall think it fit and requisite, that application be in this
case made to the Parliament or Council of State, we then humbly pray, That we,
being Members of this City, your Lordship will please to move for present
redress in this our grievance, and future protection and security (with others
our neighbors) in out habitations.

My Lord, the day following they seached our houses for Arms, there being
reports of great numbers found there, which were no more in all our houses but
as follows, viz.

Lieuetenant Colonel Kiffen, 2 Drums, 1 Pattisan, 5 old Pikes, and 6 Swords.

Major Mallery, 3 Pistols, 2 Swords, and his sons Fouling piece.

Captain Gosfright, 3 Drums, 1 Leading staff, 1 Sword, and 3 Birding pieces
belonging to a Dutch Merchant, and another friend.

Captain Hewling, 7 Pikes, 12 Muskets, and 17 Swords, whose arms being gathered
in by the States Order, to be returned into the Tower. The said Captain Hewling
gave notice before to the Clerk of the Delivery, to cause them to be fetched in
accordingly, who hitherto had omitted it.

Lieutenant Lomes, 3 Muskets, 3 Pikes, and 1 Sword.

And whilst we were writing this Letter to your Lordship, there was brought to
our view a printed Libellous paper, this day published, styled A Serious
Manifesto and Declaration of the Anabaptists, and other Congregational
Churches, touching the present transactions of the affairs of this
Commonwealth, both in Church and State. Touching which, although we doubt not
but all sober minded people will perceive it to be (as it is) forged, false and
scandalous, and done by profane and luxuriant Incendiaries, who makes lies
their refuge, and under falsehood hide themselves, designing to foment
distractions and confusions in this City and Nation, yet we think fit, without
further, troubling our selves therewith, to certify your Lordship our
disowning and detesting thereof, with our confidence and assurance of the like
disowning by all those upon whom its unworthily patronised, humbly desiring,
that such Printers and Publishers being searched out, may be made exemplary, or
at least, that such abusive and scandalous papers, may be speedily and
effectually suppressed according to Law, there being neither Names of Author,
Printer, or Stationer annexed thereunto. We are, my Lord,

Dated in London the 28 February 1659. Your Lordships humble Servants, To the
Right Honorable, Thomas Alleyn, Lord Mayor of the City of London. William
Kiffen. George Gosfright. Benjamin Hewling. Thomas Lomes.


London, Printed by Henry Hills dwelling in Aldersgate Street, next door to the
Sign of the Peacock* 16^^


