Erastus Junior.

OR, A FATAL BLOW TO THE CLERGIE'S Pretensions to DIVINE RIGHT.

In a solid Demonstration, By Principles, Forms of Ordination, Canon-Laws, Acts
and Ordinances of Parliament, and other public Acts, Instruments, Records,
and Proceedings, owned by themselves, THAT No Bishop, nor Minister,
(Prelatical, or Presbyterian) nor Presbytery (Classical, or National) has any
Right or Authority to Preach, (and consequently, much less, to Officiate in the
public Worship, minister Sacraments, demand Tithes, ordain Pastors, inflict
Censures, or exercise any other act of Simple, and much less of Governing
Jurisdiction,) in this Nation, from Christ, but only from the Parliament.

In two parts: the one demonstrating it to an Episcopal, the other to a
Presbyterian Minister.

By Josiah Web, Gent. a serious detester of the Dregs of the Antichristian
Hierarchy yet remaining among us.

LONDON Printed, and are to be sold by Livewell Chapman at the Sign of the
Crown in Popeshead Alley, 1660.

The Preface.
THere has been much debate a long time betwixt the Prelatical and
Presbyterian Clergy, which of them has Divine Right (or Authority from Christ)
to preach, minister Sacraments, ordain Pastors, inflict Censures, and exercise
other Acts of Spiritual Jurisdiction in this Nation: whereas the plain truth
is, neither of them has any from Christ, but only from the Parliament.

This truth I shall demonstrate in the ensuing Discourse, by their own
Principles, forms of Ordination, Acts (or Ordinances) of Parliament, and other
public Acts, Instruments, and Records owned by themselves. And in regard one
of my means of proof is to be from their own Principles, I shall allege diverse
things as truths, which are not so in my opinion, but only in theirs against
whom I urge them, and therefore also I shall in urging of them use their own
terms.

And because the Demonstration will be more expedite, and clear, in one of
these Acts singly, then in so many together; and the confuting their Divine
Right as to any one of them, will in consequence confute it in all the rest
(because they all hang by one string;) and Preaching is the first and least act
of Jurisdiction, and so the proof against that, will prove more strongly
against all the rest: therefore I shall insist only upon that of preaching,
and demonstrate, that no Minister ordained by Imposition of hands, and
constituted a Pastor, whether it has been by any of the late Bishops, or a
Classical Presbytery, has any authority (by which I mean, power to exercise
the Office lawfully) so much as to preach (by which I mean, teaching Gods word
by way of Office) to any creature in this Nation, from Christ, (that is, by any
been placitum, or will of his, by him revealed, or any means, or ordinance by
him instituted to that end,) but only from the Parliament, (originally under
God, as author of Nature only.)

And my end in it, is,

First, to unbeguile the common people, in their believing their Ministers as
men of God, and Ministers of Christ, and their teaching, as Gods word, because
of their being Ordained by Bishops, or a Presbytery; and villifying all others
not so Ordained, by the nick name of Tub-preachers: by making it appear, that
there is not the meanest Teacher in the Land, allowed by the State, or deputed
by a Congregation, but is a Teacher sent, and a man of God, and Minister of
Christ, as much as the Reverendst Bishop or Minister of them all; and his
teaching, is as truly the word of God, as the best of theirs is; that is, when
he holds forth a Text of Scripture, or other revealed truth; and the the best
of theirs is no more, or otherwise.

Secondly, to vindicate the Authority of the Parliament, in what they have done
in abolishing Episcopacy, and several branches of it, or shall hereafter think
fit to do, in abolishing the yet remaining branches of it, (Imposition of
hands, Tithes, Presentations, Classes, Synods, National Ministry, Directory,
etc.) and impowering every Congregation to depute their own Pastor: by making
it appear, there is no Minister, Priest, Bishop, Classis, or Synod, in this
Land, has or (since the Reformation of Religion by Henry the Eighth) ever had
any authority to Ordain Pastors, demand Tithes, license Preachers, or so much
as to preach, but what he or they have or had originally (under God) from the
Parliament; which therefore by the same Authority whereby it established them,
may when it pleases dissolve them, without any ones just complaint at the
Authority.

And now then to go in hand with what I have undertaken, and to proceed against
them severally, beginning first with the elder of the two, the Prelatical
Minister, (or Priest, as he loves to be called.)

The first Part. Demonstrating to an Episcopal Priest, that he has no
authority to Preach, from Christ, but only from the Parliament.
SIr, I shall suppose your Case the best can be supposed of any Prelaticall
Minister in England, viz. That William Lawd, late (commonly called) Archbishop
of Canterbury, being a true Bishop Ordine, (or in power of Episcopal Order) and
as much as the King and all the Bishops in England could make him, lawful
Archbishop of Canterbury, Ordained you a true Priest, and afterward gave you
Mission to the Church of N. within his Diocese, (that is, Instituted you Rector
or Pastor of it, and Licensed you to preach in that Congregation.) And I say,
that in this Case, you have no authority to preach to that Congregation, from
Christ, but only from the Parliament. And I make it good by this Argument.

You have no authority from Christ to preach to that Congregation, but what you
have, either by your Ordination, or by your Mission.

But you have no authority to preach to that Congregation, by your Ordination;
and none from him, but from the Parliament only; by your Mission.

Therefore you have none from him, but only from the Parliament.

The major is supposed in the Case: nor is there any other ordinary way
imaginable, and you pretend not to extraordinary.

The first part of the minor [That you have no authority to preach to that
Congregation, by your Ordination,] I prove from the form of your Ordination,
which was this. The Bishop, with the other Priests present, laying their hands
upon you, the Bishop said these words to you, [ Receive the Holy Ghost: whose
sins thou forgivest, they are forgiven: whose sins thou retainest, they are
retained: and be thou a faithful dispenser of the Word of God, and of his holy
Sacraments. In the Name of the Father, etc.] After which the Bishop delivering
the Bible to you, said these words [Take thou authority to preach the Word, and
to minister the holy Sacraments, in this Congregation, where thou shall be so
appointed] So, what authority you have by your Ordination, must be given you by
the one of these words. Now,

First, that the former words at the Imposition of hands [ Receive the holy
Ghost, etc.] gave you none, is manifest; because those words, being
Sacramental, We deny not Ordination to be a Sacrament, though it be not one of
those two, which are generally necessary to salvation. Bish. of Derr. (...). p.
97.
(that is, giving a grace (or free gift of the Holy Ghost) from Christ
immediately, to preach and minister Sacraments;) what grace they gave you, they
gave you to all Congregations in the world alike, as much to every one as to
any one; because they propagated to you the same power as Christ gave to his
Apostles, when he said to them, [ As my father sent me, so I send you. Receive
the Holy Ghost; Whose sins you remit, etc. Preach the Gospel to every creature,
etc.] whence it is, that being once Ordained, you are capable to preach and
minister Sacraments to any creature or Congregation in the world, by mere
Mission only, without a new Ordination. If then the grace they gave you were
Authority to preach and minister Sacraments to that Congregation; these
absurdities would inevitably follow.

1. You would be a Pastor Apostolic, or such a one as the Apostles were, that
is, a Universal one, created by Christ immediately, and consequently a supreme
one, (subject to no mortal superior, in the exercise of your jurisdiction:)
which would utterly overthrow all your Hierarchy.

2. The next words, at the delivery of the Bible to you [Take thou authority to
preach in the Congregation where thou shall be appointed:] would be, 1. Vain,
and absurd, to give authority given before. 2. Retractatory of the former. 1.
To qualify the authority, given before absolute. 2. To suspend it to a future
condition, or event, possible never to be; when it was given before,
absolutely, and in present.

3. Your Mission afterward to that Church of N. would have been, 1. An act vain
and arrogant in the Bishop, to authorize you to preach, and to one
Congregation; after Christ himself had authorized you, both to that, and to any
other. 2. A proceeding injurious to all other Priests, to Institute you Pastor
of that as your proper charge, with this privilege, that none might minister a
Sacrament, or so much as preach there without your consent: when Christ had
Instituted every one of them Pastor of it, in common with you; for if, by the
words of Ordination, he authorized you to that Cure; by the same words he
authorized every other Priest in the world to it, as much as you. 3. A
proceeding injurious to your own self. 1. To accept of a Pastorship from the
Bishop, and so to hold it of him, as your mesne Lord, liable to be suspended,
or deprived of it at any time, by sentence of his Court; when you had a right
to hold it immediately of the Lord Paramont, and so without subjection or
service to any but him. 2. To accept from him the Pastorship of one Cure, and
that none of the best in England, when Christ had authorized you to any Cure in
the land, or in the world, where you would please to undertake it.

The Church of Rome therefore (whose apes you are in this right of Ordination,
and whose scholars in your doctrine of its being a Sacrament,) does not hold,
that the qualifying grace (or, as they call it, Character) given by Ordination
is any authority, but a mere power to exercise lawfully such an Office, when
authority shall be given for it by Mission. And if you will avoid these
absurdities, you must say, that no authority, but this power only was given
you by these first words, [Receive the Holy Ghost, etc.]

Secondly, that the next words, at the delivery of the Bible to you [Take thou
authority, etc.] gave you no authority to preach in that Congregation of N. is
manifest from the words themselves, because they authorized you only as to
such Congregation where you should be appointed: which you were not then in
that Church of N.

If you say, these words gave you your authority to preach in any Congregation
where you should be appointed, and your appointing in that of N. only
determined the place, or assigned you a matter or subject whereon to exercise
it: I ask, whether after these words, [Take thou authority, etc.] and before
your appointing in that Church of N. you had a power (in your own right,
without asking the Pastors consent) to preach lawfully in that Church of N. I
suppose you will not, dare not, say you had: for then your appointing to it
signified nothing; and then every Priest would be a lawful Pastor to every
flock, where and when he pleased; and all your Hierarchy (which subsists in the
distinction of Pastors and Flocks) would fall to the ground. And if you say,
you had no such power; you grant what I say, that these words gave you no
authority to preach in that Congregation; but your appointment (or, as I call
it, your mission) did not only determine the place, or assign you a matter or
subject whereon to exercise the authority before given you, but gave you your
first authority there. And consequently, though the Bishop said to you, [Take
authority, etc.] he could not possibly mean by authority, any more then a power
to preach lawfully in any place where you should be appointed.

If you say, that power was given you in the words before, and so would be
vainly given you again here; I grant your inference: for though I argue validly
from your form of Ordination, against you who approve it, I who approve it not,
am not concerned to defend it. So I hope I have sufficiently proved the first
part of my Minor, [That you have no Authority to preach to that Congregation of
N. by your Ordination.]

The second part of it, [That you have none from Christ, (but only from the
Parliament) by your Mission:] I thus make good.

If he who gave you your Mission had no authority from Christ (but only from
the Parliament) to give it you, you have no authority from Christ, but only
from the Parliament, by your Mission.

But he who gave you your Mission, had no authority from Christ (but only from
the Parliament) to give it you.

Therefore you have no authority from Christ (but only from the Parliament) by
your Mission.

The sequel of the major is evident in the terms.

The minor is thus proved.

If William Lawd had authority from Christ to give you Mission, it must be,
either as he was a Bishop Ordine, or as he was a Bishop Officio; that is, as he
was Archbishop of Canterbury.

But he had no authority to give you Mission, as he was a Bishop Ordine, nor
from Christ (but only from the Parliament) as he was Archbishop of Canterbury.

Therefore he had no authority from Christ (but only from the Parliament) to
give you Mission.

The sequel of the major I cannot suppose will be denied, because no third
ordinary way is imaginable. And you cannot say he had it in both respects
jointly, if (as will appear in proof of the minor) he had none at all, as he
was a Bishop Ordine.

The first part of the minor [That he had no authority to give you Mission, as
he was a Bishop Ordine] is manifest; because the giving Mission, is an act of
complete Jurisdiction, which he had not as he was a Bishop Ordine (no more in
Canterbury, then he had in Rome, or Constantinople; or no more then the Bishop
of Rome, or Constantinople, had in Canterbury.) And the Style, in his
Instrument, whereby he Instituted, and Licensed you [William, by Divine
Providence, Archbishop of Canterbury;] shows, he Instituted and Licensed you,
not as he was a Bishop Ordine, but as Archbishop of Canterbury: which he might
have been (sufficiently, to the Instituting and Licensing you in that Church,)
although he had not been so much as a Deacon Ordine.

The second part of it [That he had no authority from Christ, but only from
the Parliament, as he was Archbishop of Canterbury] is thus proved.

He was no Archbishop of Canterbury by authority from Christ, but only of the
Parliament.

Therefore he had no authority from Christ, but only from the Parliament, as
he was Archbishop of Canterbury.

The Consequence is evident, The Antecedent, I prove thus.

Matthew Parker (the first Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury) was no
Archbishop of Canterbury by authority from Christ, but only of the Parliament.

Therefore Will. Lawd was no Archbishop of Canterbury by authority from Christ,
but only of the Parliament.

The Consequence I suppose will be granted me: because Matthew. Parker was
Confirmed and Consecrated, in all the same form, and by all the same authority,
as Will. Lawd was: and he being the first Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury,
(and consequently one, and the chief, in the Confirming and Consecrating of
those by whose Successors William Lawd was Confirmed and Consecrated) was the
necessary pipe or channel, for conveying Divine Authority from Christ to
William Lawd; and so must have his authority from Christ first before William
Lawd could have any by him.

The Antecedent (which is indeed the only difficult part of my Argument) I
prove from the form of creating him Archbishop, which was this. The Sea being
void, by the death of Cardinal Pool, the Dean and Chapter petitioned the Queen
for her License to choose their Archbishop, which she granting, sent with it a
Letter, nominating to them Matthew Parker for the man; and him they were bound
to choose, under a Praemunire. The Election being made, and certified into the
Chancery, there issued out a Commission under the great Seal to seven Bishops,
assigned by the Queen, commanding and authorizing them, or any four of them, to
Confirm the election, and to Consecrate him. This four of them did. And his
Consecration being certified by them into the Chancery, there issued out a Writ
to the Dean and Chapter, commanding and authorizing them to Install (or as they
called it, to Inthronize) him: that is, to put him into the actual possession
of his Office and Dignity. After which he enjoyed his Spiritualties, (that is,
all Spiritual Jurisdiction pertaining to that See.) And then issued a Writ out
of the Exchequer to the Sheriff to restore to him the Temporalties, (which at
the death of any Bishop were used to be seized into the Prince's hands.)

This was the whole form, from first to last, of creating him Archbishop: which
(as you see) consisted of four parts, 1. His Election, which presented him to
the Queen, to be created. 2. His Confirmation, which created him Archbishop
elect. Immediately after which, by the ancient Canon Law, he should have had
all ordinary Jurisdiction, (to which was not requisite powers of that Order
which he wanted, if he wanted any; for any Layman might have been elected to
it, (as Ambrose was to Milan) and his Election confirmed) pertaining to that
See: namely to Collate Benefices in his gift, to Institute Pastors, to License
Preachers, to visit the Province and Diocese, to call and hold Courts and
Synods, inflict or release Censures, appoint Chancellors, Vicars General,
Archdeacons, etc. Extra C. transmissam and C. nostri, and C. inter corpor. de
Translat.
But by the later Canons of the Pope (in grossing all Authority into his own
hands) he could not exercise any, though Consecrated, until he had his Pall
from Rome, and the Popes Bull for putting him in possession of his Church Extra
Injuctae, de Elect. inter extra comm. and C. Nisi and C. Quod sicut, etc
. And accordingly, the Queen, by the Law of the Land, succeeding to the Pope in
all his privileges: and in that among the rest, he could not, no not after
Consecration, exercise any Jurisdiction, until by her Writ, he was put in
possession of his Bishopric. 3. His Consecration, which gave him the Style,
Name, and Dignity of Archbishop (absolute.) 4. His Installation, which gave him
possession of his Spiritualties. The first and last of which Acts, were
performed by the Dean and Chapter, the two middle most by the Bishops, and the
first mover of all was the Queen, (or her Chancery.) If I then make it evident,
that none of these Agents under the Queen, acted in it by any Authority from
Christ, but merely as the Queens Commissioners, and that she had her Authority
for Commissionating them, not from Christ, but from the Parliament: I hope you
will grant it a Demonstration, that he was no Archbishop of Canterbury by
Authority from Christ, but only of the Parliament. Now all this is easily made
evident. For as to the Dean and Chapter, I am sure you will grant me that they
acted not in it by any Authority from Christ: for though you hold Bishops to be
de Jure Divino, you hold not Deans and Chapters to be so too. The rest I shall
prove in the ensuing five Propositions.

The First Proposition. Those Bishops who Confirmed and Consecrated Matthew
Parker, could not validly do either, by their own Authority, as Bishops,
without a Faculty (or Commission) from some Superior in Jurisdiction to the Sea of Canterbury. For,

First, they could not do either validly, as they were Bishops Ordine. For
first, I suppose you will grant me, that as Bishops Ordine, they could not
Confirm his Election: because that was an act of complete Jurisdiction, and of
giving complete Jurisdiction, (speaking of that act per se, or of its own
original nature, before it was invalidated by the Popes Law.) Nor secondly, for
the same reason could they Consecrate him validly, as Bishops Ordine. For the
Consecrating of a Bishop consisted of two parts, or acts. One was the
Sacramental part: viz. the Imposition of hands by all of them, and pronouncing
the words of Ordination by one of them in all their names, [Receive the Holy
Ghost: and remember to stir up the Grace of God which is in thee, by Imposition
of hands, etc.] And of this Act I will make no question, but they being (as
they were) true Bishops Ordine, might, and did, as such, perform it validly,
But then, this Act did only Ordain him a Bishop Ordine, not Consecrate him
Archbishop. The other part therefore of the Ceremony, (which was all the rest
of it, and from whence the whole Ceremony had its name of Consecration) which
may be called the Sacring (or the Ritual) part, was that which Consecrated him
Archbishop; to wit, the Investing of him with his Mitre, Ring, Crosiar-staff,
Cross, Rochet, etc. the anointing of his head and hands with Chrisme, the
pronouncing over him the Prayers and Benedictions proper to an Archbishop, and
the adhibiting of all these Ceremonies with that intent to create him
Archbishop and Pastor of the Cathedral and Metropolitical Church, called
Christs-Church, in Canterbury. For so was their Commission, [Quatenus eundem in
Archiepiscopum and Pastorem Ecclesiae Cathedralis and Metropoliticae Christi
Cantuariensis, Consecrare, etc.] And so was their demand, when three of them,
at his Consecration, presented him to the fourth to be Consecrated: [Hunc tibi
praesentamus, ut Archiepiscopus Consecretur.] Now this therefore being plainly
a mere act of complete Jurisdiction; they could not perform it validly, as
Bishops Ordine only.

Secondly, they could do neither of these acts validly, as they were Bishops
Officio (or Jurisdictione:) because,

1. Not one of them was an actual Bishop Officio. For, one of them (Hodgskins)
was only a Bishop Suffragan of Dover, which was no Cathedral Church, nor could
he exercise any Jurisdiction but by Commission from the Bishop of Canterbury.
Another of them (Coverdale) was only a quondam Bishop of Exeter. And the
remaining two ( Barlow and Sco^y) were so also, (that is, quondam Bishops
only:) but only that they were Elect, the one to Chichester, the other to
Hereford. This appears by the style given them in the Letters Patents: [
Reverendis in Christo Patribus, Wilhelmo quondam Bathoniensi and Wellensi
Episcopo, nunc Cicestrensi Electo: Joanni quondam Cicestrensi Episcopo nunc
Electo Herefordensi: Miloni quondam Exoniensi Episcopo, Joanni Episcopo
Suffraganeo, etc. That is, To the Reverend Fathers in Christ, William late
Bishop of Bath and Wells, now Elect of Chichester: John, late Bishop of
Chichester, now Elect of Hereford: Miles late Bishop of Exeter: John Bishop
Suffragan.]

2. No Bishop could validly exercise any least act of Episcopal Jurisdiction
(as both these were, and of the highest nature) out of his own Diocese; as
London, where they Confirmed, and Lambeth where they Consecrated him, was: and
as any place possible, must have been out of the Diocese of all but one of them.

3. No Bishop could validly give a Jurisdiction to be exercised out of his own
Diocese; as Canterbury was out of all their Diocesses.

4. No Bishop, nor number of Bishops (always meaning, by their own authority)
could validly give a Jurisdiction greater then their own, and superior to their
own, and over themselves and all the Bishops in the Land, as that of the Sea of
Canterbury was.

The second Proposition. [ No Bishops in the Land could validly Confirm, or
Consecrate an Archbishop of Canterbury without Commission from the Queen.] I
shall give the reason in the words of the Statute, 8. Eliz 1. Because all
Jurisdiction Spiritual, and Ecclesiastical, as by any Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical power or authority, has hitherto been or may lawfully be used
over the Ecclesiastical State of this Realm, was fully and absolutely, by the
Statute of 1. Eliz. 1. united, and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm.
Now it is well known I believe to your self, that before the Statute of 25. H.
8. and after the repeal of that Statute, by Queen Mary, until that Act of 1.
Eliz 1. the Pope had this privilege in this Realm, that no Bishops in the Land
could validly either Confirm, or Consecrate an Archbishop of Canterbury without
a Faculty (or Bull) from him: and consequently, after that Statute, which
settled all the Popes privileges in the Crown, that privilege was in the
Queen, that none could do either of those acts without a Faculty from her.

The third Proposition. [ The Queen did give Commission to those Bishops, for
the Confirming and Consecrating of Matthew. Parker.] This appears by the Letters
Patents themselves, extant in the Rolls, in these words: [ Elizabetha Regina,
etc. Reverendis in Christo Patribus, Wilhelmo, etc. (naming seven Bishops.) Cum
vacant nuper sede Archiepiscopali Cantuariensi per mortem naturalem D.
Reginaldi Poli Cardinalis, ultimi, and immediati Archiepiscopi and Pastoris
ejusdem; ad humilem petitionem Decani and Capituli Ecclesiae nostrae
Cathedralis and Metropoliticae, Christi, Cantuariensis, eisdem per Literas
nostras Patentes Licentiam concesserimus alium sibi eligendi in Archiepiscopum
and Pastorem sedis praedictae, ac iidem Mattheum Parker elegerunt, etc Nos
eidem electioni Regium nostrum assensum adhibuimus pariter and favorem. Et hoc
vobis tenore praesentium significamus: Rogantes, ac in fide and dilectione
quibus nobis tenemini, firmiter praecipiendo, Mandantes, quatenus vos, aut
quatuor vestrum, cundem Matheum Parker in Archiepiscopum and Pastorem Ecclesiae
praedictae Electum, electionemque praedictam, Confirmare, and eundem in
Archiepiscopum and Pastorem Ecclesiae praedictae Consecrare, caeteraque omnia
peragere, quae vestro in hac part incumbunt Officio Pastorali, juxta formam
Statutorum in ea part editorum and provisorum, velitis cum effectu. That is.
Elizabeth Queen, etc. To the Reverend Fathers in Christ, William, etc. Whereas
the Archiepiscopal See of Canterbury being lately void by the natural death of
my Lord Reginald Pool Cardinal, the last and immediate Archbishop and Pastor of
it; at the humble petition of the Dean and Chapter of our Cathedral and
Metropolitical Church in Canterbury, called Christ's Church, we did by our
Letters Patents grant License to them to choose themselves another for
Archbishop and Pastor of the Sea aforesaid, and they have chosen Matthew
Parker, etc. We have given our royal assent and favor to the said Election.
And we signify this to you by the tenor of these presents. Requiting, and by
the fidelity and love wherein you are bound to us, firmly enjoining, Commanding
you, that you, or four of you, effectually Confirm the said Matthew Parker
Archbishop and Pastor Elect of the said Church, and Confirm the said Election,
and Consecrate him Archbishop and Pastor of the said Church, and do all other
things which in this behalf are incumbent on your Pastoral Office, according to
the form of the Statutes in this case made and provided.]

And further, for the avoiding of all ambiguities and questions that might be
objected against the lawful Confirming and Consecrating of the said Matthew
Parker: (partly because the Popes consent (without which all was void and null
by the Canon Law established in general Councels But universally this is
clear, that if any one be made a Bishop, without the consent of his
Metropolitan, the great Synod has defined, that such a^one ought not to be a
Bishop, (meaning by Bishop, any Bishop whatsoever, and principally the Primate
of a Nation; and by Metropolitan, meaning any Metropolitan whatsoever, but
principally the Patriarch of that part of the world, which you grant the Pope
to be of the West.) Conc. Nic. 1 Can. 6.
which you count the proper Rule for judging, even against Acts of Parliament,
in these matters, Councils truly General, being the supreme Tribunals of the
Catholic Church, do bind particular Churches, as well in point of
discipline, as of faith. Bish. of Derr. schism guard. p. 475. English Statutes
cannot change the essentials of ordination: the validity or invalidity of it,
depends not upon humane Law, but upon the Institution of Christ. id. (...). p.
41. Judges at the Common Law, have neither grounds nor rules in the Common Law
for judging of the validity of an Episcopal Consecration, id. ib. p. 60.
was not to it; and partly because none of those who Confirmed or Consecrated
him was an actual Bishop) it was judged (by her Council, and by those Lawyers,
Civil, and Canon, who were advised with in it) needful she should insert into
her Patent, a clause, whereby by her supreme royal authority she should enable
those Bishops, in regard of the present exigencies (because neither the Popes
consent nor actual Bishops enough to consecrate him, could be had,) to supply
to themselves all defects whatsoever, in quality, faculty, or any other things
necessary to that performance, by the Laws of the Church. For so it follows in
the Patent. [ Supplentes nihilominus suprema authoritate nostra Regia, siquid
in vobis, aut vestrum aliquo, condition, statu, aut facultate vestris, ad
praemissa perficienda desit eorum quae per Statuta hujus Regni nostri, aut per
Leges Ecclesiasticas, in hac part requiruntur aut necessaria sunt; temporis
ratione, and rerum necessitate, id postulante. That is, Supplying nevertheless
(to your selves) by our supreme Regal Authority (hereby delegated to you to
that end) if any thing, in you, or any one of you, or in your condition, state,
or faculty, to the performing of the Premises, is wanting of those things which
by the Statutes of this our Realm, or by the Ecclesiastical Laws, are in this
behalf requisite or necessary: the condition of the time, and necessity of
things requiring it.] So you see how true it was I said, they could do neither
of those Acts without her Commission; when not only her Commission was judged
necessary to give them power to do them, but her Dispensation also, to make
their acts valid, non obstante, the Laws of the Church.

The fourth Proposition. [The Queens Letters Patents was not a mere Mandate,
commanding them to execute their Office, which they might be supposed to have
from Christ, but a Commission, authorizing them to do what they did; so as they
acted in it, not as Bishops, (or Officers authorized by Christ) but merely as
her Commissioners.] That in that quality only they Confirmed him, themselves
expressly acknowledge and declare in the Instrument of his Confirmation, (as it
is to be seen in the Records at Lambeth.) For thus they say, [ In nomine
Domini, Amen. Nos Wilhelmus Barlow, etc. Mediantibus Literis Commissionalibus
Reginae, Commissionarii specialiter and legitime deputati, etc. praedictam
electionem Mathei Parker in Archiepiscopum and Pastorem Ecclesiae praedictae,
suprema authoritate Regia nobis in hac part Commissa, Confirmamus. Supplentes
ex suprema authoritate Regia nobis delegata, quicquid in nobis, aut alique etc,
ut supra. That is, In the name of the Lord, Amen. We, William, etc. By the
Queens Commissional Letters, specially, and lawfully deputed Commissioners,
etc. do by the supreme authority of the Queen to us, in this behalf, committed,
Confirm the aforesaid Election of Mat. Parker, etc. supplying, by the supreme
authority of the Queen, to us delegated, if any thing be wanting in us, or any
of us, etc. as above.] And if as her Commissioners they Confirmed, as her
Commissioners also they Consecrated him. For, 1. The Patent Commissionates them
to both alike, and they needed her Commission to both alike. [ Mandantes
quatenus eundem Confirmare, and Consecrare velitis, etc. Commanding you that
you Confirm and Consecrate him.] So if Mandantes did authorize them to the one,
it did so to the other also. 2. The Patent did, in formal words, authorize them
to dispense with themselves for any defect of Faculty, etc. for the performing
of both those acts alike: [Supplentes, suprema authoritate nostra Regia, si
quid, ad praemissa perficienda, deest, etc.] And this Dispensation was
necessary to the validity of both those acts alike. 3. To signify they did
Consecrate him in virtue of the Queens Commission to them for it, when three of
them, at the performing of that Ceremony, presented him to the fourth, to be
Consecrated; whereas (before the Statute of H. 8.) the Popes Bull for
authorizing the Consecrators, was used to be read, at that time; in place
thereof was read the Queens Patent to them. [ Proferebatur (says the Act of
it, upon Parkers Records) Regium Mandatum pro ejus Consecratione, and. The
Queens Mandate (or Commission) to them for Consecrating of him was read.] as
the authority for what they did.

The fifth and last Proposition. [The Queen had her Authority for
Commissionating them, from the Parliament.] This is manifest.

First, from the Statute of 25. H. 8.20. which recites how that by an Act made
that Parliament, they had enacted [ That if any person nominated or presented
by the King to the Sea of Rome, to be any Archbishop of this Realm should be
delayed, denied, or otherwise disturbed from the same, for lack of Palls,
Bulls, or other things to him requisite (by the Law of the Land then in force)
to be obtained of the Sea of Rome; that then he might and should be
Consecrated, and Invested by any two Bishops in this Realm, appointed by the
King.] Where although in the next words, [according, and after like manner, as
diverse Archbishops and Bishops have been heretofore in ancient time, by sundry
of the Kings Progenitors, made, Consecrated, and Invested within this Realm:]
they were willing to seem as if they did not then first grant that right or
privilege to the Crown, but only restore it: yet it is manifest they did then
grant it to him. For, as they named none, so nor could they name any one King
of England, who made a Bishop within this Realm, and much less (the Primate of
England) the Archbishop of Canterbury. Indeed William the Conqueror, Rufus,
and Hen. 1. (and perhaps some of our Kings before them) did without asking the
Popes consent, Invest Bishops, in vacant Sees; that is, by the delivery of a
Ring, and Crosiar, did put them in possession of their Bishoprics, so as to
enjoy their Temporalties, and to be legal Bishops in the Kings Courts. But I
know no instance of one Archbishop of Canterbury, Invested by any one of them,
without the Popes consent; nor did any of them use that practice of Investing
Bishops, after the Council of Vienna (which was in the time of Edw. 2.) had
prohibited it to all Lay persons, under excommunication both to them that did
it, and to the Bishops that accepted it. Which their desisting to use it after
that time, and the Parliaments silence in it, (who were at that time very
active, and full of animosity, in vindicating the rights of the Crown, against
the Popes usurpations and encroachments) seems to acknowledge, that those who
had done it before, had done it defacto only, and not of right. But however it
were for that of Investing: it is certain, all our Histories will not afford
one Instance of any King of England, who appointed, or assigned (that is, in
the sense of the Statute, authorized) Bishops, to Consecrate a Bishop. So,
without all peradventure, this privilege was plainly granted to the Crown by
this Statute. And it was granted him at first, only in case of the Popes
refractoriness; but soon after, by the Statute aforenamed, all recourse to Rome
for Confirmation, or Consecration, of any Bishop, was forbidden, and the power
of authorizing Bishops within the Realm to perform those acts, was placed
absolutely in the King. [Whereas in the said act (meaning, that before spoken
of) it is not plainly expressed in what manner Archbishops and Bishops shall be
Invested, and Consecrated, within the Realm: be it now therefore enacted by the
authority of this Parliament that no person shall be presented to the Bishop of
Rome, nor shall send, nor procure there for any manner of Bulls, Palls, or
other things requisite for an Archbishop, Bishop, etc. And if the person be
elected to the office of an Archbishop, after such Election certified to the
King, he shall be reputed Lord Elect to the said Office. And the King shall by
his Letters Patents signify the said Election to one Archbishop, and two other
Bishops, or else to four Bishops within this Realm, to be assigned by the King,
requiring or commanding him or them to Confirm the said Election, and to Invest
and Consecrate the said person so elected, to the Office and Dignity that he is
elected unto, and to give and use to him, such Pall, Benedictions, and other
Ceremonies, as formerly were used. And every person being hereafter Invested
and Consecrated to the Dignity or Office of any Archbishop, according to the
tenor of this Act, shall and may be Inthronized, and Installed, etc. and shall
be obeyed, etc. and shall do and execute in every thing and things, touching
the same, as any Archbishop of this Realm, (without offending the Prerogative
Royal, and the Laws and Customs of this Realm) might at any time heretofore do.]

Secondly, from the Statute of 8. Eliz. 1. made purposely to set forth the
Authority, (next under God) by which Matthew Parker, and the other first
Protestant Bishops in the beginning of the Queens Reign were made: and sets it
forth, by reciting how they were made by authority of the Queen, and how she
was authorized to that end, by the aforesaid Statute of Hen. 8. and by the
Statute of 1. Eliz. 1. These are the words of it, for as much as concerns my
purpose. [Forasmuch as diverse questions has lately grown upon the making and
Consecrating of Archbishops and Bishops within this Realm, whether the same
were duly and orderly done, according to the Law or not, which is much tending
to the slander of all the state of the Clergy, being one of the greatest States
of this Realm; therefore for the avoiding of such slanderous speech, and to the
end that every man that is willing to know the truth, may plainly understand,
that the same evil speech and talk is not grounded upon any just matter or
cause: It is thought convenient hereby partly to touch such author^ties as do
allow and approve the making and Consecrating of the same Archbishops and
Bishops to be duly and orderly done, according to the Laws of this Realm.
First, it is very well known to all degrees of this Realm, that the late King
Hen. 8. was as well by all the Clergy then of this Realm in their several
Convocations, as also by all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in
diverse of his Parliaments, justly and rightfully recognized and knowledged to
have the Supreme Power, Jurisdiction, and Authority over the Ecclesiastical
State of the same. And that the said King did by Authority of Parliament in the
twenty fifth year of his Reign, set forth a certain order of the manner and
form how Archbishops and Bishops should be made, etc. And although in the time
of the late Queen, the said Act was repealed, yet nevertheless at the
Parliament 1. Eliz. 1. the said Act was revived; and by one other Act there
made, all such Jurisdictions, Privileges, etc. Spiritual and Ecclesiastical,
as by any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power or Authority has heretofore been,
or may lawfully be used over the Ecclesiastical State of this Realm, is fully
and absolutely, by the Authority of the same Parliament, united and annexed to
the Imperial Crown of this Realm. And by the same Statute, there is also given
to the Queen (mark, given also to the Queen by that Statute) full Power and
Authority, by Letters Patents, to assign, and authorize such person or persons
as she shall think meet, (whether Bishops, Noblemen, Lawyers, Merchants, or who
ever else, so they be NATURAL BORN SVBJECTS; for the words of that Statute
requires no other Qualification to them but that) to exercise under her all
manner of Jurisdiction in any wise touching or concerning any Spiritual
Jurisdiction within this Realm. Whereupon (that is, upon the Authority given to
her by this Act) the Queen having in her order and disposition all the said
Jurisdiction, etc. (that is, all that which formerly was in the Pope) has, by
her Supreme Authority, caused diverse to be duly made and Consecrated
Archbishops and Bishops, according to such order and form, and with such
Ceremonies in and about their Consecration, as were allowed and set forth by
the said Acts, etc. And further, for the avoiding of all ambiguities and
questions might be objected against the lawful Confirming, Investing, and
Consecrating of the said Archbishops and Bishops, her Highness has (in her
Letters Patents) used diverse special words, whereby, by her Supreme Authority,
she has dispensed with all causes and doubts of any Imperfection, or
disability, etc. So that to all those that will well consider of the effect and
true intent of the said Statutes, and of the Supreme and absolute Authority of
the Queen, (granted to her by them) and which she, by her said Letters Patents,
has used in and about the making and Consecrating of the said Archbishops and
Bishops, it is and may be very evident, no cause of doubt can or may justly be
objected against the said Confirmations and Consecrations, etc.] Lo here
declared, by the Queen her self, by Matthew Parker himself, and all the other
Bishops then in the Land, and by all the Lords Temporal, and the Commons in
Parliament, that Matthew Parker was made, Confirmed and Consecrated Archbishop,
by Authority of the Queen, and that she had her Authority for it from the
Statutes of 25. H. 8. 20. and 1. Eliz. 1.

3. From that Clause in the Commission it self, for the Confirming and
Consecrating of Matthew Parker, wherein she expressly refers to the Statutes
made in that behalf, meaning those two aforenamed. [ Juxta formam (says she)
Statutorum in ea part provisorum and editorum. According to the form of the
Statutes in this case made and set forth.] As much as to say, that the Patent
was grounded upon those Statutes.

And so I have abundantly demonstrated my Thesis, as to you, [That you have no
Authority to preach, but what you have originally from the Parliament.]

The second Part. Demonstrating to a Presbyterian Minister, that he has no
Authority to preach from Christ, but only from the Parliament,
SIr, I shall suppose your Case the best that can be supposed of any
Presbyterian Minister in England; viz. That William Juxon late Bishop of
London, being a true Presbyter, together with all the Presbyters then of London
assisting him, Ordained twelve Presbyters, whom afterward he placed as Pastors,
or preaching Ministers, in so many Parish Churches in London lying next to one
another. These twelve preaching Ministers were the first Classical Presbytery,
that after the abolishing of Bishops, was erected in the Nation. And the Church
of N. within the Precinct of that Classis, falling void, they Ordained you a
Presbyter, and afterward gave you Mission to that Congregation of N. (that is,
placed you to be the Pastor or preaching Minister of it) And I say, that in
this Case, you have no authority to preach to that Congregation from Christ,
but only from the Parliament. And I make it good by this Argument.

You have no Authority from Christ to preach to that Congregation, but what you
have either by your Ordination, or your Mission.

But you have no Authority to preach to that Congregation by your Ordination:
and none from him, but from the Parliament only, by your Mission.

Therefore you have none from him, but only from the Parliament.

The Major is supposed in the Case: nor is there any third ordinary way
imaginable, and you pretend not to extraordinary.

The first part of the Minor, [That you have no Authority to preach to that
Congregation by your Ordination] I prove from the form of it; which (supposing
it the same as is prescribed in your Directory) was this. The Presbytery of
that Classis laid their hands upon you, accompanying it with a short Prayer, or
Blessing, by the Preacher who carried on the Work of that day, to this effect:
[ Thankefully acknowledging, etc. for fitting and inclining this man to this
great work, we beseech him to fill him with his holy Spirit, (whom in his name
(here they laid their hands upon you) we set apart to this holy Service) to
fulfill the work of his Ministry in all things, that he may save both himself,
and his people committed to his charge.] In which words (added to the
Imposition of hands, to interpret the meaning of it, that it might not be a
dumb Ceremony) you see there is not one syllable of authorizing you to preach
to that Congregation of N. but only that they who laid their hands on you, set
you apart to this great and holy work and office of the Ministry; that is,
that by, in, or with that Imposition of hands, there was given to you from and
by Christ himself immediately, a divine power lawfully to execute the Office of
preaching, and ministering Sacraments in Christ's name, and with his authority,
to that Congregation unto which you were then designed, or to any other in the
Nation, or in the world, whereunto you should be duly admitted. And that this
power (I speak of) was all that these words, or the Imposition of bands, gave
you and not any Authority as to that Congregation of N. is manifest; because if
they gave you Authority to that Congregation, it was either to that
Congregation alone, or to more then that. If to that alone, you could not be
admitted as Minister to any other Congregation, without being anew Ordained:
which you count neither necessary, nor lawful. If a Minister be designed to a
Congregation, who has been formerly Ordained Presbyter; let him be admitted
after examination, without any new Ordination.
And if to more then that, it must be to any (or every) one in the Nation and
in the world; because the words name none, nor mean no one more then another,
and authorized you as much to every one, as to any one: or else when you should
be admitted to Officiate in any Congregation, neither you nor the people could
be certain, whether that were one of the Congregations or no, to which your
Ordination authorized you: which uncertainty would render it useless as to any
one. And if you say, your Ordination authorized you to every one, you would be
a Pastor Apostolic, (or such a one as the Apostles were) that is, universal,
created by Christ immediately, and consequently supreme, (subject to no
Classis, Synod, Parliament, or other mortal superior) which would utterly
overthrow all your form of Church Government and Discipline. For then you might
preach and minister Sacraments in any Church, where you should please, against
the Pastors will; then all Admissions of Presbyters to be preaching Ministers
to such or such a Church, would be vain, absurd, and arrogant acts: Then no
Classis, Synod, or Parliament, could for any crime whatsoever, convent, or
silence you, and much less depose or eject you. In fine, then there would be no
distinction betwixt Pastors and flocks. Of necessity therefore, to avoid such
horrid absurdities, the first part of my minor must be granted me, [That you
have no authority, by your Ordination, to preach in that Congregation.]

The second part of the Minor, [That you have no authority from Christ, but
only from the Parliament, by your Mission.] I thus make good.

They who gave you your Mission had no Authority from Christ, but only from
the Parliament, to give it you.

Therefore you have no Authority from Christ, but only from the Parliament, by
your Mission.

The Consequence is evident in the terms. The Antecedent is firm, for two
reasons.

First, because those Presbyters who gave you Mission, were no Ministers of
those Churches, by any Divine Right, or Authority from Christ, but only of the
Parliament, because placed in those Churches by the Bishop of London, as he was
Bishop of London: which I am sure you will not, cannot, dare not say he was by
authority from Christ, (for then it had been a wicked and sacrilegious act in
the Parliament to deprive him of his Bishopric; and in you, to advise and
encourage them to it) nor by any other Authority but that of the Parliament;
for then it had exceeded the power of the Parliament to deprive him of it. Nor
can you say, those Ministers were placed in those Churches by him in any other
quality or capacity, but as he was Bishop of London: because as he was a
Presbyter, he could not Institute Pastors by himself alone, as he did those;
nor Institute them in any wise, as a Bishop Ordine.

Secondly, because supposing they had been Ministers of those Churches by
Authority from Christ; yet as they were single Presbyters, they had no
authority so much as to Ordain, and much less to give Mission, but only as
they were Associated into a Classis, (or Presbytery.) Preaching Ministers,
orderly Associated, are those to whom Imposition of hands does appertain. Humb.
Adv. of Div. at Westminster. in the Doctr. part of Ordin.. 10.
Now this Association was not made, formed, or authorized by any authority from
Christ, but only of the Parliament: and so those Ministers who gave you your
Mission, did not give it you as Presbyters or Officers of the Church,
instituted by Christ, but merely as Officers or Commissioners of the
Parliament, (which it was by accident, that any of them were Presbyters.) This
appears,

First, because for Associating the first Presbytery, there was no other
imaginable (ordinary) Authority then in the Land, but that of the Parliament.
And if you will say, the first was Associated by Christ immediately; any of
those whom you call Sectaries, say as much for their authority, and with as
much reason.

Secondly, because it appears by the Ordinances, Acts, and public Proceedings
of the Parliament, by you owned and abetted, in abolishing the form of Church
Government and Discipline then established, and introducing another in place
thereof; in settling Classes, and authorizing them to Ordain Ministers; in
ejecting Ministers, and placing others in their Cures; in Collating, and
Instituting to vacant Benefices; and executing these powers not by Presbyters
only, but by Lay-Committees, nay, by single Lords and Officers of the Army,
etc. that the supreme visible Authority in matters Ecclesiastical in this Land
was in the Parliament: and so no Classis was Associated but by authority of the
Parliament, and after its Association, had no authority to give Mission, or
exercise any other act of Jurisdiction, but what it had from the Parliament.

For Instance I name these Ordinances.

1. That of 12. June, 1643. [Whereas it has been declared and resolved by the
Lords and Commons in Parliament, that the present Church Government, by
Archbishops, Bishops, etc. is evil, etc. and that therefore they are resolved
that the same shall be taken away, and that such a Government shall be settled
in the Church of England, as may be most agreeable to Gods Word, etc. the right
Honorable Algernon Percy, Earl of Northumberland, etc. (naming other Earls and
Lords) John Seldom, Dr. Gouge, etc. (naming diverse others Lawyers, Gentlemen,
and Divines) are hereby authorized and enjoined to sit, confer, and treat of
such things as concern the Discipline and Government of the Church of England,
as shall be proposed to them by both, or either House of Parliament, etc
Provided that they assume not to exercise any Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical
whatsoever, or any other power then is particularly expressed.]

2. That of 22. January following. [The Earl of Manchester shall have authority
in the associated Counties, to eject all such Ministers as he shall judge unfit
for their places, and to place in their rooms such as shall be approved of by
the Assembly of Divines at Westminster.]

3. That of 22. Feb. following. [The Lord Fairfax shall nominate and appoint
such able and godly Divines as he shall think fit, into all such Churches in
the County of York, as are, or shall be destitute of Ministers.

4. That of 23. April 1645. [ Philip Goodwin shall be henceforth Vicar of
Watford, and Officiate the Cure as Vicar thereof, during his life, without any
further Admission or Induction.]

5. That of 26. April following. [None may preach, but Ordained Ministers,
except such as intending the Ministry shall for trial of their Gifts be
allowed by such as shall be appointed by the Parliament.]

6. That of 29. August, 1648. [Be it Ordained by the Authority of this
Parliament, that all Parishes in this Nation shall be brought under the
Government of Congregational, Provincial, and National Assemblies, etc. And all
Classes, and Parochial Congregations, are respectively hereby authorized and
required to proceed accordingly, etc. The Province of London shall be divided
into twelve Classical Elderships. The first Classis to contain Alhallows, etc.
The several Classes where no Congregational Presbyteries are already settled,
shall have power to nominate such Ministers and others as are qualified
according to this Ordinance, to join with them in the same, to be approved by
the Committee of Lords and Commons for Scandal, until such time as
Congregational Presbyteries shall be settled in the said respective Precincts,
etc. When seven Congregational Elderships or more shall be constituted into any
Classical Precinct, the same shall be signified to the several Congregational
Elders so established, who shall depute fit Elders, who, together with their
Ministers, shall meet as a Classis, etc. That which shall be done by the major
part of the Classis, shall be esteemed as the act of the whole. And none shall
be esteemed a valid act, unless done by four Ministers, and eight Ruling
Elders, etc. The power of Classical Assemblies, shall be: 1. To Ordain, and
admit Ministers for the Congregations. 2. To censure Ministers, etc. It is
Ordained by the Authority of this Parliament, that the Classical Presbyters
within their Bounds may and shall Ordain Presbyters, according to the Directory
for Ordination hereafter expressed, etc. The Presbytery, or five Ministers at
least sent from them, shall solemnly set him who is to be Ordained, apart to
the Office and work of the Ministry, etc. Laying their hands on him, with a
short Prayer or Blessing to this effect, etc. Let every one which is or shall
be chosen for any Congregation or place not being at that time within the
Bounds of any Classical Presbytery, be Ordained by that Classis which he shall
address himself unto, etc. And it is further Ordained by the Authority
Aforesaid, That all persons who shall be Ordained Presbyters, according to this
Directory, shall be forever reputed, to all intents, for lawful, and
sufficiently authorized Ministers, etc.]

Thirdly, It appears from the humble Advice of your Divines assembled at
Westminster, unto the Parliament (before any Classes were formed) to authorize
Ministers to Associate themselves into Classes, for the Ordaining of Ministers,
for the Army, Navy, City of London, etc. [In these present exigencies, while we
cannot have any Presbyteries formed up to their whole power and work, etc. And
yet it is requisite that Ministers be Ordained for the service of places and
Congregations destitute of Ministers, by some who being set apart themselves
for the work of the Ministry, have power to join in the setting apart of
others: Let some Ministers in or about London be designed BY PUBLIC
AUTHORITY, (meaning, of the Parliament, to which they addressed that Advice)
who being ASSOCIATED, may Ordain Ministers for the City, and vicinity, etc. And
let the like ASSOCIATION, be made BY THE SAME AUTHORITY, in other Counties,
etc.]

And so I have abundantly demonstrated my Thesis, [That you have no Authority
to preach in that Church of N. (where you are Minister) from Christ, but from
the Parliament only.]

FINIS.

