A LETTER to General Monk, expressing the sense of many thousands of the well
affected people of England.
Old Parliamenters, and old Puritanes.
To the Magnanimous and truly Excellent General Monk.
Noble SIR,
GOD has made you the instrument of conveighing one of the greatest blessings
to this Nation that has been bestowed upon it in these latter days; even of
rescuing our Laws, Liberties, Estates, Ministers, Religion, all that is dear to
us out of the hands of men, who being in their first constitution our servants,
had by craft and treachery made themselves Lords over us, and designed to
sacrifice all these to their own ambition. But the most wise and righteous God,
who raised you as a deliverer to this poor Nation, has caused them to fall
before you without stroke striking, filling their hearts with fear, and their
faces with contempt and shame, for which his wonderful mercy, as thanks are
rendered to God by many on your behalf, so doubt not honored Sir, but many
prayers are daily poured out before the Lord for you, that he would direct your
steps in his ways, so evenly and unerringly, that that deliverance which is so
happily begun may be perfected by your hand. Your Excellency, (for that Title
your merit gives you whether men do or no) cannot be ignorant that great
persons (as your self is) in great actions (such as this in which you are now
imbarqued) are attended with great temptations, which though your own deep
wisdom and much experience be sufficiently able both to discern and decline;
yet will it not we hope be offensive to your Excellency to hear what the vox
copuli is concerning the temptations that lie before you. First, some think
there is now lying before you a sore temptation of making your self great, and
to take the Supreme Power and Government of these Nations into your own hands,
and make your self a Protector, a King, or what you please, and it is verily
thought you might do it with a far more universal acceptance then Oliver did;
and it is feared there may be some who may secretly whisper such counsels to
you: But surely Sir, it is hoped and believed you are so much a Soldier, a
Gentleman, a Christian, as that you despise and abhor the thought of any such
thing, having declared the contrary as you have done. They that know you say
you have too brave a Spirit, to purchase the personating of a King with so much
guilt and infamy as Oliver did, who after he had played Rex upon the Theater of
the world, for a few years hated of some, scorned by others, flattered by a
few, went off with reproach and hissing, and his memorial is perished with him;
who had he had so much honesty in him as a Heathen, would instead of his
pompous Funerals (yet unpaid for) have contented himself with a plain
Tombstone with this inscription (...), etc. Look upon me and learn not to be
Treacherous, False, Ambitious. So recent an example of Gods revenging wrath,
should cast a damp upon the pride and ambition of men, but we see it did not:
witness Fleetwood and Lambert, who not thinking themselves high enough till
they were got into Phaetons (that is Cromwells) Chariot, had certainly set this
whole Kingdom on a flame, if God by your hand had not cast them down as
suddenly and strangely as if they had been thunder stricken. But your
Excellency is of another Spirit, even like that Noble Earl, that said He had
rather make a King then be a King. In which respect we fear not much your being
overcome by this temptation. That therefore which others fear, and fear more is
your being tempted to close with this piece of the Parliament now sitting at
Westminster, and to assist and aid them in their setting up of that which they
call the Commonwealth of England, though by all that ever we poor Plebeians
could see or understand of it, it is but the setting up of themselves; And that
which makes us something fear you here is, that in many of your Declarations
which you have emitted, you have expressly and in Terminis declared for this
Parliament as it was sitting in October. 1659. and for the establishment of
Government by a Commonwealth. These things make us fear; but when we consider
that these Declarations were made by you when you were in Scotland, or in the
remotest parts of England, where you neither did nor could know the sense of
the English Nation; we hope that now God has brought you among us, where you
may hear the sighs and groans of your Brethren, and from our own mouths
understand what we groan under, and what we groan after, God may put other
thoughts, and other resolutions into your heart then what you have yet
published or declared to the world. Give us therefore leave to declare and
Remonstrate to you that a great part, yea, the greatest part of the godly
people and Ministers in England, who adhered to the Parliament in all their
contest against the King from 1640. to 1648. never did own, nor never can
prevail upon their consciences to own those men that now sit at Westminster for
the Parliament of England, since they contrary to all Equity and Reason,
contrary to their Trust and Duty, contrary to their Covenants and
Protestations, suffered so considerable a part of their Members to be by the
Army plucked from them. Nay, not only suffered it, but we fear some of them
contrived it, and all of them now since their last meeting abetted it.
Resolving upon a solemn Vote next day after their solemn fast, that these
Members were duly excluded: a thing so contrary to the light of common reason,
that every man is ready to blush at the reading of it; Is this the fast that
God has chosen? Is this to loose the bands of wickedness, and to let the
oppressed go free? Nor, secondly, can we (if this were not) look upon that
handful of men sitting at Westminster as men to be trusted with the Lives and
Liberties of the Nation, and least of all with Religion. Some of them being
persons of notorious looseness and debauchedness, others desperate Atheists,
despisers of the Word and Ordinances. The most of them, (whether out of carnal
policy, or what other principle God knows) friends to all Sects, Errors, and
Heresies, even to Popery it self; witness their repealing penal Statutes made
against Popish Recusants before their breaking up in 1653. and their Vote
passed in the Speakers Chamber before the last breaking up in 1659. whereby they
gave Papists equal protection with the most pure and Orthodox of Protestants,
we hope your excellency when you are informed of these things, will not think
it strange that neither City nor Country can cheerfully accept these men for
Englands Parliament, we hope your self having expressed so much zeal for the
true Orthodox Protestant Religion, and for the Ministers and Ordinances of
Christ, will not now give them up to the mercy of these men. We have done with
the Parliament, may it please your Excellency to give us leave to express our
selves concerning the other particular, the changing of the Government of the
Nation into a Commonwealth. First, we call to remembrance that saying of the
holy Ghost, Prove. 22. 28. Remove not the ancient Landmark which thy fathers
have set. Our forefathers according to the wisdom given them of God, had very
equally and justly bounded both the Kings Power and the subjects Liberty. The
late King he went about to remove the ancient Landmark of the Peoples Liberty,
and this has been the overthrow of him and his family unto this day. Let the
People now take heed of removing the other Landmark, least the Lord see it, and
it displease, and he lay their Liberty as low in the dust as he has done the
Kings Authority. Extrema non durant, There is also another Text that not a
little troubles us when we think upon these changes, and that is Prove. 24. 21.
My son, fear God and the King, and meddle not with them that are given unto
change; for their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of
them both. Sir, you have merited so well at our hands that we cannot but be
very unwilling you should be involved in that calamity which we are very
confident will again suddenly overtake these Members given to change. Secondly,
we call to remembrance how in the beginning of the quarrel between the King and
Parliament. The King did lay to their charge that they had a design to alter
the Ancient Governments of the Nation, and to let a flood of errors and
heresies into the Church, and that thereupon he was forced to take up arms for
his own defense, and the defense of Religion; and now if these men do indeed
alter the Government, as they intend to do; and do set open a door to all
Errors and Heresies, as they have begun to do; do they not thereby justify the
King before God and men (for whoever yet questioned but that it was lawful for
a King to defend Religion, and his just Authority against those that seek to
subvert them) and do they not hereby bring upon themselves the guilt of all the
blood that has been shed in England, and we are very loath you should share
with them in that guilt. Thirdly, we call to remembrance that the Parliament
both in their answers to the forementioned Declarations of the Kings; and in
all their Declarations both to this and neighbor Nations, Scotland, Holland,
etc. did in the most solemn manner that could be disclaim this altering of the
Government, and looked upon it as the greatest slander that could be raised
against them, and therefore they cannot alter it without falsifying their word
to foreign States and Princes, and incurring the note of false and perfidious
men. The very suspicion of which crime we are persuaded your noble soul abhors.
Fourthly, we call to remembrance the many solemn Vows and Covenants whereby
the Parliament bound themselves and us to maintain the Government as it was
then established; and therefore they cannot alter it without incurring the
guilt of Perjury or Covenant Breaking, which God never suffers to pass
unpunished, no not among the Heathens. Fifthly, we consider the blood and
treasure that this attempt has put England, Scotland and Ireland to already.
The blood that Cromwell shed in Scotland; and the blood that Cromwell shed in
Ireland (after your Excellency had ended the first War with the Popish Rebels)
in what quarrel was it spilt, but in the quarrel of this Idea, this Fairie
Commonwealth (which we often hear the name of, but could never yet see.) That
vast Treasure that has been expended now for these eleven years in the
maintaining of an Army here in England (necessary for nothing but for the
cudeling of People into a compliance with every prevailing power) whom may we
thank for it but the modellers of our Commonwealth. Sixthly, we cannot but fear
that the altering our Government into a Commonwealth, will be so far from
ending that it will but perpetuate our miseries from Generation to Generation;
for so speak as Christians, the foundation of this intended Commonwealth has
been laid in so much Treachery, Perjury, Blood, and there is such a cry of the
Fatherless, Widow and Oppressed goes up before the Lord against it, as it can
never be blessed to England; and to speak as men, the Masters of this new
Commonwealth know there is such a spreading family of the Stuarts, and their
interest is so spread and rooted in this Nation and among Neighbor Nations,
Protestants as well as Papists, that let them make never so many Votes,
Engagements, Oaths of Abjurations, they will never dare to trust their Infant
Commonwealth, as themselves call it, without an Army Royal to back it. And so
the Nation must be at the charge of maintaining continually an Army of fifty or
sixty thousand men, to please the humors, and maintain the Grandeur of forty
or fifty men that are (forsooth) the Commonwealths Representative of England,
for more there are not that are sticklers for this new device. For this,
seventhly, we complain of as a very great grievance and oppression that so
inconsiderable a number of men should assume to themselves the sole Legislative
Power, and impose Oaths and new forms of Government upon the Free-both People
of this Nation, not only without their consent, but contrary to the known
judgment and conscience of the People of the Nation. For, Eighthly, this
themselves know, and we will not hide it from your Excellency, that if it were
put to the Scrutiny, whether the People of this Nation would be governed after
the form of a Commonwealth or no, there is scarce one man of 500. but would
give his Vote in the Negative, except Papists, Quakers, Anabaptists, and other
Sectaries, or those who under the specious pretense of a Commonwealth, seek
their own private wealth, and have built their nests upon the public ruins.
And into the secrets of these men we hope your soul will never enter. And that
this averseness to a Commonwealth may not be judged will and stubbornness in
us to all the former Reasons. 9. Let us add this (in the ninth place) that
this device of changing the Government of England into a Commonwealth, it is a
pure Popish Jesuitical device to alter and overthrow the true Protestant
Religion in England, witness father Parsons his memorials for Reformation
printed at Sevill, An. 1596. Campanella in his Monarchia Hispanica, and
Cardinal Richilieu in his Instructions. These things make this alteration of
Government not only suspected but formidable to these that love the true
Religion, as we doubt not but your Excellency does. And such cannot but with
grief observe, that under these men that are the Contrivers of our
Commonwealth Religion, has suffered more detriment then it did in a leven
years before. 10. Lastly, we cannot but observe how God from heaven has
apparently fought against this Idol of their brain. These men said in the pride
of their hearts (in one of their Declarations as soon as they had cut off the
Kings head) that they would speedily set up in the Nation a better Government
then ever was under any, even the best of Kings. (Surely they might have
excepted David, or Josia, or Hezekiah) But see how God has befooled them from
that day to this (which is now eleven years) they have not been able so much as
to lay their foundation. Sometimes God divides their Tongues, and puts all in a
confusion and disorder, as in the building of Rabel; sometimes he scatters
them, so in 1653. so again in 1659. This is the Lords doing. Lord when thy hand
is lifted up, they will not see, but they shall see, if they be not more blind
then Balaam, he when the Angel of the Lord had stopped his way twice, the third
time desisted: Twice God has stopped these men in their Eager pursuits of a
Commonwealth, Let them desist in time if they will not, yet we dare not say a
Confederacy to them, least we should be found desertors of our Covenant,
self-condemned and fighters against God.

And therefore we do humbly pray, That your Excellency (according to the
opportunity and Authority wherewith God has betrusted you) would interpose
effectually with that part of the Parliament now sitting at Westminster, that
their secluded members may be readmitted, and vacant places may be filled up,
then shall we cheerfully own them as the Parliament of England, and humbly
acquiesse in their declared judgments. And in so doing you shall make us
happy, your self Honorable to the memory of all after ages; and oblige us, and
our Posterity after us to be

Your Lordships most humble Servants, The Commons of England,
January 22. 1659.


