A LETTER TO The Honoble William Lenthal Esquire Speaker to the Honorable House of
Commons, From the COMMISSIONERS Employed by the PARLIAMENT For the Reducing of
NEWARK: Together with The SUMMONS of the Commissioners of both Kingdoms to the
Governor, for delivering up of the said Town for the use of the KING and
PARLIAMENT.

And the Governors ANSWER thereunto.

APpointed by the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire; Speaker to the Honorable House
of Commons, to be forthwith printed and published.



London: Printed for EDW. HUSBAND, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
April 6. 1646.

TO The Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker of the Honorable House of COMMONS.
SIR,
ON Saturday we met with the Earls of Lothian and Dunfermlyn, the Lord
Balcarris, Sir David Hame, Sir Thomas Carre, Sir Tho: Ruthen, Mr. Glandonnon,
and Mr. Johnston, Committees of the Parliament of Scotland, and did that day
agree upon, and send Summons into Newark; We have here enclosed sent you copies
of our Summons and the Answer; and since the merey of the Parliament is
neglected, we hope by such other means as God and you have put into our hands,
ere long to reduce that place.

The Yorkshire Committee have written unto us, to be disingaged of the promise
of repayment what the Counties of Lincoln, Leicester and Nottingham should for
the present lay out for the Quarters of their Horse (in regard their Ordinance
was expired, and that they sensibly find by experience, they are like to
expect no more moneys considerable, so long as the Scotch Horse continue those
heavy burdens upon the County) We therefore (and for that without present
payment these Countries cannot long provide for their Horse) shall be
necessitated to send them into Yorkshire, and the Line being now finished, we
hope they may be spared without much prejudice to the service. Colonel Poyntz
doubts not but suddenly to turn the course of the River Trent, which ran close
under Newark, and will in a little time turn the River Smite into a new
channel, that their Mills may not be helpful to them, or the water hinder the
approaches on the North side Trent. The field-Officers have viewed the most
convenient place for Forts to shoot either into the Town or Sconces, which are
in preparation, and will speedily be finished: We shall lose no time to make a
good end of this service; and we beseech the House, that their promised and
often Ordered payments to the three Companies of the Isle of Ely and the other
Forces may be duly observed. We have received a Letter from the Committee of
the Eastern Association, which declares their great care and pains for payment
of their Garrison Soldiers, and we hope the execution of their Orders will not
be neglected.

Your humble Servants, W: Pierrepont, Tho: Hatcher, W: Armyne, Edw: Ascoughe.


The Summons to Newark.
WE the Committee of both Kingdoms being sent and authorized, to use our best
Endeavors for the reducing the Town and Garrison of Newark; do hereby (in the
Name of both Houses of the Parliament of England, and for the use of the King
and Parliament) demand of you, That you forthwith surrender the same into their
hands: It is the pious care of the Parliament, to prevent the effusion of
Christian blood, the wasting of the Country, and the destruction of Towns. We
shall esteem our selves happy in being Instruments to avert those Miseries; and
shall therefore grant to you, the Gentlemen with you, and the Town, Honorable
and fair Conditions; which if you shall now neglect, and will let nothing but
experimental sufferings declare unto you your unavoidable ruin; You are to
give an account to God, to this present age, and to posterity, for all the
blood that shall from henceforth be shed, for the wasting your Native and
neighboring Counties, and destruction of so considerable a place: You may not,
nor can any in reason expect (and most assuredly on the faith of honest men,
you shall not hereafter obtain from us) such terms as we are now willing to
afford you. We sent no Summons until you and all with you might see, we were
able by force to attain what we much rather desire by Treaty; the Parliament
have 16000 Horse and Foot at present before your Town, Soldiers of Experience,
United, and in Health and Courage; This is no way mentioned, as if we trusted
in the Arm of Flesh (God the Lord of Hosts has manifested, that we figh: his
Battles) but to show you the vast expenses which will be occasioned by the
continuance of this Singe (for which your Estates must answer) and that your
holding out may not further tempt the Almighty: And though you should not
regard your own ruin, though some others should be of that your opinion, shall
yet that wealthy Town be sacked, and others perish with you that see their own
misery and would avoid it? A Prudent man, a Soldier cannot live or die in
reputation or peace of Spirit, to maintain a place not so long temable, as till
is can be relieved, of which you cannot have the least hope: Flatter not your
selves, relief is not to be had; Chester was nearer Succors, and considerable
Armies for them in the West and in Wales, now scarce seen what remains of
either. Was not that strong City of most great importance? were they not very
often promised? did not all Assurances to be relieved come to them? They had
none: That place is surrendered. Your Wealth, if you rightly consider in what
state you are, promoves your certain and sudden destruction: You are prepared
in some things for defense, you know (and we know) you are not for some other.

Consider these things seriously, and you cannot but through them, see your
ruin to be inevitable, if you do not avoid it, by accepting what is now
offered. We will expect your Answer on Monday next by eleven of the Clock in
the forenoon at Balderton.

Balderton, March 28. 1646. Signed in the Name, and by the Warrant of the
Committee of both Kingdoms, by Rutland Lothian.

For the Governor of the Town and Garrison of Newark, the Gentlemen there, and
the Mayor, Aldermen, and Burgesses of that Town.
The Governor of Newarks Answer to the Summons, March 31. 1646.
HAving received a Paper subscribed by the Committee of both Kingdoms, directed
as to a Committee-Governour, by putting the Gentlemen and Corporation in equal
Commission with me (though the joining us together was with the intention to
divide us) I shall in Answer thereof, desire you to reflect upon the Kings
Letter of the 23 of March, sent to the two Houses of Parliament (which I
received from your own Quarters) where, in a full compliance with all their
desires, upon the most Gracious Conditions that ever Prince propounded, He
offers to disband His Forces, and to dismantle His Garrisons: To what end then
do you demand that of the Steward, whereof the Lord and Master makes a
voluntary tender? I conceive it my duty to trace His Commands, not to outstrip
them: So that though Honor and Conscience would permit the Delivery, yet
Civility would retard it, least His Majesty's Act of Grace be frustrated by my
over hasty speed. I shall wave the Arguments wherewith you endeavor to evince
my consent: I am neither to be struck into Apostasy, by the mention of fair
Conditions in a Misty Notion, nor to be frighted into dishonor, by your running
Division upon the fate of Chester; For as I do not measure my Allegiance by my
Interest to the former, so I do disdain that poverty of Spirit, as by
resemblance of Chester, to suffer by example: I can be Loyal without that Copy,
and I hope this Garrison shall never be the transcript of their Calamity. You
may do well to use your fortune modestly, and think not that God Almighty does
applaud your Cause, by reason of your Victories, or that he has not a Blessing
in store for Ours. Whereas you urge the expense of the Siege, and the pressures
of the Country in supporting your charge there (since occasioned by your
selves) I am not concerned; yet in order to their ease, if you will grant a
Pass to some Gentlemen to go to the King and return, I may then know His
Majesty's pleasure, Whether according to His Letter, He will wind up the
business in general, or leave me to steer my own course; then I shall know
what to determine: otherwise I desire you to take notice, that when I received
my Commission for the Government of this place, I annexed my life as a Label to
my Trust.

J. Bellasyse.
Newark, March 31.
To the Committee of both Kingdoms.
FINIS.

