A TRUE ACCOUNT of the late REDUCEMENT OF THE Isles of Scilly Published; In
regard of the many false and Scandalous reports, touching that SERVICE.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Giles Calvert, at the black spread Eagle at the
West end of Paul's. 1651.

A true Account of the late Reducement of the Jsles of Scilly, published in
regard of the many false and scandalous Reports touching that Service.
FOr as much as some men have taken upon them to write and report very falsely,
and indeed scandalously, traducing the unspotted reputation of faithful
Instruments in managing the late Reducement of the Isles of Scilly: I hope
'twill be accounted no transgression, if I take leave to represent an honest
and true Account of the service done there.

I shall not venture, as some have unworthily done, to say ought upon bare
hearsay, but shall write upon better knowledge, being actually in the service
from first to last, and an eye witness of what was done.

And why I may not with more reason expect to win credit upon that Account,
then those who have written and reported swelling words of vanity, and yet
never hazarded their carcasses within Cannon shot of danger in the service; I
see not.

It Is to be feared, I wish it be not so, That greediness of honor have promped
some to prepossess the world with their own worth above what was meet; and not
only so, but thereby, detracting from others, have, with too much affectation,
attempted to pin the Honor of the work upon their own sleeves.

I shall avoid Partiality in my Relation, and follow the unbyassed way of
Truth; I refer my self to the Test, let any disprove me if they can.

The manner of the service was thus:

After we had layn at Sea, from Saturday April 12. til Thursday 17. in the
morning betimes (each Officer having received Orders overnight) we boated our
Soldiers, intending to gain a landing place upon Triscoe, to that end we
divided our Boats and Men into two parts, the one to land in a sandy Bay by
their Fort within old Grimsbay Harbor, the other in a more stony Bay, somewhat
to the Westward of that; But the quickness of the Tide had set our Boats so
much to the Eastward out of the way, and the fearful Pilots directing another
course among the Rocks, we were necessitated to set all forwards toward Old
Grimsbay Harbor. The Enemy perceiving our motion, drew their chief strength
thither-wards to oppose us. Our Boats being all of them exceedingly crammed with
men, and many of them very slenderly accomplished for such a service, rowed
exceeding heavily, and could not by any means be brough to row up close one
with another, and some were set fast upon the Rocks for want of water: Whereupon
Orders were given, that the Boats should stop under a Rock till they came up
altogether, that we might jointly set upon the Work. But in the Progress, the
Pilots, and many of the Powers (who were taken up in the West Country, very
backward to the service) misguided our headmost Boats to a little Island called
Northworthel, standing in ^he entrance to Old Grimsbay Harbor, and within half
Musket shot of Triscoe, divided by the water, and so situate, as none, save
those who were acquainted, could know whether 'twere part of Triscoe or not. To
this place the timorous or treacherous Pilots directed, affirming once and
again that it was Triscoe; and when Major Bawden replied, he was doubtful of
it, in regard he discovered none of the Enemy coming down to oppose their
landing, one Nants (accounted the most knowing Pilot for the place) affirmed
resolutely (upon his life) that it was Triscoe, whereupon three Companies
presently landed; but the Mistake discovered, prevented the landing of any
more, yet not without some disorder upon our business; Notwithstanding which,
and that the Tide and opportunity might not be lost, Orders were given, that
the rest of the Boats should row on into the Bay, where we intended to land;
but our foremost Boats were again misguided, and unadvisedly made, to that part
of the Island nearest hand, occasioned the rather as I suppose, for that the
Enemy had there drawn down a Body of Musketeers, and fired much upon our Boats,
with whom our men desired to be doing, but the place proved craggy and
inaccessible, so that we could not land: Here was hot firing between our men
and the Enemy, (the Rocky shore being the only Interponent;) They had a
sufficient advantage against us, having the Rocks for their shelter, and our
men so very thick crowded in their open Boats, as many of them could not make
use of their Arms: indeed it was a miracle of mercy that we lost not very many
men here; if any of our Boats had been foundred, all the men must needs have
been lost; for every Boat was so exceeding full, that in such an extremity, one
could not possibly have helped another.

Now to be plain, when the Boats drew somewhat near, and the great, small, and
case shot flew about to some purpose, and danger must be looked in the face,
(for I believe we endured about 70 great shot, besides muskets in abundance)
many of the Boats, in stead of rowing forward into the Bay, turned the Helm,
and rowed backward, and aside, from the business. And notwithstanding Lievt.
Colonel Clark (of whom, to speak the truth in this place, I hope will be no
offense) strugled all he could to draw them on, earnestly calling to one and
commanding another to follow him with their Boats, yet would neither commands
nor threats persuade them to observance; but, do what he could, they rowed off.
This I must affirm for truth, for that I heard and saw the gentleman
abovenamed standing on the head of his Boat, amidst the thickest of the shot,
under this performance. And I believe there want not sufficient testimonies;
Captain Dover may please to remember, that he among others was called to, yea
and commanded too, upon pain of death to follow on with his Boat: What his
Answer was, and how carefully observed, cannot be unknown to himself, nor yet
to others; for I am sure his boat rowed off, and came no near.

After some time spent, I think near half an hour, in this perilous, yet
succesless manner, we withdrew to Northworthel, the little island where our
Boats were first misguided; Our loss was not great in respect of the hazard,
which I wish may be recorded upon all our hearts as a signal testimony of Gods
abundant goodness and favor to us; Some four Soldiers and one or two Seamen
were slain, and the like number of the Enemy, with Colonel Wogan wounded.

Three Companies were left upon Northworthel to keep the Enemy busy, and the
rest were landed upon an adjacent island, called Tean, from whence we had a
better discovery of the Enemies shore; The place yielded but little fresh
water, which, through the number of our men, was soon troubled, and made unfit
to drink, which together with the want of provisions, and the raw constitution
of our men newly come on shore, made this cold nights lodging the more irksom
and comfortless.

The next day, April 18. the enemy spent some great shot at us, which fell
among some of our Tents and brake them, but did no farther harm; We labored to
get some provisions a shore (which could not be suddenly done, our ships riding
at that distance) for want of which our men were indeed distressed: and some
thereupon murmured even to discontent, repining at the condition of the service
they were to undergo upon such faint terms; But through a supply of victual,
and careful regard of Lievt. Colonel Clark, all was put into an exact posture,
in order to a second attempt; To which end Capt. Hatsel and Capt. Smith were
sent aboard Admiral Blake, to desire that the Boats, and Rowers who would stick
more resolutely to their Oars, might be sent to us, which he did: And that we
might be the better besteaded in our landing, he moreover appointed about 150
or 200 Seamen (who were better acquainted with Marine affairs) to attempt with
us, under the conduct of Captain Morris.

We thought it necessary to deal with the enemy speedily, while the weather was
seasonable, for should it have proved otherwise, and our ships have been forced
off to Sea, we must either have perished, or have given our selves up to the
Enemy for a morsel of bread. Upon Consultation, we resolved (it being judged
best) to storm the Enemy by night, and to that end, had, in this daytime,
carefully observed how to direct our course to the place we intended for
landing, (which was about of a mile, and interrupted with many rocks in the
way,) For now we became our own Pilots.

We boated our men (having drawn off those three Companies from Northworthel in
the dark of the evening, and left there only some 80 men to Alarm and amuse
the enemy in that quarter while we fell on,) and between 11 and 12 of the clock
at night set forward (the Seamens Boats being head-most,) at which time it
pleased God that it was very calm, so that the enemies Friggots, whom we
doubted might injure us in our passage (being thereunto designed) and do most
prejudice, could not come up to do any harm, though they spent some great shot
at us. We made fires upon Tean as if we had continued there, the smoke whereof
was blown toward the enemy, which somewhat obscured our passage; Yet the enemy
discovered us when we came about half way over, and took an Alarm, and ere we
attained the shore fired many Ordnance upon us, which did no hurt.

The boats came up for the most part roundly together, and put to the shore,
where the enemy disputed our landing with stout resistance, in so much as the
Seamen were forced back into the water; yet our men charged them resolutely,
even to club-musket, and through the blessing of God worsted them, killed upon
the place one Captain, and some 12 or 14 others, took Prisoners 167. whereof
four Captains, the rest fled, none had escaped, had we been acquainted with the
Island.

The Enemy opposed us at this place with about two hundred of their best men,
but the Lord was pleased to make their strength as stubble, and to give the
place with a greater advantage into our hands, then if we had succeeded in our
first Attempt; for the Enemy grew the more confident, and sent over another
supply of their best men from Saint Mary's Island to make this the more sure,
which made up in all above 300 men, a greater strength by far then was
imagined: But the Lord was our Helper, graciously answering to the Word given
out amongst us, which was [Help Lord.]

This nakedly represents the sum of our Proceeds, which indeed is
circumstantiated with so much of the manifest Providence and Power of God, as
might make the most deserving Instruments (concerned in the work) humble and
sober, and not to have high thoughts of themselves.

And now what reason there is for some to write and report, That the Seamen did
all the work, That they alone gained the landing place, That they did the main,
the work, That the work was undertaken by, etc. undervaluing and declaiming the
service of the Soldiery, let all men judge.

Truly I would not detract a hairs breadth from their worth, nor would I write
one word that might provoke emulation, or stir up animosity, I love the girdle
of Amity and Unity; the Seamen did good service, and the Soldiers did no
less. But that the main work, or gaining the landing place, was (as some have
too largely written and reported) solely performed by them, I must deny as
untrue. For although the Seamen were in the second or third headmost Boats,
(as, I conceive, in reason they should, in regard of their better experience
for guidance of the rest through that Rocky passage in the night, and greater
skill and acquaintance with Maritine service, and besides having under them the
choycest and best accomplished Boats for that purpose,) yet had not the rest of
the Boats been carefully kept on together with them, and, as it were, in the
nick of time, put to the shore and the Soldiers immediately grapled with the
Enemy (who to give them their due, sternly opposed,) without doubt the Seamen
had come to an ill Market, and must needs have perished: For it is well enough
known, that upon their landing they were presently beaten back into the water,
even under their Boats, and were as soon relieved by the Soldiers, whose
courage was no whit daunted from doing their duties: I insert not this as any
blemish, the best men in the world may receive a check, but that the clear
truth of the business may be fully known.

This appears no fiction; besides a Cloud of Testimonies, honest and valiant
Corporal Perry, of Captain Northcots Company, carried the mortal witness of
this charge to his grave, who then received his deaths wound upon the edg of
the shore.

But if one hundred fifty, or two hundred Seamen, (which were the utmost) thus
interested in the work, be accounted such a high matter; it may be remembered
that (upon Conference between the Sea and Land Commanders at Plymouth about
this business) the Assistance of so many Seamen was no more, nor indeed so
much, as was thought requisite to the carrying off this Mariterrene service,
which, give me leave to say, is another manner of business, and of another
complexion, then that we usually are acquainted with at Land.

To say more; Put the case (though it be not the case here) a party of
Soldiers or Seamen should of themselves have carried that or the like Attempt
against an Enemy, without the actual Assistance of the residue of the Forces
orderly following to the service, should that party have so vainly blown the
Trumpet before them, as that they had done the main work? the Honor of it was
due to them, -- etc. causlesly decrying and traducing the rest of the Forces.
Truly, I conceive, so doing would not, only, be accounted a frothy vapor, but
an unhandsom piece of injury to the rest.

All that can be said to this particular (as far as I can see) is, That Admiral
Blake sent about one hundred fifty or two hundred Seamen to assist the Land
Forces in the storming of Triscoe: God was pleased to give a blessing to the
Attempt, and thereupon we forced our Entrance, spoiled the Enemy, and gained
the Island: A slender ground, methinks, for any to vent such lofty language on
the one hand, and causlesly to bespatter the good service of the Soldiers on
the other.

What should move Captain Peck to insert in his letter such false intelligence
to Major General Desborough, as that the first days attempt failed through the
timerousness of some Commanders of the Soldiers, that the Seamen did the work,
etc. his own heart best knows; little reason I believe he had: I am sure he
shot his bolt at random, and could write nothing of his own knowledge; for
indeed neither himself, nor any other Sea-Commander hazarded themselves in
either of the Attempts; The Seamen who were with us the last day were commanded
by Captain Morris, a Passenger to the Barbados; And when Captain Peck was
questioned about this, by some of the Officers at Triscoe, why he would offer
to injure and disrepute the Soldiers, by writing such detracting language,
without any real ground of truth, things which he indeed knew not; and withal
desired that he would name some that had failed their duty; He answered, he
could name none; nor knew nothing, but by hear say, and report of some Seamen,
and that he was sorry his writing should any ways prove prejudicial, and that
he thought no more harm in what he wrote then he intended to his own heart. I
would not have been thus particular but for the Truths sake.

No better ground, questionless, had some others, to give the like blind
Account of the business; and among the rest Captain Pecks Brother (as I am
informed) took upon him the boldness, very unworthily to traduce the reputation
of Lievt. Colonel Clark, and to exercise his tongue very scandalously; the
Gentleman has no need of my pen to vindicate or commend him; his merits and
faithful endevors in this piece of service, will, I question not, survive the
lying reports of all detractors. If any failing may be imputed to him, I think
it can be no other, unless the overmuch care and pains he took in prosecution
of the work may be so accounted; indeed he underwent too much for his body,
which was but sickly when he came from Plymouth, and which the Sea had much
oppressed with continual distemper all the while he was on shipboard, and now
more weakened on shore for lack of natural rest, etc. Yet I am confident none
can truly say, he either swerved from his duty at any time, or favored himself
from hazard, or yet accounted his life precious for the works sake.

But it is more then probable, this Gentleman, as some others, who have
impudently lashed with their tongues, wanted a true prospect of the business,
being muffled up in the smoke of the Ordnance fired from Aboard, the ships far
enough out of danger; and mistaking so much at hand, ran into grosser
absurdities farther off, speeding those false reports abroad, where (for
present) were none that could contradict them.

It Is a good part of Religion to bridle the tongue; if that were observed more,
we should have less strife and emulation.

Thus much I have adventured to public view; I hope I have therein not
exceeded the bounds of soberness and truth; my end is, that this piece of
service may be truly understood; and the Honor and Worth of faithful
Instruments vindicated. Indeed I was hitherto loath to exercise my pen upon this
subject, lest I might hazard the breach of amity; and, truly, had not done it
now, had not the lavish tongue and pens of some gone about to crop off the best
flower in a man's garden, viz. his honor and reputation: And therefore speaking
but the truth, I hope I shall justly give no offense; If offenses come, woe be
to them by whom they come.

Let the exceeding goodness of God to this unthankful Nation, in lopping off
the bough even with terror, and giving into our hands a place stufft with about
12 or 1300 men, a greater number by many then we were, and but yesterday the
remora to our Maritine affairs, a scourge to the Merchants, thought invincible
for strength, and desperate to attempt, with so little loss, and in so short a
time; Let, I say, the eminent hand of Gods good Providence in these particulars
teach us all to live the life of Faith, and to walk more humbly and thankfully
before him, and not to forget and undervalue such signal mercies, or disesteem
such faithful instruments, whose hearts and hands (I may confidently say) were
really fixed, and through Gods blessing became instrumental for the compleatment
of the work, which as it carries in it a singular high advantage to the
Commonwealth, so let it gather from all our hearts due acknowledgments of
praise and glory to the God of our Salvation, who has delivered and will yet
deliver us, if we wait and put our trust in him.

Jos. Lereck.

FINIS.

