A LETTER To the Right Honorable, and Right Reverend the General Assembly of
the Church of Scotland, or their Commissioners. These present,
Right Honorable, right Reverend, and dearly beloved Brethren in Jesus Christ,
AS We have great cause to bless God for the brotherly union of these two
Nations in the common Cause of Religion and Liberty, and for that good hand of
blessing which has accompanied the joint indevors of both, in the prosecution
thereof: so we cannot but be sadly and deeply sensible of those many
obstructions and difficulties wherewith God in his wisdom has seen good to
exercise his servants in both Kingdoms, in the carrying on of that work,
wherein they stand so much engaged. Herein He has clearly manifested his own
power, wisdom, and goodness, for our encouragement to trust him in the
managing of his own work; and our utter inabillity to effect it of our selves,
thereby to train us up to a more humble and faithful dependence upon him to do
all, when we by our own wisdom and strength can do nothing. Our perplexities,
we must confess, are, and have bin many; and yet in the midst of them all, we
cannot but thankfully acknowledge it, as a to ken for good, and that which has
bin and still is a great comfort and refreshing to our hearts, that God has
given you wisdom timely to foresee approaching dangers, but especially to
behold, as the steadfastness of your faith, in that both formerly you have bin,
and at present are able to trust God in straits, and to appear for him in
greatest dangers; so your eminent faithfulness and integrity, in your firm
adhering to your first principles, and chiefly in your constancy and zeal for
the preservation and prosecution of the Solemn League and Covenant, so
Religiously engaged in by both Kingdoms, in your vigorous pursuance whereof,
with much thankfulness to God, we are very sensible, more particularly, of
your steering so steady and even a course between the dangerous Rocks of
profaneness and malignancy on the one hand, and of error, schism, heresy,
and blasphemy on the other hand; as also of your constant desires and indevours
to preserve the peace and union between the two Nations so nearly, and so many
ways united. In all which we humbly acknowledge the mercy and faithfulness
of God, in guiding You so graciously hitherto; and through His assistance we
shall still be ready to afford You the best help and encouragement of our
Prayers and Praises to God on Your behalf; Having this confidence, that he who
has already vouchsafed you and us so many blessed pledges of his Favor, will
in his own time and way accomplish his own Work, which so much concerns his
own glory and his peoples good. To his most gracious protection and guidance,
in these doubtful and dangerous times, we humbly commend You and all Your holy
indevours, and rest

ubscribed in the name, and by the appointment of the whole Assembly by us,
Charles Herle, Prolocutor, W. Gouge Assessor. Henry Robrough Scriba. Adoniram
Byfield Scriba.

Westminster June 7. 1648.
This Letter was sent with the Approbation of both Houses of Parliament.

Printed at London for S. B. July 6. 1648.


