THE LEVELLERS (Falsely so called) VINDICATED, OR THE CASE Of the twelve Troops
(which by Treachery in a Treaty) was lately surprised, and defeated at Burford,
truly stated, and offered to the Judgment of all unbyassed, and wel-minded
People, especially of the Army, their fellow Soldiers, under the Conduct of
the Lord Fairfax.
By a faithful remnant, late of Col. Scroops, Commissary General Iretons, and
Col. Harrisons Regiments, that has not yet bowed their knee unto Baal, whose
names (in the behalf of themselves, and by the appointment of the rest of their
Friends) are here unto subscribed.
The Case, etc.
IT is well known, and yet fresh in the public memory, with what monstrous and
hateful defamations, as Anti-Scripturists, L^thertines, Atheists, Mutiniers,
Levellers, etc. we have most falsely and maliciously been deciphered out to the
people and Army, on purpose to bury us under the rage and edium of our
fellow soldiers; and utterly to blast, and prejudice the common acceptance,
against our late, lawful, and conscientious Undertaking: And seeing the equity
of all transactions is most commonly measured by the event, and success that
befalls them; few considering how God many times suffers unjust me^ to
prosper, and spread themselves in the world, like the Green Bay Tree; and the
just (for their correction and proof) to be subdued and trod under foot for a
season. We are thereby at so great a seeming di^^dvantage amongst men, That in
every thing we are fore-spoken, our truths (how ^^^able and evident soever) are
rendered as incredible, and regardless, strength and po^^^ being on their side
to countenance their actions, our enemies over awing all j^^^ments, and forcing
by the might of their lawless Sword, a credit or subjection to their own most
perfidious and deceitful ways; so that, as for the fruit or success that we
expect, we could still have sat in patience, and not have uttered a word, but
the dishonest and treacherous dealings received, with the woeful ruin of the
Nation, therewith sustained in ours (evidently appearing) do so boil at our
hearts, and so prevalently press upon our consciences, that we are not able
longer to rest in silence; but let the hazard to us be what it will, we shall
so far presume upon the public view, as faithfully and impartially, to set
down the true state and manner of our whole proceedings in that our late
undertaking, hitherto most falsely and deceitfully represented by the ruling
Faction of the Army, and so leave the same to the judgment and timely
consideration of all honest and conscientious people, especially of the Army,
our fellow soldiers, under the conduct of the Lord Fairfax, and amongst them
in a special manner, all those that really in judgment and conscience, took up
Arms for the Rights and Liberties of their Native Country, as the whole Army in
their Declaration of the 14 of June, 1647. declare they all did. Thus then
understanding, that we the soldiers of Col. Scroops Regiment, and others, were
allotted for the service of Ireland, without our consent, or of any of our
fellow soldiers in Counsel for us, we fell into serious debate (as in reason
and honesty we could do no less, considering likewise our late solemn
Engagement) whether we could lawfully, in safety to our selves, and our own
Native Rights in England, submit unto that foreign Service, or no? And finding
by that our old solemn Engagement at New Market, and Trip^o Heaths, June 5.
1647* with the manifold Declarations, Promises, and Protestations of the Army,
in pursuance thereof, were all utterly declined, and most perfidiously broken,
and the whole fabric of the Commonwealth fallen into the grossest and vilest
Tyranny that ever English men groaned under; all their Laws, Rights, Lives,
Liberties, and Properties, wholly subdued (under the vizard and form of that
Engagement) to the (...) wills of some deceitful persons, having devolved the
whole Magistracy of England (...) their Martial Domination, ruling the people
with a Rod of Iron, as most men's woeful experience can clearly witness; which,
with the consideration of the particular, most insufferable abuses and
dis-satisfactions put upon us, moved us to an unanimous refusal to go, till our
Conscience were discharged in the faithful fulfillment of our (...) Solemn
Engagement to our Native Country; in which Engagement, we were expressly and
particularly obliged against the Service of Ireland, till full satisfaction and
security were given to us as Soldiers and Commoners, by a Council of our own
free (...) according to the rule and tenor of that Engagement, Recorded in the
Armies (...) of Declarations* page 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. Whereupon we drew up a
Paper of some (...) by way of Declaration, concerning our said refusal, to
deliver to our Colo^^^ (...) which, we all cheerfully subscribed, with many of
our Officers (especially (...), who then seemingly was extreme forward in
assisting us to effect our desires) (...) being delivered a day or two after,
immediately our Officers caused a (...) ^^ar unto Salisbury, where they
declared, That the General intended not to force (...), but that we might
either go or stay; and so testifying our intents to stay, we were all drawn
into the Town again, and the Colonel, with the rest of the Officers, full of
discontent, threatened us the Soldiers; and because we were all, or most of
one mind, he termed our Unity a Combination, or Mutiny; yet himself upon our
request to know, told us, That he could not assure us, that he would go. Which
forementioned Paper, with a Letter, we sent to Commissary General Iretons
Regiment, who took it so well, That they were immediately upon their march
toward our quarters, to join with us, for the making good of their and our
Engagement, which we, they, and the rest of the Army had engaged at New Market
and Triple Heaths.

After this, all politic means that could be thought upon, were put in
practice to work us off from our Resolutions, as severing the Troops, and
dealing with them apart, not suffering the Soldiers of one Troop to come to
any of the other, employing Agents and Preaching Officers from Troop to Troop,
to work us to that Service; and craftily, and lyingly, telling each Troop, That
the other Troops were listed for the Irish Service, sin rupticiously to over
reach, and gain us by that deceit. A crime they most maliciously fix upon
others, whom they would make the world believe drew us to that undertaking, as
in their Declaration of their proceedings against us, published last May 22. is
to be seen, where page 6. speaking scandalously of some persons, naming none,
yet strongly implying our four worthy Friends in the Tower, they say of them,
That they sent their Emissaries and Agents into all parts, pretending from one
Regiment to another, that each Regiment had declared, That so by that Artifice,
they might draw each to declare. To the Forces in Wales, and the West, they
gave assurances, that the forces about London would revolt; to th^se about
London, that those in Wales, and the West, would do the same. Thus to shroud
their own vildness, and to effect their own evil ends, they are not sparing to
blast innocent persons with their own wicked devices themselves are so
apparently and foully guilty of; and yet wipe their mouths, as if no speck or
stain were upon them, and raise the report upon others.

All those devices working nothing upon us (there being no satisfaction given
to our just exceptions) our Colonel fell to violent threats, and commanded us
to put our Horses in a Field two miles from our Quarters; which though at first
we did, yet finding the bitterness of his spirit to increase, and that upon his
information, That the General, and Lieutenant General were preparing a force
against us: what could we do less, then put our selves into the best posture we
could to preserve our selves, which we immediately did (and in this no man was
more forward, and violently earnest, then that perfidious Apostate, Cornet
D^n.) And for our justification therein, we need go no further then their own
words, in the Armies Declaration of the 14 of June, 1647. where to justify
their own opposition and rebellion to the Orders of a full, free, unforced,
unravished, and un^w^er purged Parliament, they tell us, That the Parliament
has declared it no resisting of Magistracy, to side with the just principles,
and Law of Nature and Nations, being that Law upon which the Army assisted; and
that the Soldiers may lawfully hold the hands of the General that will turn
his Cannon against his Army, on purpose to destroy them.

This being done, we had further Intelligence (...) ^he greatness and
speediness of the Generals preparations against us, and that, Though what we
had done, did not amount to so much, as the Army had formerly done at Saffron
Walden, upon the Parliaments commanding them for Ireland, yet were we strangely
represented to our fellow Soldiers, by the Lieutenant General in Hide Park,
under the notion of Mutiniers, Levellers, and denyers of the Scriptures, of
purpose to make them engage against us Though none act more directly against
the tenor thereof then themselves, as is too manifest by their frequent
breaking of all Faith, and Premises, making nothing of Treachery, dissembling,
yea, and lying too (which is not once to be mentioned amongst Saints, as they
would have men think of them.) O abominable Hypocrites! know ye not, that
dissembling Piety is double Iniquity; but we fear, while ye pretend to
Scripture, ye believe neither it, nor the Resurrection: For if ye did, ye would
not condemn the Innocent, against Knowledge and Conscience, of those things your
selves are guilty. Repent betimes, or else your portion will be with Hypocrites.
; so that now we saw, there was (...) of safety left us, but by standing upon
our (...) and capitulating with our Sword in our hands, ^^ing encouraged
thereto, as well by our own ^nnocency, and the equity of those things, upon
(...) we had grounded our Resolutions: As also for (...) we could not think our
fellow Soldiers of the Army, who with us engaged at New Market He^^^ would
fight against us, for upholding the said solemn Engagement, wherein they were
equally concerned and obliged with us, both as Soldiers and Commoners to each
other, to us, and the whole Nat^^^, with whom it was made. But indeed, this
Treacherous Tragedy was principally managed and acted by (that Turn Coat)
Reynolds, and his Regiment; who for the most of them were Strangers to that
Engagement. A company of Blood-thirsty Rogues, Murderers, Thieves,
High-way-men, and some that were taken in Colchester, and such as were
cashiered out of other Regiment, for high misdemeanors, being entertained
therein. And these were the men principally designed, and to be trusted against
us, as most fittest to fight for the truth of the Scriptures, and such Saints
as the Lieutenant General These are of the men that usually asperee the Peoples
best Friends with such Language, as Atheists, Levellers, Anti-Scripturists, and
who lives more like such, then they? for it is they who ruin all, and destroy
Propriety, by their Arbitrary and Lawless Power; and who more like Jesuits
they themselves for crafty Policy, Lying, and Treachery? and certainly these be
the effects, or fruits of Atheism: For by their works you shall know them.


But to return. Hereupon our Officers leaving us, we choose new ones, and
disposed of our Colors, and immediately drew up a Declaration, wherein we
signified the Resolutions of the General (upon our refusal to go for Ireland)
in a s^ght and unworthy manner to disband us, after our so many years hard and
faithful Services; which (...) then knew to have been practiced upon many of
our fellow Soldiers in Colonel Hu^son, and Cooks Regiments; and thereupon, we
resolved to stand to our former Engagement made at New Market; which the
proceedings of the General and our Officers, did expressly contradict and make
void. This Declaration was publicly read as our Rendeavous in old Sarum, where
four Troops of Commissarie General Iretons met us, and unanimously assented to
by both Regiments; whereupon our conjunction we advanced to Marlborough, and so
to Vantage, where Commissioners from the General met us, to wit, Major White,
Captain Scotten, Captain Pev^^al, and Captain Lieutenant Baily, with whom that
day we did nothing, but agreed to meet at Sta^ford Green, the next morning by
eight of the Clock, where we were all according to appointment, but the
Comm^ssioners not coming, we marched out of the field, on our way toward
Abbington; and as we were upon our march the Commissioners came posting after
us, and we presently made a Hault; then they overtaking us, and told us, They
had Order from the General, and Lieutenant General, to hear our Desires, and
endevor the Composure of our Differences; then they rea^ a Letter unto us from
the General, which took but little effect upon our Spirits; and so marching a
little is further, two of Col. Harrison Troops, to wit, Cap. Picks and Captain
Winthrops were marching to their Quarters, where Cornet Den and diverse others
met them, And read a Declaration to them, and used many glorious invitations of
them to desire them to come and join with us, making appear the lawfulness of
our cause, telling them that we were resolved to stand to our first principles,
and that if there were but ten men would stand for those just things, he would
make the eleventh, with diverse such like expressions, the two Troops being very
willing to be satisfied in the lawfulness of the engagement, telling us they
were marching to Th^^n^, and the next morning we should know their resolutions:
But as we were marching back again, before we were half out of the field, we
spied a party of horse, which it seemed was the Apostate Reynolds with his
mercenary damme crew (such as in our hearing most desperately swore, That if
the Devil would come from hell and give them a great a day more then the State,
they would fight for him against the Levellers or any others) well, upon this
we drew out a Forlorn hope, and thereupon two Troops of Colonel Harrisons
marched with us toward them; they retreated toward New-^ridge and kept it by
force against us, but we unwilling to shed blood, or to be the original
occasion of a new war (though they have often branded us with it as if we wholly
sought it) but our actions did then clearly manifest the contrary; for we
seeing Soldiers, coming in a Hostile manner against us as aforesaid, did meet
them, having forty or fifty of them at our mercy, and could have destroyed
them, for we had them two miles from the foresaid bridge, but we did not then in
the least offer them any violence or deminish a hair of their heads, but let
them go to their body again, and withal marched to a Ford, because we would
not in the least be on occasion of any bloodshed; And having marched through
the Ford into the Marsh on the other side, we called our Council together, who
referred the appointment of our quarters to Lieut. Ray, and Cornet Den, who
designed us for Burford, where being in the Treaty with the Commissioners, and
having intelligence, that the General and Lt. General were upon their march
toward us, many of us several times, urged to Major White, and pressed upon
him, that he came to betray us, to which he replied. That the General and
Lieutenant General had engaged their Honors not to engage against us in any
Hostile manner till they had received our Answer, no not so much as to follow
their Messengers or Commissioners with force, and being too credulous to the
Generals words, knowing that he never broak engagement with the Cavaleers in
that kind; We gave the more credit to the Major, who seemed extreme forward and
hasty to make the Composure, pretending so far to approve of our standing for
the things contained in our engagement at Triplo-Heath, that himself with our
consents drew up a Paper in Answer to the General for us, so fully according
to our desires as that it gave us satisfaction, so that the Agreement betwixt
the Generals Commissioners and us, seemed to be even concluded and at an end,
And for full satisfaction take Copy of the said Letter which is as follows:

Nay it please your Excellency.
We are your Excellencies Soldiers, who have engaged our lives under your
Excellencies conduct, through all difficulties and hazards in order to the
procurement of Freedom Safety and Peace to this Nation, and our selves as
Members thereof, and being lately designed by lot to be divided, and sent over
into Ireland for the prosecution of that service, in order to the Peace and
safety of this Commonwealth, which we think necessary to be performed, but
looking back to take a view of our former proceeding, we find that we cannot
in conscience to our selves, in duty to God, this Nation, and the rest of our
fellow soldiers undertake that service, but by such a decision as is Agreeable
to our solemn Engagement made at New Market Heath, the 5 of June 1647. where we
did in the presence of God, with one consent solemnly engage one to another,
not to disband nor divide, nor suffer our selves to be disbanded nor divided,
Until satisfaction and security was received by the judgment of a counsel
consisting of two Officers and two Soldiers together with the General
Officers that did concur, such satisfaction and security as that engagement
refers unto; And being now departed from our obedience to you because you keep
not Covenant with us: yet we shall not in the least barber any evil thought or
prejudice against you, nor use any act of hostility, unless necessitated
thereunto in our own defense, which we desire God to prevent; All that we
desire (and we speak it in the presence of God, who knows our hearts) is, that
your Excellency will call a General Council according to the solemn
Engagement. In the Judgment whereof we will acquiesse, and refer our selves to
them to take an account of our late actions. This being assured we will every
man with cheerfulness return to our obedience, and submit to your Excellency
and the Judgment of that Council in all mattters that concern us as Soldiers,
or Members of this Commonwealth; this we beg of your Excellency to grant, out
of the respect of your duty to God, this Nation, and the Army, that we may
thereby retain our peace with him and procure the happiness of this Nation
under him, which is the desire of our souls: If you shall deny us this, we
must lay at your door all the Misery, Bloodshed and Ruin that will fall upon
this Nation and Army; for we are resolved as one man by Gods assistance to
stand in this Just desire, and although our bodies perish, yet we shall keep
our consciences clear, and we are confident our souls will be at peace; now
till we have a full determination herein, we desire your Excellency will
forbear all manner of hostility, or marching toward us for avoiding any
inconveniences that may come to our selves or the Country; these desires with
affection being granted, we hope the falling out of friends will be the
renewing of love, And we shall subscribe and manifest our selves your
Excellencies faithful Soldiers, and servants to this Commonwealth.


But to return, during the time of treaty, while the Commissioners thus
assured us all security, one of them, to wit, Captain Scotten privately slipped
from us, and two others, to wit, Captain Bayley and Peverill left notes at
every Town of our strength and condition, whilst Major White held us in hand,
and told us, that if they fell upon us, he would stand between the bullets and
us: So that when notice had been sufficiently given, and we with all the means
that could be used, wrought into a secure condition at Burford, and after the
setting of our Guard, which was commanded by Quartermaster More who was
thereupon appointed, by his Brother Traitor, Cornet Den (who himself) since his
coming to London has avowedly declared to M^. W.W. to this effect that his
beginning, and continuing with the Burford Tro^^^ was out of premeditated and
complotted design, that so at last he might the easier bring on their
destruction, holding all the time he was with them, correspondency with the
Generals creatures, which said Quartermaster More after he had set the guard
in this slight manner, and possessed us with as much security as he could, and
under the pretense of going to refresh himself and horse, did most villanously
and treacherously leave the guard without any Orders, and himself in person
posted away to the Generals forces and brought them in upon us, marching in the
head of them with his sword drawn against us; And Quartermaster More being
afterward called Traitor by some of the Soldiers, Cap. Gotherd of Scroops
Regiment made answer, he was none, for that he did nothing but what he was sent
to do; so that most Treacherously, that same night the Generals forces came
pouring on both sides of the Town of Burford, where we had not been above
three hours, swearing, Damme them and sink them, and violently fell upon us,
and so by a fraudulent and Treacherous surprise defeated us, not expecting it
during the Treaty, especially from them with whom we had joined these seven
years for the defense of Englands Liberties and Freedoms, and though diverse of
us had fair quarter promised us by Colonel Okey, Major Barton and the rest of
the Officers then with them, as that not a hair of our heads should perish, yet
did they suffer their soldiers to plunder us, strip us, and barbarously to use
us, worse then Cavaliers, yea Cromwell stood by to see Cornet Tomson, Master
Church and Master Perkins murdered, and we were all condemned to death,
although Colonel Okey, Major Barton and others of the Grandees had engaged that
not a hair of our heads should perish, when they surrendered themselves unto
them, Tompson being then at the head of a party of two Troops of horse, and the
other with their fellow Soldiers made good their Quarters while they had the
conditions promised them, and then Cromwell after this horrid murder was
committed upon the three forementioned, contrary to Okeys, Bartons and others
of their promises at their taking them, came to us in the Church, and making
his old manner of dissembling speeches, told us it was not they that had saved
our lives, but providence had so ordered it, and told us that he could not deny
but that many of the things that we desired were good, and they intendended to
have many of them done, but we went in a mutinous way, and disobeyed the
Generals Orders; but withal he told us that we should not be put off with
dishonorable terms, because we should not become a reproach to the common
Enemy: but we desire all unbyassed men to judge, whether ten shillings a man,
and a piece of paper for seven years Service, be honorable terms: the paper
being good for nothing but to sell to Parliament men's Agents, who have set them
a work to buy them for three shillings, or four shillings in the pound at most;
and we are forced to sell them to supply our wants, to keep us from starving,
or forcing us to go to the high way, by reason they will not pay us one penny
of our Arrears any other way but by papers, that so they may rob us and the
rest of the Soldiers of the Army of their seven years Service, to make
themselves and their adherents the sole possessors of the late Kings Lands for
little or nothing: and for ought we know, the moneys they buy our Debenters
withal, is the money the Nation cannot have any account of. But this their
dealing is not only so to us, whom they pretend disobeyed their commands; but
they dealt so basely by other Soldiers who never resisted their unjust
Commands, as we believe no age can parallel: For in the first place, they
turned them off with two months pay. Secondly, They have taken away three parts
of their Arrears for Free Quarter, though the Country (whose victuals, grass
and corn they eat) be never the better; and do also force them to sell their
papers at the rate aforesaid. And de^^ Fellow Soldiers, think not, because you
are in Arms a little longer then we, that you shall speed better then we, which
they have disbanded before you; but be assured, that when they have their own
ends served on you, as they have already on (...), you shall have as bad
conditions of them, and may be, worse, if it be possible, then we have had
before you; and may also reward you for your good services, by raising a
company of mercenary Rogues to cut your throats, as they did traitorously to
cut ours at Burford.

But to return, from this sad and long digression: by this their serpentine
craft, and our own over credulous innocence, we were overthrown, and our
hopeful beginnings for the rescue and deliverie of our selves and the nation
from thraldom, blasted and destroyed; and then utterly to break and dash in
pieces our spirits, and in us all Assertors of the Freedoms of England, and to
put an utter inconfidence and jealousy for ever amongst such upon all future
engagements, they made that wretched Judas Den, to that end their pandor and
slave: they pretendedly spare his life after his condemnation to death,
although now upon good grounds and intelligence, (yea partly from his own
confessions as is noted before) we do believe that from the beginnings of our
proceedings, he was their appointed Emissary (as well as the forementioned
Quartermaster) to be most zealous and forward of any man for us, the better to
compass our ruin and lead us like poor sheep to the slaughter; they enjoyne
Den, to preach Apostasy to us in the Pulpit of Burford Church, to assert and
plead the unlawfulness of our engagement, as much as before the lawfulness to
vindicate, and justify all those wicked and abominable proceedings of the
General, Lieutenant General and their officers against us, howling and
weeping like a Crocadile, and to make him a perfect Rogue and villain upon
everlasting Record, to which like the most abhorred of mank^nd to bring about
their pernicious ends upon the people, he willingly submitted, and to this end
published a Recantation paper fraught with lies, infamies and most Traiterous
assertions of an arbitrary power evidently tending to the introduction thereof
upon this Nation in the persons of the chief Leaders of the Army, and in that
paper at the advantage of this wicked and treacherous overthrow of ours
endeavored to bury our sollemn Engagement at New market heath in our ruins,
as if long since cancelled and of no longer force or obligation, pretending
that by petition we had called home our council of Agitators and so dissolved
our engagement at New Market heath, And so the Army absolved from all further
observation thereof.

Now to this, is to be considered, that the said engagement was radical upon
the grounds of common freedom, safety, and security to the Nation, and upon
that account and to that end only undertaken and solemnly made, and all
righteous oaths, vows, and covenants are indissolveble and of force till their
full and perfect accomplishment; the Apostasy and defection of no man, though
of him or those that vows, or makes such oaths or engagements can absolve or
untie them; and this no man that has any spark of Conscience or Christianity
in him can deny. Therefore it was most deceitfully and corruptly urged, that
the same power that gave it a being dissolved it; for till the vows of that
engagement be paid unto the people, it stands firm and obligatorie, till then
the gates of hell a^e not able to prevail against the being and obliging power
thereof; and we are sure none can say, the genuine ends and intents of that
engagement are yet obtained, but a thousand times further off, then at the
making of that vow: besides, as that engagement enjoynes, what security or
satisfaction to their private or public rights, both as Soldiers and
commoners, have we or the rest of our fellow soldiers yet received from a
council consisting of two Soldiers chosen out of every Regiment, two
Commission officers with such General officers only as assented to that
undertaking, when or where was it? Indeed had such a Council so concluded, and
we the soldiers by our unanimous testimony and subscription (as we did to our
engagement) testify our satisfaction, there might have been some plausible
pretense for its dissolution; but to this day it is evident to the whole world
that no such thing has been, and this was the express letter and intent of
that New Market engagement; and to urge a petition for recalling the Agitators
is a blind excuse; for put the case there had been such an one, and that of
general concurrence yet could it not detract or any way diminish from that
righteous engagement; though the defection and subscription were both of
General, Officers and Soldiers, yet the foundation of that Vow stands sure
to us all, it is immovable till its own proper end, viz. the accomplishment of
the right^ous end therein contained, affix its period: which we earnestly
desire, may be conscienciously and seriously laid to heart by all our
fellow soldiers in solemn covenant with us; for there is a God that
over-seeth, and one day (when there will be no Articles of War to prevent) will
call us to a strict reckoning for the breach of our faith and vows one to
another, and the Nation, and account with us for all the blood, ruin, misery
and oppression that thereby has ensued, and still depends upon that most
monstrous Apostacy. That pretended Petition at that day will be found to be
but a broken reed to lean upon, it will nothing abate of the guilt: and
how-ever it is now highly urged to wipe off all worldly dishonor from the iron
Rulers of our age, we are not such strangers to the Army, if any such
Army-Petition were, as not to know it: Sure we are, no such Petition can be
produced from any single Troop, Company, or Regiment, much less from the
Army. And though some such endeavors were for the promotion of so wicked and
vile an enterprise, and now as evilly made use of; yet it never fell under the
cognizance of the Army, neither yet of any single entire Regiment, Troop or
Company; and the Engagement by the Army was made as an Army, by unanimous
consent, and therefore no otherwise dissolvable, but unanimously as an Army and
that neither otherwise then righteously, after the tenor and true intent of
that Engagement, as we have clearly evinced, and therein have discharged our
Consciences: See further upon this Subject a late Book of Aug. 1649. Lieut.
Col. John Lilburne, Entitled, An Impeachment of High Treason against Oliver
Cromwell, and Henry Ireton Esquires page 4, 5. See also the 40, 41, 42, 43, 81,
pages of the second Edition of his Book of the eight of June 1646. Entitled,
The Legal Fundamental Liberties of the People of England, asserted, revived,
and vindicated.

Thus we have truly stated the case of our late proceedings and differences
betwixt our Officers and us, and hope sufficiently to beget a right
understanding and approvement, especially with all honest and conscientious
people, of the equity of our late undertakings: however to those that are and
shall come after, we have published and left upon record a perfect view and
Prospect of our condition, that if the present Perusers shall not, yet happily
that those that are to come may be thereby provoked to consideration thereof,
and equal resentment with us of the righteous ends of that now betrayed,
deserted, Engagement of the Army, which we chi^y desire and expect at the hands
of our Fellow Soldiers, that they may not longer like their Leaders be numbered
amongst such as will not be limited or circumscribed within any Bounds,
Engagements, Oaths, Promises, or Protestations, but level, break, frustrate
and throw off all, (as if no ties betwixt man and man were to be on mankind) to
bring about the corrupt ends of their ambition and avarice, as not only in this
case of ours, but in all others of their public undertakings since the
beginning of the Armies Engagement is clearly manifest, and yet all their
successes, and advancements over the People, gaind by their perjury, fraud,
equivocations, treacheries and deceipts they ascribe to the immediate approving
hand of God, and zeal over their delusions with the glorious exercise of
Religious formalities to the eye of the People, by which a thick mist, as thick
as the Egyptian darkness is lately come over the eyes of the greatest
pretenders to true puriritie and Religion, and many conscientious people
therewith bewitched into the favor and approvement of their alone Jesuitical,
wicked, desperate and bloody ways, even to the opposition and persecution of
the most faithful and constant promoters of, and sufferers for, the just
freedoms of the Nation.

But in case our fellow Soldiers will not remember their vows, but still
slight and desert the same their sin be upon their own heads, we have
discharged our selves: yet considering they may again possibly incline to their
countries redemption (as laboring more under ignorance then willfulnes) we
shall offer them and all others that bear good will to the Nation, what in
reason and Equity is most conducing to a safe and well grounded peace amongst
us, and which by its greatest Adversaries cannot be denied but to be righteous
and just, though contadictory to the lawless Lordship and ambitions of their
Officers.

And first, We desire it may be considered, that our Hostile engagements
against the late King, was not against him as out of any personal enmity, but
simply and singly against his Oppressions and Tyranny on the People, and for
their removal, but the use and advantage on all the success God has been
pleased to give us is perverted to that personal end, that by his removal the
Ruling swordmen might intrude into his Throne, set up a Martial Monarchy
more cruel, Arbitrarie and Tyrannical then England ever yet tasted of, and
that under the Notion of a Free State, when as the People had no share at all
in the constitution thereof, but by the perjurie and falseness of the
Lieutenant General and his Son in Law Ireton with their Faction was enforced
and obtruded by mere conquest upon the People, a Title which Mr John Cook in
his Book Entitled, King Charles his Case, etc. there confesses to be more fit
for Wolves and Bears then amongst men, and that such Tyrants that do so govern
with a rod of Iron, do not govern by Gods permissive hand of approbation, and
in such Cases its lawful for a People to rise up and force their deliverance,
See page 8, 10.

Now, rather then thus to be vassallaged, and thus trampled and trod under foot
by such that over our backs, and by the many lives, and loss of our blood from
us and our fellow soldiers, have thus stepped into the chair of this hateful
Kingship and presumption over us, in despite and defiance of the consent,
choice, and allowance of the free-people of this Land (the true fountain and
original of all just power, (as their own Votes against Kingly Government
confess) we will choose subjection to the Prince, choosing rather ten thousand
times to be his slaves then theirs, yet hating slavery under both: and to that
end, to avoid it in both, we desire it may be timely and seriously weighed,

That whereas a most judicious and faithful Expedient to this purpose, has,
(...) A Peace Offering been tendered to the acceptance of the free people of
England, entitled, An Agreement of the People, dated May 1 1649, from our four
faithful Friends, now close prisoners in the Tower of London, we cannot but
judge, that that way of Settlement, to wit, by an Agreement of the People, is
the only and alone way of atonement, reconciliation, peace, freedom, and
security (under God) to the Nation; it being impossible by way of Conquest to
allay the feud, divisions, parties and Quarrels amongst us, which if not stopped,
will certainly devour us up in Civil and domestic Broils, though we should
have none from abroad; for the Sword convinces not, it does but enforce; it
begets no love, but fomenteth and engenders hatred and revenge; for blood
thirsts after blood, and vengeance rages for vengeance, and this devoureth
and destroys all where it comes. And though our present Rulers have settled
themselves and their conquest-Government over us; yet are we farther from peace
and reconciliation then ever: the discontents and dissatisfact^ons amongst the
people in the Kings time, which at length burst into desperate War) was not
the hundredth part so great as the discontents that are now; and if so much did
follow the lesser, can better be expected from the greater? never were there
such repinings, heart-burnings, grudgings, envyings and cursings in England as
now, against the present Governors and Government; never such fraction and
division into parties, b^nding, biting, countermining and plotting one against
another for preheminency and majority then now; and of all this nothing is the
cause, but this way of force and martial obtrusion: And can it be imagined
such counterplottings, repinings and divisions can be with safety and peace? it
is impossible: Insurrections, tumults, revoltings, war and commotions are the
proper issues of the ways of such violence, and no better is to be expected:
none but intruders, usurpers and tyrants can be for the way of forc^; such as
would be but servants to the people, and not make the people their servants,
cannot but abhor it, and lay down their glory at the feet of the people: these
(that now ramp and rage over us) were they other then Tyrants, could do no
less: they draw near it indeed in words, but are as far as hell from it in
actions; they vote and declare the People the supreme Power, and the original
of all just Authority; pretend the promotion of an Agreement of the people,
style this the First year of Englands Freedom, entitle their Government a Free
State, and yet none more violent, bloody and perverse enemies thereto; for not
under pains of death, and confiscation of lands and goods, may any man
challenge and promote those rights of the nation, so lately pretended to by
themselves: if we ask them a Fish, they give us a Scorpion, if bread, they give
us a stone. Nothing but their boundless, lawless wills, their naked swords,
Armies, arms and ammunition is now law in England; never were a people so
cheated, so abused and trod under foot; enough to inrage them (as once the
children of Israel against Adoram) to stone them to death as they pass the
streets; which some could not certainly escape, were it not for the fiery
sword, vengeance that surrounds them, which at the best is but the arm of
flesh, for their shelter and protection, and may fail ere they are aware: all
sorts of people watch but for their opportunity, and if it once come like a
raging sea on Pharaoh and his host, they will swallow and devour them up alive:
and sure, this kind of constitution of Government thus by force in despite of
the people obtruded and settled, thus grutched, cursed and hated, will never
bring any peace, quiet or rest unto this Nation, it will be but as a continual
fire in their bones: therefore this conquest Constitution is not the way of
Englands peace: There is but two ways, by Conquest, or Agreement; by fire and
sword, or by compact and love; and both these are contrary to each other as
light is to darkness, and take their rise from ^^^trary ends; and the way of
love must needs be of God, for God is love, and all ^^^ways are love; therefore
we are bold of all other ways and Expedients whatsoever (...) commend only this
way of love, of popular Agreement to the public con^ for a well founded and
safe settled peace: and upon this account, and no other, (...) any security or
enjoyment be expected to any public transactors in this Eng^^^^ Theatry,
whether Prince or others. We believe, he that now judges otherwise, (...) at
the length, it may be, when it is too late, find himself as much deceived, as
he (...) lost his head against his own Palace gate.

Therefore considering there can be no sure building without a firm foundation,
and for prevention of further homebred divisions and backslidings (...) blood,
we desire our fellow Soldiers for their several Regiments of Horse and Foot
to choose their respective Agents to consider of this way of Peace, that (...)
at length they may be isntrumental in saving (as now they are in destroying)
th^^ Nation; but considering what unsetledness, and wavering from their
principles, has appeared among them, and how slender grounds we have of their
return from Apostasy, we heartily desire that all serious and well-affected
people, that have any bowels of compassion in them to an afflicted, distressed
nation, any sense of piety, justice, mercy or goodness in them, any hatred to
oppression or remorse of spirit, (...) the afflicted, or desire of deliverance,
or freedom from their worse then Egyptian bondage, that they would lay the
miserable condition of the Nation to heart and unite themselves in their
endeavors for a new, equal, and speedy Representative^ and we humbly offer
this motion as a just expedient to that end that they would choose two or three
or more faithful persons from their several and respective Counties of the
Land to come up to London to demand the freedom and release of the Owners and
Publishers of the foresaid Agreement unjustly detained in Prison by Will and
Force, (...) debate and consult with them etc. of some way if possible to
accomplish the said Agreement, before a deluge of Intestine insurrections and
Foreign Invasions from Ireland, Scotland, Swethland, Denmark, France, and
Spain, sweep us away from (...) Land of our Nativity; and for our parts we do
declare, that though we have (...) thus abused and defeated, we have still the
hearts of Englishmen in us, and (...) freely (if there be occasion) spend the
Remainder of our strength and blood, (...) the redemption and purchase of an
Agreement of the People, upon the foresaid p^^^ciples, the which for the
satisfaction of such as have not seen it, We have hereunto annexed the
forementioned draught of the said Agreement of our 4. impriso^^^ Friends in the
Tower of London, as containing those things our souls like and approve of as
the most exactest that our eyes have seen, and commend the effect^^^ promoting
of it to the serious consideration of all the true hearted friends of (...)
miserable and distressed Nation, and rest

The Nations true Friends and hearty Wel-wishers w^^^^ we have a drop of blood
running in our Veins.

Signed at London this 20 of August 1649, by us John Wood Humphry Marston
Robert Everard William Hutchinson Hugh H^rst James Carpe^
in the behalf of our selves, and by the appointment of the rest of our
forementioned Friends of the three forementioned Regiments.

FINIS.

