A Letter to the Right Honorable THOMAS ALYN Lord Mayor of The City of London,
sent to him from the Committee appointed To Disperse The General Remonstrance
and Protestation of the 16th of November last, into the Several Cities and
Conuties of ENGLAND and WALES, To be by him Communicated to the Aldermen, and
Common Counsel of the said City.
December 6th 1659. At the Committee appointed to disperse the General
Remonstrance and Protestation, into the several Cities and Counties of England
and Wales. Right Honorable,
WE being appointed by lawful Authority, to disperse the General Remonstrance
and Protestation as aforesaid, have thought good hereby, to direct the same
here enclosed to your Lordship, desiring you to communicate the same to the
rest of your Brethren the Worshipful Aldermen, and together with them, to the
Court of Common Council of the City of London; and to do therein, as by the
printed Letter herein also enclosed, or as by the Remonstrance it self is
directed, or otherwise, as to Your and their Grave wisdoms shall seem most
meet. We very well know that your Lordship, and the Aldermen, with the Court of
Common Council, are really sencible of the great and miserable distractions,
and confusion the three Nations are at present almost overwhelmed with, and of
the sudden and great decay of Trade by reason thereof; but especially of that
sad and miserable distraction, and confusion which happened in this famous City
on Monday the 5th instant, and of the several notorious Murders then Committed:
all which, we conceive, have been of late chiefly occasioned by the
interruption of the Parliament, the 13th of Oct. last; and also, that the and
distractiaons and decay of Trade, is like to grow every day worse and worse,
unless some speedy way and means be found out, to put a stop to the Torrent of
the Rampant Sword, that so the Parliament may again return with safety, to the
free exercise and discharge of their trust in settling the Government of these
Nations, upon true and sure Foundations of a Free State and Commonwealth; by
which all the good people of these Nations, both as men and Christians, may
enjoy their Common and equal Rights and Freedoms, both in their Persons and
Estates, which undoubtedly is, and will be, the only, speediest, and most
probable way and means, for a full and free Trade once more to flourish in
these Nations, to the encouragement of all Art, labor and industry, the only
Glory and Sinews of a good and well ordered Commonwealth. And to the end no
doubt may remain in your Lordship, whether the said Parliament be the lawful
Supreme Legislative Authority of these Nations, be pleased for your better
information therein, to read the Statute of the 16 Cor. 7. whereby it is
declared and enacted, That this Parliament shall not be dissolved, prorogued,
or adjourned, but by Act of Parliament to be past for that purpose, nor shall
at any time or times be adjourned, unless it be by themselves or by their own
order; And that all and every thing, and things whatsoever, done or to be done
for the adjourning, proroguing or dissolving the said Parliament contrary to
the said Act, shall be utterly void, and of no effect; By which, as also by the
several reasons and grounds for the making the said Act declared in the
preamble thereof, together with the Parliaments answer to the Kings Letter of
the third of March 43, Printed in the Book of Collections of public Orders,
and Ordinances, etc. fol. 451, by which with the advice and concurent consent
of the Commissioners of Scotland, for the better solution of the said question,
the PARLIAMENT told the KING, That they were bound to let him know, that they
were called together according to the known FUNDAMENTAL LAWS of the Nation, and
their continuance settled and established by a Law, and therefore they were
bound in duty, and accordingly did then resolve with their lives and fortunes
to preserve and defend the just Rights and Authority of this Parliament, and
likewise by several other arguments and reasons, very fully and learnedly set
forth and printed in the same and other books, your Lordship may and will fully
and clearly understand, that notwithstanding all or any of the seclutions and
interruptions they have or shall at any time meet withal, yet so long as the
said Act stands unrepeall'd, and that a Quorom according to the ancient Custom
of England of the Members that last sat are living, they are and unavoydably
must and will be the Lawful and Supreme Legislative Authority of these
Nations; And therefore not to trouble your Lordship any further, but hoping
according to the duty of your place, and the trust reposed in you, being
Lawfully called to so high and Honorable place and Seat of Authority, your
Lordship will speedily use all Lawful ways and means for restoring this
Parliament to the safe and free exercise, and discharge of their trust for the
ends aforesaid, which we judge will undoubtedly be by the assisting hand of
Gods providence, the only means under Heaven to heal all our breaches, put an
end to all our public distractions, which at present is ready even to swallow
us up in a Flood of general Confusion: Free us from that Bondage and Slavery
the people of these Nations for many years past, but especially at prefent are
like to undergo by forceable imprisoning their persons, and violent seizing
upon and taking away their Estates contrary unto, and against the known and
good Laws of this Commonwealth, and that this poor miserable and divided Nation
but once flourishing, and now a scorn and reproach to all Nations, by reason
of our distractions and often changes may as formerly again become a terror to
all the Nations round about it, and your Lordship may be confident that no
assembly of men in these Nations Rebus sic Scantibus can be better confided in,
to secure the promises unto us then this Parliament, who have all along been
and now are engaged for the same things; And let not your Lordship and the City
of London think that they shall be alone in this good work, for all the
Counties in England and Wales are engaged in the same as by the Remonstrance
your Lordship may understand, and within very few days will be ready to lend
their assistance thereto, so that having Nakedly and plainly laid before your
Lordship the hearts and spirits of the people engaged in this Remonstrance, and
their good affections to this work, we doubt not but that your Lordship and
this City will be ready and willing to do the same, that so this good work may
if possible without the expense of blood be soon finished, and all just
interests thereby fully satisfied, and all persons have cause to rejoice that
they can once more set down under the wholesome Vines of peace and safety.

Signed in the name, and by the consent and appointment of the Commit. JOHN
FREEMAN, Clerk to the said Committee.

For the Right Honorable Thomas Allyn, Lord Mayor of the City of London.
London Printed by I. C.


