A LETTER Written from a Person of worth to a Friend of his in LONDON:
Discovering London and the Kingdoms Danger, and advising the City to adhere to
the Parliament.

TOGETHER, With a Just and fair REMONSTRANCE of the Honest and Ingenious People
of one of the Neighboring Counties.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1647.

COmmend me to Nol Nod, and tell him that he has very good friends abroad,
that will not see him starved in these hard times; assure Mr. Sorwind that he
is in some danger, tell him he had need be well victuall'd, and manned in these
straights, the sooner the better. Did you not hear the News from France, that
Mounsieur Liamentrap, and some of his friends are impeached of high Treason?
there is a very subtle plot laid to blow up Mr. Donys. Mr. Grips and his two
Sons are very active against Mounsieur Liamentrap they plead that we must all
be ruled by the Law of Nature; that Liamentrap has forfeited all and therefore
is not to be accounted himself. France, you know, is governed by a standing
Parliament, but standing pools gather mud, and therefore must be drawn dry, and
rid once a year; all he power, say the Populars, is in the people, they set up
the Parliament, and they may pluck it down. On the other side it is pleaded,
that the Populars have a mind to introduce Tyranny and Anarchy both at once;
for if they (do in the State, or in an Army, as they have done in the Church)
place all the power in the Body, and none in the Officers, the body of the Army
being most commonly corrupt, the Officers must not be Dissenters under pain of
cashiering, or somewhat worse; It is whispered that London is like to be
besieged: and Mr. Grips said shrewdly, that though the Demands which Joyce and
his 400. men are about to make, will seem strange and unreasonable to the City
and Parliament, yet yield they must, says he, when they are under the Rod. The
King, they say, did forfeit all his Power by abusing it; and now the Parliament
have too after the like manner forfeited theirs. They talk of fortifying at
Reding Albey, of possessing Windsor Castle, keeping strong guards at Stains,
and at Kingston-bridge, that they may command the River. If some little
Garrilons were made 4. or 5. miles round about London, they could never come to
sit down before it; and if they sit down at a distance, it will be easy to
beat up their Quarters, and it will be impossible for them to relieve one
another, because they can never have any Communion of Quarters. If Donys were
dissolved, they might undeceive the honest and ingenious people in every County.

Put on heroical Spirits, brave Boys of Mars, the 20. Guns sent from hence
are only fit for to keep the Field, most of them were Sakers: the Pieces that
are for battery are as yet left behind; Mr. Grips and his two Sons are here
making Proselytes, but we are not easily persuaded though they assure us that
we do but rise against the rising Sun.

1. Nol nod 1. London. 2. Sorwinde 2. Windsor. 3. Donys 3. Synod. 4. Lionentrap
4. The Parliament.


The Happy Union.
WE of the County of -- observing (the overthrow of the Privileges both of
Parliament and people ^o be seriously endeavored by some (who were not long
since professed Cavaleers) now in Arms under the fair vail of their love to the
Parliament, make this fain and just Remonstrance to all true English hearts:

We consider, that if the Parliament of England be affronted, reviled,
threatened, and even almost forced in a mutinous and rebellious way, to Answer
the Demands of daring Cavaliers, the Parliament is then no free Parliament, and
the Act made by the three Estates for the Continuance of this Parliament being
violated, we have cause to fear, that no Parliament will ever hereafter be
free, or safe, and no Acts of Parliament be observed; and then no man can call
his wife, or lands, or goods his own; farewell Liberty and Property.

We cannot but believe, that the rich City is an inviting bait not only to
some poor hungry Soldiers, but to some rich, yet greedy, Commanders; If some
Members of either House, against whom nothing is yet proved, be demanded, must
London be besieged till eleven Members of the House be tried? Many women and
children, in all probability, will be aff^ighted out of their wits, and some
out of their lives; the free Trade of the Kingdom will be stopped, hundreds
undone, thousands starved, and the City of London sacked, and ruined by the
unjust practices of those who cry for Justice.

We do therefore by these Presents testify and declare, that we approve the
Piety, Nobleness, and Prudence of those Colonels, other Officers and
Soldiers, who refuse to jovn with those who are now drawing up in a Body to
besiege and force the two Houses of P^rliament, the famous Cities of London and
Westminster, and the adjacent parts to yield and submit to such Conditions as
these men in Arms shall think fit to put upon them. And we do clearly protest,
that we are ready upon Command to serve both the Houses, and the Cities with
our lives and Estates against these gallant Mutineers, who complain of
Grievances, and protest against Enemies, but will not declare what are their
Grievances, or who are their Enemies.

We observe, that by sundry Declarations, false suggestions, and otherwise,
these men in Arms do insinuate into the favor of those foolish people whom
they do daily oppress, by taking free quarter and otherwise; they promise in
lord to prevent effusion of blood, and yet endeavor to engage and embroyl more
Kingdoms then one in a bloody War; they vow that they will settle the just
Liberties of the People, whom they do more and more enslave.

Wherefore we call upon our Friends in this and the neighboring Counties, even
upon all our fellow subjects, to fall upon these Confederates (who are none of
our fellow subject, because they will not be subject to King or Parliament) and
doubt not but that all ingenious and honest people throughout the Land, will
detest and abhor the cursed practices of these vainglorious Hypocrites, now
they are thus clearly discovered to the world.

We hear, that Joyce and some of the Isle of Ely are to rule the King of three
Kingdoms, and the Parliament is to be in Wardship (now the Court of Wards is
down) to Wat Tyler and Jack Straw; Sirs, the Spirit of the English cannot (and
the Scottish Nation will not) bear it; only peradventure some Irish, French,
Spanish, Italian Negroes may come under Goring to do Justice upon London.

Friends, you of the meanest Rank, even you my Contrymen that handle the
Plough, and Whip, are freeborn English, and have as good a Commission as these
Disbanded Bands: Come take up your Swords and come away; you are Englishmen,
and may be Soldiers; Come, come let us cry for Justice, Justice against these
self-Justiciaries, and cry even whilst we are fighting and bleeding with one
lip and hand, we have not that Liberty, which true Englishmen are born to; and
we will rather dye than loose our Parliament, our Liberty, our London, our All.

By Command of the Honest and Ingenious People of our County.
June 22. 1647.
FINIS.

