A LETTER, Written to a Member of Parliament, Concerning the East India TRADE.
SIR,
THE many Obligations which you have laid upon me, might justly make me thought
guilty of the greatest Ingratitude, if I should in any thing omit a Compliance
with your Commands; and therefore without making that Apology which I might
well do to excuse my self, for my disability to give you that Satisfaction
which you may probably expect, I shall readily obey, and give you the best I
can, hoping you will excuse the defects, and accept my endeavors, and the
readiness of my Will, which (however my Power may) can never be wanting in any
thing of your Service.

The two Points on which you were pleased chiefly to require my thoughts, in
relation to the East India Trade, were these:

1st. Whither the Continuance of the East India Trade in the present Company,
and not permitting others to Trade, be most for the Interest of England, or of
the Dutch?

2ly. Whether that Trade may not be Settled, by adding 744000 l. by new
Subscriptions to the Stock of the present Company, as much to the advantage of
the Kingdom in general; as by a Company with a new Joint Stock of 15 Hundred
Thousand Pounds, or 2 Millions to be raised by new Subscriptions?

As to the first Point, Whether the continuance of the East India Trade in the
present Company, and not permitting others to Trade, be most for the Interest
of England, or of the Dutch? -- I must beg leave to observe to you, That the
great advantages which the Dutch have now over us in most Trades, is become the
subject of almost every ones Observation. So that it may well be accounted a
very Popular Objection to any thing, of which it can be said, that it is their
Interest, and especially in those Trades, wherein this Kingdom stands more
immediately in competition with them. -- The Members of the East India Company
were well aware of this Objection, and how justly it might be urged against the
Continuance of their Company; and their pretense of having the sole Trade of
the East Indies, exclusive of all others their Fellow Subjects; and therefore
they have made it their Business, to ward it off from themselves; and by sly
Insinuations, to cast it upon those, who have endeavored to procure the
Settlement of that Trade, on a National Foundation, thereby to retrieve and
preserve it: And they have so far succeeded in this Design, as to persuade some
unthinking men, That what is really and truly the strongest Argument in the
World, for the Determination of this Company, ought to be used in their
Defense, for its Continuance. And how false soever this their Assertion is in
it self, yet by the diligence, and assurance of those who Solicit their
Affairs, it has not wholly been without Success; having made an Impression in
the minds of some, (though there will not appear any shadow of Reason for such
an Opinion,) when it is seriously considered, That for several years past, this
Kingdom has been decreasing, and the Dutch increasing in that Trade; so that
indeed, they have had it in a manner wholly to themselves: For if our
East India Trade were compared with theirs, for these 4 or 5 years past, we
should find, that they have yearly had home above ten times as much Goods, as
our Company: and more particularly, the last year, the Dutch had 15 Ships
arrived from thence, richly laden, besides 3 that were lost, coming home:
whereas our Company had but one Ship, and she not full, and her Lading mean,
and of that, great part for private Accounts; notwithstanding that about half
the value of this Ships Cargo was drawn upon them by Bills of Exchange; and
this year the Dutch have had home 16 Ships richly laden; and we but 3 small
ones, with very poor Cargo's, (though great part on Permission;) all of them
together, not above the Burden, or near the Value of some one of the Dutch
Ships, or of one such Ship as we have been formerly used to have from thence.
The Dutch Cargo's, for these last two years only, are computed to amount to
about Five Millions Sterling, and ours not one Twentieth part so much: though
most East India Goods are worth in England at least one half part more, and
some above twice as much, as they are worth in Holland.

And whereas we formerly supplied Germany, Sweden, Denmark, France, Spain,
Italy, and even Holland it self, with most East India Goods, (Spices excepted,)
the Dutch have for several years past, not only furnished themselves, and all
all those Countries; but it is come to be our turn, to be supplied by stealth,
from Holland, with those Commodities, for our own Consumption; thus adding
another occasion, besides the War, to export our Bullion thither.

There is no need of Arguments, to show a thing so clear in it self, that this
Method of Trade, has already, and will in time much more Impoverish England,
and Enrich Holland; unless some speedy care be taken to prevent it. And
besides, the loss of our Exportation-Trade, for those Commodities, and the
great Burden and Tax which is laid on the whole Nation, by paying so dear for
all East India Goods, spent for our own Consumption; we are likewise obliged,
to pay so much more, for Taxes for the support of the War, than otherwise we
need to do. For if the East India Trade were drove to the height, as it would
be, if either a new Stock were raised, and a a new Company established; or all
the Subject; of England were permitted to enjoy that Trade, (as there is no Law
that prohibits them,) the Customs and Imposts payble on East India Commodities,
considering the high Duties which are now laid upon them, would amount to above
100000 l. per annum; and the whole Customs which the Company have paid, for all
their own, as well as Armenians, and other Men's Goods, which have been brought
home on their Ships, on permission, the last two years, has amounted but to
about 20000 l. which in two years time is above 180000 l. -- that the Nation
has lost on the Customs of East India Goods, merely by the continuance of this
Company, and hindering others from Trading. A Sum which could be but ill spared
at this time; and which would have excused some other Tax, being laid on the
Subject, to supply the want of it.

And this Calculation will seem very modest, when it is considered:

1st. That the Owners of one small Ship, arrived this year for particular
accounts, whose Cargo cost here but 16 or 17000 l. have paid near as much for
Customs, as what her whole Cargo cost; which is but little less than what the
Company have paid for all their own, and other men's Goods brought home on their
Ships, in two whole years Trade.

2ly. That if Protection had been allowed for 400 Seamen, to go to the
East Indies in 5 Ships this Season, according to the Petitions delivered Her
Majesty, -- by several Merchants, the Customs and Imposts which would have been
payable on the return of those Ships, would have amounted to above 60000 l. --
though the number of Seamen which they desired, be but one third part of what
are granted the late Company this year.

But I know it is objected by the Companies Friends, That their Determination
would cause an Interval of Trade; and the permitting others to Trade, as well
as the Company, would lose the Trade to the Dutch; and from thence they would
infer a necessity of their continuance, and hindering others from Trading:
Whereas the direct contrary of this is really true: For the continuance of the
Company, and hindering others from Trading is the only probable way for this
Nation to lose the Trade to the Dutch. And the Establishing a New Company, or
permitting all others to Trade, 'till it be settled, is the only way to preserve
the Trade to this Kingdom, and to prevent its falling wholly into the hands of
the Dutch; this Company has made an Interval of Trade, as they call it, for
several years together, for want of Stock to carry it on; and the certain way
to prevent the like for the future, would be for an Act to pass, declaring the
East India Trade open and free (as by Law it is) for all Their Majesty's
Subjects; that so none of them may be excluded from that Trade, to which they
have all equally a right, by the Law of the Land. And as such a declaratory Act
would not hinder the Company from Trading, as much as they can: So the Trade
which would then be driven, by others, would be a present and immediate
Enlargement of it; and be so much more Trade, than would have been driven by
the Company alone: Therefore a Freedom in this Trade, for all the Subjects of
England, would really prove the Cure of those evils, which the Company would
make us fear by it; for thereby the Trade would be effectually secured, and
fully carried on, without an Interval, or any danger of giving the Dutch the
opportunity to engross it wholly to themselves; which they have in a manner
done already, and are like to do more, by its continuing in the present
Company, and hindering others from Trading; and this would be a help, and
encouragement to other Traders, who have suffered such extraordinary losses,
and lain under so great discouragements in their other Trades during this War.

Such a Liberty of Trade, would certainly employ more Ships, and hands, in the
East India Trade, pay more Customs, make English Goods Sell dearer here, and
East India Goods cheaper; whereby the Nation would gain; and we should not only
supply our Consumption, with East India Goods directly from thence: but
likewise other Countries, as formerly we used to do: and though the Merchants
who drive the Trade may get the less, yet the Kingdom would nevertheless
certainly get the more.

And having thus given you my thoughts as to the first Point proposed, I shall
now consider the second, viz. Whether that Trade may not be Settled, by adding
744000 l. by new Subscriptions to the Stock of the present Company, as much to
the advantage of the Kingdom in general; as by a new Company, with a new
Joint Stock of 1500000 l. or Two Millions, to be raised by new Subscriptions.

This Question in a great measure Answers it self, for if a Joint Stock were
necessary to carry on that Trade, (which is a Proposition I am yet to be
convinced of) certainly a Stock of 1500000 l. or Two Millions, raised by new
Subscriptions, would be more National, and more likely to increase and enlarge
the Trade, and consequently would be more for the advantage of England, and
less for the Interest of Holland, than the adding 744000 l. to the Stock of the
present Company. For the 744000 l. so added, would be the whole Stock of the
Company, if the Debts and demands due from them should be no more than what
their Old Stock could discharge, but if they should exceed it (as it is most
probable they will) then the Money added by new Subscriptions, must go toward
the payment of them, and so great part of it would be swallowed up, and
consequently so much the less left to carry on the Trade; for if 744000 l.
should be added, there is so great a Debt now due, and to be paid in England,
(besides the 370000 l. for the 50 per cent. which they paid in last year, and
is now made a Debt to be repaid) that if they only pay their Debts in England,
there will be little or nothing left, wherewith to drive the Trade, till some
Ships arrive from India with a fresh supply. And for their Debts abroad, (if
they are ever paid) they will require a Prodigious Sum to discharge them, so
that this new Subscription will only serve to enable 2 or 3 great Men to pay
themselves, and draw out the fresh Money which may be brought in, and to give
the Company fresh Credit to Enable them to send out their 12 Ships this year,
as they did their 6 Ships last year by the help of the 50 per cent. which they
then called in, and could not do without it.

If it should be said that such an Establishment would give them credit to take
up what Money they would at Interest, I shall only Answer, that I Appeal to all
the World, if they have deserved so much Partiality from a Parliament to give
to them, and their Posterity for ever, all the advantage of this profitable
Trade, which they have already enjoyed so many years, and by which they have so
often divided their Original Stock; and that the rest of their Fellow Subjects
should sit down content with the bare Interest of their Money lent them to
drive that Trade.

And notwithstanding their pretense that their Stock cannot be thought less
worth than 744000 l. seeing the Parliament have rated it so much, and that
their being so Taxed, shows the Parliament were of Opinion 'twas worth it. The
contrary is too well known, and it is what they don't Believe themselves, and if
this Proposition should be credited, and others join with them on that
supposition, its the ready way for them to be cheated of their Money; and there
can be no color of Reason that the Company should have 744000 l. given them in
that Trade for nothing, but only admitting others into a share of it, who have
as much right to the Trade, by the Law of the Land, as the Company themselves;
nor is it reasonable, the Subjects of England should be forced to Purchase of
their Fellow Subjects, the admittance into a Trade at so dear a Rate, when they
cannot be Legally excluded from it.

If such a Conclusion could be drawn from their Stocks being Taxed at 744000 l.
as that it was really worth so much, it might well be supposed they procured
themselves to be Taxed so much, that so they might make use of that for an
Argument.

Its true, that in their Accounts given to the Parliament, they pretended their
Estate was much more than 744000 l. and perhaps their going about to Impose
such a Falsity on that Honorable House, by pretending their Estate was so much
more than really it was, might be a Reason why they were so Taxed, like the
Millers-Man in the West, who was Hanged for Lying and saying he was the Miller
himself; but if their Stock was not worth 744000 l. (as its evident it was not)
then their being rated so much, does not make their Stock the more, but its
certain it makes it the less. Such a Proposal as the adding 744000 l. to the
Companies Stock, can only be a means to give the whole Trade to the present
Company, or to endanger its being lost to the Dutch, and is so far from making
that Trade the more National, that it makes it the less, for they alone must
supply the 744000 l. and so have all that Trade to themselves, seeing that no
Body in his right Mind, will join with them upon those Terms; they themselves
may perhaps add to what they have there already, to make that worth something,
which now they know is otherwise worth nothing, and to be sure those who have
the Great Stocks will Subscribe 10000 l. each, to encourage others to do the
like; for its only paying back some of the Money which they have formerly
Divided, on purpose to put themselves (as they once said) out of the Power of
the Parliament. For to induce others to come into their Stock they offer
Personal Security to repay the Principle Money and Interest in 12 Months if
desired, That so Ignorant People, Widows, and Orphans who know nothing of such
Agreements, might by such Examples be drawn in to Buy or Subscribe: how Honest
it is to offer, or Prudent to accept such Proposals the World may judge; it
seems to me to be just like two Sharpers at Play, who agree together to Play
Booty and Cheat all the rest; but this is a new and extraordinary way of making
the Trade National and diffusive; and it cannot be supposed, it should ever
receive countenance from our Legislators, for it would be a strange recompense
for all the unjust actions which the Company have committed, as well toward
their Fellow Subjects, as the Natives in India, and for which they are justly
accounted, both a scandal to our Religion and Government, having been Voted
Murderers, and for their Illegal Proceedings, the Honorable House of Commons
have judged some of them, might be justly excepted out of the Act of Indemnity,
so that its inconsistent with the Honor and Justice of the Parliament to
establish this Company (who have so highly affronted them, by endeavoring to
baffle them, and procure an establishment in direct opposition to them) and
especially, after they have so justly censured them, and made two Solemn
Addresses to the King to have their Charters Dissolved.

The Establishing this Company, I say, at this time would plainly admit of the
Pretended Power of Excluding the Subjects of England from a Freedom of Trade by
Charter, to the Freedom of which they have not only a Right by Birth, but its
likewise particularly taken care of, and secured to them by several express
Statutes, the exercise of which Powers for want of being checked by former
Parliaments, has already given Color for a pretense to Claim it by
Prescription, the ill consequences of which no Man can foresee.

And it may well seem strange, that Grafting on this Company should now be
thought a reasonable Proposition, which was formerly thought so dangerous as
well as ridiculous, that it was very properly compared to the Grafting a Peach
on a Bramble; if some Men's Minds are changed, the Company and their Condition
are not, unless from bad to worse, they continue now as much a Bramble as ever
they were, and are still as dangerous and unfit to be Grafted upon, and will
certainly prove so, if there should be found any people so easy as to be
Wheedled into such a Project.

Thus Sir, I have in Obedience to your Commands, given you my Thoughts upon
those two points you desired, What I have said, I hope will be sufficient to
convince you, that the continuance of the present Company, and the hindering
others from Trading, is greatly prejudicial to this Kingdom in general, and is
chiefly for the advantage of the Dutch, and a few of the leading Men of this
Company, and that its certainly for the interest of this Nation in general,
that a New Company should be established by Act of Parliament to carry on that
Trade, either like the Turkey Company, or by a Joint Stock of 1500000 l. or
2000000 l. to be wholly raised by New Subscriptions.

And therefore it is absolutely necessary, that some speedy Resolution should
be taken in this matter, that so by the longer continuance of this Trade under
the late management, and hindering others from partaking of it, who cannot
Legally be Excluded, This Advantageous Trade may not be wholly given up to the
Dutch, and so be past retrieve; and to incline you the more to think of some
speedy and effectual course for preventing so great a mischief, and also to
enforce what I have already observed, I will add a Quotation out of a Treatise
of Trade, formerly written by Sir Josiah Child, and Reprinted this Year 1693,
who in his Preface says thus, I think no true English Man will deny that the
Season cries aloud to us, to be up and doing, before our Fields become
unoccupied, and before the Dutch get too much the Whip hand of us, (whom in
such a case were they free from their French Fears, which they labor under at
present) I fear we should find as severe Taskmasters as ever the Athenians
were to the lesser Trading Cities of Greece.

And if when this Gentleman wrote his said Treatise, there appeared such Danger
of the Dutch encroaching upon us in our Trade, it will certainly be granted by
all Thinking Men, that as the Danger with respect to the Trade of this Kingdom
in general, is not lessened, so particularly as to the East India Trade it is
now very much increased; and as he has farther observed in the same Preface,
neither are the Dutch the only Neighbors we have at this time for Corrivals in
Trade, but the French King, and King of Sweden, are now as Active, Circumspect
Industrious and Perspective too in this Affair, and have, and are ordering
things as prudently for promoting thereof, as the Dutch themselves.

To which Number there may likewise be added the Danes, Portugueze, and
Genoueses, who do not only Court and Promote all Trade in General, but in a
particular manner the East India Trade.

And as the securing the Turkey Trade from our Enemies has been thought a
matter Worthy the Care of the Honorable House of Commons, so its to be hoped
the preserving the East India from our Friends, will appear of such concern, as
that it will not be past over without due Consideration.

I heartily wish what I have wrote you on this subject, may convince you of the
Necessity there is, of declaring this Trade free for all the Subjects of
England, and then I am sure you will employ your self Vigorously therein, being
a matter of so great concern, as well for the securing the Rights and
Properties of the Subjects of England, as the Trade of this Kingdom; You may
perhaps think I have touched too slightly upon the Subject of a Regulated
Company. What I have been obliged to observe to you as to other matters, has
run this beyond the ordinary Bounds of a Letter, and will I doubt, tire your
Patience, besides that the other, is a point which requires a larger discussion
then my Time would allow me Opportunity for, -- But if you desire it, you know
you may command me in any thing, though I could wish you would require it from
some better Pen, least you should be Prejudiced against a Proposition, which if
accomplished, would be so extremely Advantageous to this Kingdom, for I am
fearful the Cause might suffer in your Opinion, by my ill managing the
Arguments which might be used for its Defense. I shall conclude, and only
assure you, that no one can be more than I am,

Sir, Your most Obliged Servant


