Considerations by way of Sober Queries, Whether the State and Condition of the
three Nations have been, or may be bettered, or made far worse, by the sitting
and acting of the Remnant of the Old Parliament, without a Free and Full
Assembly, chosen by the Consent and Election of the People, which are most
concerned therein.
By THO. LE WHITE Esquire
1. WHether Parliaments heretofore have not been the Darlings of the people,
and whether at present they are not the Starvelings of the Nation?

2. Whether the Parliament has either bettered the Church and State, or made
them worse (under the umbrage of reformation) since their putting down of
Kingship, Peers and Prelates?

3. Whether of late they have not made all the Counties in England their
enemies, in rejecting their Petitions and Addresses to them for a Free
Parliament, and whether it be not against Law, Reason and the ancient Custom
of England, to debarr the Counties and ancient Boroughs of their free choice of
Knights and Burgesses by limiting them with Qualifications?

4. Whether this way of Qualifications be not of the same nature with that of
Richard the second, who made choice of such members for a Parliament as fuited
to his own ends and pleasure, and on the regret and dislike of the people,
guarded and defended his packt Parliament Viris armatis et sagittarij, guarded
them with armed men and Archers?

5. Whether the Laws enacted by a confined Parliament, can either by Law or
reason, oblige the people to obey them, when as they shall be debarred the
freedom of their Elections, siince it is their Birthright to choose their own
Laws, by their Respresentative?

6. Whether this way of Qualification and debarring the Natives of they just
Rights, will not be a furtherance of the increase of our distractions, and in
the conclusion bring all to confusion?

7. Whether on these our distractions and disagreements, it may not invite
Charles Stewart (as they call him) to come in with a foreign Army, and to Land
his forces in sundry places as in the year 1600, Don John de Aquila did
Ireland; the more to distract the Queens forces, as at Kings-sayle, Baltimore
and Ben Haven?

8. Whether then he will not find ten for one that will side with him, and
whether then many of the Parliaments Soldiers will not revolt from them, and
adhere to him?

9. Whether then the Parliament will find any of their old fast friends, which
lent them their Money and Plate on the Public Faith, which they never
restored, or any of those, that all along the late war assisted and stood close
unto them, to the loss of all they had, yet never got any reparation, other
then slights and scorn, neither a groat more then out of old Olivers private
purse, and that also taken away from poor wounded and maimed Soldiers,
sufferers and redeemed slaves, whilst many of these which now do, and will fit
at the Helm, have inricht themselves beyond reason and measure?

10. Whether as the affairs of she Nation are now carried on, there are any
hopes of better times.

11. Whether, as concerning the Church, there is any expectation of bettering
it, since by those Commissioners authorized by the Parliament to put out all
^candalous and deboist Ministers, they have thrust out too many Pious and
Orthodox Divines, and placed ignorant Sectaries, and illiterate Mechanics in
their rooms, and many Churches left without any man, either to teach, preach or
pray; and the most considerable Livings let out by the Commissioners to their
Sonns or friends and servants, at the fifth part or less then the yearly
value, and yet no account given to the State whereby not so little as 100000
li. has been purs'd up in silence, which would, and may yet serve for payment
of the Soldiers, would the Parliament look into it in time.

12. Whether a stander-by, may not sometimes see more then they which play the
Game; and then whether it be seditious to tell the Gamesters wherein they
played amiss?

13. Whether then, in such cases, it be Felony or Treason publicly to declare
the wilful errors of a few, or such as will not be told of their faults,
especially when they concern a multitude, even the Peace and safety of the
Nations?

14. Whether it suits with Justice, that my Lord Craven should loose all his
Lands, when his greatest delinquency lies in the greatness of his Estate?

15. Whether it suits with Justice, that Sir John Stowell (though a most
notorious Delinquent) should not have the benefit of his Articles on the taking
in of Excestter, since the very Heathens evermore made good their faith given
to an enemy?

16. Whether it was not high ingratitude in those that have villified the parts
and person of the late Protector Oliver, both before his death and since, who
as all men knows, was the only instrument (under God) to reduce the three
Nations to peace and quietness: as also to disgrace, dishonor and distrengthen
both his worthy Sons?

17. Whether this Parliament has not of late years, and after they had quitted
themselves of the late Kings power, under pretense of supplying the Church with
able and Pious Mimsters, by Tryars of partial spirits, admitted and approved of
sundry men of no great merit, refusing such (though learned and Pious men) as
have been legally presented by their Patrons, whereby the very Inheritance of
diverse Nob^emen and Gentlemen, who anciently have had Jus Patronatus, a Right
by Law belonging to their Lordships, have been debarred of the tight of their
Representatives?

18. Whether in Mr. Henry Miles his Case, and Proposition presented to ^o the
Parliament, for a Register to be chosen in every County, for Registring ^l
Contracts, Sales of Lands, Leases for years or Lives, in their respective
Counties, at the doors of the Inhabitants, and at the tenth part of the charge,
he Vendors pay for their Inrowlment at London, and those County Registers very
Term ordered to send up a Transcript of all the Contracts, etc. to the Grand
Register at London, where there, as also in the Country, search might have
been made, etc. for avoiding of all fraud and Covin, etc. and the said granted
to the said Miles under the Broad Seal of two Kings, approved by two Lord
Keepers, two Attorney Generals, and all the Judges of the Land: and the same
well relisht, and approved in Parliament, as also the persons chosen for the
execution thereof by the Parliament, to be only such as had suffered much in
the late War. And yet notwithstanding this setrlement, the whole work (so
benesicial to all the Nation, so much approved, by the Votes of Parliament)
blanck'd, cast aside, and stopped by one Lawyers only means?

19. I say again, without scandal, or any seditious thought, but only to move
the faulty to amendment, Whether Parliaments as well as Kings may not be told
of their faults, especially at such a time and season as this is, wherein the
Universal people stand^gazing what may be the sad issue of our present
distempers, divisions, and distractions?

20. Whether it were civil or handsome to quarrel and affront the City, in
pulling down their Gates and Portcullisles, and imprisoning some of their
Aldermen and Common-Counsel-men, who in their greatest distress, Ient them
ready money, Plate and Jewels, and supplied them with men and their best
assistance?

21. Whether Kings or other Princes, assuming absolute power to themselves
without any to control them in their exorbitances, as the Roman Senate had
their Tribunes, and the great Court of Arragon which over ruled them in their
extreme actings, be not most necessary to be put in practice in a Free State
and Commonwealth.

22. Whether the present Remnant of a few Parliament Members of the old and
illegal Assembly, ought in Law or Reason, to assume to themselves an absolute
power over the three Nations, without a King, a Protector, the Nobility, or
some partner with them in the Government, that may qualify that their assumed
power?

23. Whether on supposition, that the Counties and Buroughs choose, and elect
any of the secluded Members for filling up a Free Parliament, the remnant of
the old Parliament can or ought in reason except against these so chosen?

24. Whether that Kingdom or Nation can be safe and secure, where a King, or a
few shall assume the sole and absolute power of Government unto themselves,
without some one or other Partner that may control them on all Just
occasions? And lastly, quaritur on due consideration, Whether a mixed Government
(as ever it has been in England) will not be the best, safe and secure
Government for this Nation, and all others.

25. Whether the present doubling of the Taxes on the universal Nation, will
not bring the Parliament into an Odium altissimum, make them hateful to the
whole Nation, whereas legally and with ease, they may raise within two Months,
not so little as a Million out of that wherein they have been most notoriously
cousened and deceived, were theypleased to hearken to the discovery?

26. Whether, as concerning that regreet and dislike which all the Nation take,
against that absolute and Arbitrary Power of some few, which at present assume
the sole power of Government to themselves, so anarke and hateful to the
Universal people, may not be regulated and balanced by setting up again the
Lords House, and that all the Nobility of the 3 Nations, may be assembled to
sit, Act and Vote, as they in their own house anciently have done, in a Full
and Free Parliament; whereby the Government may return into a mixture of
Government, since Kingship, Single persons, and proud Prelacy are laid aside,
that so the present remnant of the old Parliament, may gain the last love and
respect of the whole Nation; especially. since it appears not to any man of
reason and reading, wherefore the Nobility and Barons of the Land, should be
excluded out of the great Council, which in all ancient times, have withstood
the Arbitrary Power of our Kings, and recovered the ancient Laws of the people,
even Magn Carta, and Carta de forresta, as in many presidents its apparent,
amongst which this one only we shall here insert, as the Record every where
extant manifests. Henry surnamed Bew-cleark, youngest son to William the
conqueror, staving off all Parliaments which might and would cross him in his
design to Rule at will and pleasure, after 15 years of their discontent the
Lords enforced him at last to call a Parliament, at Salsbury, where he was
compelled to restore unto the people their old Laws, the Record runs thus: Legam
Edwardi vobis reddo, cum illis emendationibus, quibus poter meus eam emendavit
Concillio Baronum suorum. I restore unto you the Laws of King Edward, as they
were amended by my father by the Council of his Barons. Hence we may see the
power and use of the Bartons of those times, and in sundry other Reigns how
courageously they stood up, and oftentimes fought for the Liberties and
Freedoms of the people. Why now, and in these times they should be put down,
and excluded from the great Council as useless, is past many wise men's
understanding; especially by an inconsiderable number of the lower, or middle
sort of the people; but rather admitted as we have before said, for the
ballancing of arbitrary power, assumed by an inconsiderable number, in respect
of a Full and Free Parliament?

27. Whether the Parliament in the late war, did not raise their Forces against
the Kings arbitrary Power; And whether at present they assume not to themselves
an absolute and Supreme power over the 3 Nations.

28. And lastly, Whether in these times of divisions, distractions and
Factions, they do take into their consideration that of Solomon viz. Oppression
makes a wise man mad? And whether there is not a kind of ambitious madness
amongst those which said (as is reported) they would fire the City when they
could not obtain so much money as they demanded on Lo^n?

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for the Author. 1660.


