THE LEVELLERS NEW Remonstrance or Declaration SENT TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE LORD
GENERAL FAIRFAX, CONCERNING Their present proceedings, and making choice of a
Glorious King, and Heavenly Protector, for the redeeming of them from Slavery,
and judging the Cause of the Oppressed righteously.

ALSO, Their Demands and Proposals (...) the Judges and Ministers of this
Nation, touching the Reign and Government of the late King CHARLES; with a
discovery of those persons who held their Royalty by the power of the SWORD.

LONDON: Printen for general satisfaction to all the Freeborn people of
ENGLAND, MDCXLIX.

THE LEVELLERS NEW DECLARATION Sent to his Excellency the Lord General
Fairfax, concerning their present proceedings, in making choice of a King and
Heavenly Protector.
Right Honorable,
THe intent of our writing to you, is not to request your protestion, though we
have received an unchristian like abuse from some of your soldiers; for truly
we dare not cast off the Lord, and make choice of a man or men to rule Us. For
the Creation has smarted deeply for such a thing since Israel chose Saul to
be their King; therefore we acknowledge before you in plain English, That we
have chosen the Lord God to be our King and Protector. Yet in regard you are
our brethren as an English Tribe, and for the present are owned to be the
outward Governors anp Saviors of this Land, and whose hearts we question not,
but that you endeavor to advance the sum King of righteousness with us;
therefore we are free to write to you, and to all the World. And if after this
Representation of our, either you or your forces called soldiers, or any that
owns your Laws of propriety, called Free holders, do abuse or kill our persons
we declare to you, that we die, doing our duty to our Creator, by endeavoring
from that power he has put into our hearts to lift up his Creation out of
bondage, and you and they shall be left without excuse in the day of Judgment,
because you have bin spoken to sufficiently. But if you do slight us and our
cause, then know we shall not strive with sword and spear, but with spade and
plow and such like instruments to make the barren and common lands fruitful,
and we have, and still shall, commit our selves and out cause unto our
righteous King, whom we obey, even the Prince of peace to be our protector; and
unto whom you likewise profess much love, by your preaching, prayings,
fastings, and in whose name you have made all your Covenants, Oaths, and
promises to us: I say unto him we appeal, who is and will be our righteou^
Judge, who never yet sailed those that waited upon him, but eve^ did judge the
cause of the oppressed righteously. We desire that your Lawyers may consider
these questions (which we affirm to be truths) and which gives good assurance
by the law of the land that we that are the younger brothers or common people
have a true right to dig, plow up, and dwell upon the Commons, as we^ have
declared. Whether Will. the Conqueror became not to be^ King of England by
conquest, and turned the English out of their birth ^ights, by reason whereof
all sorts of people suffered, and compelled the conquered English for necessity
of livelihood to be servants to him and his Norman soldiers. 2 Whether K.
Charles was not successor to the Crown of England from Will. the Conqueror, and
whether all Laws that have bin made in every Kings reig^ did not confirm and
strengthen the power of the Norman Conquest, and so did, and does still hold
the Commons of England under ^lavery to the Kingly power, his Gentry and
Clergy. 3 Whether Lords of Manors were not the successors of Co^onels and
c^ie^^ Officers of Will. the Conqueror, and held their Royalty to the Commons by
the power of the Sword.

And here now we desire your public preachers, that say, they preach the
righteous law, to consider these questions, which confirms us in the peace of
our hearts, that we that are the Common people born in England, ought to
improve the Commons, as we have declared, for a public Treasury and lively
hood, and that those that hinder are rebels to their Maker, and enemies to the
creation. 1. We demand I or no whether the earth with her fruits was made to be
bought and sold from one to another? and whether one part of mankind was made a
Lord of the land, and another part a servant by the law of creation before the
fall? I affirm and challenge you to disprove that the earth was made to be a
common Treasury of livelihood for all, without respect of persons, and was not
made to be bought and sold. 2. I demand, whether all wars, blood shed and
misery came not upon the creation, when one man indeavored to be a Lord above
another, and to claim propriety in the earth one above another. 3. Whether the
work of restoration lies in removing covetousness, casting that Serpent out of
heaven (mankind) and making man to live in the light of righteousness, not in
words only, as Preachers do, but in action, whereby the ^^ation shines in
glory? I affirm it.

4. Whether is the King of righteousness a respecter of persons yea or no? It
you say no, then who makes this difference, that the elder brother shall be the
Lord of the land, and the younger brother a ^lave and beggar? I affirm, it was
and is covetousness, since the ^all.

6. Whether does the King of righteousness bid you love or ^ate your enemies,
if you say love them, then I demand of you, why do some of you in pulpits and
else where, stir up the people to beat, to imprison put to death or banish or
not to buy and sell with those that endeavor to restore the earth to a common
treasury again? surely at worst you can make them but your enemies; therefore
love them, win them by love, do not hate them, ^hey do not hate you.

Edinburgh June 6. Young Mr. Row employed as a Messenger with the Po^tage of a
Letter to this Parliament came hither on Wednesday last; the next morning the
Letter was read in Parliament, great notice was taken of some passages ^
reading the same, and especially at the words [Of the Commonwealth of England]
Which upon reading occasioned some uncivil smiles from many of the Members by
way of derision; Others, not containing themselves, brake forth into high
language; and an eminent Member of that Parliament made a large Speech upon
those words, reflecting much upon the honor of another Nation. And upon the
score another person of quality then present in that Assembly, expressed himself
to thi^ purpose. How in reason they could be accounted friend by enemies.

The Letter admitted of no further public debate a present no^ more likely ^
be for the future, till a responce come from Holland of their last address to
his Highness.

All depending here upon the Royal Intentions and Motions of his Majesty;
(...) that nothing of public concernment admits either of debate, or
resolution, till th^^ be known; their course being to be steered according to
the same, which is both daily and hourly expected. As for the Kingdom in
general, it is at present very q^^^^ and peaceable.

The Lords of the Sessions sat down on Friday last; the Commissioners of the
Kirk are likewise met in Council. David Losley is (after Conquest) returned
hither so also is Col. Ker and Gol. Straughan; their Brigade of Horse ordered
still (...) quarter in the North of Scotland.

The Priests are high for concluding a Union, and for revenge, will wave the^^
Covenant in a great measure, to strike in with the Royal Party, and Argyles
Fact^on being inconsiderable to their number, its much feared a peace will upon
these (...) Overtures too soon be concluded.

It is not safe for our English interest to be so much divided, which gives
(...) much occasion for a foreign Invasion; for if this Parliament send for
their fo^^^^ out of Ireland (which is much feared, so soon as the peace is
concluded) with a conjunction of the Royal and Presbyterian party of this
Nation; which will make a great Body, and will make work enough for both the
late dissenting parties (...) England.

The young King has sent several Propositions to the Parliament, in answer
(...) their Demands, the substance whereof follows: First, That the
Presbyterian Government shall be established and settled, (...) in the days of
his Father. Secondly, That Popery and Ep^scopacy shall be utterly abolished out
of the Kingdom. Thirdly, That those who have assisted Him, or His Father,
against the Pa^liament of Scotland, shall be restored to their estates.
Fourthly, That all persons who have acted for Him, or His Father, against the
Parliament, shall be incapable of sitting in Parliament, or bearing any
public Office for some ye^rs. Fifthly, That the King shall act nothing (for
the future) but by consent of Parliament. Sixthly, That there shall be an Act
of Oblivion granted to all persons in that Kingdom, except such as had a hand
in the death of the late King


DUndalk in Ireland, 8 June, 1649. The Scots had a Randezvouz at Blures Moor
within two miles of Li^^^gurby; they are between 4 or 5000 strong; the Lord of
Aids is their General but must not act without the Presbytery: The division
betwix Prestons party, and Owen-Roes continue, Ormond and Preston has taken
some Garrisons from Oneal. Our party have permitted 300 of Oneales own Regiment
to quarter in our parts amongst the Creats within 2 miles of Dundalk. I hear
that Ormond has sent express Orders to the Governor of Kingsale castle, not
to admit Prince R^pert to have any command in it. Col. Mu^k is very active and
lies much in the field: If our expectations fail not from England, but that
relief come hither before Harvest there is great possibility of doing very
considerable service in this Country in a short time. There was never so much
Corn sowed, and fair upon the ground at one time in the Rebels quarters, then
there is this year. Sergeant Pinelston was this day made one of the Judges of
the Common Pleas and M^. Rigby* Mr. Ask, and Mr. Warberton, were first made
Sergeants of the Quaite, and presently after one of them made Judge of the
Common Pleas, and the other two of the Upper Bench. Something of the formality
more particularly thus: There sat in the Common Pleas (besides the Lord chief
Justice, St. John and Judge Phesant) the three Lords Commissioners of the Great
Seal; and after a motion made, and granted to every one of the Sergeants, the
Lord Commissioner Whi^l^ck, made a short speech unto them, intimating, That the
Parliament taking special notice of their abilities and good affections to the
Nation had ordered that they should have Commissions to be Judges, etc. The
speech being ended, they were called up into the Court, where they took their
Oaths, and rece^ved their ^ommissions.

Many Letters this day came to col. Popham, representing the condition of our
Navy (...) Sea which has blocked up Kingsale, a town more remarkable for its
strength then for i^ weal^h and better defended by its Fort then by its Castle.
Col. B^^cket is ^^^mander in chief of it for the Prince. There is some hope
that a good accoun^ (...) will suddenly be given to the Parliament. Some action
has already h^^^^^ (...) sharp conflicted sputed, in which fight we boarded
three of the Princ^s Men of Wa^ and seized on the Mariners, wherein was above
thirty pieces of O^^^^^nc^ and in our pr^^^^^t sunk another of them, with the
loss of three or fou^

It is said that the Royal party which are surrounded in Kingsale, begin to
co^sult for a negotiation with the Parliaments Forces.

The aforesaid Mr. Wistanley does declare, that the Reformation that England
now is to endeavor, is not to remove the Norma^ Yoke only, and to bring us
back to be governed by those Lawe^ that were before William the Conqueror came
in as if that were the rule or mark we aim at: No that is not it; but the
Reformation is according to the word of God, and that it is the p^^^ Law of
righteousness before the fall, which made all things un^^ which all things are
to be restored: and he that endeavors no^ that is a Covenant breaker.

Letters from the City of Dublin of the 8. instant, does fur^her advertize,
That the Marq. of Ormond does now begin to appear^ near the Confines thereof
that he has mustered within 25 mile^ of them, and was 1^00 Horse and Foot say
some that were present: Others, that the number was 12000 Foot, and 24 Horse,
wit^ these, and all his great Officers, be^ween whom all differences ar^
composed, He has taken in the Garrisons of Castle Shamiagh an^ Talbots town,
and is besieging a third, and drawn, as is certified, about Trim, where he had
700 Horse, and some Foot, for diver^ weeks, who had continually skirmished with
the town, and loss o^ both sides, the Scots in Ulster are come 3 days march
South i^ favor of Ormond, as its believed to fall upon General Oneal.

FINIS.

