A LETTER Sent from the STATES of HOLLAND TO THE KING of SCOTS, Imploring his
Personal Residence and Assistance: With their Desires, Propositions,
Engagement, and Promise; agreed upon at a General Council held at the Hague,
the 23 of this instant July; and presented by the Lord BORETZ. Signed, A.
Beauchurst. ALSO, His titular Majesty's Answer thereunto; and the great
Preparations at the Hague for his Royal Entertainment. With the Declaration of
Lieut. Col. John Lilburn touching the same. Published throughout the United
Provinces.

London, Printed for George Horton, 1652.

A MESSAGE Sent from the States of HOLLAND, To the King of Scots; touching his
Residence in the Low Countries; with his Answer thereunto; and the great
preparations at the Hague for his entertainment.
BY an Express from the Hague it is certified, That the Estates of the United
Provinces, at a General Council, taking into ferious debate and consultation
the great and weighty Affairs of their Commonwealth, and how the groundwork
thereof, might be carried on with the best advantage, in this Juncture of time
against England, after mature deliberation, it was terminated, That a Message
should be sent to the King of Scots, imploring his Residence at the Hague; to
the end, that by a mutual condescension, all possible means might be used for
the preservation of their Religion, Liberty, Freedom, and Interest.

This Message being sent by the Lord Boretz, and presented, a Council was
thereupon called at Saint Germans, where was present diverse of the English
Nobility, and after serious consultation, mutually assented to leave his
titular Majesty, to the fortune of his Resolutions, by reason of his ardent
affection to be so far importuning, that he chose rather to communicate a
satisfactory Answer to the States, then any ways to decline or wave so cordial
an invitation.

In pursuance whereof, great are the preparations at the Hague for solemnizing
of his Reception, in triumph and honor.

There is daily Action between our Scouts, and Trumps; and this morning captain
Peacock, with the Tiger, going to relieve the Guard, was set upon by three
Dutchmen, who maintained a gallant dispute, for the space of half an hour;
which our Admiral hearing of, dispatched captain Watson and captain Tailor to
his assistance, who bearing up so drown the Country. The allarum whereof has
so exasperated the spirits of many, that they are exceedingly enraged, and
vows revenge.

We hear that there is a general Rising from 16 to 60; and those that do refuse
to to engage, are to die without mercy. They are setting forth another great
Fleet of 100 sail, and the Zealanders have chosen a new Admiral.

Lieut. Col. John Lilburn has caused a Declaration to be published at
Amsterdam; wherein he states the Case between England, and the United
Provinces, in this present Juncture, whereby all true Englishmen may
apparently discern, how much it concerns them to be unanimous and vigilant
upon the motion and design of the Netherlanders, who are aspired to such a
height of Ingratitude, that they would willingly forget what was their
condition when England first undertook their protection and espoused their
quarrel with the loss of many thousands Englishmen, and the expense of eleven
hundred thousand pounds sterling. Amongst the rest, there has been a paper of
great concernment dispersed throughout the several Provinces; a Copy whereof
follows:

It is no wholesome counsel to trust another with the death of one descended of
Royal blood: he suffers him to live either through pity or policy: If he be
compassionate, he knows not how to be cruel; if politic, he thinks the present
times will not last long; his thoughts are busied on times to come; and he
endeavors more to save himself, then to secure others: And whereas some there
are, who say, That to take away a Kingdom, and suffer the King to live, is a
cruel piece of charity, wherewith all Tyrants whilst they go about to deceive
the World, they oft-times deceive themselves. The whole will easily meet
together, the parts whereof are left alive. To set the Statue of Virtue upon a
despicable foundation is as much as to build a Colossus of Gold upon feet of
dirt: Piety becomes a State, for that his Government is free: Cruelty, a
Tyrant, for that he is violent; courtesy befits the one, force is requisite to
the other: neither yet does that secure him; he is not unlike a belly-god, who
if he persist to eat, a surfeit kills him; if he desist, a diet; if the Tyrant
bloody his hands without respect, he dies for being cruel; if otherwise, for
seeming to be pious.

In a word, that hand will not prosper, that fights under the Banner of Tyranny;
and the force and might of all those will be maugred that fights for the interest
of Usurpation. Therefore, who are ye, O ye Netherlanders, that dare to set your
selves against the Lord, against what he has done, and is done in England,
Scotland, and Ireland; to endeavor to strike out all the glorious Characters of
his footsteps and presence, what his Arm has brought to pass for him, and his
mighty Power established in these Dominions? Who are you that dare to think,
that you can root out this Cause, and give the Lie to all the appearances of
God, the Prayer, the Faith, the Praises of the Saints in those Nations? Who are
you that say their Gods, are Gods of the Hills, therefore we will fight with
them in the Valleys: they stood against their own forces, but they shall not
against ours: The Land is given them in possession, but the Deep is ours, and
we will swallow them up as in the belly of Hell? Our God is the same, and so is
Our Cause on the Sea, as well as the Land: Spain found it so in the year 1588.
and all others have since our late Wars and Troubles.

FINIS.

