A LETTER sent from several AGITATORS of the ARMY To their RESPECTIVE
REGIMENTS: VIZ. The Generals Lieut. Generals Commissary Generals Col. Harrisons
Col. Hortons Col. Fleetwoods Col. Lilburns Col. Whaleys.
Wherein is discovered the ground of the present differences between them and
the General Council, concerning the King; and the establishment of Common Right
and Freedom, for all People in this Kingdom. With a true Account of the
Proceedings of the General Council thereupon.

LONDON, Printed for John Harris. 1647.

A Letter sent from the Agitators of several Regiments of the Army to their
respective Regiments etc.
Gentlemen and Fellow Soldiers,
WE esteem it our duty to render you an Account of the present state of our
affairs with us, and at the head quarter: We have been consulting about the
most speedy and effectual settlement of your and all the peoples Freedoms,
whereby the people may be disposed into a capacity and willingness to provide
constant pay, and secure our Arrears: we found by sad experience, that there
was so possibility of obtaining either* so long as the settlement of the
peoples freedoms was delayed, and therefore as well in love and real respects,
to you, and to our dear Country; we were constrained to propound the
foundations of freedom to be forthwith establishe^ by a mutual agreement
between the people and you: and though we dare aver that there is nothing
contained in that Agreement, or in the Case of the Army stated, which is
propounded to be insisted on, but what is (at least) the equitable sense of our
former Declarations and Remonstrances; yet we find many at the Head quarters,
obstructing and opposing our proceedings.

We sent some to them to debate in Love, the matters and manner of the
Agreement: And the first Article thereof, being long debated, it was concluded
by Vote in the affirmative: viz. That all Soldiers and others, if they be not
Servants or Beggars, ought to have voices in electing those which shall
represent them in Parliament, although they have not forty shillings per annum
in freehold Land; and there were but three voices against this your Native
Freedom: after this they would refer all to a Committee: And the next General
Council our friends obtained a general Rendezvous, and a Letter from the
Council to clear the Army from any desire or intent of constraining the
Parliament to send new Propositions to the King, Whereby your Indemnity for
fighting against the King should be beggd of the King, and so the guilt of
innocent blood taken upon your own heads; and your Enemies should boast and
insult over you, saying, you were forced to ask them to save you harmless: At
the next meeting a Declaration was offered to the Council, wherein the Kings
Corrupt Interest was so intermixed, that in short time, if he should so come in,
he would be in a capacity to destroy you and the people; and assure your
selves, if any power be but in the least given to him, he will improve it to the
utmost to enslave or ruin you* that conquered him, and to advance your enemies
to trample upon you: Upon this we desired only a free debate of his question,
Whethen it were safe either for the Army or People to suffer any power to be
given to the King: And Lieu. Genesis Crumwel and the rest professed as before God
they would freely debate it; And Monday last a General Council was appointed
for that purpose, but when they met they wholly refused, and instead of that,
spoke very reproachfully of us and our actings, and declaimed against that
which was passed the Council before concerning the voices of those in elections
which have not forty shillings a year freehold; And against the Letter sent by
the Council to the Parliament: and the day before Commissary General Ireton
withdrew and protested he would act no more with them, unless they recalled
that Letter.

And to prevent any further debate they would have dissolved the Council for
above a fortnight, and thus our hopes of agreeing together to settle your and
the Peoples Freedoms were then frustrate: and though the chief of them had
desired some of our friends not above three days before to go on in their
actings; for they might come in when they should do us more service then at
that time; yet there they made great outcries against us and complaints of
distempers in the Army, which were nothing but endeavors after their Rights and
Freedoms.

The next day they still waved and refused the free debate of the aforesaid
question, and disolved the Council for above a fortnight, and for a time
resolved; they would only prepare some fair propositions to the Army, about
Arrears and pay, and sent to the Parliament for a months pay against a
Rendezvouze; but they declared they would divide the Army into; parts, to
Rendezvouze severally and all this appears to be only to draw off the Army from
joining together, to settle those clear foundations of freedom propounded to
you, and to procure your Rights, as you are Soldiers effectually.

Thus you may observe the strange unconstancy of those that would obstruct our
way, and the great matter wherein the difference lies, and the candidnes of our
Actings: but we hope it will be no discouragement to you, though your Officers,
yea the greatest Officers should oppose you* it is well known, that the great
Officers which now opposed, did as much oppose secretly, when we refused to
disband, according to the Parliaments Order; and at last they confessed the
providence of God was the more wonderful, because those Resolutions, to stand
for freedom and justice; began amongst the Soldiers only; and yet now they
would affright you from such actings, by telling you it is disobedience to the
Generals Command, and distempers, and mutinies: These were the words of that
faction in Parliament which opposed you before; and you may consider, that you
had done as much service for the people, by disobedience to the Parliament, as
ever you did by obedience, if you had fulfilled your Declarations and
Engagements which you then passed.

As for the months pay, if it come, you may consider, it is but your due; and
yet we believe none had been procured for you, unless we had thus appeared, and
if any Declarations or Propositions about pay or Arrears be offered to you,
remember you have been fed with Paper too long; we desire* that there may be a
general Rendezvouze, and no parting each from other, til we be fully assured,
we shall not return to burden the Country by free quarter, and til our Arrears
be actually secured, and the Foundations of our Freedom, peace and security in
the Agreement established: And likewise, until a sure way be settled, for
calling Commitees, Sequestrators, and Parliament men, to account for the
Countries money; that so the Country may know, we intend their Good and
Freedom, we know some fair Overtures will be made to you about pay, Arrears,
seeming Freedom and security; but we hope as you formerly rejected such
Overtures from the parliament, knowing that without a settlement of Freedom, no
constant pay or Arrears will be provided: so now we are confident you will not be
deceived, and hope you are all resolved for a General Rendezvouze, that we may
all agree together in fulfilling our Declarations and Engagemetts to the
people, that so we may not become the objects of scorn and hatred. We shall now
add

NOVEM. 11. 1647. We are yours, etc. Edward Sexby The Generals Regiment. Robert
Everet Of Lieut. Generals Regiment. John Walter Of Lieut. Generals Regiment.
Edmont Bear Of Lieut. Generals Regiment. Joseph Aleyn Col. Harrisons. George
Hassall Commissary General IRETONS. William Perkins Commissary General IRETONS.
Tobias (...) Col. HORTONS. William Russel Colonel WHALEYS. Richard Seal Colonel
WHALEYS. Richard Hilyer Col. LI^BURNS Regiment. The George Col. LI^BURNS
Regiment. John Nicholson Col. FLEETVVOODS Regiment. Will. Pryer Col.
FLEETVVOODS Regiment. Will. Mitchel Live-Guard.



