The Copy of a Letter, Written to the General from Lieut. Col. John Lilburn,
M. Richard Overton, April 27. 1649.
In behalf of M. Robert Lockwer, M. Geo. Ash, M. Joseph Hockley, M. Robert
Osburn, M. Matthew Heyworth, M. Thomas Goodwin; all of them in Captain Savages
Troup: who by the said Council were adjudged to cast lots for their lives, and
one of them to die.
In which it is by Law fully proved, that it is both Treason and Murder, for
any General or Council of War to execute any Soldier in time of Peace, by
Martial Law.

May it please your Excellency,
WE have not yet forgot your Solemn Engagement of June 5. 1647. whereby the
Armies Continuance as an Army was in no wise by the Will of the State, but by
their own mutual Agreement: And if their standing were removed from one
Foundation to another (as is undeniable) then with the same they removed from
one Authority to another; and the Ligaments and Bounds of the First were all
Dissolved, and gave place to the Second; and under, and from the head of their
first Station, viz. By the Will of the State, the Army derived their Government
by Martial Law; which in Judgment and Reason could be no longer binding then
the Authority (which gave being thereto) was binding to the Army: For the
denial of the Authority, is an Abrogation and Nulment of all Acts, Orders, or
Ordinances by that Authority as to them: And upon this account, your Excellency
with the Army, long proceeded upon the Constitution of a new Council and
Government, contrary to all Martial Law and Discipline, by whom only the Army
Engaged to be Ordered in their prosecution of the ends, to wit, Their several
Rights, both as Soldiers and Commoners, for which they associated; Declaring,
Agreeing, and Promising each other, not to Disband, Divide, or suffer
themselves to be Disbanded or Divided, without satisfaction and security in
relation to their Grievances and Desires in behalf of themselves and the
Commonwealth as should be agreed unto by their Council of Agitators: And by
virtue, and under Color of this Establishment, all the Extraordinary Actions
by your Excellency, your Officers, and the Army have past: Your refusal to
Disband, dispurings the Orders of Parliament; Impeachment and Ejection of
Eleven Members; your First and Second March up to London; your late violent
Exclusion of the Major part of Members out of the House, and their imprisonment
without Cause, etc. which can no way be justified from the Guilt of the highest
Treason, but in the accomplishment of a righteous end, viz. The enjoyment of
the benefit of our Laws and Liberties which we hoped long ere this to have
enjoyed from your hands; Yet when we consider and herewith compare many of your
late carriages both toward the Soldiery and other Free People; and
principally your Cruel Exercise of Martial Law, even to the Sentence and
Execution of Death upon such of your Soldiers as stand for the Rights of that
Engagement, etc. And not only so, but against others not of the Army; we cannot
but look upon your defection and Apostasy in such dealings, as of most
dangerous Consequence to all the Laws and Freedoms of the People.

And therefore, although there had never bin any such solemn Engagement by the
Army, as that of June 5. 1647. which with your Excellency in point of duty
ought not to be of the meanest obligation. We do protest against your Exercise
of Martial Law, against any whomsoever, in times of Peace, where all Courts of
Justice are open, as the greatest encroachment upon our Laws and Liberties that
can be acted against us; And particularly, against the Trial of the Soldiers
of Captain Savages Troup yesterday, by a Court Martial, upon the Articles of
War, and sentencing of two of them to death; and for no other end (as we
understand) but for some dispute about their pay: And the reason of this our
Protestation, is from the Petition of Right, made in the third year of the late
King, which declares, That no person ought to be judged by Law Martial, except
in times of War; And that all Commissions given to execute Martial Law in time
of Peace, are contrary to the Laws and Statutes of the Land. And it was the
Parliaments complaint, That Martial Law was then commanded to be executed upon
Soldiers for Robbery, Mutiny, or Murder. Which Petition of Right, this present
Parliament in their late Declarations of the 9. of Feb. and the 17. of March,
1648. commend as the most excellentest Law in England; and there promise to
preserve inviolably, it, and all other the Fundamental Laws and Liberties,
concerning the preservation of the Lives, Properties, and Liberties of the
people, with all things incident thereunto. And the Exercise of Martial Law in
Ireland, in time of Peace, was one of the chiefest Articles for which the Earl
of Strafford lost his head; The same by this present Parliament being judged
High Treason. And the Parliament it self, neither by Act nor Ordinance, can
justly or warrantably destroy the Fundamental Liberties and Principles of the
Common Law of England: It being a maxim in Law and Reason both, that all such
Acts and Ordinances, are ipso facto, null, and void in Law, and binds not at
all, but ought to be resisted, and stood against to the death. And if the
Supreme Authority may not presume to do this, much less may You, or Your
Officers presume thereupon; For where Remedy may be had by an ordinary course
in Law, the Party grieved shall never have his recourse to extraordinaries.
Whence it is evident, That it is the undoubted Right of every Englishman
(Soldier or other) that he should be punishable only in the ordinary Courts
of Justice, according to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm in the times of
Peace, as now it is; and the extraordinary way by Courts Martial, in no wise to
be used.

Yea, the Parliaments Oracle, Sir Edward Cook, Declares in the third part of
his Institutes, Chap. of Murder, That for a General or other Officers of an
Army, in time of Peace to put any man, although a Soldier, to death, by color
of Martial Law, it is absolute murder in that General, etc. Therefore erecting
of Martial Law now, when all Courts of Justice are open, and stopping the free
current of Law, which sufficiently provides for the punishment of Soldiers as
well as others, as appears by 18. H. 6. Chap. 19. and 2, and 3. Ed. 6. Chap. 2.
4, and 5. P. and M. Chap. 3. and 5. El. 5. and 5. Jam. 25. is an absolute
destroying of our Fundamental Liberties, and the razing of the Foundation of
the Common Law of England; the which out of Duty and Conscience to the Rights
and Freedoms of this Nation (which we value above our lives) and to leave You
and your Council without all excuse, we were moved to represent unto Your
Excellency, Earnestly pressing, you well to consider what you do, before you
proceed to the taking away the Lives of those men by Martial Law; lest the
blood of the Innocent (and so palpable Subversion of the Laws and Liberties of
England) bring the reward of just vengeance after it upon you, as it did upon
the Earl of Strafford: For innocent blood God will not pardon; and what the
people may do (in case of such violent Subversion of their Rights) we shall
leave to Your Excellency to judge, and remain

From our Causeless, and unjust, and Tyrannical Captivity in the Tower of 7
London, April 27. 1649. Your Excellencies humble Servants, John Lilburn,
Richard Overton.



