The Afflicted Man's Outcry, against the Injustice and Oppression exercised
upon; OR, An Epistle of JOHN LILBURN, Gent. Prisoner in Newgate, August 19.
1653. to Mr. Feak, Minister at Christ Church in London.
Honored Sir,
THough I cannot say I am acquainted with you, yet I have heard so much worth
of you, and of your tenderness and zeal for the honor of the Lord Jehovah, my
long and sensible enjoyed lot and portion, that I am imboldned to present you
with a few lines, by way of complaint of that sad and unjust dealing that I
find from those that would be reputed Christian and righteous Judges, that now
would take away my life upon a most unjust Act of Parliament, grounded upon the
most notorious Lie in the world; and in which I am no more concerned in Law, or
Truth, then the child in the Mothers womb: for it is an Act for the execution
of a Judgment past in Parliament against one Lieu. Col. John Lilburn the 15 of
January 1651. for high Crimes and Misdemeanors; but there was never any such
Judgment either the said 15 day of Jan. 1651 or any day before, or since p^st
against me in Parliament in the least; And therefore in Law and Verity, I
cannot be any more concerned to be the man mentioned in that unrighteous Act,
then the child in the Mothers womb; And that there never was any such Judgment
past in Parliament against me, I give these Reasons for it.

First, there was never any Charge, Indictment, or Information in the least
filed or preferred in Parliament against me, that ever I was summoned unto in
the least to answer; neither did the Parliament call me by any due process of
Law in the least, so much as to hear any Charge, Information, or Indictment,
read against me; nor never so much as called me to their Bar, to demand of me
what I could say for my self; why they should not pass Judgment against me:
Neither was I ever in all my life outlawed for not appearing: So that I do
again with confidence aver it before God, and all his People, that I am no more
in Law, Reason, Truth, or Verity, concerned in that Act, upon which I am
indicted for my li^e, then the child in the Mothers womb: Neither has any man
of honor, conscience, or common honesty, the least ground in Law to say, that
I am the man meant in that Act for executing of a Judgment past against one
Lieu. Col, John Lilburn, Jan. 15. 1651. for high Crimes and Misdemeanors. And
yet upon the Trial for my life, although the said Judgment be the foundation of
the Act, and the Act the foundation of the Indictment; yet am I denied by the
Court at Old bayley the hearing or seeing of that Judgment, which is, and ought
to be the foundation and ground of all; and which says all the Council I can
speak with, or hear from, is the highest injustice that can be acted against a
man in England, by those that (in the least) profess themselves to be Judges,
or Executors of the Law: Yea, and when I desire from the Court but liberty from
the pure and undefiled Law of God, the true fundamental laws of England, and
multitudes of the late Parliaments own Declarations, to prove that I ought to
see and hear the said judgment: And when in the first place I begun with Gods
righteous and just dealing with Adam, and although God was absolute supreme
over him, yet he would clear up the justice of his ways even to Man; and
therefore gave Adam a plain law to walk by, Gen 2. And when Adam had
transgressed and broken it, although God knew well enough he had so done; yet
he abhorred to deal unjustly with him, and condemn him without summoning him to
answer for himself; and therefore he sits him by, saying, Adam where a^t thou?
as much as if he had said, Come forth and stand up for thy self, and answer to
the Bill of Indictment against thee, for breaking the pure and undefiled Law of
Me thy Sovereign Lord and King, and speak the utmost that thou can why thou
should not be condemned for thy Rebellion against me, thy endeared Lord and
Master.

But Sir, while I was thus speaking, steps up Col. John Barkstead (the present
Lieutenant of the Tower of London) who, as he is a soldier, no more fit to be
a Judge in a legal Court for a man's life, then a Surgeon or a Butcher is to be
a Jury-man for a man's life; and he cries out to me, and commands me to hold my
vain babbling, for what have we (says he) to do with the law of God. O rare
Judge indeed! and a fit man, under the color of justice and magistracy, to
murder the innocentest man in the whole world: for the best and chiefest of the
law books of England do aver and glory in it, that the foundations of the true
law of England, is built upon the pure law of God. And says the notable and
ancient law-book called The Doctor and Student, chap. 2. page 4. The law of God
or law of Reason is written in the heart of every man, eaching him what is to
be done, and what is to be fleed; and because it is written in the heart,
therefore (says he) it may not b^ put away: no, it is never changeable by no
diversity of place, no time. And therefore against this Law, Prescription,
Statute, nor Customs, may not prevail: And if any be brought in against it,
they be no Prescriptions, Statutes, nor Customs, but things void and against
justice. And he says this law of God, or Reason, engraven in the heart of man,
teaches that good is to be loved, and evil is to be fleed; also, that thou
shall do to another, that thou would another should do to thee; and that we
may do nothing against Truth; and that a man must live peaceably with others;
that justice should be done to every man; and also that wrong is not to be done
to any man.

In which Opinion, that great and excellent Oracle of the law of England, the
Lord Cook sully concurs; and therefore styles the true and fundamental law of
England, the perfection of Reason.

But above my du^l commendation, is that learned, rational, laborious, and
excellent piece, or law-book, entitled, Rights of the Kingdom; Or, Customs of
our Ancestors, printed in London by Richard Bishop, 1649. and commonly called
Mr Sadler the Town Clerk of London's Works, who is now a Parliament man, and
member of the Council of State: Whose rare expressions in that excellent,
useful, and profitable book, especially in the first part page 91. and the 2d
part, page 60, 63, 68, 74, 123* 159, 160, 161* 164, 168* 170, 175 176, 177,
178, 179, 180, 181, 184 185, 186, 188. are worthy to be written and printed in
letters of Gold; some of which; although Time at present is exceeding precious
to me, I shall think it very profitable and useful here to insert; and the
first shall be out of his second part, page 63. where he says, There and there
only, seems to be true liberty; which may most appear in the actings of
those beings which are most knowing.

Show me then the Sphere of man's being, and you may quickly find the measure of
his freedom; his being is by all agreed to be rational; and Reason therefore is
the proper measure of his liberty; for, he is then free, when his activity is
preserved equal or proportional to his Being: this is rational, and so must
that; and man is then and then only free, when he can act what he should act,
according to Right, Reason; this is the law of his Nature, which is rational;
and Reason is his Royal collar of S.S.S. or Chain of precious Pearls, which
Nature has put about his Neck and Arms, as a badge of Honor, and most happy
Freedom.

This digression will be scarce excusable, but that our law does so adore
Right, Reason, that it is a Maxim, What is contrary to Reason, is contrary to
law. And in page 123. he says, The next thing is the Basiis, or Foundation, of
our law process, and of all judicials. In all cases (says he) accusers,
parties, (or Defendants) Witnesses and Judges, be, and must be distinct.
Neither let the judgments be strange, nor celebrated from their Judge, or
Place, or Time: neither is judgment to be given in a doubtful Matter, or on the
party accused being absent.

Let there be nothing done without an Accuser; for God, and our Lord Jesus
Christ did know Judas to be a Thief; but because he was not accused, therefore
he did not suffer. The Witnesses are lawful, and present, without any infamy,
or suspicion, or evident spot. The Priests cannot rightly accuse the Lacians;
neither does it behove any one to be judged or condemned, before he has
lawful, present accusers, and may receive a place of defending, to make his
Crimes of no effect.

And again, one that is pressed upon before his Judge, if he will, he may
declare his cause; and not pressed upon before his Judge, if he will, he may
hold his peace. If any one does uspect the Judges, he may speak against, or
contradict them: affliction or imprisonment ought not to injury him that does
appeal, and elevate his Crime, by a remedy of appealing: every one is to be
judged by his equals, and of the same P^ovince. Whatsoever is against those
that are absent, neither from their Judges, is utterly void.

An Oath must have its companions, Truth, Justice, and Judgment; if those
things be wanting, it is not an Oath but a Perjury, etc. Are these, (says Mr
Sadler) the laws of England, or of Nature, rather? these we owe to Beauclerk,
or Henry the first.

And in page 158, 159. speaking of the Kings Exorbitancies. he says; But, did
we labor, toil, and sweat so much, to keep a little River in its bounds, that
so we might be drowned by the boundless Ocean, or be swept away at once by a
destroying and devouring deluge? Did we scruple at a little gravel, or a
pebble, that we might be crushed by a Mountain? Would we strain at a Gnat that
we might be choked by a Camel? or be swallowed whole by Behemoth? Have we not
all reasoned so much, and fought so long, with a vast expense of Treasure; and
of that, which is by much more precious, life, or blood of many hundred
thousand freeborn Irish, Scottish, English men, to bound our King, that he
might not press Us with his Arbytrary power: only, that by this, we might but
plain the way, and make it level; that some others (for I will not say the
Parliament) might be oppressive more and more, unjust and arbytrary more. I
hope I need not, and therefore I would not fear it; but I have no art or power
to fl^tter. And I should have doted on the Roman Poet of the Civil Wars, had I
not found him blessing his Fates for bringing forth a Nero through those bitter
Pangs and Throws: And yet I must confess, if I knew where, or could be so
happy, to presage another new Birth of Tyranny, to follow such a long and sore
Travel of our State, I should also desire and pray for one Nero, rather then
one hundred, or one million; for of Evils, this is nothing, for I speak of
Tyrants: I did ever hate a Multitude, as much as a Magnitude; for if I must be
forced still to live under a displeasing Tyranny, I choose it, and obey it, and
am pleased with it in one Tyrant rather then many.

But again, I say, I do not believe it; and I hope I need not fear it, of, or
in an English Parliament: and yet again I say, they are, at least I think they
are, but men; and men in former times might err; and therefore once again, and
yet again, I bow and beg, and humbly pray they may be just and merciful in all
and very tender, least their little fingers do oppress Us more then ever did
our Princes loins; And since I have presumed to speak so long, that am so low,
they will, I hope, be not offended, if I speak a word (one word, yet more) of
them that are so much my Elders and Betters.

It may not be, at least, it may not seem enough to quiet trembling minds, to
say, or prove by Arguments, there shall be nothing done, but what is just;
except we also see or know the way and means, and usual course: Our Governors
will please to take, in doing that which may or is, and ever shall (I hope) be
just, the way must be both right and clear, as well as is the end, and of the
too unjust and arbitrary power, and both seem to be, in Process: or in ways or
means much rather then in ends or things that be effected by it, sure it was,
at least it might be good to build a gallant fleet of ships, and so it might be
just that each should contribute a part of such a public work, nor was it only
that which then was taken from us for a ship that made us sigh and groan, and
cry, or fear our ruin, or a universal Deluge of Oppression, but it much or
mainly was, we did not see the way or mean or legal process which the Court
did take in taxing, or assessing such a place a County or a person, and it was
but thus, in Loanes, and so in diverse if not all the things we so abhorred in
the Crown, the thing did not so much displease, as did the way or means, to
such or such an end.

I need not say how curious, or how scrupulous and tender still our Laws have
been in pointing out the way, as well as the end, the process in Courts of
justice, as the final judgments: so that indeed the very form, and life and
power, or substance of the justest Laws, does much consist in process, which
by some may now be though a shadow, or a ceremony left at pleasure, for a
blustering wind, or any furious hand to shake as much, as long as it shall
please, and then to salve it up, by saying to the Root, We mean you good, and
do but lay you bare, that so you may the more behold, and more admire our
justice in the end, when all the boughs and branches shall be gone, that do but
hinder all your Prospect.

I must but touch and glance; there is a Trinity which all our laws do seem to
worship here on earth, estate, liberty, and life.

And in page 175. Mr Sadler says, I need not speak how curious our Fathers
were in all their process, touching life: the way was still as punctual, as
clear and plain, as was the end; they loved to be just, and to do justly. Does
our Law condemn any man without hearing, or due Summons to judgment? I hope it
never will.

A great man of a good name, stands upon Record, as by Parliament, condemned
to death, without hearing, or legal Summons. But there is a Bl^sh, or a Vail of
Oblivion drawn upon it by good Writers, as a stain, and a shame to the
Parliament Rolls: yet, as a just judgment on him that had first moved that
another might be so condemned; and, he so perished, by that law, which he would
have made for others. This seems also to be written in the law of Nature; and
doubtless, the sins of Sodom were as notorious to God in Heaven, as any others
can be to men in Parliament; and yet he would, and did go down to hear, and
see, and proceed in a judicial way; nor would he condemn or execute before he
had not only cleared his justice, in himself, or to his Angels; but also to
Abraham, Lot, and other lookers on, that he still might be justified both when
he judges, and is judged; for he still did, and will put his actions on man's
judgment: as we shall more fully clear hereafter.

This Process also toward Sodom* is by many of our old Lawyers brought for
the pattern of our laws; in that especially, that none may be condemned without
a legal hearing: And in this and diverse other things does Bracton and Fleva,
borrow much in the laws of Henry the first. And be the matter of Fact never so
notorious; yet there may be some plea, that no man can foresee, or ought to
fore-judge, before he hears. For all men may plead necessity or force upon
themselves (as well as right, and law) for any thing they do amiss.

And for this, and other Reasons, the law does suppose all men to be just, or
excusable, till they be legally heard and adjudged. This difference there is
between the Judges, and the Lawmakers; for, these (they say) do suppose all
men to be evil; but the Judges should suppose all men to be good, till they be
proved to be evil.

The Charge and Accusation by the law of Nature ought to be clear, distinct,
and particular (with time and place, or other circumstances) else the party
accused cannot discharge himself. Universals do not press, or oppress at all.
Generals do not press at all, or else they are apt to oppress.

The Witness and the Evidence must also be so clear, that those must condemn,
rather then the Judge; who si^teth as Council for the party Accused: That so he
be not oppressed by, or against law.

And besides the Judge (in most Cases, and in those also of life in Scotland)
there is Council allowed by law, which may, and ought to be heard in
particulars of law, or what ever may be justly disputable, as Treason is by
Statute: so that of all Crimes, by express Acts of Parliaments it ought to
have no Trial, but clear and plain; according to the course and custom of the
common law.

In such Cases therefore should the Judges (both in Law and Conscience) sit,
and be in stead of Council to the party; and this they owe to every subject,
though they had a special Obligation to the King. Who, to his own Rights (and
therefore to his Wrongs) was ^n Infant in Law, and so expressly declared in the
old Mirrou^. B^sid^s other Books. His Politic Capacity never; but his Person
ever in Nonage; or supposed so in law: for it may be, a child, or a woman, not
able to know the laws; and therefore always had by law a legal mouth assigned
in Council of law. And so might any man else (of old) it seems for matter of
demurs, before judgment; or for framing of a leg^l appeal (by Writ of Error, or
some other way) from any judgment whatsoever.

But our last King professed himself to know the laws so well, that it seems
the Judges, and others, did hold themselves to be excused from speaking for
him; as else they would, or should, or might have done. In this I might speak
too plainly; but I may be pardoned.

It is also the law of this kingdom, and of Nature, That although there be no
Council assigned; yet may any, in a good manner, move the Court to keep the
party from injustice, or the Court from error; as Stanford, and the third part
of Institutes, Cap. 2. fol. 63. and 101. and in such Cases it may be excused;
(and not censured for rash Zeal) if some do, or shall appear, where, or when,
it may be thought they be not called.

Neither can the whole Parliament of England, I suppose, make any Court to
condemn without lawful Accusers, or lawful Witnesses; which by express Acts of
Parliament is most especially provided in Case of Treason, in King Edward the
sixth, and Queen Mary's Reign, and Trial of Treason most expressly tied to the
Course and Custom of the Common Law. Nay, in full Parliament of Henry the
Eighth it was declared, That attaint of Treason, in, or by Parliament was of no
more force or strength, then it was, or ought to be, by the Common Law; or then
as good and strong, as that by Parliament.

Nor can the whole Parliament, I think, by the law of Nature, and right Reason,
make any children, Idiots, or all others whatsoever to be so much as Accusers,
or Witnesses: That, I say, not Indictors, Tryors, or Judges.

By express Acts of Parliament, in Philip and Mary, Edward the sixth, Hen. 8.
Hen. 4. Hen. 1. (for to him does the Mirror, and his laws lead us, as to a
clear Crystal Fountain of our Law-process; as was showed before.) None shall
suffer for Treason or other Crime, but by lawful Accusers, and lawful
Witnesses, before those, that by law might receive Indictments: Which, with all
Inquests, are to be made by honest, lawful, able men; Neighbors to the Fact.

And in page 179. he says, He should mispend his time, to show it to be the
great law of the Kingdom, as well as of Nature, that none may be Judges and
Parties in their own Cause. Which may ere long be found, perhaps, to be the
reason of the th^ee Estates, and very much of our Common Law: which is punctual
in nothing more, then in providing for a clear distinction of Accusers,
Witnesses, Indicters, Tryers, and Judges, especially in Cases of Treason, which
upon diverse motions of the Commons in Parliament, have been so often enacted,
and declared, to be only tryable by the course and custom of the Common Law,
and no otherwise.

Nay, in Parliament it self, and Parliament men there was; and for ought I
found, always, and the like course observed. For, in case of a Peer, the
Custom of the Kingdom is to proceed by a special Commission to one, as Lord
Steward, and 12 others at least, for a Jury ^f Tryers besides Accuse^s, and
witnesses and a formal indictment, and all from Record to Record; or, all is
illegal if it be only by the House of Peers.

If a Charge come from the House of Commons, they are as Indictors, being more
then 12 sworn men, Trustees to the whole Kingdom, and Neighbors to the fact, or
party, or both: to which also there must be a legal proof by lawful Witnesses,
or else the Charge, will not suffice.

And in page 181 he says, That for any thing done abroad, I hope, they do not
use to tabe rumors and reports (though from their own members) to be
sufficient for, or equivol^nt to, a legal Indictment, an Oath; seeing there
scarce is, or can be, any Case so notorious, but it may be pleaded unto by
somewhat of law, or necessity.

And although I should yield the Commons to be the Masters of the law, in
making it; yet they^^ pleased to allow others to be Judges by their Laws; and
if they reassume this also, yet it may be more easy to judge of some law,
then of any fact; at least it may be clothed, so as a curious Search, or
Inquest, may be requisite to lay it clear and naked.

Neither can I see how it may be necessary to proceed against any by force, or
illegal process, when it is so easy, as well as just, to go rightly, as to do
right.

For who can imagine a case so dark or intricate, but it may be contrived so,
that particular men may be Accusers, and others Witnesses, with a clear and
real distinction between Indictors, Tryors, and Judges? most of all in Cases
notorious and evident; for in such there may be less fear of the Juries
Verdict, against Evidence, or of the Judges Sentence against the Verdict.

And in page 184. he says, I will not, I cannot say the Commons of England
cannot choose or constitute their Judges (yet of this again ere long.) But this
I say, or believe, their Delegates ought to be exceeding curious (I had almost
said exceeding scrupulous) in making Judges, and bounding them to law and
justice, both in way, as well as end.

I must again repeat it, that it may not seem enough to settle Judges just and
wise, and good; nor only to provide that they may do what is just; I speak of
ends; but men are men, and ought in cases of such consequence to have their
way, their Rule and Square, by which they must proceed to be prescribed in
their Pattents, or Commissions, that they may do justly too, as well what is
just, to me it seems to be reason, or the law of Nature unto men, that the
supreme Court should so limit all inferiors, that it may not be left at large
to their list or pleasure, to condemn or sentence, without Hearing, Accusation,
Witness, or without such process and Trial, as shall be clear and plain, and
so prescribed in the Pattent or Commission.

If it be not so done and expressed, I know not what Appeal can be, but from
the Court before judgment; for what Appeal, what Writ of Error, or what Plea
can a man frame upon their Judgment, who have no Rule, no way of process
prescribed, and so cannot err transgress, or exceed their Commission. No, not
if they should without all legal Accusation, Proof, or Witness, condemn one to
be sliced and fried with exquisite Tortures. They are Judges unlimitted in way
of process, infinite and purely arbitrary. No, they are men, and so they must
be rational and just, which was presupposed by them that gave so vast a power.

They may be just indeed, and so they should; but yet no thank for this to
their Commission, if it does not bound and limit out their way and manner or
process, as it does their work and object, or their end; which was the wont of
English Parliaments, who were so just and wise themselves, that they did see or
fear it might be possible for their Committees to be both unjust and arbytrary,
if they were not most exactly limited of all Commissions. None were more
curiously drawn and pointed out by our Ancestors, then those of especial Oyer
and Terminer; because the Cases were not only heinous, so they ought to be,
but such as for some extraordinary cause emergent seemed to be as it were
extrajudicial, and such as could not stay and abide the usual process of the
settled Courts of justice: yet of these also did our Fathers take most especial
care they might be just in way as well as end, and that they might not be too
high in justice; for it seems that they had also learned a usual saying of the
Ancients, sumum iis est injuria; so that in diverse of the Saxon laws, we find
high justice (summum jus) to be as much forbidden as injustice; and I should
tremble at it as an ill Omen, to hear authority command the Kings Bench, or any
other Court should be now styled The Bench of high justice; for injustice, the
higher men go up the worse; or so at least it was esteemed by our Ancestors;
their constant limitation was in every such Commission; thus and thus you shall
proceed; but still according to the Laws and Customs of England, secundum
legem, and consuetudinem Angliae; and no otherwise; that is, as Fortescue well
says, You shall be pitiful in justice, and more merciful then all the world,
besides this Kingdom. And if such a limitation were not expressed, this was
enough to prove the Commission unjust and illegal; which is so well known to
all Lawyers, that I need not cite N. B. or the Register Commissions; or Scrogs
Case in Dyer; or so many Elder Cases in Edw. 3. Hen. 4. and almost all Kings
Reigns.

Nay, in King James, among the great debates of uniting Scotland, to England,
when it was driven up so close, that instead of, according to the Law and
Custom of England, it might be according to the law and custom of Britain, it
was resolved by all the Judges, that there could not be that little change; but
of one word that does so limit such Commissions, but by consent of Parliament
of both kingdoms; and in diverse Parliaments of Ed. 1. Ed. 3. and Hen. 4. there
were many Statutes made to limlt all Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, as that
they must never be granted, but before, and to some of the Judges of the Bench,
or of the grand Eire; nor those to be named by parties, but by the Court; and
with this usual restriction, according to the known cause of the Statute of
Westminster, in the 2d Reign of Edw. the first.

And the Lord Cook in the 4 part of his institutes, chapt: High Court of
Parliament folio 39, (which book by two special Orders of house of Commons in
their purest purity; is published to the special view of the Nation) expressly
says: That by order of Law a man cannot be attainted of high Treason, unless
the offense be in Law high Treason, he ought not (says he) to be attainted by
general words of high treason by authority of Parliament (as sometime has been
used) but the high treason ought to be especially expressed, seeing that the
Court of Parliament is the highest and most honourablo Court of Justice, and
ought (as has been said) to give example to inferior Courts.

And the Lord Cook in the last recited chap. shows that Empson and Dudley two
privy Counselors to Henry the 7th were indicted as a couple of Traitors, for
acting without Juries contrary to the fundamental Law of the land, although
they had an Act of Parliament, made in full and free Parliament, by Kings,
Lords, and Commons, to bear them out in what they did.

And yet for all this, and twenty times more that in law I am able to say for
my self, wherefore I ought not to be past upon, adjudged, or condemned without
due process of Law; and having Crimes particularly and distiuctly laid unto my
charge, must I be overruled in all manner of law that I can all^dge for my
self, and be endeavored to be hanged because I am so honest and just that my
adversaries neither have, can, nor dare, lay any crime in Law unto my charge.

But in the second place, although the great sword men of England be the
present Lords and Rulers of England, and my grandest and principallest
prosecutors at this time: And although several of their Declarations against
their quandam Lords and Masters the Parliament, they appeal to all men, whether
it be just or tolerable, that any privilege of Parliament should (contrary to
the Law of Nature) make a man's adversary judge in his own cause and
concernment; And therefore they declare, they cannot any longer suffer the
same, but shall take some speedy and effectual course whereby to refrain them
(viz. several Parliament men) from being their own, ours, and the Kingdoms
Judges, in those things wherein they have made themselves parties.

And yet contrary to the express Law of England, the Law of Nature, and their
own foresaid Declarations, the great Sword men, my present chiefest
adversaries, have constituted one of my grandest and maliciousest enemies that
I have in the world, viz. Mr. Attorney General Prideaux to be one of my
principallest Judges, and that also in his own concernment.

And that he is so, I thus make appear.

First he was in October, 1649 at Guild Hall my chiefest most bloody and cruel
Prosecutor without Law or Reason to take away my life, and was so malicious and
unjust in his prosecution of me, as that he did avowedly again and again in
open Court aver that there was a Statute made in Queen Mary's days, that did
expressly take away and abolish those two Statues of Edward the sixth, viz. Ed.
6.12. and 5 and 6, Ed. 6. chap. 11. that I insisted upon to save my life by, at
those that require two plain and evident witnesses to prove every fact of
treason against any man that are charged therewith. And if in that particular I
had not understood the Law as well as himself, he had taken away my life with a
consident lie and f^lshood.

2dly, he produced two of his sevants Mr. Nutleigh and Edward Radney, and
Nutleigh (who the other day at the Sessions took two of the strangest
contradicting oaths that ever I heard from the mouth of a man in my life,) And
he swore that he was with the Attorney General in his chamber, when he see me
give to his Master the Attorney General this specifical book, entitled, A
Preparative to Hue and Cry after Sir Arthur Haslerig, and he did own it, (says
he) and called himself the Author of it, save only the errataes of the Printer.

The same said Edward Radney, but being both demanded by me whether to the
words there was not this addition, saving the Printers errataes which are many,
and they both denied them; although Col. Francis West the then Lieutenant of
the Tower, who sat all the while betwixt Mr Prideaux and my self, swore these
were the words, viz. here is a book which is mine, which I will own, the
errata's of the Printer excepted, which are many.

And besides I did not see either of the foresaid servants of the Attorney
General in the room, although I often looked diligently about me, and were it
the last thing that ever I were to say, I am not able to say there was so much
as one person in the room at that time, besides, the Attorney Genesis Prideaux,
Col. West, then Lievt. of the Tower, and my self.

Again about a term or two before I left England, the said Attorney General
Prideaux, before the Lord chief Baron Wild, and Baron Thorp at the open
Exchequer Bar, preferred and caused in open Court to be read against me, one or
more most false, forsworn, and perjured affidavits; which in the substance of
them did declare; That I was in the head such a day as the Ringleader of a
great Rabble of people, and set them on to pull down about four score houses,
and set them on to do it in my own person, in the Isle of Axom; After the
reading of which, I told the Lord chief Baron Wild, that I was amazed and
confounded, that a man that pretended to have any thing of common honesty,
durst be so impudent and audaciously wicked, as contrary to his own particular
knowledge and conscience, with his own hands and tongue to present, such
abominable false and perjured oaths into a Court, as Mr. Prideaux that day had
done against me, when in his own conscience and knowledge in open Court I did
then appeal to; that Mr. Attorney very well knew that for so many days before
the day mentioned in the said oaths, that the houses were pulled down, and upon
that very day the act was done, and for so many days after, I was constantly
day by day without intermission at the Parliament doors or at a Parliament
Commit; with Mr Prideaux himself, a managing and negotia^ing that very affair
of my honest Cliants, of the Isl^ of Axome; and therefore then told the Judges,
That if Mr. Attorney General did deny this, which I was confid^nt in his own
kn^wledge he kn^w to be true; I had witnesses enough at that Bar to prove every
circumstance of it, and therefore being I was constantly in London and
Westminster both before the day the fact was committed, and upon the very day
it was acted, and so many days after it was done, it was impossible for Mr.
Prid^aux his oaths, to have any shadow of truth in them, unless he could
prove, that I had such a body that could be at Westminster, and in the Isle of
Axholm, about 7 or 8 score miles from Westminster, at one and the self-same
moment of time, and yet though about this very business he was, as a man might
easily then see sufficiently shamed and branded for a lying and false man; yet
after this when I was ready to leave England, was he the principal man, that
caused to be preferred in Parliament against me about this very business of
the Isle of Axholm, a most notorious and false unjust and lying Petition, as
upon the utmost hazard of my life now I am come into England, I do engage to
make it evidently appear.

And yet more then all this, this very Attorney General Prideaux was one of the
most violent, and furious, and unjust sticklers that Sr Arthur Haslerig had in
the whole Parliament against Josias Primate, mentioned in the Act upon which I
am indicted; and was the chief Actor in misleading and misguiding the House
against the light of Truth, and plain Evidence, to pass their Votes against
Primates honest and just business; and as by common fame, but not o^herwise it
is said, and to pass certain Votes against me, upon which the pretended Act
upon, which the Indictment against me is founded; and yet must he now come to
be a violent Judge upon my life, to take it away upon an unjust Act, and unjust
proceedings made in a great measure by himself; for which he rather deserves
(like Empson and Dudley) to be hanged as a Traitor, for subverting all the
Foundations of all the fundamental laws of England, and thereby cutting in
pieces; as much as in him lies, all the bonds, and ties, and ligiaments of
humane society in the English Nation, and thereby leaving no man now in England
any thing else, for the security of his life, liberty, and property, then
absolute Will, lust, and unbounded pleasure; then in the least to be justified
in his so doing: but yet this is not all. For besides, to render him incapable
to be at liberty, to execute any office in the least, much less to be my
Judge, or any man's else, he is a legally and formally impeached Traitor in the
Upper Bench upon Record, before the Lord chief Justice Rolls, by Thomas Elslist
Esquire; which said Esquire, as his own mouth has informed, has entered into
great bonds before the said Lord chief Justice Bolls, to prosecute the said
Charge of High Treason against the said Prideaux; unto which, the said Elsliot
does avow the said Prideaux dare not appear, but stands in absolute contempt
and defiance of the law; for which the said Esquire, being a legal man of
England, has already (as he avers to me) almost brought him to an Outlary: in
all which considerations I appeal to your conscience and judgment, and all
rational and ingenuous men that shall read this Epistle, whether in law,
equity, or conscience, the said Attorney General Prideaux be not altogether
unfit in any kind to be my Judge; and whether all the premises seriously
considered, they be not clear, palpable, and evident demonstrations, that the
Lord General (whom upon very good grounds I look upon to be my grand and
principal prosecutor and thirster after my innocent blood) has nothing in
crime, law, or justice, to lay unto my charge; but only endeavors to take away
my life by will, force, power, and palpable injustice; for a deliverance from
which, I most earnestly and heartily desire your public and private prayers
to the Lord Jehovah, my assured and undoubted Rock of Salvation, and the utmost
of all just, righteous, and lawful means that lies in your power; for which, I
with my poor afflicted wife and babes, with all the honest single-hearted
people of England, shall be much engaged unto you: so with my unfeigned love,
and hearty respect presented to you, I rest,

Yours faithfully in those undesolvable bonds of Union and communion in the
Lord Jesus Christ, John Lilburn.
From my sore bodily affliction; yet soul-rejoycing captivity in Newgate, this
20 of August, 1653.

