A DEFENSIVE DECLARATION OF Lieut. Col. John Lilburn, Against the unjust
sentence of his banishment, by the late Parliament of England; directed in an
Epistle from his house in Bridges in Flanders, May 14. 1653. (Dutch or new
still, or the 4 of may 1653. English or old style) To his Excellency the Lord
General Cromwell, and the rest of the Officers of his Army, commonly sitting in
White Hall in Council, managing the present affairs of England, etc. Unto which
is annexed, an additional appendix directed from the said Leut. Col. John
Lilburn, to his Excellency, and his Officers, occasioned by his present
imprisonment in Newgate; and some groundless scandals, for being an agent of
the present King, cast upon him by some great persons at Whitehall, upon the
delivery of his third Address (to the counsel of State, by his wife and several
other of his friends) dated from his captivity in Newgate the 20 of June 1653.
MY Lord and honored Gentlemen.
Having seen nothing abroad in print to declare that title that you would have
people give you that address themselves to you, I must therefore crave your
pardon, if through ignorance I do not exactly give you (being my self in a
foraigne nation, at so far a distance from you) that title that is usually
given unto you; for upon my word and reputation, my present design is to write
with all respect unto you; wherefore, I crave leave truly to inform you, that
by the sudden and unexpected arrival of my endeared (though greatly afflicted)
wife, with me yesternight. I am by her certainly informed of the total
dissolution of the Parliament, with the necessity of your assuming to your
selves the power of the Nation, with large and serious promises from you, of
doing it real good and healing it is rents, breaches, hazards, and dangerous
divisions, by setting it at real liberty and freedom, founded upon the true
principles of reason, common equity, righteousness and justice: 'at the sight
of which in truth and verity, my heart should more truly rejoice, then at the
enjoying of all earthly riches and honor, that possible it can be imagined the
whole world can afford to me particularly; And also, she very much incourages
me to believe, that if I can obtain your pass, faith, or engagement for my
safe and free returning into England, and remaining there (which she with
confidence assures me, by virtue of this letter thus penned, and her
negotiations thereupon, speedily to procure from you) I may with confidence
rest upon it. In which consideration, most noble and worthy gentlemen,
vouchsafe me, without distaste I beseech you, liberty, truly to acquaint you,
That by the late Parliaments Votes of the 15. of January last was twelve Months
I was fined seven thousand pound to Sir Arthur Haselridge, etc. to be banished
out of England, and its territories for ever, and never to return into any of
them again, upon pain of death; but if I do, I am to dye as a fellon without
mercy, and upon pain of death to be gone within thirty days after the said 15
of Januarie; And by their Act of the 30 of the same month, all persons are
declared accessory of Felony, after the fact, that shall relieve, harbor or
conceal me in England, or any of its territories, after the expiration of 20
days after the said 15 of January, the said day that the judgment of my
banishment was past against me, and the harbors all stopped, that none should
pass without a pass. And yet, though I went to the Speaker Master Lenthal, at
his own house, and with all the earnestness and importunity that my tongue
possibly could express to him, begged a pass of him, as for my life, but it was
again and again absolutely by him denied me; So that I ran apparent hazards of
being hanged in England before I could get away, forwant of a pass to go into
my banishment.

For at Dover, the Mayor of that Corporation, absolutely and resolutely denied
to let me go without a pass, although I had been at the charges to carry
thither from London with me several witnesses, judicially to depose upon their
oaths, that I was the individual Lieut. Col. John Lilburn mentioned and named
in my banishing votes, which were publicly printed by special order of the
Parliament, one of which copies I then delivered to him (till his wife (a mere
stranger to me) and one that to my knowledge I had never seen before) upon my
mournful expostulation with him, burst out into crying, and begged and desired
of her husband to let me pass; and rather, by so doing, to run the hazard of
his own ruin, then of my apparent death by his means. And all this is done
unto me, I do here solemnly avow it (and dare engage with the utmost hazard of
life, judicially legally, fully, and evidently to make it good) without any the
least shadow af law, reason, justice, conscience, or provocation; without so
much, as ever laying any pretense of a crime unto my charge, or ever letting me
know my accuser, or any accusation, or ever by sending forth any manner of
process of law, calling me to any answer whatsoever; or ever permitting me
(though in the face of the Parliament sitting I most earnestly pressed it and
desired it, upon the twentieth of Jan. being the very day that by their fifth
vote past against me, I was called to their bar to hear their sentence read to
me) to speak so much as one word in my own defense, or expressing any manner of
cause in my foresaid banishing votes, either general or particular, wherefore
they so banished and fined me seven thousand pound. The foresaid Act of the
thirtieth of January (past also against me) was made after it was publicly
known I was upon my journey to Dover, to go into my banishment; and yet that Act
expresses no particular crime, in the least in law, against me, but only
generals, which by the law of England and the Armies Declaration signify
nothing. 2 Part Cooks Inst. fol. 52, 53, 315, 318, 591, 615, 616. and 1. part
of the Parliaments book of Declarations, p. 38, 77 201, 845, and the votes upon
the impeached 11 Members: see the Petition of Right, and the late act that
abolished the Star Chamber, and those excellent printed arguments upon the Writ
of Habeas Corpus, in the Court of Kings Bench, in the Case of Sir John Eliot
and other Parliament Men committed to prison in the third of King Charles. The
unparalled strangeness, and high injustice of which sentence (by no laws of
nature, rules of reason, nor foundations of English government can no way (I am
confident) be justified (nor any man that had really a finger or vote in
causing or procuring of it) by any man endued either with one grain of honor,
true understanding, conscience, or common honesty; the justification of my own
innocence, and every way causeless suffering in every particular, against that
most unrighteous sentence, I dare venture my life to the uttermost hazard, to
justify, and vindicate fully against the learnedest, ablest, or rationalest
writer, or lawyer in England, that shall in the least open his mouth in the
defense of that Sentence; which yet, with all respect I leave to you further to
judge of.

And yet by virtue of this very Sentence, Sir Arthur Haselridge many weeks
since has actually seized, and is actually possessed by his tenants or other
agents of all my land, and corn sown upon the ground, and turned all my
servants out of house and home. By means of which sentence, I being but a new
beginner (by reason of my many, and long continued chargeable troubles and
imprisonments) to take root in any outward settlement in the world, for the
future subsistence of me, my wife, and helpless little babes: I have been
already so destroyed in my estate, as that really and truly, I am already
several thousands of pounds damnified thereby, besides all the constant hazards
of my life; And already I profess, bona fide, as in the presence of God exposed
to so great straights (which till now, for my own reputation sake, I never
durst divulge) as that I have already been forced in a land of strangers, for
many months together, to borrow here every penny that bought me ^ead, while my
wife in England, for the subsistence of her and our children being forced to
sell a great part of her household stuff, and to pawn other of it, yet
unredeemed; and also to borrow several sums of money of her friends, being in
point of payment of moneys unto her so dealt with, by almost all persons in a
manner, that she may justly say, they have dealt unhonestly and unworthily with
her, they taking advantage of my absence, and great afflictions; yea to procure
money to buy her, and her poor young babes bread she has already been
necessitated to part with my interest in one house in London, for one hundred
thirty five pounds, that stands me in much above three hundred pounds, and yet
by my Landlord of that house, being one of that most corrupt tribe of Lawyers,
is basely, unconscionably, and unworthily dealt with, by reason of which, a
great part of the said one hundred thirty five pound is kept from her. And yet,
all this put together, is the least of my present sad affliction and banishment.

For at Dover was clapped upon me a spy, a Rogue, called Captain Wendy Oxford,
who had stood upon the Pillory for wilful perjury, in two several places; and
yet at the same time was hired and pensioned by Master Thomas Scott Sir Arthur
Haselridges bosom and most indeared friend; who has held a constant (though
many ways, seemingly disguised) correspondency, with the perjured Rogue Oxford
ever since; as to Master Scotts face, I am able still, in a great measure, to
prove, and allowed him vast sums of money therefore; of the payment of some of
which, much more then circumstantial, I am able to bring proof: And which
Oxford has had a dispensation from the said Master Scott (or at least has
made it his practice) to fall down upon his knees, with his dublet and hat on
the floor, to drink healths to the damnation and confusion of the Parliament
and Army (as I have been informed by one of his own Comrades) even during the
receipt of his well paid, large Pension from Master Scott; in which time also
he has avowedly writ, and caused to be printed several books, with his name to
them, proclaiming in foraigne Nations, the Army and Parliament traitors against
the King; and vigorously excited and stirred up all the Princes of Europe, to
join together in one body, and by force of arms to cut them in pieces, as a
pack of the grandest traitors and tyrants that ever breathed in the world; and
who to his knowledge had their agents in all the Kingdoms of Europe, to stir
up their subjects against their Sovereigns, and to reduce their Kingdoms into
Commonwealths or Anarchies: but the maine and evident scope of all his said
books, and constant plotted dissembling devises and actions being principally
to exasperate the body of the mad or Ranting Cavaliers in these parts, to cut
my throat, as the present greatest enemy the present King, or his Father ever
had in the world.

And yet, at the same time, or under the same employment of M. Scot, etc. has
writ over to the said Mr. Scot I was become a Cavalier, or at least a mighty
great man with the chief leaders of the Kings party here, whose Agent or Agents
of Sir Arthur Haslerig and Mr. Scot, even at Parliaments, Committees, (or
Committee) have made their open and proclaimed use of it; to the great and
extraordinary detriment of me, and my friends and Clyents, that had business of
many thousand pounds consequence, then depending, and in actual agitation
before the said Committee, or Committees.

By means of which, with much more of as dangerous and sad nature to me, that I
am able, if it were now fit, most truly to relate, all my brains, valor, and
mettle has been scarce able several times to preserve my life, from the
murderous hands of the various plots, and wicked contrivances of Mr. Scots
known Agents, and their greatly deluded, credulous accomplices, the pistol of
some of whom, viz. Hugh Rily, a common reputed Irish Rebel, and lately a piece
of a Quarter-master-General to Sir Charles Lucas in Colchester, whose tyranny
the said Rily exercised, as I am credibly informed, upon abundance of people in
Colchester, and particularly upon his Landlord Mr. Beakon; and which Rily for
his most villainous roguery, cheating, cozening, treachery, and running from one
side to another, has several times hardly escaped hanging in Flanders, etc.
beyond Seas, as I have for certain been informed by some of his own
Countrymen, and Associates at Colchester, from whose mouth, especial in the
particular of treachery, I have heard so much vildness related by them of him,
as I never in all my days heard of one man; and yet this very man is one of Mr.
Scots great Agents and Negotiators beyond the Seas, to promote the interest and
freedom of Englands Commonwealth; though Job says, of such most wicked and
profane men, he would not set them with the dogs of his flock; and righteous
Paul says. The damnation of such men is just, that say (as Mr. Scot constantly
practices) they must do evil that good may come of it; all such vile,
dissembling, wicked actions, having no foundation at all from God, or his
Volumn of Truth, but from the devil and his Machiavilian principles, which are
notably, excellently, and politickly described by that subtle wise man
Nicholas Machiavel, his most rememorable book called his Prince, in his whole
18 chapter, extremely well worth reading and taking special notice of: and yet
as my wife informs me, the said wicked Hugh Rily has lately to the Council of
State, (by Mr. Scots instigation as I imagine) presented a strange, lying, and
false Petition against me, a copy of which I know not how to come by, to return
an answer to; and therefore do humbly entreat your honors jointly or several,
to help me to a true copy of the said Petition, that so in the face of the Sun
I may be freely admitted to make my just defense against it, truth hating holes
and corners; with most bitter and fearful oaths immediately to kill me, has
several times been almost even at my very breast and that without any real
provocation.

Yea, and Mrs Oxford (a common notorious reputed whore) and who commonly
passes once every month, for above these twelve months together, betwixt her
husband (the said Captain Wendy Oxford) from Amsterdam and Delfe, to and from
Mr. Thomas Scot at White Hall, has from time to time avowed to several persons
(from whom I have my relations) that I am confident will justify it, that if
all the interest she had in the world, would get me pistolled or stabbed, she
would have it done, having (as from several I have been informed) boasted, that
she has already, on purpose brought with her into Flanders, several stout men
to do it, and to dispatch me; yea even at Dunkirk about fourteen days ago
(being newly come from White Hall, from Mr. Scot) she vowed, protested and
swore, and most bitterly damned her self to the pit of hell, to the very face
of an acquaintance and friend of mine, that if by any of all the hands, of all
the friends she had in the world, she could get me pistolled or stabbed, it
should speedily be done; or if by any other ways and means that she could
invent, she could get me murdered, it should undoubtedly and speedily be done.
All which murdering conspiracies, I have too much ground and cause really to
believe, does most wickedly take its original, true, and malicious cowardly
rise from Mr. Scot, and Sir Arthur Haslerig, the former and often practices of
both of them against me, even in this very kind, has been as wicked, bloody,
treacherous, and barbarous, even while I was in England, as in a great measure
I am able truly to evince, and punctually demonstrate.

All which seriously considered, I humbly, and earnestly entreat you, to cast a
just, favorable, speedy, and compassionate eye, upon my causless, unjust, and
sad suffering condition (being constantly in a strange land,) by reason of the
wicked, and cowardly plots and devices aforesaid, of Mr. Scot, (Sir Arthur
Haslerig his grand and most indeared friend) accompanied with constant ^d daily
hazards of death, and to afford me such speedy, and effectual remedy, and
deliverance from it, as your present exercised power, will best enable you
with; and particularly, that you will immediately give such a Pass, and such
security for my speedy, free, and safe returning into the Land of my Nativity,
and there to live in security, from the hazard of all or any part of my
aforesaid sentence, or any actions done depending thereupon, as may be ground
of security and confidence, unto my faithful and beloved friends, Major General
John Lambert, Colonel Bennet, late a Member of Parliament, Colonel Thomas
Pride, Mr. Henry Duel my Father in law, Mr. Feake, and Mr. Powel, Ministers or
public preachers, Mr. William Walwin, Mr. Thomas Prince, Mr. William Kiffin,
Mr. Boulton, Mr. George Ward, Citizens of London, and Clement Oxenbridge
Esquire, or the major part of them, with your Pass, to send me under their
hands, their encouragement, that I may freely with security of my life, from
any danger, by reason of any action whatsoever, depending upon the said
sentence, return into England; for which favor I shall judge my self obliged
to remain,

My Lord, and Noble Gentlemen, Your obliged friend, in all just and righteous
ways, heartily to serve you, JOHN LILBVRN.
From Bridges in Flanders, this 14 of May 1653 new, or Dutch style, or May 4
1653 old or English style.
An Additionall Appendix by the penner of the foregoing Address.
MY Lord and honored Gentlemen, it has been my hard fortune often to be
misunderstood by diverse of you, and which I am confident of it, many times has
principally flowed from the cunning and in^inuating artifice of corrupt persons
without you, whose own particular guilt and fear, required them for their own
safety to calumniate and asperse me, and to do the utmost that in them lay, to
set you, or some of the chiefest of you, and me together by the ears, and such
was some of their mischievous practices even with his Excellency himself, at
his late being at Scotland, which made and compelled me after the battle of
Worcester, to wait upon his honor at his own house in the Cockpit, who very
well knows he was pleased to honor me so far, and to take me with himself into
a Gallery, where without a third person present, his Excellency very well
knows, we had hand to hand above an hours friendly and rational discourse, at
the beginning of which discourse, I do verily believe his Excellency cannot
choose but very well remember I expressed my self unto him in this manner: My
Lord, with all respect and sincerity of heart I am come to wait upon you, and
humbly to beg that honor from you, that you would vouchsafe to give me leave a
little friendly to speak with you, which being with all willingness granted by
his Excellency, I proceeded to this effect; my Lord, through misapprehensions,
and a kind of partaking in other men's quarrels, you and I have for some time
by past, been engaged in several disgusts against each other, although my Lord
I think a greater and realler familiarity could not possibly be betwixt two
friends, then was betwixt your honor and my self, in the years 1643. 1644.
1645. and part of 1646.

And at your late going to Scotland, and my self accompanying you 25. miles on
your journey, (by reason of a very great Obligation you had put upon me in the
Parliament House and Council of State the day before) there seemed to be a
very solemn and friendly reconciliation betwixt us, which on my part has been
faithfully, honestly, and justly ever since, both privately and publicly,
inviolably kept and preserved, to your honors very great advantage and safety;
and yet notwithstanding from Scotland, etc. by several of my friends I have
been often informed, that Mr. Scot, and others at White Hall has writ several
Letters to you, and therein informed you, that I was a mannaging, and had
joined in destructive designs against you and the Army with the Kings Party, in
which regard I have judged my self obliged in conscience and duty to my own
safety, to wait upon your Excellency, and face to face to aver unto you, upon
my reputation and credit, that I am absolutely free in any kind, either
directly or indirectly, of doing the least action that may give you distaste, or
be prejudicial in any kind to your interest; and therefore do most humbly and
earnestly entreat you, to do your self that Right, and me that Justice, as to
call Mr. Scot, or any other that has endeavored to accuse me to you (and
thereby to incens^ your indignation against me) face to face, that so I may
speak for my self; and my Lord, if either Mr. Scot, or any other can accuse me
justly in the least, as being guilty of any one action of disservice unto you,
since the day of our said solemn reconciliation, let me for ever be esteemed by
you the veriest false treacherous Rogue and Villain in the world, at the saying
of which, his Lordship was pleased to say, he had not the least ground of
disgust or distaste against me, but that I stood right in his affection, and he
should be ready to do me any office of love.

On which I told him I was the more induced to do this, because Mr. Scot being
Secretary of State, (which being one of the greatest places of trust in the
Nation) I could not but judge thereby, he was very deep in his Excellencies
favor, and therefore might have more then an ordinary influence upon him, and
thereby the more able to do me a mischief, and I was sure he had will enough
unto it, forasmuch as I was able to prove it to his face, while I was a
prisoner in the Tower in 1649. he had made it his work to hire an Agent, my
great pretended friend, with great sums of money, to come and persuade me in my
then great discontents, by reason of my sad sufferings, to write Letters to the
King of Scots at Jersey, and send them by his said Agent, that so I might be
drawn into a treasonable snare, thereby to lose my life; and having had much
private discourse with his said Agent, and easily perceiving his drift, I was
through the goodness of God too hard for him; whereupon he and Mr. Scot
failing of their wicked and bloody ends in getting any Letters from me, he the
said Agent alone, or joined with Mr. Scot, as I have too apparent grounds to
judge, hereupon counterfeited my hand, and feigned and produced several false
Letters of mine, intercepted, as was pretended, that I had writ to the King of
Scots: For my old friend Mr. Cornelius Holland avowed with a great deal of
seriousness to my wife then familiar with him, that he knew my hand as well as
his own, and if ever he saw my hand in his life, those Letters of mine that
they had to produce against me, which he said I had lately writ to the King of
Scots to Jersey, was every word my own individual hand, and he was very sorry
that I, who for my honesty he had so highly esteemed, should be so Apostatized
from all my principalls, as to turn my back of God, and of his people, and the
cause of the Commonwealth, and to join with their grand enemy the King, to
destroy them all.

And the Lord Bradshaw averred the substance of this to ^ very good friend of
mine, a Knight; upon the knowledge of which, I did confidently, truly, and
solemnly avow, I never writ a line in my life to the King, nor was no more
directly nor indirectly in combination with him, then Mr. Holland, or the Lord
Bradshaw themselves; whereupon after I was calumniated by M. Scots means all
over City and Country, to be an absolute Agent of the King, and threatened a
little before my trial at Guild Hall, to be tried for my life thereupon, yet
upon my resolute and true averments, this cheat vanished as smoke, so that Sir
by this you may see Mr. Scot wants no will to do me mischief, therefore for
time to come I beseech your Excellency not to believe any of his tales against
me in his future endeavoring to make again debate and strife betwixt your
honor and my self, but upon all his information against me, before they receive
belief with you, call me face to face to speak for my self, which his
Excellency solemnly promised he would do.

Whereupon in the second place I expressed my self in this manner to his
honor; my Lord, I crave your favor to speak a few words further unto you,
which being granted, I went on to this effect, My Lord, there has been in my
late imprisonment much differences betwixt Sir Arthur Haslerig and my self,
occasioned by his taking from me, by his will and pleasure, without shadow of
Law, or authority of any in power, about 2500. l. of my own proper money, and
besides, prosecuting to take away my life with that eagerness and vileness
that he did, and that by ignoble and unworthy means; and now my Lord there is a
great contest betwixt him and my Family, whom ^ruly I cannot but say he most
unjustly endeavors to extirpate out of their country, and from my Uncle and
others of his friends, he has already by his will and pleasure, without Law or
reason, taken a Colliery worth, as Sir Arthur himself says 5000. l. per annum,
and I know my Lord, Sir Arthur is a man very dear unto you in your affections,
and in regard the business is like to come to a very high contest, and I as a
Counselor against Sir Arthur am like to the utmost to be engaged in it;
therefore least your honor should judge I contest with Sir Arthur upon any old
score of reflection upon him as your Lordships friend, or any the least design
to occasion any disturbance, I am come to wait upon your honor, on set purpose,
to take out of your mind all or the least apprehension or conceit of any
disgust remaining in my heart against your honor, and to let you clearly know,
my thoughts are fully fixed with as much respect upon your Excellency as its
possible for a man's to be; and therefore I am come to offer this unto your
honor, that seeing Sir Arthur Haslerig is your great friend, and seeing we
judge our cause in contest with him so just and righteous as we do, I humbly
and seriously profer this unto your honor, that if Sir Arthur pleases
absolutely to refer the final judgment of the cause unto your Excellencies
sole judgment, and bind himself in a bond of twenty thousand pounds, finally to
stand to your determinate and sole judgment, I will engage my friends shall
enter into as great bonds, upon your Lordships full hearing of the cause on
both sides, to stand to, and finally to acquiesce, without further dispute, in
his honors judgment, for which his Lordship very much commended my ingenuity,
and my honorable respect to himself and his integrity, so absolutely to put our
selves in a cause of so great consequence into his hands, but withal told me,
he understood the cause was long, and he had many weighty affairs upon his
hands, which would by no means afford him so much time as to hear so long a
cause as he believed that was, unto which I replied to this effect; then my
Lord, because I will absolutely leave you without the least starting hole, or
any the least ground to harbor any disgust in your breast against me, for my
zealous appearing in this Colliery business against Sir Arthur Haslerig, over
whom I know you have a kind of friendly command; and therefore seeing you will
not undertake to be Judge in the case your self, in the second place, although
Sir Arthur be a great man, and a Parliament Man besides, and also a great
Military Officer under you, and none of those for whom I am engaged against him
in any of those capacities or qualifications, yet to show and fully hold out to
your honor our own honest, just, and peaceable intentions. I say in the second
place, on the behalf of my said friends, in reference to the said Colliery, I
offer this, that if your Lordship please to engage Sir Arthur Haslerig to make
a final and fair end of it without too much heat and contest, that if he
please to choose two Parliament men, or two Officers of the Army, out of those
of either sort which he leaves we will choose two more, and bind our selves
finally in the said bonds of twenty thousand pounds, to stand, and abide their
final Judgment in the case, and therein absolutely to acquiesce, provided that
in regard they being an even number, there might be two and two in opinion
opposite to each other, that therefore in such things as they shall not fully
agree in, his Lordship should be final Umpire, which profer his honor highly
commended for so much ingenuity, that he was highly taken with it, and promised
effectually to speak to Sir Arthur about it, which yet produced no other
healing effect in the least, but my banishment.

Which being upon such hard and cruel terms, as is before truly expressed, and
my life beyond the Seas in a constant and perpetual hazard and danger, and
that principally by Mr. Scots means, Sir Arthur Haslerigs indeared and bosom
friend, who by his large pentioned Agents, and particularly by that notorious
convicted perjured rogue, Capt. Wendy Oxford, whom I have too much cause
confidently to believe, he got set in the Pillory, and banished, out of design
to go over with me, and put him in the more disguise, the more securely to get
me murdered in our travells together, who I am able to prove has ever since
been in a constant pentioned correspondency with the said M. Scot, and the said
Oxfords wife, or whore, as she is commonly reputed, has constantly and
commonly once a month, past and repast, betwixt the said Oxford and Mr. Scot,
on purpose to plot and contrive, as I have too apparent cause to judge, my
murder, ruin, and destruction, the said perjured rogue Oxford, having
constantly and apparently ever since my banishment made it his work in Holland,
first by discourses and printed papers with his name to them, to make the
people of Holland believe my banishment was but a counterfeit, a juggling and
dissembling fictious thing, out of design, that so I might be the more
serviceable to the General, or my brother Traitors at Westminster, as in his
printed books he calls me and them, that so the people in Holland might beat my
brains out as a rogue, and one of the Generals or Parliaments chief Spies.

2. By his discourses and printed papers, he has constantly made it his work
to incense the whole Body of the Kings Party beyond the Seas against me,
constantly averring, that I have been the only principal man that imbroyled
the three Nations in war, that murdered the King, and altered the Government
into a Commonwealth, and have destroyed the King, his Queen, and Posterity,
with the Nobility and Gentry, by means of which my life has been in a constant
and perpetual danger to be taken from me, especially by the rasher and madder
sort of the Kings Party.

To counterbalance these two destructive evils and mischiefs against me, and
my life, I have had no other way under God to preserve my life, but these two
ways:

First by discourses and print beyond the Seas, to make it evident and apparent
to the people there, that my banishment was a real thing, and no fiction in
the least, and that I was so far from being a Spy for the General, that I had
grounded cause to look upon him as the capitallest Adversary I had in the whole
world, because as my information told me before I left England, that by one of
his own Favorites, who was then constantly at his elbow, that notwithstanding
all the fore-recited fair outside carriage, my banishment was diverse days
before it was declared by Parliament agreed on by the General himself, and a
cabal of Parliament Men in the Generals own private Chamber.

And secondly, an information before my wife by some that sat in the House,
and heard, and diligently observed the whole carriage of my banishment, told
me, that the General upon that Tuesday that I was called to the Bar, to hear
their sentence read to me (being the very day that my honest and faithful
Citizen friends delivered their Petition to the Parliament against the
injustice of their own banishing Votes) appeared openly in the House as the
grand and principal man that caused me to be banished, in all which regards
and considerations, I was then of opinion, and yet am not fully altered, that I
had just cause to write, and speak as evil of the General, as my tongue or
pen could invent; and I confess I did it, and do appeal to all unbyassed men
amongst your selves, what less the godliest, meekest, and moderatest amongst
you would have done, all circumstances considered, had you been in my most
desperate and sad condition, daily and hourly encompassed round with the
plotted and contrived designs of murder and death, by the pentioned Agents of
the Secretary of State; Mr. Scot, who was great in favor even with the
Generals Excellency himself.

The second main thing that I had under God, in reason, honestly, or policy to
preserve my life, was in all the just and honest ways I could to fall into a
friendly familiarity with the rationallest and principallest of the Kings Party
that lived in the parts where I lived, and accordingly I did, and was very
familiar with the Lord Percy, the Lord Hopton, the Lord Culp^pper, the Bishop
of London Derry (a wise and shrewd blunt man) and the Duke of Buckingh^m, with
all of whom, or the highest ranting Cavalier I met with, upon all occasions of
discourse whatsoever, I always maintained my own principalls, that at the
first I engaged with in the Parliaments quarrel against the late King, viz.
unlimited Regal Prerogative, and Parliaments unknown unfathomable privileges;
and with whom, or any other of the Kings Party, either directly or indirectly,
I never in the least (I speak it as in the presence of the Lord God Almighty,
that knows the secretest thoughts of the hears of the sons of men) in all my
days, from the beginning of the war to this hour, entered into the least
contract, agreement, oath, or confederacy, to be his Agent, or to advance his
ends or interests, and am as totally ignorant as a young child of the
particulars of any present designs of his, negotiated in England, Scotland, or
Ireland, and never in all my days held any Counsels with them, or any of
them, for the mannaging of the Kings designs against the interest and welfare
of the Land of my Nativity; and in all my actions and carriages beyond the
Seas, in my cruel banishment, I have been to the utmost of my power,
understanding, ability, as constant, as studious and industrious a real
well-wisher to the prosperity of the people of England in general, as ever I
was in my life, and I appeal to a late published Letter of mine to Col Henry
Martin, as a part of my justification in this averment.

And as for George Lord Duke of Buckingham, with whom I was the most
conversant, I was again and again importuned by the said Captain Wendy Oxford
thereunto, our first meeting, or seeing one another faces, being at the said
Captain Wendy Oxfords Chamber in Amsterdam, where we all three dined together,
and the Duke and my self had a very large and private discourse about his own
particular individual business, he craving my best advise, how he might the
most rational, expeditious, and honorable way he could, make his peace in
England, and return thither to breath in the Air of the Land of his Nativity,
which ne avowed he loved above all places in the world, and was ready and
willing to do any thing that the present power in England could require of a
man, that had either a grain of honor or honesty in him, and to give them any
security to the utmost of his power for his future quiet, and peaceable living
under their Government; for the accomplishment of which end I gave him many
reasons to believe that his only way was to make a sure and firm friend to his
Excellency the Lord General Cromwell, in order unto which I advised him to deal
with Captain Wendy Oxford, who was a Mercenary fellow, and whom I gave him
abundance of reasons to believe, was very great with Mr. Thomas Scot Secretary
of State, who I confidently then averred to him was extraordinary great with
his Excellency the Lord General Cromwell, and accordingly the said Duke of
Buckingham followed my advise, and large instructions in that particular, and
entered into a contract with the said Oxford to obtain his pass, who to my
certain knowledge negotiated it, both by Letter to his said wife (or commonly
reputed Whore) with Mr. Scot, for diverse weeks and months together, and the
said Mr. Scot sent over to the said Oxford a Pass, at the said Oxfords earnest
desire, to come from Holland to England to speak with him the said Mr. Scot,
about the said business; which Pass, as I was told by a Merchant, that in
Oxfords hand see it, the said Oxford was possessor of: but it being
accidentally seen in Oxfords hands, by some Cavaliers who were drinking hard,
and ranting it with the said Oxford, he judged it his safety and policy
immediately to tear and burn it; and immediately to fall a cursing and swearing
at the Parliament and Army, and to call them Rogues, Traitors, and Villains,
and to with all the plagues of Heaven and earth to fall upon them, for their
destruction and damnation. And which said Oxford received several sums of money
of the said Duke of Buckingham to negotiate his business with the said Mr.
Sco^, to procure his Pass to come into England: and as I have been credibly
informed from Col. Leighton, then belonging to the Duke of Buckingham, and then
fully privy to all the said negotiations: the said Oxford with Mr. Scot brought
his desired Pass to that perfection, that if he the said Duke would truly
declare all the discourse he had with me at Amsterdam, he should have his Pass;
but the Duke having at our very first meeting engaged his word and honor to
me, that his and my discourse together should not be divulged without my
consent, and according to my instructions refused to tell Mr. Scot the same,
and so failed of his then obtaining his Pass; and thereupon sent his friend
Col. Leighton with a Letter, and full instructions immediately to his
Excellency the Lord General Cromwell to procure his extraordinary much desired
Pass; and the said Col. Leighton had with his Excellency and the then counsel
of State many debates about it, as the said Col. fully and particularly at his
coming into Flanders told me at Ostend, and Bridges, the place of my then
habitation; and this business, and the debating from time to time of the honest
and just ways and means how to procure the said desired Pass, for the said
Duke, was the true and real ground of the Duke of Buckinghams and my many
converses together ever since our first knowledge each of other: unto whom I
must most truly and faithfully say this, That I do as immediately and
instrumently owe my life and being to him, as ever David ought his to Jonathan:
his powerful influence among the desperate Cavaliers, being such, as that
instrumentally under God he principally preserved my life, from those many
complotted designs, that the said Oxford had cunningly laid by their hands to
get me murdered; and of whom and in his real commendations, whether it be gain
or loss unto me, I am in gratitude compelled to say this:

That during the time of my banishment, I was more really obliged and beholden
to him the said Duke of Buckingham, for those extraordinary benefits and
favors I have received from him, then I am to my Father, my Brother, and all
the Kindred and friends I have in the three Nations, in England, Scotland, and
Ireland; and in whom I have by long experience found so much reason, sobriety,
civility, honor, and conscience (that) as to his own particular, if ever it
should lie in my power to do him any personal service, without detriment to my
native country (which I am confident he would never desire of me) I judge my
self bound and obliged in conscience and gratitude to travel in his errand a
thousand, and a thousand miles upon my feet; and if he wanted security, and
mine might any ways be advantageous unto him, in case he should ever live to
enjoy that, which he to me scores of times passionately has declared to be
esteemed by him so great a happiness, once again to be admitted to breath in
English air, I durst be bound body for body, for his punctual, and faithful
performance of any solemn engagement he should make for his future and
peaceable, quiet and obedient living under the present power of England.

Most noble Lord, and honored Gentlemen, I am the more bold to be thus large in
these particulars with you, because, being compelled by my own necessities (Sir
Arthur Haselridge having actually seized all my land) and the apparent hazard
of death, ( Oxford having in his third or last printed book declared, he has
two more to come speedily out against me, in which he sufficiently threatens,
to make it too hot for me to hide my head in any hole in Europe.) And my wives
most urgent importunity, grounded, as she said to me, upon some encouragement
she apprehended from his excellency the Lord General Cromwell; I say, being
necessitated and encouraged by the foresaid declared premises, to return into
England, and to cast my life at your feet and favor, by reason of the
unconscionable letter of an unjust, injurious, and many ways void Act of
Parliament in it self.

And in the sincerity of my soul, since my compelled return, have made to his
Excellency and the honorable Council of State, upon 14, 16, and 20 of June
present three humble, rational, submissive, and moderate petitions; unto all
or any of which I can yet obtain no other answer, but my commitment to
Newgate, in order to a trial for my life, upon the said illegal and unjust
Act of Parliament; and serverall averments from Major General Desborough, and
Major General Harrison, unto diverse of my Friends, as several of them inform
me, that the Council of State has letters and papers under my own hand, of my
engagement to the present King of Scots, to come over to be his Agent, and to
imbroile the Nation again in blood; and that all the Duke of Buckingham's
familiarity and mine has been only in order thereunto, with diverse other
things of the like mischievous nature: and that which is worse, some of my said
Friends, that were down at White Hall with my last Petition, aver to me, that
Major General Harrison with much incensed bitterness should aver to them, that
there was no credit to be given to any of my averments to the contrary, of what
he said against me, because he had found me so false, that he could not trust
any thing I said: and others of my Friends aver to me, that they have been
certainly informed, that Major General Harrison in open Parliament, since the
debate of my banishment was afoot, avowed in the open House, that I was a most
false perjured fellow: in all which consideration, and forasmuch as the wisest
of men in Scripture aver to this purpose that a good name is much more precious
then much sweet oil, and more to be valued then much fine gold; and to me is
much more dearer then my life; in all which consideration, I say, I am
compelled in all humility to take my life at this present time visibly into my
hand, and humbly to declare unto you, that being lately pressed upon those very
things by one supposed very powerful with his excellency about my engaging
with the King of Scots, and having solemnly declared to him, I never was guilty
of any the least engagement with him, or any of his party, to promote his
Regal interest, against the well are of the present declared Commonwealth of
England: and being desired and pressed by him, I solemnly swore it upon the
Bible, and am ready with the last drop of my heart-blood to make it good
against any man in the whole world: being confident that no man having but one
grain of common honesty, has any ground in the least, to swear such a thing
against me, as confederacy with the present King, or any for him, to be his
present agent in England; nor dare do it, unless it be some of Mr. Scots most
deboist Cavaliers, or other wicked Agents and Pensioners, that he constantly
imployes to set and lay traps and gins to betray and destroy men (as in some
cases I can punctually prove, he has already done, even to the taking away the
very lives of some) the generality of which, for a Whore or a Glass of Wine
makes no conscience at all, with most bitter oaths to dam themselves to the
pit of hell: he having already to one of them proffered to settle upon him and
his heirs for ever 200 l. land of inheritance by the year, to swear against me
at Guild Hall to take away my life there, as the party himself has confessed
to me; and has also in effect done the same to a Col. that within this very
few days tells me that at law upon his oath he will be ready to justify it.

And as for my information, of Major General Harrisons averment against me in
the open House, of being perjured; my condition at persent, with all the
sobriety I can, compels me to say no more to him but this, That I very well
know Sir Arthur Haselridge at the Parliaments Committee, where Primates
business was examined, indeavored by false Oaths, and no otherwise, to prove
such a thing against me and old and honest Master George Gray; but could not,
nor did in the least legally or effectually do it, although we fully proved
there, his principallest witness or witnesses, to be fully perjured or
forsworn: one or more of them having sworn in effect, That old-Master George
Gray, and my Uncle George Lilburne, had robbed by Committee force, Master Wray
Sir Arthurs Champion, of his deeds and evidences, diverse years ago; and yet
Master Breaton confessed at the then Bar (and that upon his Oath, as I
remember) that not many weeks before that, he had the said Master Wrays Deeds
and evidences in his possession, and perused them. And as to my being perjured,
I do hereby provoke Major General Harison with all the earnestness in the
world, to prefer a Bill of indictment in any Court of Law in England, to
convict me of that notorious crime, and I will readily and willingly answer
him; or else, if he please to aver before two or three of my friends, the same
thing, that so at the Bar of Justice they may be my witnesses, I shall not be
long (if I live) to seek my legal remedy against him for scandalizing me,
knowing in my own conscience, my self so innocent of any the least thing like
perjury, that I dare with confidence and deliberation, spit in the face of the
stoutest single man in England, that dare to my face solemnly aver such a
thing; but being my most earnest desire is with good words, and hearty and
unfe^gned engagements, of living peaceably, and quietly: without the least
disturbance to the present government, rather then by high language in the
least, if it be posfable, to provoke, (though I heartily thank and bless God
for it, it is no more dreadful to me at present to die, then to go sleep.)

I therefore entreat your Lordship and honors, as you are men of honor, and
conscence, suffer not my good name, behind my back, to be rent and torn in
pieces with notorious lies and falsehoods: but what you in any kind lay to my
charge, about the King of Scots, speedily send me a true copy of it, and
without the least demurer to the jurisdiction of the place from whence it
comes, I will speedily and freely return you a particular answer to every head
of it. Or else,

2. Be pleased to prevail with Major General Desborough, his Excellencies
brother in law (and one I believe, for his wisdom and parts, he very much
confides in, and one I have in times past, been most intimately familiar with,
and never had any particular grand disgust with in my life, that I can
remember) to vouchsafe to come and spend a few hours time with me, and I am
confident, I shall face to face give him full, rational, and just satisfaction
in every particular, that he is able to object against me; that so if it be
possible, a quiet and peaceable composure may be made of your present distaste
against me; there being nothing, I seriously profess it from my very heart,
that his Excellency in Reason and Justice can desire at my hands, but he shall
absolutely command it. So humbly craving your pardon for my tediousness herein,
and my transgression, if you judge it any, for my printing hereof, being so
much for the perservation of my own life, reputation and safety compelled
thereto; being already beyond the Seas in several Nations and Languages,
constrained, for the preservation of my life in my banishment to print the
first part of it, being my first address to you. So I humbly take leave to
subscribe my self,

(My Lord, and Noble Gentlmen) Yours to serve you, if you please, John Lilburne.
From my captivity in Newgate this 22. of June 1653.
FINIS.

