MERLINUS DEMOCRITUS; OR, The Merry-conceited Prognosticator: CONTAINING, A
general Judgment of the State of Great Britain, France, and Ireland; and the
great Change and Revolu^ion that will happen in the Year of our Lord, 1655.
Namely, The turning round of the Wheel of Fortune, and the calculating of every
thing in its own proper Center, The setting up of Heavens Vicegerent, and the
administering of Truth in the equal Scale of Justice, The purging of the
Commonwealth from Caterpillars, the discarding of Knaves, and the putting of
honest men in their places, The reclaiming of Lawyers from taking of Fees, and
an Antidote prescribed for Brokers and Usurers, to clear them of their
extortionable Malady of shaking whole Lordships into a Consumption. With the
great and ominous Eclipses that will be this year visible in our Horizon, and
the Effects thereof.

diagram explaining calculation of solar eclipses chart explaining calculation
of lunar eclipses

By W. Liby, Student in Astrology.

London, Printed for G. Horton, and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange, 1656.

Merlinus Democritus, etc.
NOw the Genius of the World protect me, or I shall slide to Heaven in
amazement; come all ye learned Astrologers, and the whole Society of
Weather-Witches, and tell me what terrible Comet that is that hangs over
Highgate Hill; what shall I call it, Cometa, Barba^a; or Argyricomus, (that
word had almost strangled me) By the faith of a Broker I Will come no more there:
But what name then shall I bestow, for in-good deed law, it changes more
shapes, then Pythagoras his soul shifted Lodgings; our Moderns are silent, it
is their modesty I perceive; let us hearken then to the Ancients, Haly Rhadoan
(with whom all the Roapmakers agree) is of opinion, that a Rhetrograde Comet,
signifies Heresies, Herrings, and legum Turbas, Long Turnips; but Junctinus
says, that Comets are very fortunate things portending life to Princes, and
great tranquillity to Kingdoms, and Commonwealths; but experience tells us the
contrary, for, Anno Dom. 1630. there was a Comet (with bush hair, like
Barneviles Perewig) and what followed, marry the very next year Hales my Lord
Mayors Cook gave up the Ghost. And in the year 1646. there was an eclipse of
the Sun, personification of a solar eclipse and soon after two Hectors, alias,
Highway men, were detected near White Hall and sent prisoners to Newgate. Nay
more, in the year 1639. there was an Eclipse of the Moon, personification of a
lunar eclipse and Barkeham the Broker hanged himself in his own Garters, having
so great and vast a breach in his Conscience, for his intolerable extortion,
that it was almost possible to drive a Coach and six Flanders Mares through the
Intervale, was it not for indangering an Overturn to the Coachman; since which
time, some of the most refined stamp, have cried out fire, fire, O let us have a
Reformation, Otherwise, for ought I know, the Devil might have given them the
same Law both in Longlane, and Hounshitch; as he did to Dr Faustus at
Wittenbergh in Germany, whose Lease being expired, and the clock striving 12,
he immediately in a great thunder, and flame of fire, fetched him away bodily,
dashing his brains against the wall: A good Memento for Usurers.

In the year 1640. when the world began to turn round into the Antipodes, there
was another Eclipse of the Moon, personification of a lunar eclipse at which
time began an excellent Conclave in Europe, and even at that instant began the
Act for Sacrilege against Sr. Thomas Tickletail, who was beheaded on Paul's
steeple. And likewise in the year 1653 was that great and fatal Eclipse of the
Moon, diagram of lunar eclipse a little before which time, Will. Lilly found a
huge Tur -- at his door; and coming to Southamptons house to view the effects
of it, vowed to be revenged upon the Stars and Planets,

Had not Sir Arthur Coodcole hanged his Dog in fury,
And called Sir William to sit as Judge and Jury.
Well Gentlemen! these things portend most strange Concavities doubtless,
beshrew me, if I fear not a Consumption of the purse, even with those Loyal
hearts that deserve most; and a great increase of Treasure in the pockets of
those that deserve least. But the best on it is, this world will not last
always; the Wheel of Fortune is now upon turning, that Knaves must be
discarded, and honest men enjoy their places. For, have we not a Prospective at
Westminster, that begins to discern and find out the Caterpillars of this
Nation? Yes, yes, they are now determined to winnow and unkenel them, and to
call to an Account the Excizemen, Treasurers, and Commissioners, that so they
may give a just account of their Stewardship, or else be h --.

Beat Drums, sound Trumpets, here is hopes of a Reformation: Justice shall flow,
and Righteousness shall stream in every angle of the whole City, the Conduits
shall run with Cream, that is rare, and your Citizens wives shall never be known
to stir abroad, or have private meetings, or to make the Beast with two Backs
with any save their own beloved husbands. The honest Lawyer (a Title somewhat
strange) shall undertake their Clyents cause for nothing, nor shall it be
possible for any man to compel them to take money: Bribery shall be laid aside
as impiou^, and a Janus face be pelted with addle Eggs, and rotten Oranges by
all the Attorneys, and Attorneys Clerks. Brokers shall become honest, and
Usurers free-hearted, that is a wonder. If not, I shall give him this Character,
and leave it upon Record to Posterity* viz. That an U^urer must be drawn like
to those pictures that have a double aspect, which if you behold one way seems
to be a man, but the other way a Devil. He grounds the lawfulness of his Usury
from the parable, wherein the servant was not approved of, that had not
improved his Talent; he will be sure therefore not to hide his, but make the best
use of it. He gets into men's estates, as Cut purses get Cloaks in the night; if
he can but wind himself into a piece of it, he will be sure to get it all at last.
Or like an Essex Ague, will shake whole Lordships into a Consumption. H^'s an
excel^ent Cook to dress a young Heir, for he first plucks off his feathe^s, and
afterward serves him up to the world with Woodcock sauce All his life is a
golden dream, and this red earth is his Heaven. For his estate is raised out of
the ruins of whole Families, which first sends him in ill getting it, and
afterward his son in ill spending it, both to the Devil, and there I leave
them.

A general conflagration attends the effects of this years Revolution, yet very
much tranquillity seems to arrive the years both of Prince and people. Religion
will still be made a Cloak for Knavery, and Gods Word and Providence a Lacquey
to the devil on horseback. Verily this year produces notable things. O
Heavens! is not thy Viceger^nt the equal Scale? where is then the perfect
administration of true Justice? when shall we partake and center on those
Golden Reins of Government so long contended for? What! must the weakest
always go to the wall, and might overcome right? No, no, there is a day of
redemption coming, wherein some great ones will be forced to rectify their
evil practices, and constrained to give an account of their stewardships; and
reason good, they may in time be fatted for the slaughter. Certainly, the rash
actions of some in Authority, will produce (in process of time) the greatest
Catastrophe that ever happened in England: We are threatened this month, and
strange news comes from France; beware an invasion for the Indies.

The Stars have of late been so cut out into paper clouts, and black patches,
by a Rapsody of Fiskin Starguisers, that poor Merlin knows not where to find so
much as a piece of a Planet; but I pray Domine Fisk who was Lord of the
Ascendant, when you leapt into the Wire-drawers saddle, Mars erected, and Venus
Rampant on the top of the bed? who is that there that is cleansing of his jaws
with a Scotch pick-tooth, -- Ha, ha, sir, the stars tell me, that while some
su^'d Gowns are feeding in fair pasture at home, their Madams shall ramble
abroad for larger commons: Will ye be always wanton ye whim-crown'd Wagtails?
what a madage is this, that any man may chew the cud upon sacrilege, without
fear of choking. But to be serious, old sores will break forth, unless
thoroughly searched by a long sword; and the soldiery will maintain their
Superiors as long as they can, yet at last the Magistracy will be handled by
Jupiter; and there is great hopes that the Nobles will advance the good of the
Commons; it is high time, too long has their freedoms been captivated; and that
ere long their privileges will receive an absolute exaltation in its own
Center and Hemisphere. Which will be upon the diametrical interposition of the
earth betwixt the Sun and Moon, when these two Eclipses shall happen, according
to the Type following. diagram explaining calculation of solar eclipses chart
explaining calculation of lunar eclipses

A very notable Scene attends the National Affairs, and great acts are brought
upon the Stage: withdraw but the Curtain, and you may discern the motion of the
Puppits, even unto the Netherlands, where the Belgic Lion begins to roar, and
once more to hang forth the skarlet streamers upon the B^ittish Ocean. Very
good, I shall I then unravel the mystery, and tell you in plain English, that
the Dutch begin new Contingencies, and their Whimsie pated Noddles, are
altogether elevated with strange Chimera's; wonderful speculation! Rare
invention! the Design being founded upon the Element of water, although the
Constitution hangs most magically in the air, like the Tomb of Mahomet, by the
virtue and phantfie of some magnetical Boar, o^ Coxcomb. Well! admit this;
nevertheless, our Commonwealth stands in a gallant posture; and is ready to
receive the enemy, beyond the credit of succeeding Ages.

Nevertheless, some in Authority now think to vaump up an old fashion of
Gubernation; and promise much, but perform little, that is no news; The people
seem to be merry, but they have small cause; for when they think Authority will
alter something that may prove beneficial, lo it is but an establishing of
what they count obnoxious; insomuch, that the Commonalty are unsatisfied, and
many Paper-kites takes their flights up and down the countries, which incites
the people to a unanimons petitioning for the abatement of Taxes, I wish it
unfeignedly; O what a sweet harmony would Englishmen sing, if every man might
enjoy his own.

Indeed, a most excellent Harmony attends the actions of the English; and
exceedingly will they in large their Dominions; he French tremble, and are like
to suffer extremely; the Spaniards quake, and Royal Phoebus cuts the Equator
line in the West Indies, which presageth notorious actions, and direful things,
pest'ring the Commons, even as many has done their Kings.

Hey-da! great Ones cannot agree, by reason of the Aphelion of Mars; and bad
ones are taken away, but worse put into their room: H^re's Virtue punished, and
Vice let go; beware the questioning of a great man! sure I am that Death seizes
of a mighty woman: some Parasi^e flatters a great man in Authority, and makes
him believe wonders; but being discovered, it will appear evident, that he has
been Author of more mischief then a hundred thousand treacherous Scots, put all
together.

Yet methinks I hear an Echo, thu^: We might expect some gracious Act or
Ordinance to befall the people; but the excellency thereof will soon receive an
Over-turn for some space of time; yet at length its glorious splendour will
shine forth in streams throughout all the dark corners of the Nation, and speak
brave English to the long oppressed Commoner: At which time; young Charles is
much talked of, and very good and pleasing intelligence delights our Ears from
Scotland. But the Merchants are like to suffer much at sea, not only by
Pyracie, but also by ship wrack. London beware, violent Fevers, Dropsies,
Bellaches, threaten thy inhabitants: O cast off thy rebellious disputes, and
maintain no longer thy Worm-eaten Opinions. For if we could but contract the
Elements, we should find the Planets favorable in their Aspects, promising
great happiness and tranquillity, both to City and Country. Therefore, beware
Holland, and have a care thou violate not thy Oath of Allegiance; if thou
do, expect no more mercy then the Devil would afford a Sergeant upon his in
gross into Hell. The year ends merrily, and as the Angels chaunt above, and
sing tryumphant praise to the Man-God King; so let the people conspire in one
mixed harmony below, that a Savior is born.

And to divulge our cordial zeal the more,
Make every Kitchen sweat to feast the Poor.
Thus drawing to a conclusion of the year, I shall in like manner put a period
to the Regal Table of Kings, though dreading the attempt of wading through
purple Ponds, and merrily wind up all with this ensuing Clew:

Kings have their evil Stars as well as I,
And Monarchs travel to Eternity
Like other Mortals; only here is the odds,
They are chastis'd with Axes, we with Rodds.
FINIS.

