AN IMPEACHMENT OF HIGH TREASON AGAINST Oliver Cromwell, and his Son in Law
Henry Ireton Esquires, late Members of the late forcibly dissolved House of
Commons, presented to public view; by Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn close
Prisoner in the Tower of London, for his real, true and zealous affections to
the Liberties of his native Country.

In which following Discourse or Impeachment, he engages upon his life, either
upon the principles of Law (by way of indictment, the only and alone legal way
of all trials in England) or upon the principles of Parliaments ancient
proceedings, or upon the principles of reason (by pretense of which alone, they
lately took away the Kings life) before a legal Magistracy, when there shall be
one again in England (which now in the least there is not) to prove the said
Oliver Cromwell guilty of the highest Treason that ever was acted in England,
and more deserving punishment and death

Then the 44 Judges hanged for injustice by King Alfred before the Conquest; or
then the Lord chief Justice Wayland and his associates tormented by Edw. 1. Or,
then Judge Thorpe, condemned to dye for Bribery in Edw. 3. time; Or, then the
two dis-throned Kings. Edw 2. and Rich. 2. Or, then the Lord chief Justice
Tresillian, (who had His throat cut at Tyburn as a Traitor in Rich. 2. time,
for subverting the Law) and all his associates; Or, then those two grand
Traytorly subverters of the Laws and Liberties of England, Empson and Dudley,
who therefore as Traitors lost their heads upon Towerhill, in the beginning of
Henr. 8. reign; Or, then traiterous Cardinal Wolsey, who after he was arrested
of Treason, poisoned himself; Or, then the late traiterous Ship Money Judges,
who with one Verdict or Judgment destroyed all our property; Or, then the late
traiterous Bishop of Canterbury, Earl of Strafford, Lord Keeper Finch,
Secretary VVindebanck, or then Sir George Ratcliff, or all his Associates; Or,
then the two Hothams, who lost their heads for corresponding with the Queen,
etc. Or, then the late King Charles whom themselves have beheaded for a Tyrant
and traitor*

In which are also some Hints of Cautions to the Lord FAIRFAX, for absolutely
breaking his solemn Engagement with his soldiers, etc. to take head and to
regain his lost Credit in acting honestly in time to come; in helping to settle
the Peace and Liberties of the Nation, which truly, really, and lastingly can
never be done, but by establishing the principles of the Agreement of the F^^^*
People; that being really the peoples interest, and all the rest that went
before, but particular and selvish.

In which is also the Authors late Proposition sent to Mr Holland, June 26.
1649. to justify and make good at his utmost hazard (upon the principles of
Scripture, Law, Reason, and the Parliaments and Armies ancient Declarations)
his late actions or writings in any or all his Books.

Ier. 5.26, 27, ^8, 29. For among my peoyle are found wicked ^en: they lie in
wait as he that sets snares, they set a trap, they catch men. As a cage is
full of Birds, so are their houses full of deceit; therefore they are become
great, and waxen rich. They are waxen fat, they shine; yea, they overpass the
deeds of the wicked; they judge not the cause, the cause of the Fatherless, yet
they prosper; and the right of the needy do they not judge. Shall I not visit
for those things, says the Lord? Shall not my soul be avenged of such a Nation
as this? Imprinted at LONDON, Anno Dom. 1649.

The Author to the Courteous Reader.
COurteous Reader, There wanting room at the conclusion of this Discourse to
make a Postscript, I am necessitated to make it upon the back of the Title
page, that being the last printed; and to acquaint thee, that diverse weeks
ago, this discouse was all in a manner printed, which I have been necessitated
to keep in ever since, by reason of a little liberty I obtained of the day time
to visit my sick and distressed family, which by sickness have been sorely
afflicted by the wise hand of him that dispenses all his dealings to those
that truly know him in mercy and loving kindness, with the bowels of a loving
father; yea, in afflictions (his seeming frowns) has that end in them to draw
the souls of his nigher and closer to himself, and that thereby they may truly
and substantially see that in the naked enjoyment of himself, that is not to be
found in all earthly or creature objects or delights; and his wise hand having
thought it fit to exercise my faith and patience by taking away both my Sons
from me, who were the greatest part of my earthly delight in this world, and
brought my wife and daughter even to deaths door; which affliction I must truly
acknowledge made me unfit to think almost of any earthly thing, and became unto
me a greater trial of my dependence upon God, then ever I had in my life;
especially, being not alone by my self, but a company like Jobs, with many
other bitter ones: but my sweet father letting me see his hand in it, and being
merciful to me in sparing and recovering my wife and daughter, and has as it
were brought my spirit to its self, which has made me wait for a righteous
and hoped for composure betwixt my unrighteous adversaries and my self, and
(which if it had come I had burnt this discourse) in whose promises I
constantly find nothing but mere delusions: and therefore am compelled in my
own spirit to let this fly; and the rather, because Sir Arthur Ha^^erig, and
Colonel Fenwick treacherously and theevishly have not only without any pretense
of Law and Justice but their mere wills seized upon above 1000l. of my estate
in the North, but also most maliciously detain it in their hands, and are so
resolved to do; which action tends to the apparent ruin and destruction of me
and the rest of my Family remaining alive, whose wickedness in this
particular, etc. I have hinted at in the following discourse, page 6. 8. as also
in the 12 page of the late second edition of my Book. Entitled, The legal
Fundamental Liberty of the People of England revived (the 2 last pages of
which I also entreat the Reader carefully to peruse) which with other grand
oppressions both general and particular remaining upon me in several
particulars; and also seeing no rational hopes of any just composure; I am
resolved (being I am in manner a weary of any thing I can see abroad) through
the assistance of God to be as prodigal of my pen and life for the future as
my bloody and tyrannical adversaries are of their oppression, cruelty, tyranny
and blood-thirstines, and so I rest this present August 1649. as much as ever

JOHN LILBURN.

To all the Affectors and Approvers in England, of the London Petition of the
eleventh of September, 1648. but especially to the owners of it, by their
subscriptions, either to it, or any other Petition in the behalf of it; and
particularly to the first promoters of it, my true Friends, the Citizens of
London, etc. (continuing ^^sh^k it in their principles, by Offices, Places, or
other base bribes or rewards) usually meeting at the Whalbone in Lothbury;
behind the Royal Exchange commonly (but most unjustly) find Levellers.
Gentlemen, and worthy Friends,
IT is the saying of the Spirit of God, Prove. 17.17. That a friend loves at
all times, and a brother is born for adversity. And Prove 18.24. There is a
friend that ^^^keth closer then a brother; the last of which sayings, I am able
by experience to seal to the truth of; and even amongst you, I have found some,
that in the burning heat of the day of my Adversity, have stuck closer to me,
then my brother; which was not only largely manifested by your Petitioning for
me, when I was prisoner in Newgate, about four years ago, and by your effectual
Petitioning for me last year, which was the instrumental means of my
deliverance out of an almost three years captivity; But also your late
unwearied pains taken for me, etc. in diverse Petitions of a hazardous nature,
at the beginning of my present captivity; which though fruitless in themselves,
as to my liberty; yet are strong demonstrations of the continuance of your
zealous affections to me in particular, and to the Liberties of the Land of
your nativity; for which I suffer, and am in bonds.

But hearing that you had some thoughts of new motions for me, and my
fellow prisoners, I judge it a fit opportunity for me, to visit you with a few
lines, and to acquaint you how things at present stand with me. I believe the
most of you have seen, if not read my late Book of the eight of June, 1649.
Entitled, The legal fundamental Liberties of the people of England, revived,
affected, and vindicated* in which, from the 43 page to the 59. page. I have
fully, both by Law and Reason, undeniably and unanswerably proved, That the
present Juncto sitting at Westminster, are no Parliament at all, in any sense,
either upon the principles of Law, or Reason, but are a company of usurping
Tyrants, and destroyers of your Laws, Liberties, Freedoms, and Properties,
sitting by virtue of the power, and conquest of the Sword; from whom, if we
will believe their Oracle Mr. John Cook, we may, and ought, if we can, to
deliver our selves. His words in the Kings Case stated page 10. are, That all
people that live at the beck, and nod of Tyrannical men, may and ought to free
themselves from that Tyranny if and when they can; for such Tyrants, that so
domineer with a rod of Iron, do not govern by Gods permissive hand of
approbation or benediction, but by the permissive hand of his providence,
suffering them to scourge the people, for ends best known unto himself, until
he open a way for the people to work out their own infranchisements.

And in page 22. (says he) Conquest only makes title amongst Wolves, and
Bears, but not amongst men: And in page 8. That a man ruling by Lust, and not
by Law, is a Creature that was never of Gods making, nor of Gods approbation,
but his permission; and though such men are said to be gods on Earth, its in no
other sense, then the Devil is called, the god of this world.

The same Note also the great men of the Army sing, in their late Remonstrance
from Saint Albans, November. 16. 1648. p. 48. 67. and in page 22. they say. That
when a Magistrate entrusted with a power to protect and preserve the peoples
Rights and Liberties, shall rise to the assuming hurtful powers, which he never
had committed to him, and indeed, to take away all those foundations of Right
and Liberty, and of redress, or remedy too, which the people have reserved from
him, and to swallow up all into his own absolute will and power, to impose or
take away, yea, to destroy at pleasure; and declaring all appeal herein, to the
established equal Judgment, or to any other Judgment of men at all, shall fly
to the way of Fame, upon the trusting people (which both Cromwell and Ireton,
etc. have already, as really done, as ever the King did,) and by it attempt to
uphold and establish himself in that absolute tyrannical power, so assumed over
them; and in the exercise thereof at pleasure, such a person in so doing, does
forf^^^^^ that trust and power he had, and absolve the people thereby, from the
Bonds and Covenant of Peace betwixt him and them; does set them free to take
their best advantage, and (if he fall within their power) to proceed in
judgment against him, even for that alone, if there were no more; of all which,
in the evil part of it, in the highest, the chief Authors of that Remonstrance
are guilty: Therefore out of thy own mouth will I judge thee, thou wicked
servant, says Christ, Luke 19.22. And says Paul to his, One of themselves,
even a Prophet of their own said, The Cretians are always ^^ers, evil Beasts,
slow Bellies: this witness is true; therefore -- etc.

Now I say, considering that which is before declared, I cannot upon any terms
in the world, either with safety, justice or conscience, as things stand with
me at present, give my consent, but hinder as much as I am able, all addresses
from you, or any others for me, that shall own those usurping Tyrants as a
Parliament, especially by Petition. Which was a course (says the pretended
Parliament Solicitor against the King, in his Case stated, page 24.) which Gods
people did not take with Rehoboam, for they never Petitioned him (although he
was their lawful and supreme Magistrate) but advised him; he refusing their
counsel, and hearkened to young and wicked Counselors, and they cry out, To
thy Tents O Israel, and made quick and short work of it.

But I shall rather desire and advise you; by Letter like your selves, address
your selves to the Lord Fairfax; by the sword of whom and his Soldiers, I am
now in prison for my honesty and innocence, and nothing else, and demand my
liberty of him; if he refuse, print it, and do as God, and Reason shall direct
you; for it was his and his Soldiers force that fetched me out of my Bed, the
28 of March, 1649. without all shadow of Law or Justice, and against the tenor
of all their own Declarations; the particular pages of which, you may read in
my following Letter to Mr. Holland, page 5. And by force of Arms, carried me to
Whitchal, and then to Derby house, before a company of men, that in Law had no
more power to commit my body to prison, then so many thieves and robbers upon
Suitors Hill have; who by the Rules of their own wills (as in the second
Edition of the Picture of them, I have fully declared) sent me by force of Arms
to the Tower; for all my short eternity in this world.

But I entreat you seriously to consider that I cannot advise you to make
address to him, as the General of the Nations forces, for he is no such thing;
but is merely a great Tyrant, standing by the power of his own will, and a
strong sword, born by his vassals, slaves and creatures, having no commission
to be General, either from Law, the Parliament, or from the prime Laws of
Nature and Reason.

For First, where he was first made General by both Houses of Parliament, it
was expressly against the letter of the Law, which action cannot be justified,
either before God or man, but in case of extreme necessity; and for the
accomplishment of a universal righteous end, viz. The redeeming, settling, and
securing the peoples rational and just Rights and Freedoms, and not in the
least, for setting up any particular selvish or factious interest.

But secondly, in refusing to disband, etc. he has rebelled against his
Parliament commission, and thereby destroyed and annihilated it; And at
New Market Heath, the fifth of June 1647. betook himself to the prime Laws of
Nature, and by common consent of his Officers and Soldiers became their
General, and entered into a solemn and mutual engagement before God, and one
another, for the accomplishment of those righteous ends therein contained, for
the good of the Kingdom and themselves, by subscribing his name, or at least
expressly assenting thereunto, and approving thereof with solemn engagement, as
is at large Printed in the Armies Book of Declarations, p. 23, 24, 25, 26. by
the very letter of which, he, nor his Officers could not govern the Army
jointly or severally, by the former Rules or Articles of Martial Law. no nor
so much as make an Officer of the meanest quality, nor put forth any public
Declaration, nor treat with, nor conclude with any in reference to the Army,
but by the joint advice and approbation of their new erected and established
council of Adjurators, which for order and methods sake, the General was
betrusted to convene and call together, as the King formerly was Parliaments,
or the Lord Mayor of London Common Councels; and yet notwithstanding he and his
Officers, like a generation of most perfidious, false, and faithless men, broke
all this engagement to pieces, within less then twenty days after it was made,
and so annihilated and destroyed his power, authority, or commission, flowing
from the consent of the Soldiers, before he had really accomplished any one
thing, he, or they engaged for, and has since two several times, put a
nullity, or force, upon his original Creators, Lords and Masters, the
Parliament.

And that he and his Officers broke their forementioned solemn engagements in
so short a time I prove fully out of their own book of Declarations, in which
page 36. to 46 I find a Declaration, dated the 14. of June, 1647. made and
published by his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, with the Officers and Soldiers
of his Army; (mark it well) for in the very words of it, it is, in Excellency
worth all the Declarations that ever the Army made since: and in page 47. to
50. I find a general charge against the eleven Members, with a paper
delivered with it to the Parliaments Commissioners at St. Albans, the 17. June
1647 by the appointment of his Excellency Sir T. Fairfax, and the Soldiers of
the Army under his command; but in the following pages, viz. page 51, 52, 53,
54. I find that the 21, 22, 25. of June, 1647. his Excellency, and his Council
of War alone, without the Council of Adjutators, representing the Soldiers,
according to their engagement, writ letters to, and entered into a Treaty with
the Lord Mayor and Common Counsel of London, which was a base, perfidious,
treacherous act, and an absolute breach of their solemn engagement; yea in page
57. June 23. 1647. The General, and twenty eight Grandee, and creature
Officers, publish a Remonstrance to the Kingdom, and that in the name of the
Army; in which base and abominable apostacy they continued, without ever
wiping their mouths, or recanting what they had so unjustly done, as the whole
tenor of their Book of Declarations does declare; yea when the particular
charge against the eleven Members comes from them, it comes only in the name
of the General, and his Council of War, page 94. yea, and all this, with ten
times more (as I believe the world will shortly and fully see) was done in
despite of the Adjutators, or consent of the Regiments, Troops, or Companies;
for all those two grand and lying Apostates ( Cornet Den, and Parson John Can,
a late cheat at Amsterdam) confident affirmations to the contrary in their late
Printed lying books, entitled the Levellers Design, page 4, 5. and the second
part of the Discoverer, page 5. 6. where they aver, That the council of
Adjutators, established by the Armies solemn engagement, was dissolved and made
null by the same power by which they had their constitution; and that it was
done by a Petition to the General from most of the Regiments, etc. But
although I judge the two forementioned lying base Apostates, to be so abominably
vile, that I judge not my excrements mean enough upon equal terms to balance
against them; yet knowing the affairs of the Army then so extraordinarily well
as I do, I will balance life against life, that neither they, nor any man
breathing can produce a Petition so much as from one single Troop or Company,
much less from a Regiment, and therefore much less from the greatest part of
the Regiments, both of Horse and Foot, for calling home the Adjutators, before
the Genesis and his Officers had, as is before mentioned, broke in pieces the
solemn engagement again and again (and invasion of Rights and Privileges was
the true declared ground and cause of all the late wars with the late beheaded
King, and is really the original ground of most (if not all) the cruel wars
in the world) But if the Soldiers had made such, a Petition (which they never
did) it were not much material I think, for they engaged something to and for
the Kingdom, in reference to the setlement of their Liberties and Freedoms,
which I am sure they in no one title ever accomplished or performed, and
therefore till that be done, they can not rationally or justly absolve
themselves from the true intent or meaning of that engagement.

But I wish those Champions for lies and Apostasy, would instance the place
where, the time when, and the Regiments that subscribed and delivered such a
Petition, and deal ingeniously with the world, whether it were a free act, or a
compulsive one, wrought underhand, by all the snares, policies, tricks, gins,
and slights, that possible the Officers could invent, without or below a
visible and compulsive force, which can never of right unty that knot; Sure I
am, diverse of the Adiutators, etc. sent several complaints to me, etc. to the
lower from St. Albans; immediately after the solemn engagement was made,
complaining that Cromwell, Ireton, etc. (one of which two penned this engagement)
would needs then by force and frowns totally break and dissolve it; of which
baseness (though then we were not visibly fallen out) I told Cromwell very freely
and plainly of, as appears by my Letters to him of the 22 of June, 1647 and the
1 of July 1647. and in my Advise to the Adiutators of the 16 of July, 1647. All
which I caused immediately after to be Printed in my Book, called Jonahs cries
out of the Whales belly, and the like in my little Book, called the Juglers
Discovered; and I am sure it was August following, when the Armies Head
quarters were at Kingston, where Cromwell begun to be afraid of the Adiutators
apprehending his underhand and night Juglings with the King, to ma^^ himself
able, like Cardinal Woolsey, to say, I and my King, which he was afraid the
Adiutators should take too much notice of, although long before their power and
authority was destroyed; and therefore was not willing they should at all
remain or lodge at the Head quarters, although Crumwel had weeks, and some
months before designedly, and of set purpose, with all his power and interest,
walked in a continual breaking and trampling the engagement under his feet, and
therefore about that time he and his agents set that Petition a foot, to rid
the Head quarters of the Adiutators, that they might not so much as see his
baseness, but alas, that Petition could not null and destroy that that was
broken, nuld in efficacy and power, annihilated long before, but yet I could
not for all this ever hear, that Petition was one tenth part so formal as they
report it to be.

But from what has been already said, (and in time will speedily be declared)
it is evident that the General and the Officers at St. Albans broke their
solemn engagement with their Soldiers and the Kingdom, immediately after it was
made, and tyrannically and treacherously invaded their Rights and Freedoms,
which bred heart-burnings, and those divisions which the public enemy (so
called) took the advantage of, and so came on the wars; God ever after their
abominable and villainous appostacy, filling their hands with troubles and
confusions, besides loss of reputation and good name, upon whose score alone
lies the true guilt of all the bloodshed in the last years war, and of all the
miseries that since have befaln Ireland Which they might easily have relieved,
if they had pleased, with those forces they disbanded in several places of the
Nation, immediately after the making the foresaid Engagement; or with those
twenty they the last Spring disbanded, out of every Troop and Company: Part of
which, in discontent at their base using of them, run to Laughorn and Poyer,
and others; to Goring, Capel, and others; to Sir Marmaduke Langdale, and the
Scots: but Cromwell it seems was resolved then. That no forces should go to
relieve Ireland, till he went with them, with an absolute Commission to be King
of Ireland: Which Commission, though he has got, yet he may fail of his
expected Town, both there and elsewhere.
and this year again is likely, by foreign invasions of strange Nations, and
by intestine broils to befall England; and therefore if you love the Lord
Fairfax, tell him, that though people at the present deal by him and Cromwell,
etc, as the Parliament used to do with the King, laying all the evil of his
actions upon his evil Counselors, yet he and his Officers in their
Remonstrance from St Albons, 16. of November 1648. say, That the King himself
is the real Fountain, and true original, from whom principally all that
mischief has issued, that of late in his Reign has befaln the Kingdom, being
himself the principal Author, and causer of the first and second War, and
thereby guilty of all the innocent blood spill therein, and of all the evils
happening thereby, page 17. 19. 23. 24. 61. 62, 64. whose one example, in doing
Justice upon, to future Generations, would be of more terror and avail, then
the execution of his whole party,; page 47. 48. It being (as they say) a most
unjust and unconscionable thing to punish inferior Ministers, the accessories,
and let the King, the principal, go free, page 50.

Even so, though most men now lay the blame of all the Armies apostasy,
baseness, perfidiousness and treachery upon Cromwell and Ireton, as the Generals
evil Counselors; yet they (his Screen betwixt him and the peoples wrath) being
gone from him toward. Ireland, he will now appear nakedly and singly, to be as
he is in himself, and let him take heed, lest from his bypast constant,
signing, assenting to, approving of, and acting in all their perfidiousness,
treachery and baseness, with his present carriage, now he stands, as it were a
Noun Substantive, upon his own legs, and may now most gloriously act honestly
and justly if he please, without their control or any others (and so regain
his lost credit and reputation) if wickedness and baseness be not as largely
inherent in his heart, as it is in either Cromwels, or Iretons: I say, let him
take heed from all his actings, the knowing and seeing people do not justly
conclude him to be the principal Author and causer of all their miseries,
distresses and woes; and so in time serve him, as he has served the King. and
only put Cromwell, Ireton, Haslerig, Bradshaw, Harrison, etc. in Hambletons,
Hollands, Capels, Gorings, and Owens places, as but accessories or dependants
upon Fairfax the principal.

But my true friends, I shall hear take upon me the boldness (in regard of the
great distractions of the present times) to give a little further advice to
you, from whole company or society (or from some of them) has begun, and
issued out the most transcendent, clear, rational and just things for the
peoples Liberties and Freedoms, that I have seen or read in this Nation as your
notable and excellent Petition of May 20. 1647. burnt by the hands of the
common Hangman, Recorded in my Book, called Rash Oaths unwarrantable, page 29
30, 31, 32, 33, 34 35. with diverse others Petitions of that nature; and the
Petition of the 19 of Jan. 1647. Recorded in the following discourse, page 45,
46, 47, 48, etc. and the masculine Petition of the 11. of Sept: 1648. so much
owned by Petitions out of several Counties, yea, and by the Officers of the
Armies large Remonstrance from St. Albans of the 16. November. 1648. page 67 68,
69. The substance of all which, I conceive is contained in the Printed sheet of
paper signed by my fellow prisoners, Mr. Will. Walwin, Mr. Tho, Prince, Mr.
Rich. Overton, and my self, dated the 1. of May, 1649. and entitled An
Agreement of the free people of England, etc. The principles of which I hope
and desire you will make the final Center, and unwavering Standard of all your
desires, hazards, and endeavors, as to the future settlement of the peace and
government of this distracted, wasted, and divided Nation; the firm
establishing of the principles therein contained, being that only, which will
really and in good earnest marry and knit that interest, what ever it be, that
dwells upon them, unto the distressed, and oppressed Commons, or people of this
Nation; yea, the settling of which principles, is that, that will thereby make
it evident and apparent unto all rational and understanding people in the
world, that the real and hearty good and welfare, of the people of this
Nation, has cordially, and in good earnest been that, that their souls have
hunted for, and thirsted after in all the late bloody civil wars, and
contests: All the Contests of the Kings party for his Will and Prerogative,
being merely Selvish, and so none of the peoples interest; and the contest of
the Presbyterians for their ^^ke-bate, dividing, and hypocritical Covenant, no
better in the least; and the present contest of the present dissembling
interest of Independents for the peoples Liberties in general, (read the
following Discourse, page 27, 28, 29) merely no more but Self in the highest
and to set up the false saint, and most desperate Apostate murderer and
traitor, Oliver Cromwell, by a pretended election of his mercinary soldiers,
under the self name of the godly Interest, to be King of England, etc. (that
being now too too apparently, all the intended Liberties of the people that
ever he fought for in his life,) that so he might rule and govern them by his
Will and Pleasure, and so destroy and envassalize their lives and properties to
his lusts, which is the highest treason that ever was committed or acted in
this Nation, in any sense or kind; either first, in the eye of the Law, or
secondly, in the eye of the ancient (but yet too much arbitrary) proceedings of
Parliament, or thirdly in the eye of their own late declared principles of
reason; by pretense of which (and by no rules of Law in the least) they took
away the late Kings head, and life, which it there were any Law or Justice in
England to be had, or any Magistrates left to execute it, (as in the least
there is not) I durst undertake upon my life, plainly, evidently, and
undeniably, to make good the foresaid unparalleld treasons against the foresaid
Ol. Cromwell, upon, and against all the three forementioned principles, viz Law,
Parliament, and Reason; yea, and to frame against him such an Impeachment, or
Indictment (which way of Indictments is the true, legal, and only just way of
England to be tried at the Common Law, higher and greater then all the charges,
against the forty four Judges) hanged for false and illegal Judgments, by King
Alfred before the conquest; which with their crimes, are recorded in the Law
Book, called The mirror of Justice, Printed in English, for Matthew Walbank at
Grayes Inn gate, 1646. page 239. 240. 241. 242. 243. 244. 245. See also page
196. 197. 207. ibid.

Or then the impeachment or accusation Of the Lord chief Justice Wayland, and
the rest of his brother Judges and Lawyers, tormented in Edward the first his
time, and mentioned in Speeds Chronicle, fol. 635.

Or then the impeachment in Parliament, against Judge Thorp, who for taking
small bribes against his oath, was condemned to die in Edward the third his
time; of whom, you may read in the 3. part. Cooks Institut. fol. 155, 156. and
in Mr. Pyms Speech against the Earl of Strafford, in the Book called Speeches
and Passages of Parliament, page 9.

Or then the impeachment (...) a charge of the dethroned King Edward the
second, in full Parliament, the manner of whose dethroning you may notably read
in Speeds Chronicle, fol. 665.

Or then the many Articles of impeachment, of the dethroned King Richard the
second, in full Parliament, recorded at large in the Chronicles, or History of
Will. Martin, fol 156. 157. 158. 159. the 8. 10. 12. 15. 21. Articles of which,
I conceive must remarkable, as to the people, which are extraordinary well
worth the reading; for in them the King himself, in those dark days of Popery,
is charged To have perverted the due course of the Law, or Justice, and Right;
and that he destroyed men by information, without legal examination, or trial;
and that he had declared the Laws of the Kingdom, were in his own Erest, (just
the same thing do Mr. Peter's and other mercenary Agents of the Grandees of the
Army, now constantly declare of them) and that by himself, and his own
authority (just Cromwell and Ireton like, only much short of them) he had
displaced diverse Burgesses of the Parliament, and had placed such other in
their rooms, as would better fit and serve his own turn.

Or then the impeachment of the Lord chief Justice Tris^lian (who had the
worship or honor in Richard the second his time, in full Parliament, to be
apprehended in the forenoon, and hanged at Tiburn in the afternoon) with his
brother Judges, viz. Fulthorp, Belknay, Care, Hot, Burge, and Lockton; or their
associates, Sir Nicholas Bramble, Lord Mayor of London, Sir Simon Burley, Sir
William Elinham, Sir John Salisbury, Sir Thomas Trevit, Sir James Bernis, and
Sir Nicholas Dodgworth; some of whom were destroyed and hanged, for setting
their hands to Judgments, in subversion of the Law, in advancing the Kings will
above Law; yea, and one of them banished therefore, although a dagger was held
to his breast to compel him thereunto.

Or then the indictment, of those two grand and notorious, traitorly subvertors
of the Laws and Liberties of England, Empson, and Dudley, Privy Counselors to
Henry the seventh recorded in Cooks 4. part. Institut. fol. 198. 199 read also
fol 41. ibid. and 2. part. Instit. fol. 51.

Or then the impeachment of that notorious, wicked, and traitorous man,
Cardinal Woolsey, by King Henry the eight his Privy Council, recorded in the 4.
part. Cooks Instit. fol. 89. 90. 91. 92. 93. 94. 95. Read especially Artic. 17.
20. 21. 23 25 26. 30. 31. 33. 35. 38. 42. in all which, he is charged with
Arbitrariness, and subversion of the Law.

Or then the impeachment of the Shipmoney Judges, who in one judgment did as
much as in them lay, destroy all the Properties of all the men in England; read
the notable Speeches against them, in Speeches, and Passages.

Or then the impeachment of the Bishop of Canterbury, in the late Parliament.

Or then the impeachment, of the Lord Keeper Finch, Earl of Strafford,
Secretary Windebank, Sir Richard Bolton, Lord Chancellor of Ireland, John Lord
Bishop of Derry, Sir Gerrard Lowther, Knight, Lord chief Justice of the Common
Pleas in Ireland, and Sir George Ratcliff, all whose impeachments are recorded
in a Book, entitled, Speeches and Passages of Parliament, from November, 1640.
to June, 1641. Page 76. 77. to 83. and 117. 118. to 143. and 174. and 256. 257.
258.

Or then the Articles or charge against the two Sir John Hothams; the elder of
which, kept the King out of Hull, the beginning of these Wars, when the House
of Commons durst not command him positively to do it, although they were
effectually put upon it, by a motion from the younger, then sitting in the
House; and yet they were both beheaded as Traitors, for but endevoring to
betray Hull to the King.

Or then the late impeachment of Sir Philip Stapleton, Master Denzil Hollis,
and the rest of the eleven Members, whose impeachment of high Treason, is
recorded in the Armies Book of Declarations page 47. to 50. and page 94 95. 96.
etc. And yet the same things, that some of them, in a capital manner, were
impeached for as Traitors, their impeachers acted, and did at the very
self-same time, as is clearly declared in the following discourse, page 31. 32.
to 39. and page 53. to 62.

Yea, or then the impeachment of King Charles, whom Cromwell and Ireton
principally (Bradshaw being but their hired mercinary slave) have beheaded for
a Tyrant and Traitor; whose impeachment is recorded in the following discourse,
page 65 66. 67.

But the principles of the foresaid Agreement, being so detestable and
abominable to the present ruling men, as that which they know will put a full
end to their tyranny and usurpation, and really ease and free the people from
oppression and bondage; that it is something dangerous to those that go about
the promotion of it; yet I shall advise and exhort you vigorously, to lay all
fear aside, and to set on foot the promotion of it, in the same method we took
for the promotion of the foresaid Petition of the 19 of January, 1647. laid
down in the following discourse, page 23. 24. 25 And write to your friends in
every Country of England to choose out from amongst themselves, and send up some
Agents to you (two at least, from each County, with money in their pockets to
bear their charges) to consider with your culd and chosen Agents, of some
effectual course speedily to be taken, for the settling the principles thereof
(as that only within an earthly Government, can make you happy) or at least,
to know one another minds, in owning and approving the principles thereof;
that so it may become to you, and all your friends, your Center, Standard, and
Banner, to flock together to, in the time of those foreign invasions, and
domestic insurrections, that are like speedily to bring miseries enough upon
this poor and distressed Nation, and unanimously resolve and engage one to
another, neither to side with, or fight for the Cameroes, fooleries, and pride
of the present men in power, nor for the Prince his will, or any other base
interest whatsoever (the which, if you should fight for, it would be but an
absolute murdering of your Brethren and Countrymen, you know not wherefore)
unless he, or they will come up to those just, righteous, and equitable
principles therein contained, and give rational, and good security, for the
constant adhering thereunto; and upon such terms, I do not see, but you may
justifiably, before God or man, Join with the Prince himself (yea, I am sure a
thousand times more justly, then the present ruling men (upon a large and
serious debate) joined with Owen Ro^ Oneal, the grand bloody rebel in Ireland)
who if we must have a King, I for my part had rather have the Prince, then any
man in the world because of his large pretense of Right, which if he come not
in by Conquest, by the hands of Forraigners (the bare attempting of which may
apparently hazard him the loss of all at once, by gluing together the now
divided people to join as one man against him) but by the hands of Englishmen,
by contract, upon the principles aforesaid (which is easy to be done) the
people will easily see that presently thereupon, they will enjoy this
transcendent benefit (he being at peace with all foreign Nations, and having
no regal pretended Competitor) viz. the immediate disbanding of all Armies,
and Garrisons, saving the old Cinque Ports, and so those three grand plagues of
the people will cease, viz. Free Quarter, Taxations, and Excise, by means of
which, the people may once again really say, they enjoy something they can in
good earnest call their own; whereas, for the present Army to set up the
pretended false Saint Oliver (or any other) as their elected King, there will
be nothing thereby from the beginning of the Chapter to the end thereof. but
Wars, and the cutting of throats year after year; yea, and the absolute keeping
up of a perpetual and everlasting Army under which the people are absolute and
perfect slaves, and vassals, as by woeful and lamentable experience they now
see, they perfectly are which slavery and absolute bondage is like daily to
increase, under the present tyrannical and arbitrary new erected robbing
Government; And therefore rouse up your spirits before it be too late, to a
vigorous promotion, and settling of the principles of the foresaid Agreement, as
the only absolute and perfect means to cure you of all your maladies and
distempers: So with my hearty and true love presented to all that remain
upright amongst you (without being perverted to Apostasy by the pretended
Council of States places or bribes) I commit you to the safe tuition and
protection of the most high, the Lord Jehovah, and Almighty, and rest,

Gentlemen, Yours and the Nations faithful, hearty, resolved friend and servant
in the midst of all adversity, affections, trials, and sorrows (that never more
in all my life encompassed me round about then now) till death, JOHN LILBURN.
From my unjust and illegal (though contented) captivity, for my honesty and
innocence, and nothing else (as to man) in close imprisonment, in the Tower of
London, without any legal and just allowance of maintenance, this present 17.
of July, 1649.
TO His honored Friend, Mr. CORNELIUS HOLLAND, These.
Honored Sir,
WIthout preamble, give me leave to visit you with a few lines; and in the
first place really to acquaint you with the true cause of my present writing,
which is as follows: I am in Prison, I know not wherefore, and I am confident
those that sent me do not, for if they had, they would since the 28. day of
March last (being the first day of my Imprisonment) have laid some crime unto
my charge (which yet to this day they have not) or if they had been able to do
it, they would let me have seen, either my Prosecutor or my Accuser, or at
least my Accusation; none of all which to this present day I ever saw, but was
condemned by Vote in the nature of a Traitor, uncharged, and unheard, which If
I may believe the ancient Declarations of the Army, made upon the like dealing
as I have lately found, is very hard and unjust measure, as they punctually
declare in their Book of Declarations, P. 10. 17. 33. 34 35 60. 61. 62. 65. and
all this at most but for the suspicion of my being active in, or accessory to
an intended address to your House, which act is justifiable in a superlative
manner, by the very words of your own primitive Declarations, as abundantly
appears in your first part Book of Declarations, p. 123. 201. 202. 548. but
especially page 720. and which was not yet never repealed by subsequent
Declarations: And for hindering and obstructing public Petitions; it is not
long since the Army, or the leaders thereof charged diverse of your principal
members as traitors therefore, as appears in their Book of Declarations, page
83. 85. the liberty of which they reckon amongst the prime Liberties of this
Nation, (for the pretended preservation, of which there has been almost eight
(...) bloody wars) as appears largely in their forementioned pages, but
especially page 44. 118. yea, and waged war with the Parliament, their Lords,
Masters, and Impowrers for abridging them thereof, as clearly appears in their
own Declarations, which makes it plain and evident, that such a Declaration
made by the House of Commons against their Petition, as the House made, 27.
March last, against one they supposed me to have a hand in, was the original
and first declared cause of all the Armies contest with, and rebellion against
the Parliament. But that I should not only be imprisoned for nothing, but close
imprisoned, sometimes from the very society of my wife and children, and ever
since the ninth of May, 1649. to be debarred the society and visits of my
friends and acquaintance, which the very Pagan Romans would not do to Paul,
that pestilent fellow, and a turner of the world upside down, as Tertullus
accused him to be; yea, to be mewed up close in my lodging, with a Padlock upon
my door, and Sentinels set thereat night and day, that I shall not so much as
speak at a distance with any of my fellow prisoners, and worse dealt with
besides, then the Canibals do with their poor imprisoned Captives, who feed
them fat with good cheer against the day of slaughter, or then the States of
Holland do their intended to be executed thieves, traitors, or murderers, whom
they largely and plentifully provide for in their imprisonment; yea, or worse
then King Charles (whom you have beheaded for a Tyrant) did by his prisoners in
this very place, unto the meanest of whom, out of the Exchequer he allowed
three pound a week for their maintenance during their imprisonment in this
place, yea, and to diverse of your very members that were men of great estates,
and possessed them peaceably in the third, four, fifth, etc. years of his
reign, he allowed them four pound and more at week apeece for their diet, when
things were cheap to what they are now; and ye for much of my time you
proffered me never a penny, and when you do, you do in a mock and scorn proffer
me at most but twenty shillings a week, which will do little more then pay for
the necessary attendance in the close and extraordinary condition you have put
me in, which I confess I refused with as much scorn as it was sent me; which
close and extraordinary tormenting condition in the heat of Summer, without
permitting me to step out of my lodging to take a little Air; admit you were as
unquestionable a power as ever was in England, and that I had really committed
treason, cannot in the least by the Law of England he justifiable; the equity
and justice of which Law abhors any torture or torment whatsoever to any
prisoners, though never so criminous, least that his pain, or torture, or
torment should take away his reason, and constrain him to answer otherwise then
of his free will, torture forcing many times the innocent person to tell lies,
which Law and Justice otherwise abhor; and therefore that never enough to be
magnified Lawyer, Sir Edward Cook, says, That there is no one opinion in all
our Law Books, or Judicial Records (that he has seen and remembers) for the
maintenance of torture or torments, etc. persons being merely instituted by Law
for safe keeping, in order to a speedy trial, but not in the least for
punishment or torment, as is most excellently declared by him, in the 1. Part
Instit. fol. 260. 2. and 2. Part, fol. 42. 43. 186. 315. 316. 589. and 3. Part,
fol. 3435. and 4. Part, fol. 168.

And all this present, unjust usage of me, to come not only from the hands of
my large pretended friends, whose just interest, according to their own
published Declarations, I have with all faithfulness, in the midst of many
deaths, for many years together faithfully served, and advanced with all my
might: But also of those, that would seem to abhor and abominate, the Ruling
and Governing by will, and Arbitrary power, as the wickedest and detestablest
thing in the world, and so declare it to be, 1. Part. Book Declarations, page
172. 195. 214. 264. 281. 342. 464. 492. 494. 496. 498. 663. 666. 690. 699 728.
750. And that have raised and maintained a bloody war, for seven years
together, principally for the pretended preservation of the Laws and Liberties
of England; that have pulled down the Star Chamber, High Commission, Council
Table, and House of Peers, for oppression, and arbitrary injustice; nay, and
beheaded the King (the quondam glory of some of your great ones eyes, As is
undeniably demonstrated in my following impeachment of Lieutenant General
Cromwell, and his son Ireton, at the Bar of the House of Commons, the 19. Janu.
1647. And offered again and again there, upon my life, to make it good.
as clearly appears by Putney projects, Mr. John Wildemans, Truths Triumph,
page 7, 8. and Major Huntingtons charge, delivered to the Parliament, August 2.
1648. against Lieutenant General Cromwell, etc.) pretendedly for Tyranny, and
Oppression, as your selves state his Case in your notable Declaration, about
Non-Addresses, dated the 11. of Febr. 1647. and your remarkable Declaration of
the 17. of March, 1648. Yea, and have suffered your Solicitor General, Mr. John
Cook, notably in Print to state his Oppressions; yea, and to draw most notable
pregnant, and cutting inferences from them, as he does in the 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 11
14. 15. 17. 20. 22. 26. 31. 36. 39. 42. pages thereof; two of which only I
shall now make use of: The first is in page 22. where he arguing of the right
execution of Trusts, says, That when any is entrusted with the sword for the
protection, and preservation of the people; if this man shall employ it to
their destruction, which was put into his hands for their safety, by the Law of
that Land, he becomes an enemy to that people, and deserves the most exemplary
and severe punishment that can be invented; and this is the first necessary and
fundamental Law of every Kingdom: Which if it be true, as you cannot contradict
it, it being your own doctrine, then it is easy to make Application, a majore,
ad minus. The second is in page 42. where he declares, That in pronouncing
Sentence against the King, and executing Justice upon him, you have not only
pronounced Sentence against one Tyrant alone, but against Tyranny it self;
therefore (says he there) if any of them (meaning the High Court of Justice,
and the Parliament) shall turn Tyrants, or consent to set up any kind of
Tyranny by a Law, or suffer any unmerciful domineering over the Consciences,
Persons, and Estates of the Free-people of this Land; they have pronounced
Sentence against Which I am sure they deserve, only I wish, they may not fail
of the same punishment; and that Master Cook would be as zealous in endevoring
it, as he was in endevoring the Kings; for Justice ought to be impartial, and
no great places ought to stop the mouths of those that are truly prosecutors
of it: And let Master John Cook take heed that the Fat Mastership of St.
Crosses Hospital, lately conferred upon him, do not stop his.
themselves. But good Trees (says he) cannot bring forth bad fruits. But say
I, bad fruits, and bad actions, are evident and undeniable demonstrations, That
the Trees or Actors of them, are bad and wicked.

Yea, and from those that have declared, All their power and authority, is but
a be-trusted power, which they ought, and are bound in duty, to exercise and
manage, only for the ends, and uses they are be-trusted for, and cannot justly
employ it for their own, or another use, then that, for which they are
entrusted, (and which is to be discharged, according to the condition, and true
intent thereof) which they acknowledge to be only for the peoples good, safety,
and better being; and not in the least, for their hurt, or mischief. 1. Part
Book, Declar. page 150. 266. 382. 700. 750. Imprecating Wrath, Vengeance, Woes,
and Miseries to fall upon them, when they do not faithfully discharge their
trust, according to the true intent and meaning of it; and who think nothing
worth enjoyment in this world, without the Liberty, Peace, and Safety of the
Kingdom, and nothing too good to be hazzarded therefore, Page 214. An
Arbitrary, Tyrannical Government, being that which they say, Every honest Moral
man abhors, especially the Wisdom, Justice, and Piety of the Parliament, Page
494. And which every honest man ought (say they) to oppose, with the hazard of
all they have, and are; accounting those men most abominably profane; who to
satisfy the Lusts of their own Ambition, are content like Esau, to sell their
birthright, and render themselves, and their posterity, to perpetual slavery,
and care not to submit themselves to any Arbitrary and unlimited Government; so
they may for their own time, partake of that power, to trample and insult over
others, contrary to the Laws and Liberties of England, The Standers for which,
with the utmost hazzards of their lives, and fortunes, are those they will join
to, live and die with, Page 660, etc

Yea, and the same Note do the Ruling men of the Army (in the day of their
distress and calamity) sing, in their Declarations; whose words are so
glorious, transcendent, and self-denying, that they are enough to ravish the
heart of an ingenious, single hearted man, and to make an honest soul to
hazard all he has in this world to stand by such men, as believing it to be
impossible for the hearts of any men to be so wicked, and vile, as ever to go
about to think of setting up Tyranny, Oppression, and a mere self-interest,
after such expressions; and to make use of all these expressions, for no other
end, but the more easily to deceive, and grow strong, to subdue all those that
stand in their secret ambitious ways: And that the Armies Expressions in the
day of their straits, were most glorious, and ravishing, plentifully appears in
their Book of Declarations, Pages 37. 39. 40. 41. 45. 46. 52. 58. 61. 62. 76.
101. 105. 110. 118. 119. 126. 128. 132. 137. 142. 144. 150. See also the
Officers large Remonstrance, against the late King, dated at Saint Albans,
November 26. 1648. Page 7. 8. 9. 12. 14. 15. 22. 23. 29. 43. 45 47. 48. 57. 62.
65. 66. 67. 68. 69.

I say, Sir, considering all the forementioned things, in abhorrency, and
detestation of that faithless and tyrannical dealing with me, I was resolved,
though it had been possible for you and me to live Methusalems days, never to
make any more addresses to you; nor suffer my wife, so far as in me lay, to do
it in my behalf, or so much as to come at your door, to speak to any Member of
your House, for the least mitigation of your indignation against me. Yet seeing
contrary to my many earnest desires, and without my privity, she has lately
been with your self at the House door, about my liberty, who as she relates
unto me, was very high with her; as though I had committed against you, little
less then the sin against the Holy Ghost, that can never be pardoned; therefore
in vindication of my own innocence, and integrity, I cannot choose, but take
this opportunity, to make a fair and ingenuous proposition unto you, that you
cannot refuse, if you have but a grain of Ingenuity left in you, which is this.

That if your House please to choose two men, I will choose two more, and they
shall have power by majority of voices, in case they cannot agree to choose an
umpire, finally to decide the business betwixt us; and I will be content they
shall appoint Cromwell, Ireton, Bradshaw, and all the Orators, or Pleaders; they
had against the King, and the beheaded Lords, or as many of them as they
please, to plead against me; and I will have none but my self singly, to plead
my own cause against them all; and I will venture so far as my 24 or 25 hundred
pounds, yet in your hands, will amount unto, five hundred pounds to one
hundred, yea, and my head, to the head of him, that in your House principally
caused my imprisonment, or any reasonable considerable balance; Provided, the
debate may be public, and that I may have free liberty to speak for my self;
and provided, the Scripture, the Book of Statutes, Cooks Institutes, (published
by your selves for good Law,) the Parliaments and Armies, Primitive, Printed
Declarations, may be the Witnesses and Jury men on both sides; for the
aforesaid Arbitrators, or Vmpire, to guide their Judgments by. And if I cannot
maintain mine own Innocence, and Integrity, against all that can, upon the
Rules aforesaid, be said against me, and it be not so determinated, and judged
by the major part of the Arbitrators, or Vmpire, chosen as before is expressed,
I will lose and for fit all I have, yea, and my life to boot: And I think this
is so fair, That no rational man under Heaven, can condemn it, or me, if it be
refused. But yet to make it more fair, I will give you the advantage of all you
can pick out of the first and second part of Englands new Chains discovered;
which I will own (although the last be Voted and declared Treasonable) my
second Edition of my Picture of the Council of State; my second Edition of my
Printed Discourse with Master Peter's, dated 25. of May, 1649. And my late Book
of the eight of this present June, entitled, The Legal Liberties of the people
of England, revived, asserted, and vindicated; or any thing acted, said, or
done, by me, in the managing of them, or any of them.

Sir, I shall give you time seriously to consider of what I have here writ, and
to return me your answer to it, by the first of July next; in which time, if
you return me not an effectual answer, to my present Proposition, or procure my
present Liberty, and my full enjoyment of my long expected, and dear purchased
Star Chamber Reparations, from bloody old Who although he be the man that was
one of the principal Judges in the Star Chamber, that past the bloody Sentence
against me, by virtue of which, I received five hundred stripes, with knotted
Cords, etc. And although he ought to pay me Reparations therefore; and although
he by his power in the House, kept me above eight years together, that I could
not get six pence Reparations; yet when something is allotted me, he by his
will seiseth upon about fifteen hundred pounds of it, and none of my just
Complaints can be heard against him: And Sir Arthur Haslerig, since my close
imprisonment, has by his will and power, seized upon wel-nigh one thousand
pounds more. Against both whom in due time, I may live to raise such an hue and
cry all over England, for robbing of me, that it may be may cost the stoutest
of them a knocking on the head. See the third Part in Folio 56. 221. For
although I be in prison, I have no crime laid to my charge, the which if I had,
yet upon their own principle (having not been in Arms against them) I cannot
forfeit any part of my estate, before a Legal Conviction, according to the Form
of the Law in Being, as expressly appears by the Statute of 1 Rich. 3. cap. 3.
which is yet in force, and by 2. Part. Cooks institutes, fol. 48. and 3. Part.
fol. 228, 229. Nay, nor my Goods so much as inventored, although I had really
committed Felony or Treason: And therefore, their seizing upon my estate as
they have done, I can judge in Law, to be no better then Robbery and Felony; and
seeing they are by force and power protected from the lash of the Law, if there
were any Legal Judges to execute it, I have in reason no other remedy left me,
but to do the best I can to raise the Posse Comitatus of England upon them, by
way of Replevy, to seize upon their estates for my satisfaction, wherever I
find it; which in due time, I may endevor from the force of the Statutes of
52. H. 3. cap. 1, 2, 3, 4, 15, 21. See Cooks Commentary thereupon, in second
Part Instit. fol. 103. 104. 105. 106. 107. 131. 139. 140. and 3. Edw. 1 cap. 9.
17. See the Comentary upon them in 2. Part. Instit. fol. 172. 173. 193. 194
195. and 28. Edw. 3. cap. 11. and 27. Eliz. cap. 13. and 39. Eliz. cap. 25.
Sir Henry Vane, etc. I hereby leave you, before God, and all the world,
without excuse; and am absolutely set at liberty, from all ties of former
friendship, to do the best I can, by any ways or means, that to me shall appear
just, for my own preservation, by Anatomizing, etc. what I know, either
privately, or publicly of you, or the rest of your associates; that for
nothing, but because I will not be your slave, would take away my life from me,
and thereby destroy my Wife, and young helpless Babes.

Sir, I almost know how your affairs stand beyond Seas, and also in Scotland,
Ireland, and this Nation, as well as your self, though you be one of the
Council of State, and I a close prisoner; and I know, that you your self know
of it. You stand (for all your present greatness) upon very slippery places
(and I cannot but mind you, that at the beginning of your contest with the
King, I am confident, he was in number five hundred for your one; but he is
laid low, and that by his oppressions.) Yet I must tell you I am now as much an
English man, as ever I was in my life, and love the true Liberties of my Native
Country, as well as ever I did in my days; and you your self very well know,
last year I hazarded something for them, and was not revengeful; though you may
remember, what clear grounds were laid down to you, and several other
Parliament men, at a private Table, at the George in Channel-Row, by Master
John Wildeman, and Master Edward Saxby, that I had little reason to trust any
more. I have sent a true friend, with my wife, on purpose to deliver this unto,
and to wait upon you for your answer, let it be what it will; and shall take
leave to subscribe my self,

Sir, A true and real-hearted Englishman, as long as I am John Lilburn.
From my close, illegal, and causeless Captivity in the Tower of London, this
26. day of June. 1649.

HAving the same day this Letter was dated, ordered my wife, with another
Friend, to carry it to Master Holland, and deliver it to his own hands; at her
coming home at night, she tells me, That Master Hunt (one that is very great
with Cromwell and Master Holland, and one that formerly I have been very great
and familiar with) had been to seek her at Winchester House, the day before;
and meeting with her at Westminster, the 26 day of June, he told her, as she
told me, to this effect, That he had been to seek her, to know how much money
of my three thousand pounds was remaining, that so he might speedily certify
some Parliament men, who were resolved to help me speedily to all my money
down, and my liberty also; which did so rejoice her, and overcome her facile
credulity, That she judged it not convenient to deliver my Letter, according to
my earnest desire to her, lest it might provoke, and came in all haste home to
me for my Ordinance and Accounts; which to please her, accordingly I sent, with
a Letter to Master Hunt, and a Printed sheet of Paper, which lively states my
Star Chamber sufferings; some hundreds of which, I delivered to the Members at
their door, the fourth of September, 1648. In which Letter I acquaint Master
Hunt, with my Diffidence, in any of their promises, which I have most
constantly found mere delusions; and therefore enclosed my Letter to Master
Holland in his, and entreated him to deliver it to him, which I understand from
himself, he did, and read it to him: But yet for all my wives extraordinary
conceits of her speedy enjoyment of good, and honest things from them, in
reference to my self. I writ Master Hunt another Letter, (having fresh in my
memory, what I said to Master Peter's, in my late Discourse with him, upon the
25 day of May, 1649. which you may read in the second and seventh pages of the
second Edition thereof) which I believe did neither please him, nor his great
Friends; the true Copy, of which, thus follows.

MAster Hunt, having of late, for many months together, been as full of
unbelief in great men's promises as Thomas Didimus, (John 20. 24, 25, 26, 27)
was of Christ's Resurrection, I cannot choose but acquaint you, for all the fair
dealing my wife supposes to find abroad, I am informed, since Have write to
you, That there is one Thomas Verney Which Thomas Verney, is son to Sir Edward
Verney, the Kings Standard Bearer, who was slain at Edg-Hill; which Verney,
though he was Traveller, yet is lately become an Agent of the Derby house
Committee, and Council of State, who (as I am from very good hands informed)
they employed to the Hague, to lay a design to put the Prince on Shipboard,
and so send him for England, to lose his head, as his Father has done; but
Verney being a little discovered, comes lately over into England, and amongst
some pretends to be an Agent from the Prince; and upon that score, the Council
of State, imployes him to write Letters of Friendship to me, and to enter into
treaty with me, to betray Oxford, etc. to whom I will appoint; that so if I had
treated with him, by his testimony, they might have taken away my life for a
Traitor, in holding correspondency with the Prince by his Agents; For the
refusing to swear I so did, honest young Master Blank, (being thereunto much
persuaded, and promised large bribes, by Sir Arthur Haslerig, but especially
upon the 23 of April last, as that alone, for which they would take away my
life) was forced by Sir Arthur Haslerig (the covetous and blood-thirsty
Governor of Newcastle) Ireton, Pride, etc. to run the Gantlop at Saint James,
whom they whipped most barbarously and inhumanely therefore, as by his Printed
Testimony, under his hand, dated the 20 of April, 1649. now in Print (in
Mercurius Militaris, Number 3) he declares: But knowing Verney before I saw
him, I was to hard for the Knave, and have his Letters by me; which I have
several times told the Lieutenant of the Tower of.
, that the Council of State has lately received his Oath against me, in order
to some trial; the Copy of whose Letters ( dated the eighth, ninth, and
eleventh of May, 1649.) I have ordered my wife to bring you; also a Surrey
Justice of Peace being yesterday at a friends House in London, declared, He
understood I was the third of July, next, to be tried at Croyden Assizes;
Reports sometimes are but reports, But if these should be true, I may draw many
inferences from them; but whether true or false, I shall not be altogether
unprovided.

In the third place, I am newly told it is intended, that I and my three
Comrades, shall have our Liberties by an Act of Grace: I confess if upon the
day time, any shall come up to my Chamber, and say, All the Gates are opened on
purpose, for me to go out, I will take my liberty, and go to my own house, etc.
let the Gates be opened by whom they will; but yet an Act of Grace is so ugly a
thing, in reference to my own innocence, that I loath the thoughts of it in
that sense: For if I had been a condemned Felon, I should have expected at the
end of a Session of Parliament, my portion in an Act of Grace; and though I
shall not be so much a fool, but to take my liberty by it, yet though I perish
for it, I must declare publicly abroad, my Reasons to the Nation, That those
that sent us hither, more stand in need of an Act of Grace from us, then we
from them.

Sir, I love to be plain with any man I deal with, as abhorring to accomplish
my ends upon any man by deceit; and therefore entreat you, to desire Master
Holland, to think seriously upon my late Letter to him, That I may have some
kind of answer from him, by the day prefixed, and send me my Ordinance, and the
Printed Sheet of Paper I sent you with it: So with my love remembered to you, I
rest

As much an Englishman, as ever, John Lilburn.
Tower, the 29. of June. 1649.

And accordingly Master Holland sent me a large Letter, dated from Sommerset
House, the 2. of July, 1649. But although it takes notice of my foregoing
Letter to him of the 26 of June. 1649. yet it has not one word of a direct
answer to the three main things I therein desire of him, that I can read in all
his, being merely a Discourse built upon mistakes; for I must here in a fair
way tell him, I have not in the least changed my principles, but he his; as I
will upon the hazard of the greatest disgrace in the world, make evidently
appear to his face, before any rational men in England, whenever he pleases:
Therefore I say, I am no way, by my foresaid Letter, engaged to silence, but am
free at Liberty, to prosecute my fixed intentions before the writing thereof;
which was to lay a firm foundation for my late promised Second part of the
Legal, Fundamental Liberties of the people of England revived, asserted, and
maintained; and fully to treat upon all those Heads, mentioned in the last page
of it, being 9.

And because I intend, and hope I have matter enough already to make it the
masterpiece of all that ever I have writ: And because unadvoidably, it must
have a dependency on what here follows, which would make it to large to be
therein Printed; therefore I must go on with my former intended thoughts, to
publish in Print my impeachment of High Treason, (yet never extant to public
view) against Lieutenant General Oliver Cromwell, and his son in law, Commissary
General Henry Ireton, as I formerly delivered it openly at the Bar of the House
of Commons, the nineteenth of January, 1647. Which with the Preamble, or
Introduction thereunto belonging, thus follows.

UPon Monday the 17. Jan. 1647. I was at the h^^se of one Mr. Williams a
Gardener in Ratcliff-high-way near East Smithfield, where I met with diverse
honest men, Inhabitants thereabouts, about a Petition now on foot; amongst whom
was one Mr. Masterson, the Parson or Priest of Shoreditch near London, who (as
since I am told) came pretendedly as a Scrupler, but said never a word there as
I heard, coming resolvedly to catch and entrap, as by the sequel of his
carriages appears.

For the next day being Tuesday, up he comes with a full careere to the House
of Lords, as if he had been running for a fat Benefice (as I was informed)
makes a most desperate complaint against Mr. John Wildman and my self, as
though under the pretense of managing a Petition, we carried on a desperate
design to destroy, or cut the throats of the Parliament men, and the execution
of our desperate designs could not be far off, for that I had (as he said)
appointed blew Ribbons to be the sign to be worn in our hats to know one
another by upon that day.

And after he had given in some such information as this, with much more of the
like nature at the Lords Bar* where without doubt it was hugged to the purpose,
and rejoiced in, as the issue of a design of their own brain, to blast (without
all peradventure as they thought) the reputation of the original and chief
promoters of that transcendnet, gallant, and large Petition that so much
touches their Copy hold, that so if it might be possible the Petition it self
might be crushed in the birth, before it had brought forth strength sufficient
to pull up their rotten tyrannical Interest by the roots.

And after he had done with th Relation at their Bar, having giving the Lords,
as it seems, a flagou of sack and sugar, they were in pains (as it appears)
till they had communicated some deep draughts of it to their friends of the
House of Commons, diverse of whose rotten Interests were concerned in it, as the
Lords sons and servants, the Patentee, Monopolisers, the Merchant Adventurers,
the Lords would be (which are principally the chief of Cromwels Faction, who
having now the power of the Kingdom in their own hands, and therefore in their
own imaginations can not miss of being (within a little time) made Barons, if
not Earls) but especeally (that grand inslaving Interest) the rotten Lawyers of
the House, diverse of whom, if the Petition took effect (in disabling all
Members of that House that are Lawyers to plead at any Bar of Justice) would
deprive some of them of two or three thousand pound per annum, which now they
get by their Pleadings by virtue of their being Pa^liament men; for if a man's
Cause be never so unjust, if by large Fees he can get two or three Parliament
men to plead it for him, he is sure to carry it, for the Judges dare as well
eat their nails as displease them for fear of being turned out of their places
by them, which they more regard then their Oaths, which tie them to do
impartial Justice; I say, after he had done his Relation at the Lords Bar, a
Conference was betwixt both Houses, where he again belcht out his most
abomin^ble malicious and false lies; and one being present that heard it, came
immediately to me in London, and told me of it, of which I no sooner heard, but
immediately by water, of my own accord, I posted by boat to Westminster, and
coming up to the House of Commons door about three or four a clock, I found the
House to be risen, and meeting with some of my friends and acquaintance at the
door, I told them there, I understood the House of Commons had again dealt
worse with me then the Heathen and Pagan Romans dealt with Paul, who when his
adversaries desired Judgment against him, they told them, that it was not the
manner of the Romans to judge or condemn any man before he which is accused have
his accuser face to face, and have liberty to answer for himself concerning the
crime laid against him, Act. 25. and yet upon a bare accusation of a single
Priest (as I was informed) they had again committed me to the Tower before they
heard me speak one word for myself, in which (I told my friends freely and
openly they had outstript the Heathen and Pagan Romans in Injustice, who though
Paul by Tertullus the Orator, was accused for a pestilent fellow, and a mover
of sedition among all the Jews throughout the world, and a Ringleader of the
Sect of the Nazarens, Acts 24. yet they would not condemn him before they heard
him face to face speak for himself.

And I further told them, this unjust proceeding of the House of Commons
against me, was but just the same unrighteous measure that they had meted out
before unto me, for about two years ago I had come Post from Sir Thomas Fairfax
Army, to bring them glad tidings of his routing of General Gorings Army at
Lamport in Somersetshire, and being daily waiting at the House door, I was a
few days after, by the Speakers means (as I have been since largely told)
Voted upon a bare suggestion to Prison, without the House ever so much as
calling in my pretended accusers (viz. Dr. Bastwick, and Colonel Edward King,
with whom for diverse months before, I had not, to the best of my remembrance,
changed so much as one word) or ever so much as calling me in, though then at
their door to speak one word for my self, they Voted, and Resolved upon the
Question, That I should be committed to prison till they please to release me,
without telling me to this hour wherefore they imprisoned me; and from their
Sergeant at Arms, tossed and tumbled me to Newgate, for refusing (to make of
one of their Committees, a High Commission, or Spanish Inquisition,) to answer
(against all Law and Justice) to their Interrogatories: And then when they had
me at Newgate, made an Order of their House, to arraign me at Newgate Sessions,
for no less then my life; and Ordered the prime Lawyers about London, viz.
Master Bradshaw, Master Steel, Master Walker, etc. to be my prosecuters, and by
a law-quirk, if it were possible, to take away my life from me: And yet for all
that, they being sufficiently baffled, by my own pen, and the pens of my
Friends, they sent me One hundred pounds to Newgate (as may be supposed) to
help to bear my charges, and released me by Vote of the House, as an innocent
man, after thirteen weeks imprisonment; without all that while laying any thing
to my charge, or so much as ever telling me, wherefore they The full story of
which, you may read in my Printed Epistle of two sheets, dated and in my large
Book called Innocence and Truth Justified, and in Englands Birthright,
Englands misery and remedy, and Englands lamentable slavery.
imprisoned me, or who were the prosecutors, or informers against me; and all
this was done unto me by Master Speakers malice principally, who though he had
not the least pretense or shadow of Crime originally against me* yet thought by
provocations laid upon me, to exasperate, and chafe my Spirit; and thereupon,
as it were, to force me to do something that might entangle me, and be a
colorable ground for him to destroy me; forgetting (although he pretend to be
a great Lawyer) that maxim of the Law, made use of by Judge. Hutton, in his
Argument in Master Hambdens Case, against Shipmoney, page 49 That that which
was defective in the Original, is not good by any accident subsequent; or as
that learned Lawyer, the Author of that notable Book, called Vox Plebis, page
20. 43. has it, That which is not good, or just, (but illegal) in its original
or beginning, by tract of time cannot be made just, or lawful. See also my
Grand Plea against the House of Lords, page 13.

I further told my Friends then, and there. That if I might have but fair play,
and free liberty to speak for my self, I doubted not, but to make it as evident
as the Sun, when it shined at noonday, That at that pretended treasonable
meeting at Wappin, (whereas I understood the parson accused me, for plotting
the destruction of the Parliament, etc.) I did the House of Commons in its just
and fundamental Interest (simply considered) a peace of the reallest, and best
service, that ever with my tongue I did them in my life: And as I said, I was
very sure I had done them some real and unspotted services.

For the occasion of that meeting, as I told them, was upon this ground, there
being a large Petition a promoting, some Copies of them came into the hands of
some cordial, honest, active men about Wappin, who though they had nothing to
object against the Petition it self; yet one or more of them, did very much
scruple (as I was told, not maliciously, but conscienciously) how they could
lawfully act to promote any more Petitions to this House of Commons, seeing
that in their Declarations, they had declared (in answer to the Kings
Objections, about tumultuous meetings, about Petitions, That desired the
abolition of things established by Law,) That they did conceive, that numbers
do not make an assembly unlawful, but when either the end, or the manner of
their carriage, shall be unlawful. Diverse just occasions (say they) might draw
the Citizens to Westminster, where many public and private Petitions, and
other causes, were depending in Parliament; and why that should be found more
faulty in the Citizens, then the resort of great numbers every day in the Term,
to the ordinary Courts of Justice, we know not These are their own words in
their Declaration of the nineteenth of May, 1642. 1. Part. Book. Declar. page
201, 202 See also page 123. 533. 548. 691. See the Armies Declarations, to this
purpose. Book. Declar. page 10. 11. 17. 23. 33. 35. 44. 60. 61. 62. 83. 85. 118
but especially read the notable Arguments in Master Nathaniel Fines his Speech
in the House, the ninth of February, 1640. To justify popular Petitions, and
multitudes deliv^ring of them for the abolition of the things established by
Law; which you may read in Print, in the 22. 23. 24. 25. pages, of a Printed
Book, entitled, Speeches and Passages of Parliament. Printed 1641. for William
Cook
. And in the same Declaration, Page 209. they say, That such a concourse of
people (as is before mentioned) cannot in the interpretation of the Law, be
held tumultuary and seditious.

And in their Declaration of the second of November, 1642. 1 Part. Book Declar.
page 720. They do acknowledge that they have received Petitions for the removal
of things established by Law; and (say they) we must say, and all that know
what b^longeth to the course, and practice of Parliament, will say, That we
ought so to do, and that both our Predecessors, and His Majesty's Ancestors,
have constantly done it; there being no other place wherein Laws, that by
experience may be found grievous and burthensom, can be altered or repealed;
and there being no other due and legal way, wherein they which are aggrieved by
them, can seek redress.

And yet notwithstanding all this, That this very Parliament, or House of
Commons, that had made these Declarations, Should declare men Traitors, for
endevoring to Petition, burn their Petitions, and imprison the persons of
diverse honest men, merely for Petitioning for those things they had made us
fight for, viz. Our Liberties and Freedom When formerly they received the poor
men's Petitions with threatening language in it, with a great deal of
thankfulness, as appears, 1. Part. Book. Declarat. page 289. 364. 365. 398.
533. 548. 557.


All these things laid together, were such discouragements to the Objecter, or
Objecters, That at the present (as it was said) they could not in Conscience,
nor Honor, go about to Petition so unworthy an Apostatized House any more.
Whereupon some of their Neighbors, in and about Wappin* that were zealous in
promoting the Petition, appointed a meeting, to debate, and satisfy these
Scruples, (if it were possible,) that so they might go unanimously to work, to
promote the Petition, which was now much retarded by the foresaid Scruples, the
party or parties scrupling, being of some eminency amongst their Neighbors:
Unto which meeting, by some Friends, I was earnestly desired to come, and if I
could, to bring Mr. John Wildeman with me; which I did.

And the substance of that Discourse was, to convince our scrupling friends or
friend, That the Kingdom was in exceeding great distractions, and the people
under general Oppressions and Burdens, and trading generally decayed; which
had occasioned mighty heart-burnings, and dividings of Spirit amongst the
people; and the present House of Commons (though sufficiently corrupted) was
the visibly best, and justest Authority that was extant in England; the
overthrowing of which (as things stood) would bring in such a present
Inundation of misery and confusion, into the whole Kingdom, that there would be
nothing in the eye of Reason, but cutting of throats every where, and all
return into its first Chaos, and the longest Swords to be Judges of all, and we
might be as soon destroyed in such a general confusion, and hurly burly, as any
others. And therefore, I and my friend pressed, That if they either wished well
unto themselves, or their Native Country, they were tied in duty and
conscience, to the uttermost of their power, to preserve the Interest and Being
of the House of Commons (so long as it continued a House;) and yet in such a
way, That they might not invassalize the people: Both of which, they were told
was provided for in this Petition; and to do any thing that might pull down or
destroy the present Power and Being of the House of Commons, in the eyes of the
people, before things are in some settledness (which would sufficiently be done
if they should disclaim them as unworthy to be Petitioned unto any more) were
to undo and destroy our selves, especially considering, That they had so lately
engaged so high against the King, and the Scots; and therefore it behoved us
not so to act, as to increase their adversaries, but rather to strengthen their
hands, and the rather at this juncture of time; and yet so to do it, as that
the generality of the Commons of England, might be gainers by it, in the
knowledge of their particular Liberties; that so if it were possible, they might
be united therein, and might thereupon, as one man in the Spirit of Englishmen,
stand up, and live, and die each with other, against all Foreign Interests
whatsoever.

And as I further told my said acquaintance and friends, That I was confident
there was never any one Discourse in England, wherein the true and just
Interest of the House of Commons, was more firmly, cordially and strongly
maintained, then in that: And if they should punish me for my actions or
speeches at that meeting, I should be punished for doing as great (and as real)
a piece of service to the Interest of the House of Commons, (and consequently
to the Interest of the Kingdom) as ever was done in any meeting by any Member
of the House. And this I told them, I doubted not but to make as evident as the
Sun, when it shined, if the House would hear me but speak for my self. At
which, my Friends were very much refreshed, considering so desperate things
were charged upon me by the Priest.

So enquiring if any of them could tell me where Master Sergeant was, I was
answered, He was with the Speaker, and the Earl of Manchester, in the Queens
Court; and going up thither to find him, I found him ready with his Mace, to
usher the Keepers of the Great Seal unto the Chancery Court. So standing in
their way, as they were to come out, I had a mind to face them, to see how
they would look upon me; and after they passed by, I could see the Speaker lay
his head to the Earl of Manchesters. Whereupon, they both turned about, and
stared wishfully upon me, and so did the three Judges that followed them, which
were, if I mistake not, Judge Rowls, Judge Phesant, and Baron Atkins; and I
looked as wishfully upon them, with an undaunted countenance, thereby
demonstrating that unspotted Innocence cheared my heart, and so down stairs
they went, and I followed them at their heels to the Chancery, with an earnest
desire, to know the matter more fully of Master Sergeant, and truly to know
what their House had done upon it, who within a little while, coming out of the
Court, I had my opportunity to speak with; who looked very strangely upon me,
as though I were now a destroyed man; at which, I smiled, and told him, If ever
the House of Commons in their lives, had true ground and cause to thank me for
any service, that ever I had done them with my tongue, it was for that nights
Discourse, and my there pleading their Cause and Interest. And much more
Discourse to the same purpose (as is before mentioned) we had, but I grated
very much upon Master Speakers unjust and unrighteous dealing with me. And I
told him, I conceived this was one of his new plots, or the Earl of
Manchesters: For guilty conscienced men, are always afraid of the shakings of
an Aspine-leaf; and would frame and contrive, out of their own brains new
plots, and then themselves bring them to light, as contrived against the State
and Parliament, That so they might thereby blast all sorts of men that were
likely to pinch them. And truly I told him, they were to mine own knowledge,
very good at these tricks, for I knew them both of old; at which he was
distasted, and told me, the House had taken off my former Order for my going
abroad, and had remanded me to the Tower again, and had sent an Order to the
Lieutenant of the Tower, to morrow morning, to bring me up to their Bat as a
prisoner: I told him, it was but like all the rest of their just dealings,
toward me; and in this I told him, they clearly demonstrated to the whole
Kingdom, That they had less Justice within their breasts, then was in the
Heathen, and Pagan Roman Judges, that had nothing but the light of Nature to
guide them in their judgment; and yet would not condemn Paul before they heard
him, though his Adversaries laid greater things to his charge, then all the men
in England are able justly to pretend against me. And as for my going again
prisoner to the Tower, I told him, I would now never go upon the old score
voluntary, while my eyes were open. And I further told him to this effect, That
if their hearts were not totally hardened, and their souls scaled up to do
wickedness for ever, they would blush for shame, so much as to talk of
committing me to prison, before now after above seven years waiting upon them,
they had done me some reasonable proportion of Justice; but now again to commit
me to prison, after eleven or twelve years (as heavy) sufferings, as ever
Englishman (that I read of) endured; to the exhausting me of all that ever I
have in the world, yea, and more too, by running into debt to buy me bread, and
to keep almost three thousand pounds of my Corn from me by force and violence,
and to commit me to prison again, without any manner of provision in the world,
for me and mine to live upon (after I have made so many mournful cries and
moans unto them.) What is this else, but to be more cruel then the very
Cannibals themselves? who always feed fat those men that they intend to eat,
and devour; and were it not more justice in them, to cause their Guard of
Halberders, to knock my brains out, and so put a period to my days, and
miseries, then again to send me prisoner to the Tower, either to be starved, or
eat the stone walls (which is impossible.) For as the Spirit of God says by
Jeremy in his Lamentations, Chap. 4.9. Better are they that die by the sword,
then they that be slain with hunger: And he gives this Reason of it, For the
last pines away, stricken through for want of the Fruits of the Field; whereas
he that is slain quickly, endures little or no pain. And how they can conceive
in the eye of Reason, (laying all things together) how I should thus long live,
and subsist without miracle, (especially, contesting with all the great corrupt
Interests of England, who have scores and hundreds of mercinary, pencionary
emissaries, in the City and Country, with their lies and falsehoods, to rob me
of my Reputation and Credit; and with their groundless reproaches, to bespatter
me, and make me as black as a Chimny Sweeper, and render me as a man not fit to
live in civil or moral Society) is beyond my Reason to apprehend.

My Prayer.
BUt O thou Just, Righteous, Powerful and Compassionate God; that sensibly has
been my God and guide about these twice seven years: that have often refreshed
my soul with those far, and soul satisfying refreshments, that has made my
heart sing and be merry, in the midest of many deaths; and which have made me
lightly esteem the cruel malice of all my fierce, and murdering Enemies: O
thou glorious God, that has taken me by the arm when I have been ready to
fall, and by whose power alone, I have been kept upright before thee, in the
midst of many soul piercing temptations; and by whose sweetness, discovered
unto my soul, I have been drawn after thee, with ready willingness of spirit
(though backwardness of flesh) to follow thee whithersoever thou go: keep
now (for the glory of thy namesake) my heart sincere and upright before thee,
that I neither flag, fall, nor start aside, like a broken bow, but may stick
close unto thee, (and to that justice and purity that shines gloriously in
thee) to the death.

O Thou compassionatest and sweetest God, who in all the afflictions of thy
people art afflicted with them, and have said, thou hear their cries, and
bottellest up their tears; O now in the greatness of straits, when my soul is
endeavored to be overwhelmed; hear now in heaven, the habitation of thy
greatness, and protect and deliver me from the cruel and bloody rage, of thy
once SEEMING servant, CROMWELL, who if my soul is now able to judge, is visibly
become a FALNESTAR, an Apostate from thee, an ENEMY to thee, and a desperate
persecutor of thee, in all those where he meets with the shining splendour and
the glory of thine own bright Image of Justice holiness, purity and
righteousness; and has done a thousand times worse thereby, then Peter did,
who, though he forswore and denied his Master, yet he never persecuted him in
his members, as he has done, and thereby has Crucified the Son of God A
FRESH, and put him to an open shame: O put a hook in his nostrils, and a bit
into his teeth, to curb his furious drivings to destroy Righthousnesse, Truth,
and Justice (from off the earth) the bright shinings of God amongst men; O
discover him (to all those that truly know thee) and his wicked opressing and
tyrannical accomplices, to be what they are, (and have of late clearly
demonstrated themselves to be, to every seeing eye) the SONS OF SATAN AND
WICKEDNESS, THE PERVERTERS OF TRUTH, JUSTICE, AND ALL KIND OF RIGHTEOUSNESS;
THE DECEIVERS AND SEDUCERS THAT THOU HAVE DECLARED SHOULD COME INTO THE WORLD
IN THESE LAST DAYS, TO DECEIVE, IF IT WERE POSSIBLE, THE VERY ELECT. O Lord,
deal with him according to all his late deserts, in doubling unto him that cup
of affliction and sorrow, that he has of late meated out diverse of thy choice
and redeemed ones; O thou righteous God, who have declared, that evil shall
shall never depart from the house of him that requites evil for good, let it be
so unto him; who causelessly, as thou know, has with all his might and
power, sought the destruction and total ruin of me thy poor servant, who in
the uprightness of his soul, while he judged him to be thine, adventured all
he had in the world for him; O dearest and truest God, seeing thou have made
the spirit of thy poor supplicant, willing from time to time to stoop unto the
lowest condition in the world, (that might consist with that knowledge, duty,
fealty, he owes unto thee, HIS ABSOLUTE AND UNLIMITED SOVEREIGN, fairly to
reconcile things betwixt us; but nothing will serve his turn, but the
prostrating of the honor and conscience of thy poor servant unto graven
Images, and painted Idols, viz. the usurping tyrannical House of Lords: and
seeing by his potency and greatness (by reason of that absolute commanding
power, he has over an over-awing, mercinary, Turkish Army, that now serve not
to defend the liberties of their native Country, but the exorbitant tyrannical
lusts of men) that thy servant can obtain amongst men no Justice, nor right,
but is hindered of all that tends thereunto, or his powerful influence; he
therefore thereby appeals to the great and SOVEREIGN CREATOR AND OVER RULER OF
ALL THE WORLD, FOR JUSTICE AND RIGHT, against this great and mighty
(apostatizing) hunting Nimrod, CROMWELL, and solely at thy feet cast his
contest with him, earnestly imploring for that glorious and unparalled riches
sake that shines in Jesus Christ, and for that unspotted Justice and
righteousness sake, that shines in thy own self; to do justice with thy own
Almighty, but stretched arm betwixt us; and visibly before the eyes of the
present generation of men, execute impartial judgment between us, that so it
may be made manifest to the sons of Men, but especially to the present living
generation of thy people, who is principally in the fault, thy servant that now
in the ardency of his soul speaks unto thee, or he against whom, in the anguish
and bitterness of his heart and spirit, he complains of unto thee:. O, as
thou art a righteous God, and as truth and justice is inherent in thee, and one
with thee, judge betwixt us, and visibly avenge upon the guilty one of us, and
that speedily; that so if it be thy will, those heart-burnings, and divisions of
spirit may cease, that by our contest is occasioned amongst our native
Churchmen, but especially amongst thy darlings, by reason of our contestings
each with other, who both have been eminent in the eyes of many thousands of
those that truly know thee: for that real integrity to thy truth and glory,
that they have Judged to be in us, that so peace and quietness, truth and
justice, thereby (if it be thy good will and pleasure) may speedily come unto
the land of our nativity; and truth, righteousness, joy, comfort, and union of
hearts and spirits, may come unto the chosen ones, and glory, honor and peace
unto thy great and glorious Name. Amen. Amen.

But in the conclusion of my discourse, I told Mr Sergeant, that though I would
not willingly go to the Tower, yet I would promise him willingly and
voluntarily of mine own accord to come to morrow morning, ( being Wednesday,
19th. of Jan. 1647.) to the House of Commons, and if they would give me but
fair play, and leave at their Bar freely to speak for my self, I doubt not
but to make my base and lying accuser (for all the start he had got of me)
ashamed of what he had done: so after I had a little faced the Commissioners of
the Great Seal fitting in open Court, and talked a little with some
Parliament Men, and given them three or four lashes, for their ungrave, unjust,
and light credulity, away to my Lodging in London I came, and being up very
betimes the next morning, to meet some understanding friends, to confer how,
and after what manner the business by me should be carried at the House; this
man, and the other man, threw in very sollid advise, and pressed me to a
careful and diligent observation, but I bid them hold their peace, and talk no
more of it to me; for I neither could nor would observe their directions; for I
told them to this effect, my heart was all one fire, and my soul did thirst and
long to be amongst the Parliament Men, that in the might and strength of my
strong God, I might talk to them, and I told them my old refuge in all such
cases as this is, was the 10th of Matthew, and I cared for no other counselor;
neither in this case could I regard any but his, who was, and is, the author of
that, who in all such cases, had commanded me to take no thought how, or what
to speak; promising that it shall be given me in that same hour, what I shall
speak, for (says he) it is not you that speak, but the spirit of your Father
that speaks in you; unto which, an eminent man in the company replied, he
liked it well, but yet for all that he loved to use means; But I told him, I
liked that well too, but in this case, not knowing what they will say unto me, or
lay to my charge, all discourses to me below the tenth of Matthew was to no
purpose, and therefore I pressed again to be gone to Westminster, for my soul
longed to be amongst them, being brim-full, and ready for want of vent to
overflow; desiring at present, nothing so much from God, as to order their
hearts so, as to cause them to give me free leave to speak.

So preparing for the journey, I arrived with other of my friends at
Westminster, and being not long at the House door, (where was many friends come
down from London and Southwark, to hear and see how things went) I addressed
my self to the Sergeant of the House, to let him know I was there to tend upon
the Houses pleasure; And he immediately after came out with his Mace, and
CALLED FOR Mr. MASTERSON, THE JUDAS PRIEST, and my self; so in we went, and
also the Lieutenant of the Tower as my guardian, and having given them that due
respect, that I conceived is due unto their just and true authority, (though I
owe little or none unto the persons that sat there, by reason of their gross
abusing and most abominable of their righteous authority) the thing that
passed, so near as my memory to the utmost punctilio will serve me, I shall
faithfully relate unto you. Upon our coming to the Bar, where both my lying
accuser and my self stood, the Speaker stepped up in his Chair, and commanded
Mr. MASTERSON, in the name of the House of Commons, to give them again a
narrative of what he yesterday declared to them.

So he very formally begun, and spoke as freely, as if he had learned his
Lesson without book; and truly, I could not but stand amazed at the man's
impudence, that he durst, with so much confidence, tell so many lies as he did:
But giving not much regard unto his accusation, to treasure it up in my memory,
being resolved before hand, to take no cognizance of his verbal impeachment,
which in Law was nothing, I fixed my mind very seriously upon the Lord Jehovah,
my old experienced refuge, strength and support, and was a wrestling with him
for the incomes of his own self, that so I might speak freely and boldly, in
his might and power (if it were possible) to the amazement and terror of his
enemies, amongst those that should hear me; diverse of whom, I was confident,
would lie in wait to catch and entrap me.

And now and then (the House (in my apprehension) being very full, I cast my
eye about me to look upon the countenances of the Members, and to observe their
behaviors, most commonly fixing my eye steadfastly upon the Speaker in the
Chair: Who as soon as he perceived Mr Masterson had done, beckoned his hand unto
me, as I conceived, to have me answer the Priest: but I stood still, and took
no notice of his beck; at last, he wished me to say what I could answer for my
self unto it: whereupon pausing a little, after a congey made unto him, I
opened my mouth to this effect.

Mr Speaker, I desire, in the first place, to premise this, That I look upon,
and own this honorable House, in its constitution and power, as the best,
legallest, and justest interest, power and authority, that is established in
this Kingdom; or that all the Commons of England visibly has, for the
preservation of their lives, liberties and estates: And I doubt not, but so to
speak unto you, and so to behave my self before you, this present day, as
thereby to demonstrate to you, that I am an honourer; an owner, and a prizer of
this greatest English authority and interest; in which, as a free Commoner of
England, I have a little share: And therefore, if this honorable House please
to afford me Paulis PRIVILEGE, that he enjoyed amongst the Heathen and Pagan,
Roman Governors, or Magistrates; which was, to hear him speak freely for
himself, before they would condemn him: Which liberty and privilege, I freely
and largely enjoyed, at the hands of the Cavalier Judges at Oxford, when I was
arraigned in irons, before the Lord chief Justice Heath, and Sir Thomas
Gardener, late Recorder of London, for drawing my sword, and at your command,
adventuring my life, for the great interest of the Kingdom involved, and single
represented in this honorable House, in the destruction of which it perishes;
who before all the City and Country, then assembled in Guild Hall in Oxford,
gave me free liberty, without the least interruption, to say what I pleased,
and to plead for my life, in the best manner that all those abilities God had
given me, would enable me The enjoyment of which, was but my right by Law, as
appears remarkably in the third part of Cooks Institutes, fol. 29. 137. 230.
to do. The which privilege, and legal and natural right, if you please to
grant me, I shall speak freely, WITH THIS PROTESTATION, AND SALVO, That I do
not speak, nor answer, out of any duty, or tie, that lies upon me by LAW, FOR
ALL CHARGES IN LAW OUGHT TO BE IN WRITING, under the hand, or hands, of him, or
them that charge, and in that form that the Law requires; and proceeded in,
according to the form of the Law of the Land, expressed in the 29 Chapter of
the great Charter, and these Laws which expound it, which are mentioned Which
you may at large read, in my plea before Mr Corbet, recorded in the 8, 9, 10,
pages of it, being called, The Resolved man's Resolution; and Mr John Wildmans
notable defense against Masterson, called, Truths triumphs, page: 2. 11, 12, 13,
14. and my late Book of June 8. 1649. entitled, The Legal Fundamentals, etc.
p. 6, 7, 8, 9.
and nominated in the Petition of Right. Which this pretended Vergall charge is
not, in the least: And indeed, Mr Speaker, in Law it is no charge at all:
neither in the way this Informer is in, can I well have any remedy against him,
in case he abuses me; for, as I understand, if he tell twenty lies against me,
I cannot punish him; but if he maliciously swear one against me, I have his See
Sir Edward Cooks 1 part Institutes, fol. 294. b. and 3 part, chapt. Conspiracy,
is very remarkable: fol. 143. and chapter Perjury, fol. 163, 164, 165, 166. and 4
part, fol. 66.
ears as my mercy, etc. and therefore a Betraier of my Liberties I should be, if
I should look upon it as any charge at all, and in that consideration, return
an answer to it; and therefore again, saving unto me the rights and privileges
of an English man, which is, to be tried by no other rules or methods, for any
real or pretended crime whatsoever, then what is declared by the known,
established and declared Laws of England; nor by, nor before any other
Authority or Magistracy, then what the Law has authorized to be the executors
Which I am sure the House of Commons are not in the least.

See my Book, called, The Peoples prerogative, p. 40. 41, 72, 73. and my Book,
called, The Laws Funeral, page 15, 16.

And my second Edition of my Picture of the Council of State, page 7, 8.

And my Book of the 8 June, 1649. entitled, The Legal Fundamental Liberties
of the People of England revived, page ^ 16, 17. And Mr Wildmans Truths
Triumph, page 2. 17, 18. And the Laws subversion, or Sir John Maynards case
stated, page 33, 34, 35, 36. The plea or Protestation of Lionel Hurbin, in
behalf of the late four imprisoned Aldermen, page 10, 11, 14, 17, 18. and the
Aldermens Petition of the 23 April, 1648.


of it: I say, saving, as before I have expressed.

I shall, out of that ingenuity of spirit, candidnesse and integrity of heart
that dwells within me; and out of that high and honorable respect I bear to the
interest and just authori-of this House, Give you, if you please, a free,
voluntary, full and perfect relation of all the most materiallest actions,
passages and speeches, that have past from me, about this Petition, since it
was first begun, to our late meeting at Wapping.

And I shall the rather, at present, lay aside the punctilios of my liberty,
which is, not to answer to any Interrogatories, or confess any thing against
my self, till it be legally, fully and punctually proved, because I have longed
for such an opportunity as this; and my silence at this time, might, in the
prejudiced opinions of some among you, against me, argue in their spirits, my
guiltiness of all the lies laid unto my charge; and thereby might, in their
own hearts, take me, pro confesso, and conclude me guilty from my silence, but
without a grant of free liberty from this House, to speak my mind freely,
without any interruption: I shall not say one word more, but remain in perfect
silence: So the Speaker commanded us to withdraw, which we did.

And after about a quarter of an hours time, the Sergeant at Arms came, with
his Mace, and ushered us in again; and having placed our selves at the Bar, Mr
Speaker having a paper in his hand, looked upon it, and said to this effect, Mr
Masterson, the House conceives, that you have nothing nigh given them so full a
relation of this business to day, to Mr Lilburns face, as you did yesterday,
when you were single: therefore I am commanded to ask you what you say, to such
a thing, and such a thing? and mentioned, as I remember, about some six or
seven particulars: The substance of all of his accusation, so near as that
little heed I gave unto it, would enable me to collect, was to this effect:

That there was a design (especially by me declared at the foresaid meeting)
contrived by me, Sir, to destroy, or cut off, both Houses of Parliament; and
that we could not be far from the intention of executing it, in regard I had
appointed blew Ribbons to be worn in the hats of all those that should be saved
alive: And that though we did now drive on a Petition to the House, yet it was
no more but a cloak, or a color to raise the people by, that so we might the
more covertly make our selves strong enough to destroy them.

But after he had done, the Speaker told me, the House had given me free
liberty to say what I pleased: at which I made a congey to him, and mightily
raised up my heart to God, with an earnest inward cry to Heaven, now to come
in, if ever, with power, strength, wisdom, resolution and utterance; and
praised be his name, he heard my inward sighs and cries unto him; and put, as
it were, a new heat, and burning fire, into all my veins, and raised up my
spirit high, beyond its ordinary temper; and, with a little pause I begun, and
said after this manner, with a soft voice.

Mr Speaker, I take it for no small honor, to be admitted this day, to this
great (though just) privilege, to have free liberty to speak my mind freely,
and boldly, without interruption; and having again premised what is before
premised, and protested again what is before protested, with a loud and mighty
voice (though with an easy and sensible command over my self) I went punctually
on (without the least interruption extemporary) and said,

Mr Speaker, I do here freely and voluntarily confess it, that I had a hand,
or a finger, in drawing the great Petition, with large Which at the last end
hereof, is printed at large.
Marginall notes fixed to it; and that I also had a hand in putting it to the
press, and paying for it: And truly, Mr Speaker, the ground of drawing of it,
in my made standing was this, we have many years been fighting for our
liberties and freedoms, and yet the generality of the Kingdom are as far to
seek what they are, and where to find them, as ever; and the oppressions, and
burdens, are very great and heavy upon the people, as by tyths, taxes, excise,
and free quarter, etc. and that which is worst of all, all trading, in a
manner, is dead^d, and all victuals grown so dear, that famine draws on apace;
and this House seems (to us) to be afresh engaged, not only against the King,
but also against the Scots: all which laid together, has occasioned such
heart-burnings, divisions and dissentions, in all sorts and kinds of people,
saving those now in fat places and offices, that are made rich by the ruins of
the Kingdom: In which regard, there was nothing more likely to arise, then a
general confusion; and the people being (as we perceived) united in nothing
that concerned their Common good, as English men; might in their distractions
and confusions, destroy their neighbors and friends; which might breed such
s^uds in City and Country, that one faction or party might be so earnest to
destroy another, without hopes of any composer; till a foreign enemy seeing
our divisions, distractions and hurly-burlies, came in with an inundation to
make a prey of us all, and of the Land of our Nativitie: The consideration of
which struck deep into my spirit, and therefore I studied how someting might be
done speedily to prevent it: And this Petition was brought forth as a salve to
heal and cure all our sores and diseases, and to knit the hearts together of
all ingenuous men, in every faction or interest, that had but the least spark
of a desire to do unto their neighbors as they would be done unto: Which Law
is not only the prime Law of Nature, but also the strict command both of the
Law and Gospel: And truly Sir, I for my part conceived this Petition so just,
necessary and righteous, that if the people closed with it, this House could
never so far dishonor themselves, as in the least discountenance it: Nay Sir,
I dare here at your Bar with confidence aver it, that there is never a man in
England that dare or can speak against the body or scope of it, unless it be
those that have guilty consciences within them, or those that are of, or allied
unto some of those corrupt interests that are therein struck at.

And truly Mr Speaker, I my self look upon that Petition with such admiration
and satisfaction of spirit, and of so transcendent concernment to all honest
and just men in my native Country; that I count it one of the most glorious
moral actions to promote that Petition, that ever God counted me worthy in all
my life to have a finger in: And Sir, let me freely tell you: I count it my
glory and honor amongst the sons of men, that I have had so great a hand in
forwarding of that Petition as a had: And therefore Sir as my crown and glory I
shall freely tell you, that as soon as I and some other of my true and
faithful Comrades had caused some thousands of that Petition to be printed; I
did the best I could to set up constant meetings in several places in
Southwark to promote the Petition: to which meetings all scruplers and
objecters against any thing contained in the Petition, might repair unto for
satisfaction: and I did constantly make one at all such meetings, to improve
and put forth my abilities, to open and unfold the excellency of that Petition,
and to answer all objections against any particular in it: and when there was
appointed Trustees in every parish (which only did consist of such as had been,
and still were active, cordial, and untainted faithful men, to the Liberties and
Freedom of their Native Country) to take the especial care to promote the
Petition effectually and vigorously, in their respective Parishes; I labored
the most I could to set up the like meetings in London; and for that end,
diverse cordial, honest, faithful, and Noun substantive Englishmen met openly
at the WHALEBONE behind the Exchange, where by common consent, we choose out a
Committee, or a certain numb^r of faithful undestanding men (but in regard I
abhor to be a betrayer, or a mischievous accuser, I shall not dare without leave
from themselves to name their names, but leave you to the information of my
illegal and unjust accuser at the Bar, or such other, as from such as he is you
can procure it) to withdraw into the next room, to form a method, how to
promote it in every Ward in the City, and out-parishes, and also in every
County in the Kingdom; and for the more vigorous carrying it one, we
nominated, as he tells you, two or three treasurers, and a proportion of
Collectors, to gather up our voluntary contributions, which were no greater,
then some two pence per week, others 3 d. some 4 d. some 6 d. some 12 d. 18 d.
2 s. the highest was half a crown per week; and this was, and is, the
voluntary act of every man in himself, and the end of it was to pay for
Printing the Petitions, and bearing the charges of those messengers we should
have occasion to send down into the Countries to our friends there to promote
the Petitions; and I do acknowledge, I have been at diverse other meetings in
London, and the out-parishes, to promote it withal the might I had: and I do
further confess, that I wrote a Letter, Entitled, To my friends and faithful
Country men in Buckingham-shire, and Hertford shire, that engaged for me, etc,
in a Petition to this House about 13 months ago, to desire you to hear,
judge, and determine according to Law and Justice, my business against the
Lords, depending in this House, either to my justification, if innocent, or
condemnation, if guilty. And the Copy of the Letter I have by me, which when
this House shall command me, I shall be ready and willing to produce it at this
Bar, the contents of it being to press them with all their might and interest,
to promote this Petition in every parish quite through both the Counties.

I also went to Darfort in Kent, and there was one of those that set my hand to
a Letter, subscribed to all the -- in the County of Kent; and also I set my
hand to a Letter to Colonel Blunt, the Copy of both which, at the command of
this House, I shall be ready to present unto you at this Bar; and at my coming
home, I set my hand to a Letter to Captain Boine in Kent, and did besides, the
best I could to promote the foresaid Petition, not only in London, but in
several other Yea, and I am confident in a months longer time, if Cromwell and
his agents in the House had not hindered us, as they did, we had got above a
hundred thousand hands to it; the promoting and prosecuting of which, would in
all likelihood have hindered the Wars that followed, the innocent blood shed
therein, lying principally upon Cromwels score for this constant hindering the
settling the liberties of the Nation, and prosecuting to death and bonds, the
prosecutors thereof, which bread divisions, and they the Wars.
Counties besides, and hearing as before is declared in my foresaid discourse
at the House of Commons door (the substance of which I again related at their
Bar) that some honest people, in or about Wappin, scrupulled to Petition any
more to the House, for the reasons before mentioned in p. 16. 17. (which I gave
the House) and being desired by some friends to come to the meeting, to help to
answer their objections; I did accordingly, and being at the foresaid place,
there were diverse friends met, and the discourse was begun; in which, with
many arguments it was declared, that it was our duty to go on with Petitioning
to this House again, for that it was all the visible just power, that was left
in the Kingdom, to preserve the peace thereof, and though all members thereof
did not act as they should, yet to do any thing that should destroy the power
of the whole, it would be a destruction to our selves and the Kingdom, for the
people being in that mutinous temper, by reason of their oppessions, and
burdens, there was no way to keep them in peace and quietness, but by a
vigorous proposing and prosecuting of some universal just things to ease them,
and for the future to secure them; neither was there any safe or sure way for
the people to act in, to make their grievances known and probably hope for
redress, but by Pettiion, and that to the House of Commons, which was the most
our own interest of any power in England; and no man knew at this nick of
time, what just and righteous things might be produced by and from the House,
if they should see the people universally own, and close with so just and
gallant a thing as this Petition is, and much more to the same purpose, which I
cannot well remember: but this I am sure of, that there was not in the whole
discourse, one dis-ingaging expression to the interest of this House, but I
dare with much confidence aver it, that the whole stream, scope and bent of
the whole discourse, was to lift up and preserve the interest of this House,
that so it might be the better enabled to do just and righteous things for the
whole Kingdom, according to the end of the trust they have reposed in you; and
I dare safely aver it, there was not so much as one bit of a mischievous or
factious discourse at all; the whole tendency of it being to peace, Justice and
Union.

And by-and-by there was an objection raised, as I remember, to this effect: I,
but if the generality of the people would join in the Petition, and act to
save themselves, with vigor and strength, there might then be some
encouragement for us once again to join in acting with them, but for any
thing could be perceived, the generality of the people were as willing to be
slaves, as any were to have them so; and having been so often jaded, had set
down with a kind of a resolution to stir no more come what would come;
therefore we being but a small number to the whole, our striving in this case,
was but to sow the wind.

Unto which Mr Speaker, it was answered, much to this effect, That the great
end wherefore God sent man into the world was, that he should do good in his
generation, and thereby glorify God in his generation; and it is said of
Christ, that he made it his work, to go up and down to do good unto all, that
he could meet with; and therein he was declared to be like unto his Father, the
immitating of which he had required of al of us, that should do good to all
men, and how did we imitate him in this; if our friends, our Countrymen, our
brethren, were ready to perish, and in their sottishness were ready to be
destroyed; and God had opened our eyes to see it, and yet we would not do the
best we could to save and preserve them, though they were unwilling to save and
preserve themselves.

Nay, Mr Speaker, it was there further pressed, that to sit still in such a
universal perishing case as this is, was so far below a Christian, that it was
beneath and below the very light of nature and selfe-preservation, that was
evinced after this manner, as I am an individual, I am a part of the whole
Nation, and if it perish in the eye of reason, I and mine must perish with it;
But the whole Nation is in danger of an universal destruction, by oppression,
injustice, and decay of Trade, which would speedily bring famine, and that
would bring all manner of confusion, by the poor peoples rising up to cut the
throats of the rich-men, to get their estates and moneys to buy them bread, and
to preserve nature, and in this horrible confusion, we should be a prey to
every foreign enemy that would first invade us; and if such a thing should
happen, we must become an Aceldoma, a desolation, a wilderness, a field of
blood: And I clearly see all this before my eyes, and yet I will sit still and do
nothing toward the public safety (in which I am transcendently concerned and
involved) because the far greater part of my neighbors sit down in silence,
and are like sots resolved (or ready) to perish in their sottishnesses, and I
must perish with them: am I not guilty of mine own ruin and destruction, if
when I see it before me, and sottishly sit down, and use not my uttermost
endeavors to preserve the whole (in the preservation of which, I am preserved)
because the rest of my neighbors and friends will not join with me to do it?

Nay, Mr. Speaker, it was further pressed, that in such a case as this is (
which is now the case of the Kingdom) I am bound and tied in conscience and
duty to my self, with vigor and strength to act, although my neigbour
refuses salvation, or preservation by me, and commands me not to save him. And
it was further illustrated in this manner; my neighbors House is on fire, and
I clearly see, if it be not quenched, mine is likely to be burned by it,
whereupon I go to my neighbor, and proffer him my help to quench it, and he
being, it may be in a fright, a fullennesse, a sottishness, a mase, a
distemper, or a revengefull maliciousness refuses my help, yea, and commands
me not to help him, but threatens me if I do; yet notwithstanding all this, I
am bound in duty to self, and universal preservation to help to do it whether
he will or no, yea, and to pull down his house to help to quench the fire, to
keep my own and my neighbors from being burnt, whereas if none of this were,
but that his house were standing, and in no such danger, for me then against
his will and mind, to set my foot over his threshold, I am a transgressor, and
an incroacher upon my neighbors rights and properties. In the second place, Mr
Speaker, it was answered, That in case my neighbor were a drowning of himself,
and I see it, I were bound by the Law of God and Nature, whether he would or
no, to save him; nay, but much more, if in his drowning, I were likely to be
drowned with him, were I bound to save him (if I can) although he laid a
thousand commands upon me to the contrary.

And hereabouts, as I remember, it was further objected; That the people all
over the Kingdom were generally very ignorant, and malignant, and hated the
Parliament and us, whom they called Roundheads, Independents, etc. for our
cordial adhering to them, under whom they groan under greater oppressions and
burdens, then before the Parliament; and for all their expenses and fightings,
were never a bit the freer, either at present, or in future grounded hopes; and
therefore for us (that were for the foresaid reason so faithful to the
generality of the people) to act in this petition, they would but contemn it
for our sakes, and be provoked to rise up against us.

Unto which, Mr Speaker, my self, etc. answered to this effect; The people are
generally malignant, and more for the King then the Parliament* but what is the
reason? but because their burdens are greater now then before, and are likely
to continue without any redress, or any visible, valuable consideration holden
out unto them, for all the blood and treasure they had spent for their
liberties and freedoms; and the reason why they were so ignorant, and did so
little inquire after their liberties and freedom, was, Mr Speaker, because,
that though the Parliament had declared in general, that they engaged to fight
for their liberties, yet they never particularly told them what they were, nor
never distinctly held forth the glory and splendor of them, to make them in
love with them, and to study how to preserve them: and for want of a clear
declaring what was the particulars of the Kings Rights, and the nature of his
office; and what was the Parliaments particular privileges, power and duty to
the people of the Kingdom, that chused and trusted them; and what particularly
was the peoples rights and freedoms; they were hereby left in blindness and
ignorance, and by reason of their oppressions, because they knew no better,
doted implicitly upon the King, as the fountain of peace, justice, and
righteousness; without whom, nothing that was good could have a being in this
Kingdom: So I told them, Mr Speaker, it was no marvail, that the poor people in
this particular, were in FOGS, MISTS, WILDERNESSES AND DARKNESS; considering,
that this House, in their Declarations, had so played at fast and loose with
them: for though, Mr Speaker, this House voted to this effect, That the King,
seduced by evil council, had made War against the Parliament and people, and
that they are traitors that assisted 1 part, Book, Decl. page 259, 260, 508,
509, 576, 722, 914.
him: And further declared, That he had set up his Standard against the
Parliament and people, and hereby put the whole Kingdom out of his protection,
contrary to the trust reposed in him, contrary to his oath, dissolving
Government thereby; and that he, in his own person, marched up in the head of
an Army, by force of Arms, to destroy the Parliament, and in them, the whole
Kingdom, their Laws and 1 part, Book, Decl. page 580, 584, 587, 617, 639, 690.
Liberties.

And yet, Mr Speaker, with the same breath declared, The King is the fountain
of justice, and that he can do no 1 part, page 199, 304.
wrong; and forced the people to take Oaths and Covenants, to preserve his
person: and yet, at the same time, gave the Earl of Essex, and all those under
him, Commission, To fight with, kill and slay all that opposed them; and
declared, the King, in his own period, marched in the head of an Army, to
oppose and destroy them; and yet gave them a Commission, to fight for King and
Parliament: So that, Mr Speaker, here is riddle upon riddle, and mystery upon
mystery; which does even confound and amaze the people, and put them into
Woods and Wildernesses, that they could not see or know where they are, or what
to think of themselves, or of the Parliament, or of the King: only this they
very well know, that their burdens are greater now, then ever they were
before; and that they have been made fools, in pretendingly fighting for
liberty, which has brought them into bondage: And that though it was formerly
declared, the King had no Negative voice, or Legislative power, but is bound by
his Oath to pass all such Laws, as the people, folk or Commons, shall 1 part,
Book, Decl. page 205, ^06, 208, 268, 269, 270, 705, 706, 707, 708, 710, 713,
714.
choose: Yet now the Parliament send unto him again and again, for his
concurrence to their acts; as though the giving of life, soul and power to
their actings, were indi^putably and inseparably inherent in him; and as though
now their consciences told them, they must crave pardon of him for all the
actions they have done without him, and against him: O riddles! and
unfathomable mysteries! sufficiently able to make the people desirous to be
ignorant of their liberties and freedoms, and never to hear of them more;
especially, considering they have paid so dear, pretendedly, for the enjoyment
of them, and yet after five years fighting for them, know not where to find one
of them.

But, Mr Speaker, they were told, that in this petition the people had clearly
held out unto them, and that upon the undeniable principles of reason and
justice, the Kings Rights, the Parliaments, and their own; and that the two
former were, and of right always ought to be subservient to the good of the
latter: and they were told, it was not so much persons, as things, that they
doted upon; and therefore undoubtedly those that should really hold out justice
and righteousness unto the people, was those that they would be in love with;
and therefore in mercy to our selves, and in love and compassion to our native
Country, it was pressed, that every man that desired to fulfill his end in
coming into the World, and to be like unto his Master, in doing good, should
vigorously promote and further this just and gallant Petition, as the
principal means to procure safety, peace, justice and prosperity to the Land
of our Nativity, and knit the hearts and spirits of our divided Countrymen in
love again each unto other and in love unto us, which they could not choose but
afford, when they should visibly see, we endeavored their good as well and as
much as our own, there being all the principal foundations of freedom and
justice, that our hearts could desire, or long after, in this very petition:
And if our greatest end were not accomplished, in our prosecuting of this
petition, viz. the Parliaments establishing the things therein desired: yet the
promoting of it would beget understanding and knowledge in the people, when
they should hear it, and read it, and discourse upon it; and if nothing but
that were effected, our labor would not be totally lost; for nothing did more
instate Tyrants in the secure promotion of tyranny, then ignorance and
blindness in the people: And therefore for the begetting of knowledge, it was
requisite it should be promoted; as also, for healing of the divisions amongst
the people, and knitting them together in love, that so their minds might be
diverted from studying the destruction each of other, to study the destruction
of Tyrants, that would in time destroy them all.

And, Mr Speaker, there was one in the company, that made a motion, to this
effect, That he did conceive it was more requisite, at present, speedily to
second the Armies Declaration, with a petition to encourage this House
vigorously to go on, to prosecute their late gallant Votes of Non-Addresses
(for so they were called) to which was answered,

That in this petition was contained more then was in all all their Votes, for
it struck at the very root of all that Tyranny that had enslaved, and would
enslave us, viz. the Negative voice in King and Lords, both which the Votes did
not; and it was impossible, that there could be an active Member in the House
of Commons, but knew that this petition was promoting all over the Kingdom;
which did abundantly declare greater encouragement to all those Members of the
House, that really intended good unto the Commonwealth, then possible could be
in a single complementall petition, signed with 4 or 5000 hands; such a
petition being rather fit to puff them up, then upon real grounds to
strengthen and encourage them fully to mind the peoples good; and there was
never a Member of the House, whose design, in the largest extent, was no more
then the pulling down of the King, that so he might be a King himself: but of
necessity he must receive more satisfaction and encouragement from the
knowledge of the promoting this gallant unparalled petition (which is a clear
demonstration to the Parliament, that those that promote it, clearly
understand, that the King and the Lords Tyranny, and their liberties, are
inconsistent) then he could do from a bare complementary petition; which would
also be dangerous to our selves, in quashing the vigorous prosecuting of this,
that contained the ultimate of our desires, and the sum of all those things,
that in this World we desired, to make us happy.

But, Mr Speaker, it was again objected, That seeing this petition struck so
much at the House of Lords, as it did, who lately it was said, had concurred
with this House in their gallant Votes against the King, it was dangerous to
the Kingdoms safety, in this juncture of time to promote it, lest it might
occasion a clashing betwixt the two Houses, which would now be very dangerous.

Unto which, Mr Speaker, my self, etc. answered to this effect, That if the
Lords had so concurred in these Votes, that they had declared it had been their
duty, without dispute, to have concurred to all such Votes as the House of
Commons had passed, there had been some ground to have pleaded for a respect
unto them from us: But seeing they so passed the Votes, as in the passing of
them, they declare it to be their right, to give their denial to any Votes the
House of Commons shall hereafter pass, that does not please them: we are
thereby engaged the rather to go on with our petition, to pluck up this their
destructive interest by the roots for future, that had brought all our See 1
part Book Decl. page 289, 364, 365, 398, 522, 526, 528, 548, 557.
miseries and woes upon us.

For, Mr Speaker, if the Lords be considered in their Judicative power, we
shall find them as guilty of treason, in subverting our fundamental Laws and
Liberties, as ever the Lord of Strafford was: who in his impeachment of high
Treason by this House, was accused in the 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. articles, that he
had traitorously subverted the fundamental Laws of England and Ireland, and
introduced an arbitrary tyrannical Government beyond and above Law, in that he
had upon papers, And if these very things should now be judged treason, as they
are and were in the Earl of Stafford, I wonder what should become of all our
present Junto at Westminster, and their new thing, called, A Council of State;
undoubtedly the most (if not all) of them, must go to Tyburn, or Tower Hill,
there by an halter or axe to receive their just deserts, Amen.
petitions and verbal complaints, without any due course, process or shadow
of Law (but merely by the law of his own will) outed diverse of the Freemen
thereof out of their liberties, properties and free holds, to the ruin and
destruction of many of their families.

And truly Mr Speaker, I must aver it, and do aver it before this honorable
House, that the House of Lords are as guilty of this traitorous subverting of
our fundamental Laws and Liberties, and introducing and exercising an
arbitrary tyrannical Government, above and beyond all Law and Justice, as he
was; and by the law of their own wills, without any due course or process of
Law, have outed diverse Freemen of England out of their liberties, properties
and free-holds; they themselves being complainents, prosecutors, parties,
witnesses, Jury and Judges, have passed most barbarous and tyrannical censures
upon them, to the apparent ruin of them and their families: Yea, and upon me
have passed so barbarous and transcendent an illegal sentence, that I am
confident the like of it in all circumstances is not to be paralleled in all
the Earl of Straffords tyranny. And Mr Speaker, let me freely tell you, that
unless this House do execute upon the present tyrannical House of Lords, or
the mischievous law and liberty destroying Ringleaders amongst them, the Earl
of Straffords punishment, for what they have already done, and for future take
care to prevent their or any others exercise of the like arbitrary and
tyrannical power again, I shall never justify you for righteous and
impartial Judges, or think that you have discharged your duty either to God or
the Commonwealth, who chose and trusted you to preserve their liberties and
freedoms, and punish those that destroy them.

The rest of my speech against the House of Lords Legislative power, being
already at large printed in the 14, 15, 16, 17, pages, of my answer of the 27
Feb. 1647. to Mr GUALTER FROSTS malicious and false declaration against me,
which I entitled, A WHIP FOR THE PRESENT HOUSE OF LORDS, OR, THE LEVELLERS
LEVELLED: to which for brevities sake, I refer the Reader, and go on to the
next thing in order (being the main thing I intend) as I upon the foresaid 19
day of January, 1647. confidently and avowedly delivered it at the Bar of the
House of Commons, which is an impeachment of Treason against Cromwell etc.
profering again and again upon my life to prove it every tittle at their Bar,
which thus follows.

And now Mr. Speaker, I must acquaint you, that there was occasion adminstred,
My charge against Cromwell, and his Son Ireton.
to talk of Lieutenant General Cromwell, and his late gross apostasy, from
patronising the peoples Liberties an Freedoms, and here Sir, it was declared
with admiration and astonishment, that Lieut: Gen: Cromwell, who was once the
glory of Englishmen, in visibly appearing for Justice and Freedom, both
against the King, the Earl of Manchester, and the whole House of Peers, etc.
and who had a principal hand in so many gallant Declarations of the Army, in
diverse of which freedom, righteousness, and Justice was published to the
whole Kingdom most gloriously, As you may clearly read in the Armies Book of
Declarations, page 8. 17 23r 25, 26. 32. 33. 35. 37. 39. 40. 41. 45, 46. 52.
58. 61, 62. 76 97. 101. 105. 110. 112. 118, 119. 132. 137. 142. 144. 150.
That this very Lieut. Genesis Cromwell (whose name for honesty once rung and
echoed throughout England) should now apostate from his former declared
gallantry and honesty, and turn his back upon his own solemn Declarations,
Remonstrances, and Engagements, and persecute with bitterness ( even to death
and bonds) righteousness, truth and justice, in all those in the Army he met
with it in (and now of late become a grand patron, protector and earnest
pleader for the preservation of all the grand corrupt and inslaving interests
in England) was a wonder and astonishment, that he that had the gloriest praise
and opportunity put into his hands, that ever God put into the hands of an
English man, to do good unto his native Country, and to settle the Laws,
Liberties, and peace thereof, in their luster and glory, should be courted out
of all his principles, protestations and engagements, by a little selfish,
glitering, worldly or corrupt honor, and to convert his power and interest to
the quite contrary, to make us slaves and vassals, was the admiration and
wonder, for all knowing, observing, and unbiased English men, and the greatest
mischief that ever befell the honest men of the Kingdom; having divided them
amongst themselves, that formerly were one, in their pursuing the firm
establishment of the Common rights and freedoms of their native Country;
diverse honest men having his person in admiration, either for advantage sake,
or former good services sake, would not see their own danger and misery, nor
willingly would suffer their friends and neighbors to see that fatal ruin and
destruction. that by his means (and HIS ALONE) was likely speedily to come
upon them, and the whole Nation; by means of which we are so divided amongst
our selves, that it was impossible, for all the professed enemies we had in
England, to have put such a mischievous division amongst us, the bitter fruits
of which we had lamentable experience of every day, in that it deprived us of
the vigorous pursuing of al effectual means to preserve and secure our selves
from that eminent ruin and destruction, that is even at our very thresholds;
And therefore it behoved us with all our might to press hard forward,
according to the marginall note of our Petition, to get our Laws so strictly
settled, as though it were impossible that ever an honest man should be borne
into the world, to be an executor or administrator of them, we having found it
too true a maxim (by experience in Lieut: Gen: CROMWELL alone) that whosoever
means to settle good Laws, must proceed in them with a sinister or evil
opinion of all mankind; and suppose (ESPECIALLY AFTER HIS GROSS APOSTASY)
that whosoever is not wicked, it is for want of opportunity; and that no State
or People can be wisely (or securely) confident of any public minister
whatsoever continuing good, longer then the rod is over his head.

And Mr Speaker, it was further declared, that though he might now seem to
face about, and to intend just and righteous things to the Kingdom, by reason
of his late forwardness in the late Votes against the King, for no more
Addresses to Him; Yet what rational man could groundlesly judge, that he
thereby intended a real good to the Kingdom? especially considering that in
the very neck of those Votes, he and his faction ( that he has at command at
the headquarters) published a Declaration to the whole Kingdom, to maintain
the House of Lords in all their tyrannical usurpations; the continuance of
whose Law-making interests, is perfect vassalage and bondage to the whole
Nation, as I have before undeniably and fully proved; or the rather, may not
any rational knowing man conclude, that Lieut: Gen: Cromwell's, and his Son
Ireton's late spite against the King, did procceed only from animositie and
revenge against the King, because he had forsaken them, and accepted of a
better bargain from the For so says Mr John Wildman in his Truths Triumph, 7.
8. and he was conversant then at the Headquarters, and knew almost all secrets,
See also his Putney projects.
Scots, who (for their preservation it may be) were not only willing to give
Him His Negative voice, and an hereafter possession of the Militia, but a
present right in it, and possession of it, the which if he enjoyed, the
Army-Grandees and their accomplices, could not reign over the people as they
intended to do, for undoubtedly, if the King would have taken, and accepted of
their conditions, and stuck close to them, and embrace no other lovers, they
would never have been so angry with Him, but withal their hearts have helped
Him to His Crown and Throne again, which is evident and clear, from Iretons
transcendent pleading for Him (and new Addresses to Him) in this House, and the
open Councels at Putney, etc. and Mr Speaker, while they accused Mr Hollis and
Sir Philip Stapleton, etc. for high Treason, for under hand tamperings with the
King; they themselves out-stript them at that very time, in that which they
declared a crime in them, for Mr Speaker, their under hand tamperings with the
King, were but petty ones to those grand ones these apostates had; for, Mr
Speaker, as I said among my friends, I do now aver at this Bar (having my
relation from so knowing good hands upon the place, that I dare engage at my
utmost peril before this House, at this Bar, to prove by exceeding good
testimony to this effect; That when the proposals of the Army had past the
great or General Council of the Army (for so themselves called it, and
therefore I will give it the same name) Commissary General Ireton declared to
diverse of the chief Officers, he would send a copy of them to the King, which
being opposed by them, he replied, that he was engaged by promise to send a
copy to the King, and therefore he would send one, though the General hanged
him for so doing. And Mr Speaker, he did send one to the King, and that by the
hands of Cromwels own Major, viz. Which Major Huntington confesses and
averreth, in the 6th and 7th pages of his printed reasons for laying down his
Commission, which by way of impeachment against Cromwell and Ireton, he
delivered into both Houses of Parliament, August 2. 1648. which because of the
pertinency of it, to prove the most of my charge against him, and because it
comes from one that then lay at his very heart, and was his choice agent and
instrument, in most of his underhand negotiations with the King, then the joy
of his heart and the delight of his eyes; I shall incert it verbatim at the
last end hereof, and entreat the judicious Reader to peruse it seriously, as as
true a piece I believe, as ever was Printed in England, and so I often declared
it to be in my thoughts, to diverse of Cromwels own friends when it was first
delivered to both Houses; though I could not join with Huntington at that time
in the prosecution of it, for Duke Hamiltons hostile invasions sake, though I
was often solicited to it by great ones, and I believe then in my lowness
might have had money enough to have done it; but I abhorred it, as Mr Cornelius
Holland with other present Parliament Men, very well knows, and also my
reasons therefore.
Major Huntington (who then was the bosom and indeared darling of both Iereton
and his Father Cromwell, and it ( viz. the Copy of the proposals) was delivered
to the Kings own hands, who read it over, and WITH HIS OWN HANDS BLOTTED AND
RASED OUT WHAT HE MOST DISLIKED, and enterlined it with His own hand in some
places, which very Copy thus curtailed and guelded, the King sent back to
Ireton, and IRETON CAVSD THIS GVELDED COPY OF THE KINGS, TO BE PRINTED TO THE
VIEW OF THE KINGDOM, AS THE ARMIES The Anatomy of which, by Mr. John Wildman,
you may fully read in Putney's Projects. page
PROPOSALS; when as indeed and in truth, Mr Speaker, they were no other, then
the Proposals of the King and himself, and therefore no wonder the King to the
Parliament so pressed to Treat upon these Proposals as He did; so that here was
once declared affection enough to the King.

But Mr. Speaker, I do further aver, and upon my life profer at your command to
produce at this Bar, a Gentleman of good quality, and of very much integrity,
and a man of much repute amongst all the honest men in the Army; who coming
from London to Westminster with me not long since, voluntary and freely told me
to this effect, w^^h avowed confidence to justify it; That Cromwels Son that
commands the Generals Lifeguard, taking notice of his averseness to his
fathers design^s, in his continual crossing him and his creatures, labored to
draw him over to a compliance with his father, telling him how great a man his
father was likely to be in the Kingdom, and thereby able to promote all those
that would comply with him; for (says he) I speak it with confidence, as a
thing already done, that the King himself, has wholly cast himself upon my
father and my brother Ireton, to make His terms for Him, and restore Him to
His Throne again: Which Major Huntington in his foresaid charge, avers to be a
truth, page 7. he himself being the King's messenger to Ireton with it, which
he delivered to him at Colebrook, who received it with joy, and returned by him
to the King this answer; that they should be the veriest knaves that ever
lived, if in every thing they should not make good whatever they had promised
to the King, because the King in not declaring against them, had given them
great advantage against their present adversaries, which was the Parliament
then sitting at Westminster.
And Mr. Speaker, I know the Gentleman that told me this, is a man of so much
gallantry, and honesty, that I am confident that he will scorn for all the
Cromwels in the world, to deny one syllable he told me; and therefore again
Mr. Speaker, I do offer upon my credit and life (if this House please) to
produce him at this Bar, and upon his oath and life to justify before you, the
effectual substance of what in this particular I have declared unto this
Honorable House.

But Mr. Speaker, whether it was the Kings forsaking of Cromwell and Ireton, and
running over to the Scots, as those that had bid most for him, (it may be)
being necessitated thereunto for their own preservation, from the fear of an
after ruin, from the King and Cromwell; if the King should come in by the
means of Cromwell, that had a powerful Army at his command, who both of them
(it may be) they thought) might be glad of a fit opportunity to chastise them,
for all their iniquities committed against them, and their afforonts put upon
them) I say, Mr. Speaker, whether it was the Kings forsaking of Cromwell, that
made him face about, and to be now of late so high against Him (for pure love
to Justice, and the universal good of his Country it could not be) or that
lost condition he might apprehend himself to be in by his apostasy, in the
affection of all his old and faithful friends (which it may be he might fear,
might produce him a great deal of danger and mischief, (especially his
perceiving the Kings staggering in his confidence of him) if not prevented by
his speedy fancig about, or at least pretending to justice and righteousness
amongst men once again:) I say, whether of these two it were, that had the
strongest impression upon him, to work so speedy a change in him, I know not.

But this, Mr Speaker, I said unto my friends, and do aver unto you, that I was
told by a very honest understanding Godly man (as I judge him) and one that is
a very great honourer and doter upon Lieutenant General Cromwell, and one that
has had many bickerings with me for contesting with him, The man is Mr. Hunt,
by name, now this present July, 1649. living in Mr. Hollands lodgings at
White Hall, and as great a creature of Lieut: Gent: Cromwels now, as ever he
was in his life; and now as intimate and familiar with him, a^ ever.
to this effect, That there was an honest, stout, gallant and godly Gentleman
of this House (for so he stil^^ him to me) and one that had been right for the
Parliament, and his Country, all along; who being lately upon very good grounds
(in his apprehension) told and informed by a Lady of quality in this Kingdom,
that a bargain was struck betwixt Lieut: Gen: Cromwell, and the King, AND THAT
CROMWELL WAS TO BE MADE EARL OF ESSEX; and since I have heard from other good
hands a confirmation of i^ AND THAT HE WAS TO HAVE BESIDES A GEORGE AND A BLEW
RIBBON, AND BE MADE A KNIGHT OF THE GARTER, etc. AND HIS OWN SON BEDCHAMBER-MAN
TO THE PRINCE, AND HIS SON IN LAW IRETON WAS EITHER TO BE LORD DEPUTY OF
IRELAND, OR AT LEAST FIELD MARSHALL GENERAL OF IRELAND: And this Member of
your House (as he told me) entering into the serious consideration of these
things, and believing they might be too true, was even confounded and amazed in
himself, that England's Liberties, and the protecters and preservers thereof,
should at once be betrayed (and as it were bought and sold (and that by
Lieutenant General CROMWELL, a quondam bosom friend; that he that sometimes had
been the glory of Englishmen (for professed honesty publicly upon the house
top) should now become the scorn and basest of his Nation, in underhand and
under-board (while he pretended friendship to honest Englishmen and their
liberties) to stab them to the heart, by betraying them to the King; against
whom, for the preservation of them, they had been fighting all this while, was
that, Mr Speaker, that confounded and amazed the gallant Gentleman, to think
with himself, that if this underhand bargain betwixt the King and Cromwell
should be true (for it seems he believed it was) all the honest men in England
(that in the integrity of their hearts had adhered to the Parliament, and
vigorously acted against the King) where destroyed and undone, and the
liberties of England now in a worse condition, then they were before any of
this late blood shed for them; for by this bargain, if the King were restored
upon it, he would have the interest and power of the Army at his beck and
command (besides his own party) by means of which, he would be enabled to cut
off the head of every honest gallant English man in England, that he had a mind
to destroy, and for ever to subdue their laws and liberties, and make the
survivers perfect vassals and slaves: The serious consideration of which, with
a hot burning zealous indignation, so fired his soul, and elevated his spirit,
that he by an unresistable force concluded, that necessarily one man must
perish to save the whole Nation; and therefore resolved with himself, that he
would be the man that would play the part of a second FELTON, was by an inward
compulsion, resolved to go to Windsor (then the head Quarters) and wherever he
met Lieutenant General Cromwell (either with his pistol or dagger) to dispatch
him, as a desperate apostatized Traitor to the liberties of his Country, though
he were destroyed when he had so done: And truly, Mr Speaker, as I understand,
this had been vigorously attempted by him, if he had not revealed his intention
to a Friend of his, another Member of this House, who stopped him, by force, in
a Chamber atWhite-hall: And this Gentleman that told me the story, speedily
hearing of it, wrote a large and pithy Letter to the Lieutenant General, of
almost a sheet of paper; wherein (to my understanding) he acquitted himself,
not only as a Christian, but also as a faithful English man; for, Mr Speaker,
he came to my lodging in Then at the Sarazens head in Friday street, with Mr
John Wildman, my then bosom Friend, and zealous and bold asserter of Englands
freedoms: though now he has not only lost all his seal, but I am afraid, his
honesty, and his principles, and is closed with familiarity and design with
Cromwell, although no man in England knows his knavery better then he.
London, and told me the effectual substance of this story, and read unto me
the copy of his large Letter, and took the opportunity thereof, to press me to
a patient expectation of the issues of things, and to moderate my heat against
the Lieutenant General, for he was confident there would be in him a speedy
visible change, and he hoped it would be for the good of the Kingdom; the fruit
of which he doubted not but I in my particular, might come speedily to reap:
And truly, Mr Speaker, I have perceived a kind of a change in Lieutenant
General Cromwels visible actions ever since: but I wish my understanding could
be groundedly satisfied, it were upon real and just principles, viz. for the
good of the Commonwealth: And now, Mr Speaker, if the House do question the
truth of this relation, I do believe, within a little time, I shall be able to
procure a copy of the Letter; but if I cannot do that now, I will engage my
credit and life, to produce my Author at this Bar; who, I am confident, has so
much honesty in him, that he will not deny the truth of what he told me. But
truly, Mr Speaker, as for the Gentleman's name of this House, that should have
been the Second FELTON, I was not told it; though I confess, so many
circumstances were hinted to me, that I believe at the first guess I could
name him, but I cease that now.

And desire further to acquaint this House, that for all the late seeming
changes in Lieutenant General Cromwell, I pressed them, they should not be too
credulous in believing him, till they see him to be an active instrument,
really and effectually to do some transcendent thing, that was for the
universal good of all the Commons of England, which I could not fully
apprehend in these late Votes of Non-Addresses, simply in themselves
considered; for as yet I could see nothing further in them, then a kind of
revenge, to pull down the King (because he had withdrawn his affections from
them, and at present given them to the Scots) by means of which, they were
deprived of their large hopes of rule and domination over the people under him,
their sole and only true end enclosing with him; and therefore were now
necessitated, for the obtaining the declared ultimate of their desires, viz.
the setting up themselves, to pull down him: And if in there Votes they had
intended real good unto the generality of the people, they would have with
them, instated them in the possession of some just and gallant freedoms and
privileges, worth their engaging again with and for the Parliament, in a new
War; and so to have made them in love with the House, for their justice and
goodness, handed out unto them; that their lives, nor estates, might not have
been dear to them, but with willingness they might have freely adventured all
they had, in opposing those that opposed them.

Whereas now with these Votes, they had nothing that was of general good
holden out unto them, but the likely hood of a new War, in provoking afresh, to
the highest, all the Kings party, the Scotch, and the Zealots amongst the
Presbyters; yea, and so passing their Votes, that in themselves rightly
considered, they signified nothing; for if the Parliament faced back again, and
un-voted them the next Week, as it is possible they might, these Votes were but
a snare, to hazard the future destruction of those men, that at present should
rejoice at them, and in them: And, Mr Speaker, they were desired to consider,
that if we implicitly, and hand over head, without first groundedly knowing
what should be the prize of all our hazards and blood, should again engage
against the King, and also against the Scots (who had declared so much enmity,
as to root up by the roots, all that would not concur to their every thing and
nothing Presbytery, under the names of Heretics and Sectaries) who were now
likely, upon the Kings interest, to invade the Kingdom: what should we get by
it? It Is true, we might be the occasion of shedding much blood, but in the
conclusion it was possible our own might be shed: But suppose we were
Conquerours, and the Army by our means did overcome the Scots: what better were
we then? nay, were we not worse then, then now we are? and more likely to be
made slaves, then now we are? For seeing the Grandees in the Army and
Parliament, have declared so much bitterness and enmity of spirit against all
those principles of righteousness and justice, that we have promoted and
proposed; without the firm establishment of which, it is impossible for us ever
to be any other then vassals; and those that rule over us, perfect Tyrants: and
if implicitly we should help them to subdue the Scots, we should but thereby
the more easily enable them to make the more perfect slaves of us, when we had:
whom we might easily see (by their malicious and bloody prosecuting of our late
Friends in the Army) did not anew begin to court us, out of any love to us, or
out of any free disposition to do us or the Kingdoms good, but merely because
they had need of us, and did not well know how to go through their work, at
present, Which I have undeniably proved, in my late Book, of the 8 June, 1649.
page 34, 35, 36, 37, 38. to be their only design in all their courting of us in
the day of their distress, and that there is no more truth in the promises,
and engagements they then made, then in the Devils; who I will never hereafter
believe, in whatsoever they say, or swear.
without us.

For truly, Mr Speaker, as I told my Friends, I was afraid that the interest of
the generality of the Officers, in the Army, but especially the Grandees, was
not peace, righteousness, justice and freedom, but wars, fightings and Which
is fully witnessed for a truth, by Major Huntington (Cromwels quondam darling)
in the 11 page of his foresaid charge; where he declares Cromwels great
rejoicing after his first breaking of the Parliament, and getting the remaining
part to own the Army, and settle pay upon them: Now, says Cromwell, we may, for
ought I know, be an Army so long as we live; and that he was as able to govern
the Kingdom, as either Stapleton, or Hollis, etc. which he declares to be the
principal thing, in all his contests with the Parliament, he sought after.
catchings; and without the continuance of which. I conceived they could not
continue their pride and tyrannical domination over their Soldiers, and the
rest of the people of the Kingdom (and absolutely I conceive their interest to
be war) But it was our interest, and the generality of the people of the
Kingdom, to prevent wars, if it were possible. But if we must engage in war
again, it was our interest and wisdom, so to engage, if it were possible, as
that merely as English men, we might be unanimous in our engagements, either
against the Scots, or any other interests whatsoever, that would rob us of our
English liberties and freedoms: And, Mr Speaker, I told them both these things
were contained in the Petition: For First, if those things were granted unto
us, that were desired in the Petition, it was impossible for us to conceive of
any thing else: the want of which, is worth the going to war for: And if the
Petition were vigorously promoted, and pursued to the House, without all
controversy it has such excellent things in it, so good in themselves; for all
sorts and kinds of English men, that if the House and the people should be
united in those gallant, just and rational things, the general heart-burnings
of the Kingdom would be alaied; and confidence in love and respect to each
other, would be raised up amongst us; and our union of hearts thereby each to
other, as Englishmen, would be as a wall of brass, for securing the common
interest of our Nation: So that neither Scotchman, nor any foreign power in
Europe, durst to invade us: so that in the vigorous prosecuting of this
Petition, union and love would be increased, and war prevented thereby: whereas
nothing in the world will occasion wars so much, as our disunion and
heart-burnings each at other: which is impossible ever to be alaied, but either
by the active prosecuting of this Petition, or something like it; that so
something that is good for all men, as Englishmen, might be settled:

But in the second place, if we could not be so speedy in the prosecution of
this Petition, so as to get those universal good and just things, therein
contained, settled, before the Scots begun to Invade us; yet if upon their march
we should enjoy the possession of them, it would make the generality of
Englishmen stand together as one man; and all of them in the spirit, and with
the principles of Englishmen, oppose them: so that the War (if it must be)
would be carried on with that vigor and strength, that it were impossible, for
all the power in Scotland, if they did the worst they could to destroy our
Nation.

Whereas now in our divided condition, they will be sure if they come in, to
make a prey of us; for in their coming in, they declare for the King's
Interest; which absolutely unites and knits their own Kingdom as one man
against us; and glues unto them in England, all the Kings party, and of
necessity the Presbyters must join with their Masters of the Covenant; and
risings there will be of necessity, and without all peradventure, all over the
Kingdom: and if the Army be united within themselves (as it is a very great
question whether they be or no) and were able to deal and grabble with all
that opposition it is like to meet with, from those several parties and
interests, that here are like to rise up against it; yet truly Mr Speaker,
though I do not like the late apostatized actions of the great men in the Army,
I do as little like the Scotch high flown expressions, to instate the King
absolutely into the Militia as His right, and His absolute Negative Voice: And
indeed Mr Speaker, it sounds not well nor justly in my ears, for the Scots, who
are and will be free men at home, and will neither (as I am told) allow the
King the exercise of the Militia in their Kingdom, nor His Negative Voice, no
nor yet the benefit of His Revenue; that they should notwithstanding all this,
go about to make us all slaves, by fettering us with His mischievous Negative
Voice, and His absolute exercise of our Militia, which seems to me to be
nothing less, then a desire to pick a quarrel with us, that so, Mr Speaker,
they might come in again for some more of our guids; therefore Mr Speaker, I
cry out for union and peace upon just principles: For the very beginnings of
War again amongst us, would presently destroy that little Trade that is left,
and then undoubtedly comes in famine, which is already at our very doors; for
Mr Speaker, they were told a story to this effect, That some Wilke-shire
Cloathiers, coming to the Sarazens head in Friday-street, had for a truth
reported to the Master of the house, that Trading was already so decayed in
their Country, that that Cloathier that used to set an hundred poor people at
work, could now scarce set twelve; insomuch, that the poor peoples necessities
were grown so great in that Country, that they already begin in companies of
six, ten, 12. 20, etc. to meet together in the Market Roads, and to take away
the Country-mens Corn, as they carried it to sell at the Market, and before
their faces to divide it amongst themselves, but give them their Horses and
Sacks again; and withal tell them, that mere hunger forced and necessitated
them to do what they did.

And truly Mr Speaker, things are like shortly to be as bad at London, for
want of Trade; for I have heard such grievous complaints from two sorts of
people especially, that it would pity any man's heart (that has the heart of a
man) to hear of the wants and necessities of diverse families amongst them, that
formerly had lived in good fashion; and they are the Weavers and Cloathworkers;
and as for the Weavers, their Trade consisting principally in Ribbons and
Laces; but superfluities in such things being laid aside, their Trade was
grown exceeding dead, and many hundreds of their families fallen into great
miseries and wants, by reason that the most part of that little remaining part
of their Trade that is left them, is taken from them by French men, Walloons,
etc. and that which adds unto their misery, Mr Speaker, is this; That the Lord
Major and Court of Aldermen, do put in execution of late A MOST WICKED, ILLEGAL
Order, or Ordinance, of their own making, by reason of which, their
Catchpoles, seize upon the goods of the said poor Freemen of London, and beat
and wound them, yea, and have committed murder upon some of them, if they come
to any Innes, etc. and offer to sell their goods to any but Shopkeepers, who
will give them but what they please for them; so that the poor Weavers, though
Freemen of London, are not only in miserable poverty, but in the miserablest
slavery (in the City where they by name are Freemen) that it is possible for
men to be in, and to bear it with patience.

And Mr Speaker, the poor Cloathworkers, who by the express Statute Law of the
Kingdom, ought to dress one white cloth in ever ten, The Statute of 8 Eliz.
Chap. 6.
that the Merchant, Patentee Monopolizers, commonly called the Merchant
Adventurers, sends into the Low Countries, and Denmark; but now by reason that
the chiefest of that Law, Liberty and Trade-destroying Monopoly, are
Commissioners of the Custom House, which in justice, equity and reason, no
Trading Merchants whatever, never ought to be, they are deprived of their right
in that particular, and crushed in pieces with potency, and great purses;
whereas, in the time of so exceeding great decay of Trade, it were more just
and necessary to enable them to dress the other nine, to set their poor
families at work, many of which are ready to starve, then to take one piece of
the tenth Cloth from them.

Mr. Speaker, All these things, with many more that then were minded,
represented the miseries of this Kingdom very sad and great, and made the
present Speaker there conclude, That if War did come amongst us, of necessity
Famine would follow, and that would occasion all the poor people all over
England to rise confusedly in hurly burly, and to cut the throats of their rich
neighbors, to get their riches to buy them bread to keep them alive: and
whether or no they might not as soon fall upon us, that they looked upon as
Roundheads, Independent, Sectaries, etc. and so destroy us for our cordial and
faithful adherence to the Parliament, whom now the most of them looked upon as
those that had brought all their evils and miseries upon them. From all which
considerations, it was (Mr. Speaker) with earnestness pressed vigorously to
promote this Petition all over the Kingdom, as the only means to heal and cure
all our diseases and maladies, the things therein contained being so just in
themselves, that none but those that desired to be absolute Tyrants, could
speak against them: the obtaining of which would settle peace and quietness
amongst us, and so cause Trade again to flourish. And Mr. Speaker, to press
this nail home to the head, I do confess that I further added, that if such a
general confusion (as before is spoken of) should arise, it would then (I was
confident of it) be greater security from the rage of the rude multitude, to be
known to be a vigorous prosecutor of this gallant, just and righteous Petition,
(that did as much concern their good as our own) then to wear a blue Ribbon in
our hats. And truly, Mr. Speaker, I may now with my pen add this, That blue
Ribbons being Sir Thomas Fairfax his Colors, who now with his Army are the
grand and strong protection of all those that march under his Colors, under
which whosoever shall come, may probably think to have safety; yet I was of
opinion, and still am, That public knowledge of a vigorous and strong acting
in so transcendent, gallant and just a Petition as this is, in the day of a
feared universal storm in England, will be of greater security and protection,
then to be one of Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army, and to wear his Colors of blue
Ribbons in his hat: for the Kingdom generally look upon the Soldiers now as
their oppressors, and destroyers of their Laws, Liberties and Properties: but
the promoters and procurers of the just things contained in this Petition,
cannot choose but be looked on by them as the repairers of their breaches, and
the restorers of their Laws and Liberties.

Mr. Speaker, When we were coming away, there was one of the company said, That
he heard a rumor abroad, as if the Lords had offered me a large sum of money
so I would desist from prosecuting this large Petition; he therefore desired me
to give him a true account, whether this report were true or no.

Unto which I answered to this effect, That it was not true; but it was
possible it might arise from the report of some Messages I lately had received
from the Lord WHARTON: And Mr. Speaker, for that particular, I told him to this
effect, That not long since, there came a Gentleman of some quality (and a man
I look upon as an ingenuous man) to my lodging in London, and told me before
two other Gentlemen (friends of mine) to this effect, That my Lord Wharton
remembered his respect unto me, who (he told me, he was very confident) was my
very good friend, and would willingly serve me (and that he did believe,
cordially) in any thing that lay within his power; and who, as he told me, did
very much consider my long suffering condition, by reason of which he did
believe money was not very plentiful with me, and therefore he was come from
him to let me know, that he has in readiness a very considerable token for
me, which he would send me, if he thought it would not be scorned, but accepted
in love and respect.

Unto which (after a little pause) I answered to this effect, That I desired
him to present my service to his Lordship, and from me to thank him for his
civility and courtesy toward me; But f^r me to receive his money, I could not
in the least do it: because for me who professed ingenuity, and abhorred
ingratitude (as a most dishonorable thing in any man whatsoever) to receive
his money, it must needs to me become an obliging engagement, and tie me one
way or another to study how to requite it, which truly I told him, to his
Lordship, (as he was now a Patentee prerogative Lord, and exercised a
Legislative and arbitrary power by virtue thereof, which I looked upon as
altogether destructive to the very being of the Liberties and Freedoms of the
Commons of England) I could not in the least do it: but was absolutely resolved
to profess open War with his arbitrary Prerogative-Lordship as long as I had
breath in my body, and never to be reconciled unto it: And therefore in short,
tell his Lordship from me, that if I were in such great straits, that I had not
one penny in all the world (nor knew not where to borrow it) to buy me, my
Wife, and Children bread to save us alive, and if in this great strait, his
Lordship as he now is, should send me ten thousand pounds in gold, I would
scorn to accept, or let my fingers so much as touch one piece of it; or that
any that belonged to me, with my consent should do it for me.

But I desired him to tell his Lordship from me, that if he pleased to throw
away his arbitrary, tyrannical pattentee, Lordly power, (which was, and would
be the ruin of this Kingdom) and would put himself upon the affection of his
Country, to be chosen a Knight of a Shire, as a well-deserving Englishman, I
should then honor him, and be willing and ready to accept of the meanest token
that he should send me, though it were but Five shillings, and judge my self
obliged to serve him, and should readily do it, yea, in preserving his real
propriety in his great estate unviolably; yea, and the title of his Honor,
hereditary to his posterity for ever. And as I told my friend, Mr. Speaker, the
Report might arise from this, which relation is true, and has not been
delivered to me once, nor twice, but oftener. But Mr. SPEAKER, I shall acquaint
you further, that I in part acquainted my friend, how ingenuously I had dealt
not only with my Lord WHARTON, but the whole House of Peers; in that I obeyed
their first Warrant they sent to me to come to their Bar, the 10th. June,
1646. and immediately as soon as I was served with it, being about six a clock
on the next morning at my own house, (and I was to appear before them at Ten
the same morning) I went immediately to my Lord Whartons house; and he being
not stirring, I desired his servant to tell his Lordship what had happened; and
that in regard I was obliged to their House, for the late Justice they had done
for me about my reparations against the Star Chamber Judges, BEING OLD SIR
HENRY VANE, etc. I was resolved for ingenuity and gratitudes sake, to veil my
Bonnet to them, as far as with honesty and a good conscience I could; And
therefore it was that I had obeyed their Warrant, and promised to appear at
their Bar; which, as I sent him word, was more then by Law I was bound unto:
but yet when I came there, I was resolved at their Bar, to protest against
their jurisdiction over a Commoner; but I could do no less then acquaint his
Lordship with it beforehand, that so if he pleased to save and preserve the
honor of their House, he might; if not, I would do it, if I dyed for it: And
if his Lordship pleased, I would meet him at the stroke of Nine a clock at COL.
FLEETWOODS in black Friars, to talk with him further about it, where he
appointed to meet me; and away went I, to a friend, and drew up my
Protestation, leaving him one copy to print in case I were imprisoned, and I
took another, with my hand and seal to it; and accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I met
my Lord at Col. Fleetwoods house, who as I remember, was gone abroad, whereupon
I walked with my Lord to the Blackfriars bridge, where we had a large discourse
about the Lords original jurisdiction over Commoners; and I showed him my
protestation, the marrow of which he read; and I earnestly entreated him that
he would be pleased to speak to the EARL OF ESSEX AND WARWICK, AND MY LORD
ROBERTS, who was the principal man that had done all my business for me, and
tell them from me, I bore so much honorable respect unto them, and their
House, that if they pleased to command me to wait upon them, I would; and upon
all the rest of the Lords in the house, and freely answer them to any questions
that they in honor could demand of me, and I in conscience return an answer
to, always provided they talked not with me as a House, nor a Committee from
their House, for having been fighting for my Liberties and Freedoms, I
protested unto his Lordship before the God of Heaven and Earth, (and so I
wished him to tell them) that if they forced me to their Bar, I both must and
would protest against their incroachment upon the Commoners Rights, and appeal
for justice against them to the House of Commons, although I died for it
immediately: And his Lordship told me, he believed the House of Commons would
not stand by me: and I answered, I was confident they would, for it was their
own Interest; but if they would not, I told his Lordship, now I knew my
Liberties, I would never betray them while I breathed. And this, my Lord, I
tell you further, and do profess it before Almighty God, that if your House
will not be ruled by reason, but by their greatness think to crush me, and by
force engage me in a contest against you, I so well understand the firmness of
the grounds upon which I go, that I will venture my heart blood against you,
and never make peace with you, till either you have destroyed me, or I have
p^ucked you or your Usurpations up by the roots. So away he went, and kept it
off till about one of the clock. And, Mr. Speaker, when I was called in to
their Bar, in going in I put no affront upon them, but went bare-head, and gave
them three or four conges (with all respect) before I came to their Bar: where
they fell a playing the High Commission Court with me, in examining me upon
Interrogatories against my self; which forced me to deliver in my Protest
against them; so that, Mr. Speaker, I am sure I picked no quarrel (nor sought
any) with them. But now, Mr. Speaker, being so deeply engaged against them by
their own folly as I am, for the preservation of the Laws and Liberties of my
native Country, against their trampling them under their feet, in the enjoyment
or practice of their usurpations, I will never make peace with them while I
live, but study night and day how to pluck them up by the roots; which I am
confident, Mr. Speaker, is also the duty of this House, if they will rightly
and truly discharge their duty to the Kingdom, according to that trust they
have reposed in them.

The Reader may be pleased to take notice that at the Bar when I was speaking
of writing of Letters, I took notice of one of the priests positive Charges,
which was that I had writ a Letter to Sir Anthony Weldon of Kent: which I told
M. Speaker was the absolutest lie in the world, for I never had a hand in the
least in writing or indicting a Letter to Sir Ant. Weldon, neither did I read
or heard read any Letter unto him; But M. Speaker said I, there is well nigh
forty lies more as palpable ones as this in his Relation, which I dare with
confidence aver it at this bar, if I had in writing verbatim the very relation
that he has now made before this House by word of mouth, (for all his
confidence) that I could by multitude of witnesses of upright life and
conversation in all their conversings with their neighbors, and of untainted
fidelity to the Parliament and the common interest of the Kingdom in the worst
of times, punctually prove the greatest port of forty absolute lies and
falshoeds, in his present confident relation; and for his averring that I said
or it was said at the meeting that we would only make use of the Parliaments
name, and of our Petition to them, for a cloak to color our raising of the
people til we were strong enough to destroy them; M. Speaker, I aver it with
confidence upon my life there was no such thing spoken at all in the foresaid
meeting, or any thing so much as tending thereunto all the time I was there,
but the absolute quite contrary; the truth of which I am confident will if need
require, be averred upon Oath by the generality of the whole Company then met
together.

And therefore Master Speaker I shall draw toward a conclusion; but being that
which followed is printed at large in the 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, etc. pages of the
forementioned Book Calleda Whip for the present House of Lords, I for brevities
sake shall here pass it over and refer the Reader if he pleases to the
perusing of it there, where also he will find I was like to be murdered at the
House door by their Guard, because I would not go to prison but by virtue of a
Warrant made according to that form the law requires all Mittimusses to be;
but being overpoured with drawn Swords and bent Muskets, I was forced to the
Tower as a pretended Traitor; And therefore to record to posterity the
desp^rate and inveterate malice and hatred of Cromwell and his associats against
the Liberties and freedoms of England who to the breadth of an hair are like
those wicked men in Christ's time unto whom in Mat. 23 13. he thus speaks: But
woe unto Scribes and Pharisees Hypocrites, for ye shut up the Kingdom of Heaven
against men, for ye neither go in you selves, neither suffer ye them that are
entering to go in; Even so traitorous, bloody and ambitious Cromwell and his
wicked associats will neither do good themselves in settling the Liberties of
England nor suffer those that would to do it, therefore woe unto them
hypocrites and painted Sepulchers, who for all their fair pretenses hate the
Liberties of England more then they do the Devil, and rather then the people
shall enjoy any real good for all the cost and hazards in seven years wars
for their Liberties and Freedoms, and so rid themselves of their Lordly and
tyrannical yoaks, they will shake Kingdoms and Nations, and hazard all yea
their own lives by dint of Sword in new and bloody Wars, rather then the people
shall enjoy their Liberties, or those without an imprisonment for Traitors that
fairly and justly prosecute them; the last war in this Nation and all the
innocent blood shed therein, lying principally upon Cromwell and Iretons s^^re,
for breaking all their faith, promises and engagements made unto the Kingdom
for their glorious s^tling of their Liberties which they not only failed in but
begun to set up a selfish and Tyrannical Interest of their own, and persecuted
unto death and bonds the zealous sticklers for the peoples welfare, liberties
and freedoms, which begot heart burnings and divisions, and thereby put the
people into fury and madness, which brought in an inundation of bloodshed. For
the demonstrating this in part take here.

A Copy of the Petition (for promoting of which M. John Wildman and I were
imprisoned a matter of seven months as Traitors, which thus follows.

To the Supreme Authority of England, the Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT. The
earnest Petition of many Free-people of this Nation.
SHOWS,
THat the devouring fire of the Lords wrath, has burnt in the Bowels of this
miserable Nation, until its almost consumed.

That upon a due search into the causes of Gods heavy judgments, we find
Ezekiel. 24.6.8.9.10. Amos 5 9, 10, 11, 12. Mic. 2.2, 3. and 3.3.4, 9, 10, 11, 12.
Nahum 3 1.2.19. Hab. 1.3.4, 6. and 2.8.11, 12 17. Joe 3.6, 7 8.
that injustice and oppression, have been the common National sins, for
which the Lord has threatened woes, confusions and desolations, unto any people
or nation; Woe (says God) unto the oppressing City, Zeph. 3.1.

That when the King had opened the by Ship-mony, Loane-mony, Coat and conduct
money, Patents Monopolies, etc.
Floodgates of injustice and oppression See the Remonstrance of the State of
the Kingdom December 1641. p. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15
upon the people, and yet peremptorily declared, that the People, who trusted
him for their good, could not in, or by their Parliament require any account of
the discharge of his trust; and when by a pretended negative voice See the
Kings Answer to the Petition of Right, and also the Parlia. Remon. of May 19.
1642. 1 part Book Dec. page 254 284, 285. See the Kings Answer to the Par. Dec.
of May 26. 1642. p. 298.
to Laws, he would not suffer the strength of the Kingdom, the Militia, to be
so disposed of, that oppression might be safely remedied, and oppressors
brough to condign punishment, but raised See the Ord. for Militia. 1641. 1
Book Dec. p. 89. 105. 106. 114, 126. 175, 176. 182. 243. 283, 292.
a War See the Par. Votes May 20. 1642. 1 part Book Dec. 259 See also p. 465.
509 576. 580. 584. 617, 618.
to protect the Subverters of our Laws and Liberties, and maintain Himself, to
be subject to no account, even to such opp^essions, and pursuing after an
oppressive power, the Judge o^ the earth, with whom the Throne of iniquity can
have no fellowship, has brough him low and executed fierce wrath upon many of
his adherents

That God expects justice from those before whose eyes he has destroyed an
unjust generation, Zeph. 3 6, 7. and without doing justly, and relieving the
oppressed, God abhor fastings and prayers, and accounts himself mocked, Pro.
15.8 Isa. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 16, 17. and 29.13, 14. and 58.41 5, 6 7. and
66.2, 3. Jer. 6.19, 20. and 7 9, 10, 11, 14. Amos 5.6, 7.15.21, 22, 23. Mich.
6.6, 7, 8.

That our eyes fall with looking to see the foundations of our Freedom and
peace secured by this Honorable H^^^e, and yet we are made to depend upon the
Will of the King, and the Lords, which were never chosen or betrusted by the
People, to redress their grievances. And this Honorable House, which formerly
declared that they were the Representatives of all England, and be trusted with
our estates, liberties and lives, 1 part Book of Decla. 264. 382. do now
declare by their practice, that they will not redress our grievances, and
settle our freedoms, unless the King and the Lords will.

That in case you should thus proceed, Parliaments will be rendered wholly
useless to the People, and their happiness left to depend solely upon the
will of the King, and such as he by his Pa^ents creat^ Lords; and so the
invaluable price of all the precious English blood, spilt in the defense of our
freedoms against the King, shall be imbezelled, or lost; and certainly, God the
avenger of blood, will require it of the obstructors of justice and freedom,
Judges 9 23.

That though our Petitions have been burned, and our persons imprisoned,
reviled, abused, only for petitioning, yet we cannot despair absolutely of all
bowels of Compassion in this Honorable House to an enslaved perishing people.
We will nourish some hopes that you will at last consider our Estates are
expended, the whole trade of the Nation decayed, thousands of families
impoverished, and merciless Famine is entering into our gates, and therefore we
cannot, but once more essay to pierce your ears with our doleful cries for
Justice and Freedom, before your delays wholly consume the Nation. In
particular, we earnestly entreat;

First that seeing we conceive this Honorable House entrusted by the People,
with all power to redress our grievances, and to provide security for our
Freedoms, by making or repealing laws, Erecting or abolishing Courts,
displacing or placine Officers, and the like; and seeing upon this
consideration, we have often made our addresses to you; and yet we are to
depend for all our expected good, upon the wills of others, who have brought
all our misery See the Kings Deccla. of the 12 of Aug 1642. 1 part Book Dec. p.
522. 526 528 548. and p. 617. 726, 728.
upon us: that therefore in case this Honorable House will not, or cannot
according to their trust, relieve and help us, that it be clearly declared;
that we may know to whom as the Supreme power, we may make our present
addresses before weperish, or be enforced to fly to the Prime Laws of nature
See 1 part book Dec. p. 44, 150. 182. 426. 637. 690.
for refuge.

2. That as we conceive all Governors and Magistrates being the Ordinance See
Col. Nath. Fienne's his Speech against the Bishops Canons, made in 1640, in a
book called Speeches and Passages of Parl. from 3. November. 1640. to June 1641.
p. 50 51. 52.
of men, before they be the Ordinance of God; and no authority being of God
approbationally, but what is erected by the mutual consent of a People; and
seeing this Honorable House alone represent or ought to represent the people of
this Nation; that therefore no person whatsoever be permitted to exercise any
power or authority in this Nation, who shall not clearly and confessedly
receive his power from this House, and be always accountable for the discharge
of his trust, to the people in their representers in Parliament; or otherwise,
that it be declared who they are which assume to themselves a Power according
to their own wills, and not received as a trust from the People, that we may
know to whose Wills we must be subject, and under whom we must suffer such
oppressions as they please, without a possibility of Justice against them.

3. That considering, that all just power and Authority in this Nation, which
is not immediately derived from the people, can be derived only from this
honorable House; and that the People are perpetually subject to Tyranny, when
the Jurisdiction of Courts, and the power and Authority of Officers are not
clearly described, and their bounds and limits See your Remonstance of the
State of the Kingdom, book Dec. p. 6. 8 15. See also the act made this
Parliament, that abolished the Star Chamber and High Commission.
prefixed: That therefore the Jurisdiction of every Court of Judicature, and
the power of every Officer or Minister of Justice, with their bounds and
limits, be forthwith declared by this Honorable House, and that it be enacted,
that the Judges of every Court, which shall exceed its jurisdiction, and every
other Officer or Minister of Justice, which shall intermeddle with matters not
coming under his Cognizance, shall incur the forfeiture of his and their whole
estates: and likewise, That all unnecessary Courts may be forthwith abolished;
and that the public Treasury, out of which the Officers solely ought to be
maintained, See the statute of Westminst. 1. made 3 Ed. 1 chap. 26. and 20 Ed.
3.1. and the Judges Oath made in the 18. of Ed. 3. Ann. 1334. recorded in
Pul^ons collections of Statutes, fol. 144.
may be put to the less charge.

4. That whereas there are multitudes of complaints of Oppression by Committees
of this House, determining particular matters, which properly appertains to the
cognizance of the Ordinary Courts See the 29. c. of Mag. Charta, and Sir Ed.
Cooks Exposition upon it in his 2 part Instit. f. 46. to 57. and the Petit. of
Right.
of Justice; and whereas many persons of faithful and public spirits have
been and are daily molested, vexed, imprisoned by such Committees, sometimes
for not answering Interrogatories, and sometimes for other matters, which are
not in Law criminal; and also without any legal Warrants expressing the cause,
and commanding the Jailer safely to keep their bodies until they be delivered
by due course See the Petition of Right made in the 3 of the King, and Sir
Edward Cooks 2 part Institutes. f. 52. 53. 315. 589. 590. 591. 615. 616. and
661.
of Law: And by these oppressions the persons and estates of many are wasted
and destroyed; That therefore henceforth no particular cause, whether criminal
or other, which comes under the cognizance of the Ordinary Courts of Justice,
may be determined by this House, or any Commit thereof, or any other then by
those Courts whose duty it is to execute such Laws as this Honorable House
shall make, and who are to be censured by this House in case of injustice:
Always ex^epted, matters relating to the late War, for indemnity for our
assisters; and the exact observation of all Articles granted to the adverse See
Psa: 15.4. Exodus 5.3. Deu. 23.21.22. 2 Samuel 21.5, 6. Eccl: 5.4, 5.
Party; and that henceforth no person be molested or imprisoned by the will or
arbitrary powers of any or for such matters as are not crimes See Romans 4.15
according to Law. And that all persons imprisoned at present for any such
matters, or without such legal Warrants as abovesaid, upon what pretense, or
by what Authority soever may be forthwith released, with due reparations. See
the Armies Book ofDeclar. page 11 31. 32. 33. 34 45. 97.

5. That considering its a Badge of our sl^very to a Norman Conqueror, to have
our Laws in the French Tongue; and it is little less then brutish vassalage to
be bound to walk by Laws which the people See 36. E. 3. 15 and 1 Cor. 14.7, 8,
11, 16, 19, 23. See also the English Chronicles, in the Reign of Will. conqueror
cannot know, that therefore all the Laws and Customs of this Realm be
immediately written in our Mother Tongue See Exo 24.7. and 31.18. and chap. 34.
and Deuteronomy. 30.12, 13, 14. and 5.1, 5, 24, 27, 31. and 6.1, 6, 7, 8. and 9.10.
and 11.18, 19.20. and 27.8.
without any abbreviations of words, and in the most known vulgar hand, viz.
Roman or Secretary; and that Writs, Processes, and Enrolments be issued forth,
entered, or enrolled in English, and such manner of writing as aforesaid.

6. That seeing in Magna Charta, which is our native Right, it is pronounced in
the name of all Courts, That we will sell to no man, we will not deny, or defer
to do any man either Justice or Right: notwithstanding we can obtain no
Justice, or Right, neither from the common ordinary Courts, or Judges, nor yet
from your own Committees, though it be in case of indemnity for serving you,
without paying a dear price for it; that therefore our native See Sir Edward
Cook in his 1 part. Inst. l. 3. c. 13. Sect. 701. fol 368. Where he positively
declares it was the native and ancient rights of all Englishmen, both by the
Statutes and common Law of England, to pay no Fees at all to any administrators
of Justice whatsoever. See also 2 part Inst. f. 74, 176, 209, 210, and 176. And
he there gives this reason why Judges should take no Fees of any man for doing
his Office, because he should be free and at liberty to do justice, and not to
be fettred with golden Fees, as setters to the subversion or suppression of
truth and Justice.
Right be restored to us, which is now also the price of our blood; that in any
Court whatsoever, no moneys be extorted from us, under pretense of Fees to the
Officers of the Courts or otherwise; And that for this end sufficient salaries
or pensions be allowed to the Judges, and Officers of Courts, as was of old out
of the common Treasury, that they may maintain their Clerks and servants, and
keep their Oaths uprightly, wherein they swear to take no Money or clothes, or
other Rewards, except meat and drink in a small quantity, besides what is
allowed them by the King: and this we may with the more confidence claim as our
Right, seeing this honorable House has declared, in case of Ship Money, and in
the case of the Bishops Canons, that not one penny by any power whatsoever,
could be levied upon the people, without common consent in Parliament, and sure
we are that the Fees now exacted by Judges and Clerks, and Jaylors, and all
kind of Ministers of Justice, are not settled upon them by Act of Parliament,
and therefore by your own declared principles, destructive to our property; See
the Articles of high Treason in our Chronicles against Judge Tresilian, in
Richard the seconds time; and the judgment of Justice Thorpe for taking money
in Edward the Third^ time, 3 part Cooks Instit. fol. 145, 146, 147: 163: 164:
165.
therefore we desire it may be enacted to be death for any Judge, Officer, or
minister of Justice, from the highest to the lowest, to exact the least moneys,
or the worth of moneys, from any person whatsoever, more then his pension or
salary, allowed from the common Treasury. And that no Judge of any Court may
continue above three years.

7. That whereas according to your own complaint in your first Remonstrance of
the Sea 1 part Book Dec. p. 9
state of the Kingdom, occasion is given to bribery, extortion, and
partiallity, by reason that Judicial places, and other Offices of power and
Trust are sold and bought; that therefore for prevention of all injustice, it
be forthwith Enacted, to be death for any person or persons whatsoever,
directly or indirectly, to bay, or sell, or offer or receive moneys or rewards,
to procure for themselves or others any Office of power or Trust whatsoever:
See for this purpose 12 R 2. c. 2. and 5. and 6 Ed 6. c. 16. and 1 part Cooks
Institutes, fol. 3^6. and fol. 233 b. and 234 a.

8. Whereas according to Justice and the equitable sense of the Law, Goals, and
Prisons ought to be only used as places of safe custody, until the constant
appointed time of speedy trials See Sir Ed. Cook 1 part Instit. l. 3. c. 7.
sect. 438. fol. 260. a. who expressly says, Imprisonment must be a safe
custody, not a punishment; and that a prison ought to be for keeping men safe,
not to punish them. See also 2 part Institut. f 43. 315. 589. 590. 591. and 3.
part fol. 3^, 35. and 4 part 168.
; and now they are made places of torment and the punishment of supposed
offenders, they being detained many years without any Legal trials; that
therefore it be Enacted, that henceforth no supposed offender whatsoever may be
denied his Legal trial at the first Sessions, Assizes, or Jail-deliver,
after his commitment See the Statute of the 4 E. 3, 2. 12 R. 2. 10.
and that at such trial, every such supposed offender, be either condemned or
acquitted.

9. Whereas Monopolies of all kinds have been declared by this Honorable
House, to be against the fundamental Laws of the Land, and all such
restrictions of Trade, do in the consequence destroy not only Liberty but
property; that therefore all Monopolies whatsoever, and in particular that
oppressive Company of Merchant-Adventurers be forthwith abolished, and a free
Trade restored; and that all Monopolizers may give good reparation to the
Commonwealth, and to particular parties who have been damnified by them, and to
be made incapable of bearing any Office of power or trust in the Nation; and
that the Votes of this House November. 19. 1640. against their sitting therein,
may be forthwith put in due execution.

10. Whereas this House has declared in the first Remonstrance of the Sea 1
part Book Declar. page 14.
state of the Kingdom, that Ship Money and Monopolies which were imposed upon
the people before the late War, did at least amount to 1400000 l. per annum:
and whereas since then, the Taxes have been double and treble; and the Army See
the Armies last Representation to the House.
has declared that 1300000 l. per annum would completely pay all Forces and
Garrisons in the Kingdom; and the Customs could not but amount to much more
then would pay the Navy: so that considering the vast sums of moneys raised
by proposition-money, the fifth and twentyeth part, sequest^ations, and
compositions, excise, and otherwise, it is conceived much Treasure is
concealed; that therefore an Order issue forth immediately from this Honorable
House to every parish in the Kingdom, to deliver in without delay to some
faithfu^l persons, as perfect an account as possible, of all moneys levied in
such Town, City or Parish; for what use or end soever, since the beginning of
the late War, and to return the several Receivers names, and that those who
shall be employed by the several Parishes in every Shire or County, to carry
in those accounts to some appointed place in the County, may have liberty to
choose the receiver of them; and that those selected persons by the several
parishes in every County or Shire, may have liberty to invest some one person
in every of their respective Counties or places, with power to sit in a
Committee at LONDON or elsewhere, to be the General Accomptants of the Kingdom,
who shall publish their Accounts every month to the public view, and that
henceforth there be only one Common Treasury, where the Books of Accounts may
be kept by several persons, open to the view of all men.

11. Whereas it has been the ancient Liberty of this Nation, That all the
Freeborn people have freely elected their Representers in Parliament, and
their Sheriffs, and 28 Edw. 1. Chap. 8. and 13. See 2 part. instit. fol 174,
175, 558, 559. where Sir Ed. Cook positively declares that in ancient times by
the common Law of England, the Coroner, the high Sheriff, Justices of peace,
Verderors of Forests; yea, and in times of War, the Leaders of the Counties
soldiers, were chosen in full Counties by the Freeholders.
Justices of the Peace, etc and that they were abridged of that their native
Liberty, by a Statute of 8th of, H. 6, 7. and the 27 H. 8th. 14. That
therefore, that Birthright of all Englishmen, be forthwith restored to all
which are not, or shall not be Legally disfranchised for some criminal cause,
or are not under twenty one years of age, or servants, or beggars; and we
humbly offer, That every County may have its equal Proportion of Representers;
and that every County may have its several Divisions, in which one Representer
may be chosen: and that some Representatives of every Parish proportionably may
be the Electors of the Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Committee men,
Grand Jury men, and all Ministers of Justice whatsoever in the respective
Counties; and that no such Minister of Justice may continue in his Office above
one whole year without a new It has been a Maxim amongst the wise
Legislators, that whoseover means to settle good Laws, must proceed in them
with a sinister, or evil opinion of all mankind, and suppose that whosoever
is not wicked, it is for want of opportunity; and that no State can be wisely
confident of any public Minister continuing good, longer then the Rod is over
him. It is the opportunity of being ill that must be taken away, if ever we
mean to be happy; which can never be done but by frequency of change: Speeches
and Passages, page 17.
Election.

12. That all Statutes for all kind of Oaths, whether in Corporations, Cities
or other, which ensnare conscientious people, as also all other Statutes
injoyning all to hear the Book of Common Prayer, be forthwith repealed and
nulled, and that nothing be imposed upon the consciences of any, to compel them
to sin against their own consciences.

13. That the too long continued shame of this Nation, viz. permission of any
to suffer such poverty as to beg their bread, may be forthwith effectually
remedied; and to that purpose, that the poor be enabled to choose their Trustees
to discover all Stocks, Houses, Lands, etc. which of right belong to them and
their use, that they may speedily receive the benefit thereof, and that some
good improvement may be made of waste Grounds for their use; and that according
to the promise of this Honorable House in your first Remonstrance, care be
taken forthwith to advance the native commodities of this Nation, that the Poor
may have better wages for their labor, and that Manufactures may be increased,
and the Herring fishing upon our own Coasts may be improved for the best
advantage of our own Mariners, and the whole Nation.

14. Whereas that burthensom Tax of the Excise lies heavy only upon the
poorer, and most ingenuous and industrious People, to their intolerable
oppression; and that all persons of large Revenues in Lands, and vaste estates
at usury, bear not the least proportionable weight of that burden, whereby
Trade decays, and all ingenuity and industry is discouraged; That therefore
that oppressive way of raising money may forthwith cease, and all moneys be
raised by equal Rates, according to the proportion of men's estates.

15. That Mr Peter Smart, Doctor Leighton, M. Ralph Grasion, M. Hen. Burton,
Doctor Bastwick, M. William Prynne, Lieut. Colonel John Lilburn, the Heirs and
Executors of M. Brewer, M. John Turner, and all others that suffered any
cruelty, or false, illegal imprisonment, by the Starchamber, the high
Commission, or Councel-board, as also M. Alderman Chambers, and all others that
suffered oppression before the Parliament, for refusing to pay illegal
imposts, customs or Ship Money, or yield conformity to Monopolizing Patentees,
may, after seven years attendance for justice and right, forthwith by this
House receive legal and just Reparations out of the Estates of all those,
without exception, who occasioned, acted in, or procured their heavy
sufferings, that so in future Ages men may not be totally discouraged to stand
for their Liberties and Freedoms, against oppressors and Tyrants.

16. Whereas we can fix our eyes upon no other but this Honorable House for
relief in all these our pressing grievances, until we shall be enforced to
despair, we therefore desire that the most exact care be had of the right
Constitution thereof: And therefore we desire that all Members of this House
chosen in their Nonage, may be forthwith ejected, and that all Votes for
suspension of Members from this House, may be forthwith put in execution;
Provided, that the House proceed either finally to expel them, that others may
be elected in their stead, or they be restored to serve their Country: And
likewise that all Lawyers who are Members of this House (by reason of their
over-awing power over Judges of their own making) may wholly attend the Peoples
service therein; and that every of them may be expelled the House, who shall
hereafter plead any cause before any Court or Committee whatsoever during his
Membersship in this House. And we do further desire, that every Member of this
House may be enjoined under some great penalty, not to be absent above three
days, without the express license of this House; and not above one month,
without the license of the place by which they are betrusted: And likewise that
no Law may be passed, unless two third parts of all the Members of this House
be present, and that the most speedy care be had to distribute Elections
equally throughout the Nation; and that the extent of the Power and Trust of
this honorable House be clearly declared, with the true end and intention
thereof, viz. To make just Laws, binding all alike for the preservation and
equal good of all, but not to execute Laws.

Now whereas the particular requests in our Petitions are for the most part
never debated in this House, but when we are at any time rightly interpreted in
our meanings and intentions, we only receive thanks for our good affections or
promises, that in due time our desires shall be taken into consideration: and
by such delays our destractions are daily increased, and our burdens made more
heavy: therefore we desire that a Committee be forthwith appointed by this
Honorable House, who may be enjoined under some penalty, to sit from day to
day, until they have debated every particular of our request, and reported
their sense of the justness and necessity of them to this House, that we may
attend for an Answer accordingly: and that a time be fixed when such a
Committee shall make their report. And we further desire the same Committee may
be invested with power to hear all our other complaints, and offer suitable
remedies to this Honorable House, and to bring in the Appeals of any persons
from the Judges at Westminster to this Honorable House, against their
injustice, briberie, or illegal delay and oppression.

Now O ye worthy Trustees! Let not your ears be any longer deaf to our
importunate cries: let not our destruction be worse then that of Sodom, which
was overthrown in a moment. Let us not pine away with famine, and be worse then
those who die by the sword. Oh dissolve not all Government into the prime Laws
of Nature, and compel us to take the natural remedy to preserve our selves,
which you have declared no people can be deprived of. See your Declaration of
the 19 of May, 1642. 1 book Declarat. page 207. And your Declaration of November.
1642. page 690. 726. 728. as also page 150. See the Armies book of Declarat. p.
39. 40.
O remember that the righteous God stands in the Congregation of the mighty,
and judges among the gods, and says, How Psalm. 82.1, 2, 3, 4.
long will ye judge unjustly, and accept the persons of the wicked? Defend the
poor and fatherless, do justice to the afflicted and needy; deliver the poor
and needy, and rid them out of the hands of the wicked.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.
Now judge O Heavens, and give your verdict O ye sons of men, where the Treason
is in this Petition, for which M. Wildman and I, as the chief prosecuters
thereof deserved seven months imprisonment as Traitors therefore: or rather
does it not declare that Cromwell and the rest of his fellow-hinderers of the
promotion and accomplishment of the just things therein contained (the
establishing of which would have, in the eye of reason, prevented all the late
Wars, and all the desperate hazards that were run thereby) are as grand enemies
to the Liberties and Freedoms of England, as any of those ever were whom they
have destroyed, and as grand Traitors to their trust as ever pissed against a
wall, merely, soly and only seeking themselves, and their own tyrannical
domination by all their actions, their pretenses being but mere stalking-horses
thereto; as most clearly appears by CROMVVEL'S own Majors Impeachment of him to
the Parliament, the copy of which thus follows.

Sundry REASONS inducing Major ROBERT HUNTINGTON to lay down his Commission,
Humbly presented to the Honorable Houses of PARLIAMENT, 2 August, 1648.
HAving taken up Arms in defense of the Authority and Power of King and
Parliament under the command of the Lord Gray of Warke, and the Earl of
Manchester, during their several employments with the Forces of the Eastern
Association; and at the modelling of this Army under the present Lord General,
having been appointed by the honorable Houses of Parliament, Major to the now
Regiment of Lieutenant General Cromwell, in each of which employments I have
served constantly and faithfully, answerable to the trust reposed in me. And
having lately quit the said employment, and laid down my Commission, I hold my
self tied both in duty and conscience to render the true reason thereof; which
in the general is briefly this; Because the Principles, Designs, and Actions
of those Officers, which have a great influence upon the Army, are (as I
conceive) very repugnant and destructive to the honor and safety of Parliament
and Kingdom, from whom they derive their Authority. The particulars whereof
being a Breviate of my sad Observations, will appear by the following Narrative.

First, That upon the Orders of Parliament for disbanding this Army, Li. Genesis
Cromwell and Commissary General Ireton were sent Commissioners to Walden, to
reduce the Army to their obedience, but more especially, in Order to the
present supply of forces for the service of Ireland: But they, contrary to the
trust reposed in them, very much hindered that service, not only by
discountenancing those that were obedient and willing, but also by giving
encouragement to the unwilling and disobedient; declaring, that there had been
much cruelty and injustice in the Parliaments proceedings against them (meaning
the Army) and Commissary General Ireton in further pursuance thereof, FRAMED
THOSE PAPERS AND WRITINGS THEN SENT FROM THE ARMY TO THE PARLIAMENT AND
KINGDOM, saying also to the Agitators, that it was lawful and fit for us to
deny disbanding, till we had received equal and just satisfaction for our past
service; Lieutenant-Generall Cromwell further adding. That we were in a double
capacity, as Soldiers, and as Commoners; and having our pay as Soldiers, we
have something else to stand upon as Commoners. And when upon the Rendezvous at
TRIPPLE-HEATH the Commissioners of Parliament, according to their Orders,
acquainted every Regiment with what the Parliament had already done, and would
further do in Order to the desires of the Army, the Soldiery being before
prepared, and notwithstanding any thing could be said or offered to them by the
Commissioners, they still cried out for Justice, Justice.

And for the effecting of their further purposes, advice was given by
Lieutenant General Cromwell, and Commissary General Ireton, to remove the
Kings Person from Holdenby, or to secure him there by other Guards then those
appointed by the Commissioners of Parliament, which was thought most fit to be
carried on by the private soldiery of the Army, and promoted by the Agitators
of each Regiment, whose first business was to secure the Garrison of Oxon,
with the Guns and Ammunition there, from thence to march to Holdenby in
prosecution of the former advice, which was accordingly acted by Cornet Joyce;
who when he had done the business, sent a Letter to the General then at
Kyton, acquainting his Excellency that the King was on his march toward
Newmarket: The General being troubled thereat, told Commissary General Ireton
that he did not like it, demanding withal who gave those Orders; He replied,
that he gave Orders only for securing the King there, and not for taking him
away from thence; Lieutenant-Generall Cromwell coming then from London, said
that if this had not been done, the King would have been (...) away by the
Order of the Parliament, or else Colonel Graves by the advice of the
Commissioners would have carried him to London, throwing themselves upon the
favor of Parliament for that Service. The same day Cornet Joyce being told
that the General was displeased with him for bringing the King from Holdenby,
he answered, that Lieut. Genesis Cromwell had given him Orders at London And I John
Lilburn have heard from very good hands [I will not now say, from the Cornets
own month] that it was delivered to to him in Cromwels own Garden in
Drury Lane, Colonel Charles Fleetwood being by.
to do what he had done, both there and at Oxford.

The person of the King And yet see the Generals Letter from Cambridge of 6
June 1647, of the Kings providential or accidental coming to them without the
privity of him, or any of his Officers, Armies book of Declarat. p. 22.
being now in the power of the Army, the business of Lieutenan-Generall
Cromwell was to court his Majesty (both by Members of the Army, and several
Gentlemen formerly in the Kings Service) into a good opinion and belief of the
proceedings of the Army, as also into a disaffection and dislike of the
proceedings of Parliament, pretending to show, that his Majesty's Interest
would far better suit with the Principles of Independency, then of Presbytery:
And when the King did allege (as many times he did) That the power of
Parliament was the Power by which we fought, Lieutenant-Generall CROMWELL would
reply, That WE WERE NOT ONLY SOLDIERS, BUT COMMONERS, promising that the Army
would be for the King in the Settlement of his whole Business, if the King and
his party would sit still, and not declare nor act against the Army, but give
them leave only to manage the present business in hand.

That when the King was at New Market, the Parliament thought fit to send to
his Majesty, humbly desiring, that in Order to his safety, and their addresses
for a speedy settlement, he would be pleased to come to Richmond; contrary
hereunto resolution was taken by the aforesaid Officers of the Army. That if
the King could not be diverted by persuasion (to which his Majesty was very
opposite) that then they would stop him by force at Royston, where his Majesty
was to lodge the first night, keeping accordingly continual Guards upon him,
against any power that should be sent by Order of Parliament to take him from
us: And to this purpose out-Guards were also kept to preserve his escape from
us, with the Commissioners, of whom we had special Orders given to be
careful; for that they did daily show dislike to the present proceedings of
the Army against the Parliament, and that the King was most conversant and
private in discourse with them; His Majesty saying, that if any man should
hinder his going (now his Houses had desired him upon his late Message of the
12 of May 1647.) it should be done by force, and by laying hold on his Bridle,
Which if any were so bold to do, he would endeavor to make it his last. But
contrary to his Majesty's expectation, the next morning, when the King and the
Officers of the Army were putting this to an issue, came the Votes of both
Houses to the King, of their compliance with that which the Army formerly
desired: After his Majesty did incline to hearken to the desires of the Army,
and not before: Whereupon at Caversham, the King was continually solicited by
Messengers from Lieutenant General CROMWELL, and Commissary-General IRETON,
proffering any thing his Majesty should desire, as Revenues, Chaplains, Wife,
children, servants of his own; visitation of Friends Sir Edw. Ford a professed
Papist, and one that had broken prison out of the Tower of London, was at that
time Iretons constant bedfellow, at whose lodging constant royal Cabals was
held; and yet at the same time Ireton, etc. impeached Hollis and Stapleton for
high Treason, for private correspondence with the King. Armies Book of Declar.
page 81, 82, 83.
, access of Letters, and (by Commissary-General Ireton) that his Negative
Voice should not be meddled withal, and that had he convinced those that
reasoned against it at the Genarall-councell of the Army, as also all this they
would do, that His Majesty might the better see into all our Actions, and know
our principles, which lead us to give him all those things out of Conscience;
For that we were not a people hating His Majesty's person, or Monarchical Yet
read Iretons etc. Remonstrance from St. Albans, and you shall find the quite
contrary; yea, and that the things here they plead for, they there condemn as
the highest Treason; as evidently there appears, page 15, 16. 17: 22, 23, 24:
32: 48: 50: 62.
Government; but that we like it as the best, and that by this King; saying
also, That they did hold it a very unreasonable thing for the Parliament to
abridge him of them, often promising, That if his Majesty will sit still and
not act against them, They would in the first place restore him to all these,
and upon the settlement of our own just rights and Liberties make him the most
glorious Prince in Christendom; That to this purpose for a settlement they
were making several Proposals to be offered to the Commissioners of Parliament
then sent down to the Army, which should be as bounds for our party, as to the
Kings business; and that his Majesty should have liberty to get as much of
those abated as be could, for that many things therein were proposed only to
give satisfaction to others which were our friends, promising the King that at
the same time the Commissioners of Parliament should see the Proposals, His
Majesty should have a copy of them also, pretending to carry a very equal hand
between King and Parliament, in order to the settlement of the Kingdom by him,
which besides their own Judgment and conscience, they did see a necessity of
it, as to the people: Commissary General Ireton further saying. That what was
offered in these Proposals, should be so just and reasonable, That if there
were but six men in the Kingdom that would fight to make them good, he would
make the seventh, against any power that should oppose them.

The Headquarters being removed from Reading to Redford, His Majesty to
Wo^or^^, the Proposals were given to me by Commissary General Ireton, to
present to the King; which his Majesty having read told me, be would never
treat with the Army or Parliament upon those Proposals, as he was then minded:
But the next day his Majesty understanding that a force was put upon his Houses
of Parliament by a tumult, sent for me again and said unto me, Go along with
Sir John Barkley to the General and Lieutenant General, and tell them, that
to avoid a new war, I will now treat with them up on their Proposals, or on any
thing else in Order to a Peace, only let me be saved in honor and conscience:
Sir John Barkley falling sick by the way, I delivered this Message to
Lieutenant General CROMWELL and Commissary General Ireton, who advised me not
to acquaint the General with it, till ten or twelve Officers of the Army were
met together at the Genenerals Quarters, and then they would bethink themselves
of some persons to be sent to the King about it; And accordingly Commissary
General Ireton, Colonel Who, I am sure daubed and jugled not as the others
did, but spoke his mind freely; for in the tower he gave me I. Lilburun a full
account of that business, yea and sufficiently then told Sir I. Maynard,
Commissary Coply etc. of Iretons, etc. Base juggling and underhand dealing,
daubing, and dissembling with the King.
Rainsborough, Colonel Hamond, and Col Rich, attended the King at Woborne for
three hours together, debating the whole business with the King upon the
Proposals; upon which debate, many of the most material things the King
disliked were afterward struck out, and many other things much abated by
promises, whereupon his Majesty was pretty well satisfied.

Within a day or two after his Majesty removed to Stoke, and there calling for
me, told me he feared an Engagement between the City and the Army; saying, he
had not time to write any thing under his hand, but would send it to the
General after me, commanding me to tell Commissary General Ireton, with whom
he had formerly treated upon the Proposals, that he would wholly throw himself
upon us, and trust us for a settlement of the Kingdom as he had promised;
saying, if we proved honest men, we should (without question) make the Kingdom
happy, and save much shedding of blood. This Message from His Majesty, I
delivered to Commissary General Ireton at Colebrook, who seemed to receive it
with joy, saying, That we should be the veriest Knaves that ever lived, if in
every thing we made not good what ever we had promised, because the King by his
not declaring against us, had given us great advantage against our Adversaries.

After our marching throug London with the Army, his Majesty being at Hampton
Court, Lieutenant General Cromwell, and Commissary General Ireton, sent the
King word several times, that the reason why they made no more have in
business, was because that party which did then sit in the House while Pelham
was Speaker, did much obstruct the business, so that they could not carry it
on at present. The Lieutenant General often saying, Really they should be
pulled out by the ears, and to that purpose caused a Regiment of Horse to
Rendezvous at Hide-Parke to have put that in execution as he himself expressed,
had it not been carried by Vote in the House that day as he desired: The day
before, the Parliament Voted once more the sending of the Propositions of both
Kingdoms to the King by the Commissioners of each Kingdom at Hampton Court.
Commissary General Ireton bade me tell the King, that such a thing was to be
done to morrow in the House, but his Majesty need not to be troubled at it, for
they intended it to no other end but to make good some promises of the
Parliament, which the Nation of Scotland expected performance of: and that it
was not expected or desired his Majesty should either Sign them or Treat upon
them, for which there should be no advantage taken against the King. Upon the
delivery of which Message, His Majesty replied, he knew not what Answer to give
to please all without a Treaty. Next day after this Vote passed, the Lieutenant
General asked me thereupon, If the King did not wonder at these Votes; I told
him no: For that Commissary General Ireton, had sent such a Message by me the
day before the Vote passed, to signify the reason of it: The
Lieutenant-Generall replied, that really it was the truth, and that we
(speaking of the Parliament) intended nothing else by it, but to satisfy the
Scots, which otherwise might be troublesome. And the Lieutenant General, and
Com. Genesis Ireton enquiring after His Majesty's Answer to the Propositions, and
what it would be, Nota been.
it was showed them both privately in a Garden-house in Putney, and in some
part amended to their own mind.

But before this, the King doubting what answer to give, sent me to Lieutenant
General Cromwell, as unsatisfied with the Proceedings of the Army, fearing
they intended not to make good what they had promised: and the rather because
his Majesty understood that Lieutenant General Cromwell, and Commissary General
Ireton, agreed with the rest of the House in some late Votes that opposed the
Proposals of the Army, that they severally replied, that they would not have
his Majesty mistrust them, for that since the House would go so high, they
only concurred with them, that their unreasonablenesse might the better appear
to the Kingdom; And the Lieutenant General bade me further assure the King,
that if the Army remained an Army, his Majesty should trust the Proposals with
what was promised to be the worst of his conditions which should be made for
him; and then striking his hand on his breast (in his Chamber at Putney,) bade
me tell the King he might rest confident and assured of it; and many times the
same Message has been sent to the King from them both, but with this addition
from Commissary General Ireton, that they would purge and purge, and never
leave purging the Houses, till they had made them of such a temper as should do
his Majesty's business. And rather then they would fall short of what was
promised, he would join with French, Spaniard, Cavalier or any that would force
them to it. Upon the delivery of which Message the King made Answer, that if
they do, they would do more then he durst do. After this the delay of the
settlement of the Kingdom was excused upon the Commotions of Colonel Martin,
and Colonel Rainsborough with their adherents; the Lieutenant General saying,
That speedy course must be taken for putting them out of the House and Army,
because they were now putting the Army into a Mutiny, by having hand in
publishing several Printed Papers, calling themselves the Agents of five
Regiments, and the Agreement of the People, although some men had encouragement
from Lieutenant General Cromwell, for the prosecution of those See Putneys
projects and the 2 part of Englands new Chains discovered, page 6.
Papers; and he being further pressed to show himself in it, he desired to be
excused at the present, for that he might show himself hereafter for their
better advantage, though in the Company of those men which were of different
judgments he would often say, that these People were a giddy-headed Party, and
that there was no trust nor truth in them; and to that purpose wrote a Letter
to Colonel Whaley that day the King went from Hampton Court, intimating
doubtfully that His MAJESTY'S PERSON was in danger by them, and that he should
keep an Out-guard to prevent them; which Letter was presently showed to the
King by Col. The design of which letter was twofold: 1. Under pretense of
real good to the King, whom they now desired to be rid of, as having made all
the use of him they could (being the Scots had bid more for him then they would
give) to get him into a new snare: which in my judgment they plainly confess
in their late Remonstrance of 16 Nov. 1649. page 53. The second was, To destroy
the new nicknamed Levellers for a generation of bloody men, that sought to
murder the King, who stood also in the way of their intended tyrannical Reign;
which was a main invention of Cromwels own brain, with the base assistance of
my Brother Henry Lilburn, as I long since truly declared in two of my Books,
viz. The Peoples Prerogative. page 52. And A Plea for an Habeas Corpus, page
12. See also The second part of Englands Chains, page 6.
Whaley.

That about six days after, when it was fully known by the Parliament and
Army, that the King was in the Isle of Wight, Commissary General Ireton
standing by the fireside in his Quarters at Kingston, and some speaking of an
agreement likely to be made between the King and Parliament, now the Person of
the King was out of the power of the Army: Commissary Genesis Ireton replied with
a discontented countenance, that he hoped it would be such a Peace, as we might
with a good conscience fight against them both. Thus they who at the first
taking the King from Holdenby into the power of the Army, cried down
Presbyterian Government, the proceedings of this present Parliament, and their
perpetuity, and in stead thereof held forth an earnest inclination to a
moderate Episcopacy, with a new election of Members to sit in Parliament for
the speedy settlement of the Kingdom; and afterward when the Eleven Members
had left the House, and marched through London with the Army, the seven Lords
impeached, the four Aldermen of London committed to the Tower, and other
Citizens committed also; then again they cried up Presbyterian Government, the
perpetuity See their notable reasons and height of expressed zeal for frequent
and successive Parliaments, in their book of Decl. page 41. 42. 43. 44 129.
142. and in the first of their Proposals dated August 1. 1647. they six upon
the certain period of a year for ending this Parliament: yea, and in their last
Declaration from St. Albons, in page 45. 46. complain most bitterly against a
perpetual Parliament, and the ill constitution of this by Burrough-towns, etc
yea also in page 65 ibidem propose and earnestly press again for fixing a
certain period to the dissolution of this; and also in page 15. 52. 66. 67.
propose many excellent things for the future constitution of sure and often
successive Parliaments: See my inferences upon all their etc. premises upon
this subject in my last book of the 8 of June 1649. from p. 43. to p. 59. Yea,
and in their first article accuse the King of treason and tyranny in not
keeping of frequent and successive Parliaments. See also his case stated, p 7,
11, 14, 17, 18 20. See Bradshaws Speech against him at his trial, Jan 27 1648.
p. 11.
of this present Parliament. Lieutenant Genesis Cromwell further pleasing himself
with the great Sums of money which were in arrear from each County to the
Army; and the Tax of sixty thousand pound per Month for our maintenance; Now,
says he, we may be, for ought I know, an Army so long as we live; and since
the sending forth the Orders of Parliament for the calling their Members
together, Lieutenant Genesis Cromwell perceiving the Houses will not answer his
expectation, he is now a gain uttering words, persuading the hearers to a
prejudice against the proceedings of Parliament, again crying down Presbyterian
Government, setting up a single Interest, which he calls an honest Interest,
and that we have done ill in forsaking it: to this purpose it was lately
thought fit to put the Army upon the choosing new Agitators, and to draw forth
of the House of Parliament 60 or 70 of the Members thereof, much agreeing with
his words he spoke formerly in his Chamber at Kingstone, saying, What sway
STAPLETON and HOLLIS had heretofore in the Kingdom! and he knew nothing to the
contrary, but that he was as well able to govern the Kingdom as either of them;
so that in all his discourse nothing more appears but his seeking after the
Government of King, Parliament, City, and Kingdom; for the effecting whereof,
he thought it necessary, and delivers it as his judgment, that a considerable
Party of the chief Citizens of London, and some of every County, be clapped up in
Castles and Garrisons, for the more quiet and submissive carriage of every place
to which they belong. Further saying, that from the rising of the late Tumult
in London, there should be an occasion taken to hang the Recorder and Aldermen
of London then in the Tower; that the City might see, the more they did stir in
opposition, the more they should suffer: adding, That the City must first be
made an example. And since that Lieutenant Genesis Cromwell was sent down from the
Parliament for the reducing of the Army to their obedience, he has most
frequently in public and private, delivered these ensuing heads as his
Principles, from whence all the foregoing particulars have ensued, being fully
confirmed, as I humbly conceive, by his practice in the transaction of his last
years business.

1. That every single man is Judge of just and right, as to the good and ill of
a Kingdom.

2. That the Interest of honest men is the Interest of the Kingdom. And those
only are deemed honest men by him, that are conformable to his judgment and
practice: Which may appear in many particulars. To instance but one, in the
choice of Colonel Rainsborow to be Vice Admiral; Lieutenant General CROMWELL
being asked how he could trust a man whose Interest was so directly opposite to
what he had professed, and to one whom he had lately aimed to remove from all
places of Trust: He answered, That he had now received particular assurance
from Col. RAYNSBOROVV, as great as could be given by man, that he would be
conformable to the judgment and discretion of Himself and Commissary Genesis
IRETON, for the managing of the whole business at Sea.

3. That it is lawful to pass through any forms of Government, for the
accomplishing of his end; and therefore either to purge the Houses, and support
the remaining Party by force everlastingly: Or to put a period to them by
force, is very lawful, and suitable to the Interest of honest men.

4. THAT IT IS LAWFVL TO PLAY THE KNAVE WITH A Nay, I John Lilburn am
confident, from the whole series of his actions, to prove, that he holds it
lawful for a man to commit any manner of wickedness and baseness whatsoever
that can be named under the sun for the accomplishment of a man's proposed end,
whether in it self it be wicked or righteous; yea to cheat, break faith with,
and murder the nighest Relations a man can converse with; yea, and for that end
only, to raise Wars upon Wars, to the devastation of Kingdoms and Nations; the
peoples lives really and truly being of no more value with him, then so many
dead dogs, serving him for no other end, but to be his footsteps to climb up to
the top of his Authority, or Elective Knighthood.
KNAVE.

These Gentlemen aforesaid in the Army thus principled, and as by many other
circumstances may appear, acting accordingly, give too much cause to believe,
that the success which may be obtained by the Army (except timely prevented by
the wisdom of the Parliament) will be made use of to the destroying of all that
Power for which we first engaged, and having (for above these twelve months
past) sadly and with much reluctance observed these several passages, yet we
have some hopes that at length there hereunto, knowing that Resolutions were
taken up, that in case the Power of Parliament cannot be gained to countenance
their Designs, then to proceed without it; I therefore chose to quit my self
of my Command, wherein I have served the Parliament for these five years last
past, and put my self upon the greatest hazards by discovering these Truths;
rather then by hopes of gain with troubled mind, continue an assistant or
abbettors of such as give affronts to the Parliament and Kingdom by abusing of
their Power and Authority, to carry on their particular Designs. Against whom
(in the midst of danger) I shall ever avow the truth of this Narrative: and my
self to be a constant, faithful and obedient Servant to the Parliament of
England.

Robert Huntington.
August 2. 1648.
Courteous Reader,

Before these REASONS of Major Huntington's, just after the end of the
foregoing Petition, in page 53. should have followed the Copy of another, very
pertinent to the illustration of Cromwell's and his creatures malice at the
Liberties of England: But in regard it was forgot, take it here; and it thus
follows.

To the Honorable the chosen and betrusted Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses
assembled in PARLIAMENT: The humble Petition of diverse well-affected Freeborn
people of England, inhabiting in and about East-Smithfield and Wapping, and
other parts adjacent:
SHOWS,
THat as this honorable House was chosen by the people to redness their
grievances; so we conceive it our native right to meet together to frame and
promote Petitions, for your better information of all such things as are by
experience found burdensome and grievous to the Commonwealth, That
accordingly this honorable House has declared, that it ought to receive
Petitions, though against things established by Law: That in the use of this
our native acknowledged right we (together with Lieutenant Col. John Lilburn,
and Mr John Wildman) were met together in East-Smithfield upon the 17 of
January last, and discoursed upon these ensuing particulars, viz. Some scrupled
the very petitioning this House any more, as a thing from whence
(notwithstanding their having hazarded their lives for their Freedoms) they had
hither to received nothing but reproaches and injuries, and were answered (by
one of the persons before-named to this effect. That it was their duty always,
and their wisdom, in this juncture of time, to use their utmost diligence to
procure the settlement of the Commonwealth; and that war, famine, and
confusion could no other way in probability be prevented. And it was generally
concluded, that the most visible interest of the people was, to uphold the
Honor of this House, and to preserve it from contempt.

2. There was likewise an occasional Discourse about the Right of the Lords to
the Law-giving power; And herein was debated the danger of such an Arbitrary
authority (as that is in its own nature) residing in any persons during life,
and much more of its descending as an inheritance from Generation to
Generation, and something was added from our sad experience of the mischiefs
which have ensued hereupon: In particular, it was declared, how their exercise
of that claim might be charged in reason with all the precious blood that has
been spilt in the late War, because the King had never had opportunity to Levy
an Army against the people and Parliament, if the Lords had not deferred so
long after many solicitations by the Commons to pass the Ordinance for
settling the Militia.

3. It was also accidentally wondered at, why LIEUTENANT GENERAL CROMWELL, and
COMMISSARY GENERAL IRETON, should now of late urge, That no more addresses
should be made to the King, whereas they have formerly pleaded, that he might
be brought in even with his negative voice. Whereupon Lieutenant Colonel
Lilburn related a story, That a member of the House of Commons (having
information from a credible person, That the King had promised Lieutenant Genesis
Cromwell, a blue Ribbond with a George, and the Earldome of Essex, besides
other places of honor and profit to his Son, Commissary Genesis Ireton resolved)
to become another Felton, rather then to suffer his Country to be so betrayed:
But the Gentleman being dissuaded by Friends, and intelligence hereof being
sent to the Lieutenant General, a Fast ensued at the Head quarters', and so he
concurred with the House in the late Vote against the King. Nevertheless, in
Mr. Wildmans opinion, he was necessitated into such a Turn, because THE SCOTS
having bid HIGHER for the King then he had done, his offer was rejected, and
they relied on.

4. Some consideration was had about proportionable assistances toward the
charge of printing our Petitions.

5. It being among other things enquired, whether there were any truth in this
rumor, That the Lords had sent to Lieutenant Colonel Lilburne, and offered
him 3000 l. to desist in the large Petition now abroad. The Lieutenant Col.
answered, That it was a false groundless report, and that he knew no occasion
for it, unless it were because a Lord had sent to him, to tell him, he would
send him a token of his love, if he thought it would be accepted. To which he
answered, That he would not be engaged to any Patentee Lord, and some other
words to that effect.

6. There was a relation made by a person, that some poor people in THE COUNTRY
did meet together in Companies, and did violently take away the Corn as it was
going to Market, saying that it was their great necessity caused them so to do:
whereupon, we fearing lest the calamity might be more general, did ask how we
should best preserve our selves in case of such Tumults, because we bore the
names of Round heads, INDEPENDENTS, etc. for adhering to the Parliament? and we
satisfied by Lieutenant Colonel Lilburn to this purpose. Friends, The only way
for you to be secured is to p^omote this Petition to the House, that so when
the people come to be informed (by the Petition) of your real intentions to
the common good of the whole Nation, as well as to your own, you will be
thereby safer then those which have blew Ribons in their hats, that being the
Generals Colors, and the modern badge of Protection.

7. It was lastly delivered as from a good hand, That some LORDS were willing
their Law giving power should not descend as an Inheritance to their Posterity,
and that they were willing to part with their Privilege of freedom from
arrests.

This being the sum and principal matter of what passed at the aforesaid
meeting, as we are ready to attest upon our oaths, if we shall be thereunto
called; And understanding that our said dear Friends, Lieutenant Colonel John
Lilburn, and Master John Wildman (who are therefore dear to us because they
have manifested themselves faithful to the Public) stand committed by this
House, in relation to the said Meeting as Treasonable and seditious practisers
against the State. We cannot but be extremely troubled, not only in regard of
their particular sufferings and our own equal concernment, especially upon the
conseq^ence thereof, as tending in a great measure to the disinfranchisement of
the Nation, from whom the Liberty of complaining must then be taken away, when
most cause is given them to complain.

Wherefore your Petitioners do most humbly pray, That Lieutenant Colonel
Lilburn, and Master John Wildman, may be forthwith enlarged, our selves
secured, and with the test of our Countrymen encouraged in a peaceable manner,
to make their addresses to this Honorable House, and to render fruitless the
practices of all such as under any coat shall seek to sow discord between you
and yours.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc. James Worts Roger Sawyer. Henry Giding.
Tho. Chapman. Valent. Elsign. Dennis Liddall George Brown. Edward Pardo. Tho.
Goddad. Tho. Culles. Tho. Williams John Merihust. Mich. Reeve. John North.
John Wells. Ed. Floyd. Rob. Bagesse. John Sowden. Rob. Levite. Andrew Dedman.


This Petition thus subscribed was (as I remember) delivered to the House of
Commons the very same week Master Wildman and my self was first imprisoned as
Traitors in reference to the foresaid Petition; but this Petition was to no
purpose nor took no effect; which rightly weighed, is a clear demonstration we
were not imprisoned for miscarriage in mannaging the Petition, but merely and
barely out of malice and hatred at us for promoting zealously a Petition that
tended effectually to the ease of the People of their grievances, and make us
really Freemen; and therefore from hence etc. And let all unbiased people judge
whether Cromwell and his Associates, or my self and those he has nicknamed
Levellers, be the real Traitors, disturbers of the peace, and the malicious and
wicked hinderers of the Settlers of their Freedoms; but to fill up this sheet
and so to conclude, I shall because I often use it, here insert the Charge
against the King, which thus follows,

The CHARGE of the Commons of England, against CHARLES STVART King of England,
Of high Treas^n, and other high Crimes, exhibited to the High Court of Justice,
Saturday the 20 of January, 1648.
The Court being sat, and the prisoner at the Bar, M. Cook Solicitor General,
spoke thus; My Lord, In behalf of the Commons of England, and of all the people
thereof, I do accuse Charles Stuart, here present, of High Treason, and high
Misdemeanors: And I do, in the name of the Commons of England, desire the
Charge may be read unto Him. Which the Clerk then read, as follows,

THat the said CHARLES STUART being Then his induction is better then theirs,
that come in by absolute conquest, and now govern us by the sword, as slaves.
admitted King of England, and therein trusted with a limited Power to govern
by, and according to the Laws of the But H. Peter's says there is now no Law,
but the sword and the will and pleasure of those that now rule by it. See his
discourse with me, 25. May, 1649. p. 4. 5.
Land, and not otherwise; And by his Trust, Oath, and Office, being obliged to
use the power committed to him for the good and benefit of the People, and for
the preservation of their Rights and Liberties: Yet nevertheless, out of a
wicked Design, to erect, and uphold in himself an unlimited and tyrannical
power, to rule according to his Cromwels, and the rest of the great Swordmens
constant practice.
will, and to overthrow the Rights and Liberties of the People; Yea, to take
away, and make void the foundations thereof, and of all redress and remedy of
mis government, which by the fundamental Constitutions of this Kingdom were
reserved on the peoples behalf, in the right and power of frequent and
successive Parliaments, or National meetings in Council: He the said Charles
Stuart, for accomplishing such his Designs, and for the protecting of himself
and his adherents, in His and Their wicked practices to the same Ends, has
traitorously and maliciously levied War against the present Parliament and the
People therein And so, has Cromwell and Ireton, etc. which I will prove upon my
life; and therefore as traitors, ought to die much more then the King, who till
now has by Parliaments, etc. themselves been often declared not to be subject
to the penal part of the Law.
Represented.

Particularly, upon or about the 13 day of June, in the year of our Lord, 1642,
at Beverly in the County of York: And upon, or about the 30 day of July in the
year abovesaid, in the County of the City of York: And upon or about the 24 day
of Aug. in the same year, at the County of the Town of Nottingham (when, and
where he set up his Standard of war;) And also on, or about the 23 day of
October, in the same year, at Edg-Hill, and Keintonfield, in the County of
Warwick: And upon, or about the 13 day of November. in the same year, at
Brainford, in the County of Middlesex: And upon, or about the 30 day of Aug. in
the year of our Lord 1643, at Cavesham-Bridg near Reading, in the County of
Berks: And upon, or about the 13 day of October, in the year last mentioned,
at, or near the City of Gloucester: And upon, or about the 13 day of November. in
the year last mentioned, at Newbery in the County of Berks; And upon, or about
the 31 day of July, in the year of our Lord 1644, at Cropredy-Bridg in the
County of Oxon: And upon, or about the 30 of September. in the year last
mentioned, at Bodmin, and other places near adjacent, in the County of Cornwall:
And upon, or about the 30 day of November. in the year last mentioned, at Newbery
aforesaid: And upon, or about the 8 day of June, in the year of our Lord, 1645,
at the Town of Leicester: And also, upon the 14 day of the same month, in the
same year, at Nas^^y-field, in the County of Northampton. At which several
times and places, or most of them, and at many other places in this Land, at
several other times within the years aforementioned; and in the year of our
Lord, 1646, He the said Charles Stuart, has caused and procured many thousands
of the free people of the Nation to be slain; and by Divisions, Parties, and
Insurrections, within this Land, by invasions from foreign parts, endeavored
and procured by Him, and by many other evil ways and means, He the said
CHARLES STUART, has not only maintained and carried on the said War, both by
Land and Sea, curing the years before mentioned; but also has renewed, or
^^used to be renewed, the said War against the Parliament, and good People of
this Nation in this present Of which years war Cromwell and Ireton by their
cheating, juggling and hindering the settling the liberties of the Nation, are
and were m^re guilty of by thousands of degres then the King or any of his
party, and if they had been but honest to their primitive engagements, the wars
had never been, upon whose heads alone principally all the blood shed in those
wars lies, say I, John Lilburn.
year 1648. in the Counties of Kent, Essex, Surrey, Sussex, Middlesex, and many
other Counties and places in England and Wales, and also by Sea; And
particularly, He the said Charles Stuart, has for that purpose, Given
Commissions to his son the Prince and others, whereby, besides multitudes of
other persons, many such as were by the Parliament entrusted and employed for
the safety of the Nation; being by him or His Agents, corrupted; to the
betraying of their Trust, and revolting from the Parliament, have had
intertainment and Commission, for the continuing and renewing of war and
hostility, against the said Parliament and People, as aforesaid. By which Cruel
and Unnatural wars by him the said Charles Stuart, levied continued, and
renewed, as aforesaid, much, Innocent blood of the But I am sure the chief
prosecutors of this charge have made us now perfect slaves, and are most
superlatively (...) of all that in the next words follows.
Free-People of this Nation has been spilt; many Families have been undone,
the Public Treasury wasted and exhausted, Trade obstructed and miserably
decayed, vast expense and damage to the Nation incurred, and many parts of the
Land spoiled, some of them even to desolation.

And for further prosecution of His said Evil designs, He, the said Charles
Stuart, does still continue His Commissions to the said Prince, and other
Rebels and Revolters, both English and Forrainers; and to the Earl of Ormond,
and to the Irish Rebels and Revolters, associated with him; from whom further
Invasions upon this Land are threatened, upon the procurement, and on the behalf
of the said Charles Stuart.

All which wicked designs, Wars, and evil practices of him the said Charles
Stuart have been, and are carried on, mark this well.
for the advancing and upholding of the personal interest of Will and Power,
and pretended Prerogative to Himself and His Family, against the Public
Interest, Common Right, Liberty, Justice, and Peace of the People of this
Nation, by, and for whom he was entrusted, as aforesaid.

By all which it appears, that He, the said Charles Stuart has been, and is
the Occasioner, Author, and Contriver of the said Unnatural, Cruel and Bloody
Wars, and therein guilty of all the Treasons, Murders, Rapines, Burnings,
Spoils, Desolations, Damage and Mischief to this Nation, acted or committed in
the said wars, or occassoned thereby.

And the said John Cook by Protestation ( saving on the behalf of the Which as
they carry their business, they judge to be no more but Cromwell, Ireton,
Bradshaw and Haslerig, all the rest being really their slalves in several
degrees
People of England, the liberty of Exhibiting at any time hereafter, any other
Charge against the said CHARLES STUART; and also of replying to the Answers
which the said CHARLES STUART shall make to the Premises, or any of them, or
any other Charge, that shall be so exhibited) does, for the said Treasons and
Crimes, on the behalf of the said People of England, Impeach the said Charles
Stuart, as a Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and a public, and Implacable Enemy to
the Common wealth of England: And pray, That the said CAARLS STUART, King of
England, may be put to answer all and every the Premises, That such
Proceedings, Examinations, Trials, Sentence, and Judgment may be thereupon had,
as shall be agreeable to Justice.

FINIS.

