THE Holy Desires OF DEATH. OR A COLLECTION Of some Thoughts of the Fathers of
the Church, to show how Christians ought to despise Life, and to desire Death.

By the R. F. Lalemant, Prior of St. Genovefe, and Chancellor of the
University of Paris.

Englished by T. V. at the Intrance of a Person of Honor.

Printed in the Year, 1678.

Qui Perfectus est, Patienter vivit, Delectabiliter moritur.

The Perfect Man, Lives Patiently, Dies Pleasantly.

St. Augustine in his Exposition upon the 1 Epist. of St. John Tract. 9. AN
ADVERTISEMENT.
THis Collection, entitled The Holy Desires of Death, was only in its
beginning a Simple and Literal Translation of some Passages of the Fathers of
the Church, which the Author made in his continual Infirmities, for the Comfort
of himself, and of some persons of Piety.

Afterward, his Manuscript having been viewed by very Prudent and Illuminated
persons, they judged that it ought to be published: but withal, that it was
fit it should be first enlarged and explicated by a kind of Paraphrase upon
some of the Conceptions of the Holy Fathers which are couched in this Work;
thereby to render it useful to more people by rendering it intelligible to all.

You will therefore find in some places, that the Author has picked out only
the Sense, and (as one may say) the Sap and the Juice of the Doctrine of these
great Saints, in explicating their Conceptions, and in adding to their
Expressions; yet so as not to swerve from their Sentiments, nor stray from the
Character of their Spirits.

It was also conceived that it might be permitted to support their Reasonings
with the authority of the sacred Scripture: and as that is the source of all
their Lights, to rely principally thereupon to strengthen this Work.

And this Liberality appeared to be so much the more tolerable, by how much it
was sometimes even Necessary to render the Discourse more consequent, more
connected, more forcible, and finally more capable to serve for the Edification
of our Neighbor, which is the sole Intention we had, and which indeed one can
justly have.

For the rest, it ought not to be taken amiss, if among the diverse Conceptions
here collected from the Scriptures and from the Fathers, there are found some
which resemble one another; since even that Resemblance has also great
Advantages. For besides that thereby it is made manifest, that these
Conceptions are not particular Opinions, it is more over a sensible Mark of the
spirit of Truth which dictated them; and it is to be hoped that they who shall
Read them in the same Spirit, will always derive from them some new
Instructions.

We have placed St. Augustine in the first Rank of the Church Fathers whose
Sentiments are here related, because we found his Discourses so effectual, that
we belive'd we had reason to make them the Foundation of this Work, and to
style them by the Name of Principles; because in effect all that which ensues,
whether out of the same St. Augustine, or out of the other Fathers, relates to
the first Maxims which we have drawn from him, as Consequences from their
Principles.

It would have been very Natural, and certainly very profitable, to join in
this Treatise the Example of the Holy Fathers to their Doctrine, but the
Author having already traced the History of their holy Death in his Book Of
the Death of the Just, you may thither have recourse.

The CONTENTS of the Principal Matters contained in this Book.
I. Article. THe First Principle of St. Augustine, That the Difference which is
between Perfect and Imperfect Christians, is, That the One love Death and
endure Life, and that the Other love Life and endure Death. page 1. II.
Article. The Second Principle of St. Augustine, That proportionably as the
Christian feels his love for Virtue to increase, he also feels the Desire of
Death to enerease in himself. p. 7. The Union of the Two precedent Principles.
p. 9. III. Article. St. Augustine having established these Two Principles;
answers an Objection. p. 11. IV. Article. The Third Principle of St. Augustine,
That there are among Christians two sorts of Fear to displease God. p. 14. V.
Article. Other Principles of St. Augustine; That we are not happy in this Life
but by the Hope and by the Desire of Eternal Goods; etc. p. 21. VI. Article.
The Fathers who preceded and followed St. Augustine, explicated themselves in
the same manner as he did upon the same Subject. p. 32. Tertullian says, That
Christians are distinguished from all other Men by the Desire they have of
Death; That they look upon it as a Grace which is to crown all the other
Graces; and That it is principally that which they daily demand of God in their
Prayers. p. 33. VII. Article. Some Maxims of St. Cyprian, collected from
several places of his Writings; and principally from the Discourse he composed,
Of Mortality. p. 38. The First Maxim of St. Cyprian: That Christians who dread
Death are Unjust and Unreasonable, because in saying every day to God in the
Lords Prayer, Thy Kingdom come, they pray him to hasten their Death. p. 39. The
Second Maxim of St. Cyprian: That it is no mervail that Infidells and Wicked
people dread Death; but that this Weakness is not tolerable in Christians. p.
43. The third Maxim of St. Cyprian: That Christians ought not to love the
World, since the World hates Christians: etc. p. 46. The Fourth Maxim of St.
Cyprian: That Death ought to be considered by Christians as a passage from the
Miseries of this Life to a glorious Immortality. p. 48. VIII. Article. The
Sentiments of St. Gregory of Nazian concerning the obligation which Christians
have to contemn Life and to cover Death. p. 54. IX. Article. The Abridgment of
a Discourse of St. Gregory Bishop of Nisse, Wherein he shows, That we should be
so far from lamenting them who go forth of this Life, that we should rather
envy and desire their Happiness. p. 62. X. Article. An Abridgment of a Treatise
which St. Ambrose made de bono Mortis, of the good of Death: where he says,
That it is Death which delivers us from the Miseries of this Life, and from the
servitude of Sin, etc. p. 77. XI. Article. An excellent Dostrine of St.
Ambrose, who establishes two manners of Living and of Dying, observed in the
Sacred Scripture. p. 82. XII. Article. Diverse Instructions of St. John
Chrysostom. p. 89. 1. Instruction, where he shows what is it to be a Christian;
and that his principal Character is to desire and to love Death. p. 90. XIII.
Article. The Second Instruction of St. John Chrysostom: That we should be
miserable if our Life were never to end, etc. p. 100. XIV. Article. The Third
Instruction of St. Chrysostom, That Death is that which most of all humbles
Man; and that Humility being the Foundation of all Virtues, it follows, That to
be virtuous, we must meditate incessantly upon Death, etc. p. 112. XV. Article.
The Fourth Instruction of St. John Chrysostom: That we ought to be as ready to
go forth of the World, as Criminalls are ready to go forth of their Prison,
when one brings to them the Princes pardon. p. 122. XVI. Article. The Fifth
Instruction of St. Chrysostom: That if we lived as beseems true Christians, we
should not have any difficulty to conceive Death to be the most desirable of
all good things. p. 128. XVII. Article. The Sixth Instruction of St. John
Chrysostom: That the Death of Christ Jesus should have cured us from the fear
of Dying: and that the Ceremonies of the Church in the Funerals of the
Faithful, ought to give us Joy and Comfort. p. 134. XVIII. Article. An
Exhortation of St. John Chrysostom, where he declaims with much vehemence
against the lazy and imperfect Christians who fear Death; and instructs after
an admirable manner the zealous and perfect Christians who desire Death. p.
146. XIX. Article. The Sentiments of St. Jerome, concerning the Advantages
which Death brings to Christians, and the Obligation they have to prepare
themselves for it, and to think continually upon it. p. 154. XX. Article. St.
Jerome teaches us what temper we ought to observe in the disgust of Life, and
in the desire of Death. p. 160. XXI. Article. An Excellent Instruction of the
same St. Jerome: p. 173. XXII. Article. St. Jerome, or the Author of some
Epistles attributed to him, which are at the end of his Works, presses this
Doctrine farther, and expressly teaches, That a Christian ought not only not to
fear Death, wherein he would do no more than many Pagans have done: but that he
ought also to represent it often to himself, to desire it, and to love it, if
he will imitate Christ Jesus. p. 177. XXIII. Article. We return, following the
Order of the time of St. Augustine, and we relate some more Sentiments of this
holy Doctor, which confirm the Truths we have established by his Principles.
p. 181. An Excellent Moral of St. Augustine against them who fear a temporal
Death, and dread not the Eternal Death. p. 182. XXIV. Art. A pithy Reflection of
St. Augustine upon the shortness of the Life of the Body, and upon the Eternity
of the Life of the Soul. p. 188. XXV. Art. A most true and edificatory
Observation of St. Augustine, That God by a particular Mercy besprinkles the
most pleasing Sweets of this World with Bitterness, and permits his Elect to be
afflicted with Infirmities, which Contradictions, with Calumnies, and with
Crosses, to oblige them to despise Life, and to desire Death. p. 193. XXVI.
Article. St. Augustine teaches in several places of his writings as an assured
Doctrine, That the most solid Virtue of Christians, and the most Visible
Character of the Predestinate, is, to sigh continually in the expectation of
Death, and in the Hope of another Life. p. 197. XXVII. Article. A Comparison of
Faithful Christians with the Faithful Isralites: In which St. Augustine shows,
That as the first coming of the Messiah was the object of the continual Desires
and of the devotion of the true Isralites; so also the second coming of Christ
Jesus ought to be the Aim of the most solid Piety and of the most fervent
Desires of Christians. p. 203. XXVIII. Article. An Instruction of S. Isidore of
Damiet to all Christians, to excite in them a perfect desire of Death. p. 213.
XXIX. Article. St. Eucherius Archbishop of Lion, exhorts Christians to observe
attentively the different Agitations of human Passions, the shortness of Life,
and the uncertainty of Death; to the end they may never engage themselves in
the Tumults of the World, and that they may be evermore prepared to die. p.
216. XXX. Article. St. Fulgentius and St. Paulinus prove, That Death is a
Recompense for the Just, and a Chastisement for the Wicked, That Life is to be
counted by the quantity of good Works which one has done, and not by the
number of Years one has lived. p. 223. XXXI. Article. Reflections of St.
Gregory Pope, upon the Subject which is proposed in this work. p. 231. 1.
Reflection. That the continual view of Death is the most assured means to lead a
Holy and Quiet Life. p. 231. XXXII. Art. 2. Reflection of St. Gregory, That
naturally all the Desires and all the Actions of Man tend to Death; That Grace
should do in us, that which Nature does of it self. etc. p. 233. XXXIII. Art.
3. Reflection of St. Gregory; That they who love the World have some reason to
fear the end thereof; but That they who serve Christ Jesus, ought not to be
apprehensive of the Worlds destruction, etc. p. 238. XXXIV. Art. 4. Reflection
of St. Gregory: That there are few Just persons, who can truly say with St.
Paul; god forbid that I should glory in any other thing, than in the Cross of
our Lord Jesus Christ; because the World is dead and crucified to me, as I am
Dead and Crucified to the World. p. 241. XXXV. Art. A pithy Description which
St. Gregory the Great makes of the necessities and of the Myseries of the Body
and of the Soul: whence this holy Pope concludes, That men ought to desire
Death for ^he enjoyment of a better Life; in which they shall no longer be
exposed either to Sorrow or to Sin. p. 257. XXXVI. Art. S. John Climachus
distinguishes the Desires of Death which the Devil suggests unto us, from those
which Grace inspires into us; and he composed one Degree of his holy Ladder
upon this subject, where he shows That the Meditation of Death is the most
profitable of all Spiritual Practices. p. 270. XXXVII. Art. St. Bernard Teaches
us, That Hope is the portion of true Christians, and That this Virtue makes
them to love Death, and to suffer patiently all the evils of this Life. p. 277.
XXXVIII. Art. St. Bernard proves, That to the end we may not dread Death, but
receive it which Patience, and even with Joy; we must prepare our selves for it
every day by (...) true Repentance. That by this mean^ Grace overcomes Nature;
That what appears so terrible to a sinful man becomes pleasing to a just man,
but particularly to such as have embraced a Religious and solitary Life. p.
288. XXXIX. Art. The Sentiments of St. Bernard touching the Comtempt which
perfect Christians ought to have of Life and of Health. From whence he takes
Occasion to speak of the Patience which they ought to have in their
Infirmities, and of the Joy which the continual thought of Death ought to
afford them. p. 294. XXXX. Art. An Extract of some passages of the Book of the
Imitation of Christ; where it is treated of the Contempt of Life, and of the
desire of Death. p. 299. XXXXI. Art. The admirable Praises which St. Laurence
Justinian gives to Death: From whence he concludes, That it is no wonder if
they who are the most perfect among Christians, are they who most desire it. p.
311. XXXXII. Art. A Collection of some of the admirable Sentiments which St.
Teresa has left us in her Writings, touching the Meditation upon Eternity and
upon the Desire of Death. p. 318. The Conclusion of this whole Collection. How
as from the beginning of this Treatise, we have drawn from St. Augustine such
Principles as were proper to establish this Proposition: That perfect Souls
desire Death, and receive it with Joy. So we end this Collection with a
Discourse which the same holy Doctor made upon the same Subject; wherein he
pretends to engage all Men, by their proper Interest, to desire to pass forth
of this World. p. 326.
To the devout Peruser of these Collections.
IF in the Mouth of two or three Witnesses every word is established: Mat.
18.16.
You have here (devout Reader) above six times that number of irrefragable
Testifiers of that Truth, which is intended to be established in this short
Treatise, to wit, That Christians ought to despise Life and desire Death.

I. S. Augustine Leads the Van, whose Principles are the Basis of the following
Building. He was one of the most famous and learned Fathers of the Church, and
the renowned Bishop of Hippo in Africa: where he flourished in admirable
Sanctity in year of our Redemption, 400. and died in the year, 433. The Fathers
who preceded and who followed S. Augustine, deliver the same Doctrine upon the
same subject, to wit. II. Tertullian. Who flourished in the Year, 230. III. St.
Cyprian. The most Eloquent and holy Bishop of Carthage: who was crowned with
Martyrdom, in the Year, 250. IV. St. Gregory. Bishop of Nazian, surnamed the
Divine, the equal of St. Basil, and the Companion of his studies, who
flourished in the Year, 370. V. St. Basil. Surnamed the Great, Archbishop of
Cesarea in Cappadocia, who flourished at the same time, to wit, 370. VI. St.
Gregory. Bishop of Nyce, the Brother of St. Basil, who flourished in the Year,
380. VII. St. Ambrose. Bishop of Milan, who died in the Year, 397. VIII. St.
John Chrysostom. Bishop of Constantinople, who died about the Year, 407. IX.
St. Ireneus. Bishop of Lions in France, who suffered under Severus, in the Y.
180. X. St. Jerome. Priest and Doctor of the Church, who died in the Year,
420. XI. St. Isidor. Bishop of Sevil in Spain, who died in the Year, 636. XII.
St. Eucherius. Bishop of Lions in France, who died about the Year, 433. XIII.
St. Fulgentius. Bishop of Ruspen in Africa, who died in the Year, 529. XIV. St.
Paulinus. Bishop of Nola, in Campania, who died in the Year, 431. XV. St.
Gregory. The first most holy Hope of that Name, deservedly surnamed the Great,
who died in the Year, 604. XVI. St. John Climacus. A holy Abbot in Mount Sina,
who flourished in the Year, 560. XVII. St. Bernard. Abbot of Claraval, an
Apostolical man of great Sanctity, who died in the Year, 1153. XVIII. The
Author Of the Books of the Imitation of Christ. XIX. St. Laurence Justinian.
The 1. Patriark of Venice, died in the Year, 455. XX. St. Teresa. A holy Virgin
in Spain, who lived and dyed in the last age. Upon the view of these many
Evidences and multitudes of Authorities, and upon the frequent perusal of
these Collections; you will undoubtedly by degrees render your Life more easy
unto you, and remove that vulgar and universal error out of your mind,
concerning the dreadful apprehension of Death; which you will familiarly behold
and hourly expect as the happy period of your painful and dangerous
Pilgrimage, and as the desirable passage opening to eternal Life, eternal rest,
eternal felicity.
THE Holy Desires OF DEATH.
Article I. The First Principle of St. Augustine. S. Aug.
That the Difference which is between a Perfect and Imperfect Christian, is,
That the first desires Death with Ardour, and endures Life with Patience;
whereas the second only receives Death with Submission, and has not yet
quitted all the Ties which ordinarily fasten men to Life.
WIll you know what Progress you have made in Charity? In Epist. ^. Joan.
tract 9.
Examine your-self upon these Words of St. John: The Perfection of our Love
toward God, consists in having an entire Confidence in him for the day of
Judgment. So that Charity is perfect in all them who have this Confidence. What
is it, to have this Confidence for the day of Judgment? It Is not to dread its
coming.

Some there are who do not believe this day will come. I speak not of these
impious Wretches; for what likelihood is there that they can either desire of
dread that which they believe will never come to pass? Epist. 1. Joan. c. 4. v.
18.
But as soon as a man begins to believe the day of Judgment he must also begin
to fear it. True it is that so long as he only fear's it, he has not yet
Confidence, because he is not replenished with this Charity which animates
Faith. Nevertheless this Fear ceases not to produce excellent Effects. It is a
beginning of Mortification and of good Works; and it ordinarily falls out that
by these exercises of Virtue, they come to desire what formerly they only
dreaded. Then a Soul looks no longer upon that last day, but as the first of
her Happiness; nor does she go against her own Sen, timents, when she
Prays-saying; Lord, Let your Kingdom come. In effect, He who fears lest the
Kingdom of God should come, fears also lest his Prayer should be heard. Judge
now in what manner one Prays, when one fears to obtain what one demands:
whereas he who Prays with that Considence which perfect Charity gives him,
desires effectually that what he demands may be speedily granted him.

We may therefore say that there are yet some imperfect persons, to whom
Sufferings and Death serve only for an exercise of their Patience and of their
Courage; and who are not yet strong enough to desire to Suffer or to Die.
These, because they desire to live longer, simply suffer Death when it befalls
them. But there are others more perfect, who are so unfettered from Life, that
in lieu of loving it as a good thing, they endure it as an Evil.

All that the former can do, is to conquer the repugnance of Nature, and to
submit themselves to the Will of God: because finally they like rather to
conform themselves to what he has ordained concerning them, than to leave
themselves to be transported with a bootless weakness in following their own
will. Thus, although the desire of this present Life struggles in their Heart
against the necessity of Dying; yet they arm themselves with Fortitude and with
Patience to receive Death with Peace and with Submission. One may say, That the
Christians who are in this Estate, suffer Death with Patience.

But the Others, who desire with the Apostle, that their Souls may be untyed
from their Bodies to be united to Christ Jesus; are not content to suffer Life
as a necessary Evil: but they receive Death it self with Joy as a great Good:
because they find nothing in this present Life but subjects of Disquiet and of
Sorrow, and that they find in Death the end of all these Pains, and the
beginning of an Eternal Felicity.

Article. II. The Second Principle of St. Augustine, That proportionally as the
Christian feels his Love for Virtue to increase; he feels also the Desire of
Death to increase within him.
WHen a man has a lively and sincere Faith, which gives him a sight of the
place whether he is to walk during his abode upon Earth; and of that where he
shall arrive one day, after his going forth of this World: the Desire of Death
ought to increase in him, according to the increase of his Piety: because it
sussiceth not that Faith makes him see that Celestial dwelling, where he is to
be settled for ever; but Charity must also make him love it, and desire speedily
to obtain it. Now it is impossible for him to have this Disposition in his
Spirit and in his Heart, without being glad to go forth of this Life.

An Excellent Passage of one of St. Augustins Disciples, who made a Collection
of his Sentences and of his chief Maxims: where the tow precedent Principles
are united.
This Collection is attribution to St. Prosper.
IF we consult our Faith, and have the Sentiments which it ought to inspire into
us; we shall acknowledge, that Sanctity of Life and a Desire of Death are things
inseparable. For one cannot be truly a Christian if one loves not God, and if
one aspires not to that Eternal Life which he has promised to all them who
love him. We see it by Faith, we expect it by Hope, we love it and we desire it
by Charity. According as a man advances in the practice of these Virtues, he
advances also in the exercise of this holy Desire. The more ardour he has for
eternal Life, the less adhesion he has to the temporal Life: and considering
Death as the sole issue out of this World, and as the entrance into that
Celestial Life, which ought to be the object of all our Defires, he looks with
Joy upon that last moment which is to take him from off the face of the Earth.
So that when Faith and Charity are perfect in a Soul, the Desire of Death is
there at the same time so perfect, that it raises itself above that love of
Life, which blind and material Nature inspires into us. But when Virtue is yet
imperfect, although Faith persuades us that Death is advantageous unto us, yet
Nature thwart's in us this holy Thought; and we then feel that we possess Life
with pleasure, and should lose it with pain and difficulty; whereas perfect
Christians endure Life with pain, and lose it with pleasure.

Article III. St. Augustine having established these two Principles; proposes to
himself the Objection of some persons of Piety, who fear the Judgments of God,
and who say, That they do not believe they should do well in desiring Death;
and that it seems better to them to demand of God Time for Mortification, and
for becoming more Perfect.
I Know not upon what they can ground themselves, Quaest. Evan in Mat. q. 17.
who having a sincere Faith, can say nevertheless that they would not dye so
soon, to the end they might have more time to labor for their Salvation and
their Perfection. For it is certain that the most infallible Mark which a Soul
can have of her advancement in Virtue, is when she advances in this holy
disposition which makes her desire Death. If then these persons will speak
according to truth, Let them not say, I desire not to die so soon, to the end I
may have time to become more virtuous; but let them rather say, I desire to
live longer, because I am not virtuous enough to love Death. Thus, not to be
willing to die so soon, is not to the Faithful a means to acquire more Virtue;
but it is a sign that they have not yet acquired any. Let them therefore who
have hitherto said, that they would not die to the end they might become more
perfect, say henceforth, That they desire to die: and this will make it appear,
that they are arrived at Christian Perfection.

Article IV. The Third Principle of S. Augustine: That there are among
Christians two sorts of Fear to displease God; One of which is destroyed, and
the Other strengthened by Charity. From whence this holy Doctor concludes, That
Faithful Souls which are the true Spouses of Christ Jesus, fear nothing so much
as to be for a long time separated from this Divine Bridegroom.
THere is a Fear which is banished by Charity, In Psalm. 127. Tr. 9. n Epist. i
Joan. and pass. 1 Joan. 28
according to that word of Saint John: Fear is not found with Charity; but
perfect Charity drives out Fear: and he who fears, is not perfect in Charity.
There is another Fear, which the Royal Prophet calls, the Fear of our Lord;
that pure and chaste Fear, Psa. 18 10.
which remains for ever and ever. Which gives us occasion to observe, That
there are two forts of the Fear of God, one of which will subsist in Heaven
with Charity, and the other will be banished thence; the one will perish with
Life, the other will remain eternally.

I cannot better explain unto you the Nature and the Properties of these two
Fears, then in placing before your Eyes a Comparison which seems to me very
just and very sensible. Figure to your selves two Women, One of them chaste,
and the Other unfaithful to her Husband: Is it not true, that when their
Husbands are absent, the unfaithful Woman fears at every hour the return of her
Husband; and that on the contrary, the chaste Woman fears lest her Husband
should stay too long from coming?

Our Souls are the Spouses of Christ Jesus, and during the state of this mortal
life, this Divine Bridegroom is separated from his Spouses. Now if you agree to
this truth, there remains no more, my Brethren, but to ask your selves
concerning the nature of the Fear which you feel; to see whether it is either
that imperfect Fear, which Charity ought to exclude, or that other tender and
awful Fear, which is to remain eternally. O Christian Souls! do not neglect
this occasion which I present unto you, to know well your selves. Question your
Conscience: Will you know whether you truly love this Divine Bridegroom? Do you
desire that he should come presently? or that he should yet for some time delay
his coming? Behold, my Brethren, and consider how your Heart is thereupon
disposed, and from thence you shall know what your Fear is, and what is your
love. Alas! How many Christians are there to whom if one should tell this News,
Christ Jesus will come to morrow to take you out of this World, they would say;
Lord, stay a little longer, I have only begun to taste Life, I have Youth and
Health about me; my House is not yet well established; my Children are in their
tender age and cannot pass without me; I have in my mind great designs for the
public good; the Poor have need of my assistance; I perform many good Works; I
render Justice without Passion and without Interest; another will possess my
place, who will not perchance acquit himself so worthily. Rather take away from
the Earth those Wicked ones, who only incommode the good people: It concerns
the honor of your sacred Name to exterminate those Atheists who contemn you;
it concerns your Glory to confound that Tyrant who abuses his power. Why strike
you not with Death that Usurer who heaps up treasures at the charge of the
Widow and of the Orphan? Why take you not an exemplary chastisement upon that
public Blood sucker who ruins a multitude of families? But as for us, who
continually bless you, who give Alms, and who spread abroad in all places the
effects of our cares and of our Liberalities, leave us to live to honor you.
It Is thus that the major part of Christians would speak. But as for them who
are arrived at such a degree of Perfection as to despise Life, the World, and
themselves; they, I say, who aspire to nothing else but to unite themselves to
God for evermore; they would make use of another manner of language. Come, they
would say, Come, O thou too long exdected Hour of the Bridegrooms arrival! Our
Souls always burning with a desire to be with him, find that all the moments of
this miserable Life which separates us from him, are so many ages. Why do you
stay, O Lord? Have not our Sighs given you sufficiently to understand that we
lang(...) with the love of your beauty (...) You need but only knock at the
door, our Heart watches, even whilst our Eyes seem to be shut up by Sleep.

Article V. Other Principles of St. Augustine: That we are not happy in this
Life, but by the Hope and by the Desire of Eternal Goods: That to be worthy to
enter into the Celestial Country, we must be willing to go forth of our Exile:
That the whole Life of a Christian is but a holy Desire of things to come, and
a generous Contempt of present Goods.
In Psalm. 83. and a^os.
WE are here in the Region of Death; but we are not, thanks be to God, to remain
here always. We are to pass from the Region of the Dead to that of the Living.
In the mean while, there is nothing in this Region of the Dead but labor,
sorrow, fear, affliction, temptation. The persons who are unhappy in the World,
are there truly unhappy; but they who believe themselves to the there happy, do
there enjoy but a false happiness; and a false happiness is a true unhappiness.
Thus, to speak truth, there are none but only they who suffer not themselves to
be blinded by the false felicities of this Life, who can enjoy in this World a
true Comfort, and who can hope to enjoy one day a true Felicity in the other.

You then who agree to this, that one is miserable in this Life, listen to the
Savior of the World, who tells you, Mat. 5.5.
Happy are they who weep and lament. O how mysterious is the Felicity of these
Tears? Nothing is so agreeable to Misery as to Sigh and to Weep: nothing is so
opposite to misery, as to be Happy. Why then O Lord, do you speak of a certain
kind of men who are afflicted and who at the same time are Happy? Let us
endeavor, my Brethren, to comprehend the truth of these Words. Why does Christ
Jesus call them Happy who Weep; and what Happiness do they possess in
lamenting? This Happiness, O Christians, it is the Contempt of Life, it is the
Desire of Death. They lament the length of their Banishment; they weep out of
compassion for the blindness of them who are tied to the Earth; they weep
finally out of the impatience they have to come to that dear Country which God
has promised them: and whatever Beauty presents itself to their eyes upon the
banks of the Rivers of Babylon, they stay not upon them but to weep.

Blessed are they who weep in this manner, because they shall be comforted,
Mat. 5.5.12.
and because a great recompense is reserved for them in Heaven. But the better
to know their Happiness, let us mark a little the misfortune of such as are in
Criminal Joy of Worldlings. Their Heart is only sensible of the objects of
their Passions: they make it their whole study to seek out new Pleasures: yet
whatever care they employ in it, a disgust so closely follows the enjoyment,
that all their industry cannot soon enough furnish new inventions to entertain
this diversity. The excess of good Cheer takes away their appetit and ruins
their Health; a tender and constant Freindship tire's them; the best
entertainment grows tedious to them; their own greatness perplexes and combers
them; if they are in company they would be alone, and yet they cannot endure
solitude. The Rich envy's the tranquillity of the Poor; the Ambitious wishes
for wealth to raise himself to honor; the Voluptuous finds that every thing
incommodes him, and creates to himself a true torment by his solicitude in
seeking for his pleasure, Finally, if we look upon things but only with human
aspects, they are extremely unhappy. But the most terrible of all their
miseries, is, That the disgust they conceive of this Life, does not move them
to desire another. They languish, they sigh, they weep sometimes in the middle
of their delights: but their delights will soon have an end and their tears
will never be dried up: And after they have wept in this Life, they shall be
plonged in darkness of Hell, where Despair and Rage shall make them weep
eternally.

Consequently to this Maxim, St. Augustine teaches moreover elsewhere: Ep. ad
Probam. Tract. 4. in Ep. Joan: passim in Psalm.
That all the Life of a Christian ought to be but a holy desire of Death and of
the goods of Eternity. No man, says this great Saint, going from Earth shall
arrive at Heaven, to be there satiated with that eternal Justice, which makes
up all the joy of the Blessed; unless he has had an ardent thirst, and an
unsatiable hunger thereof, whilst he was yet in the world. And therefore it is
Written, That they who have an Hunger and they who have a Thirst of Justice,
Mat. 5.6.
shall be happy, because they shall be satiated. It is then most certain, That
all the Justice of Man upon earth, is no other thing than a Thirst and an
ardent desire of the Eternal Justice. But how can one desire that Eternal
Justice, if one love's Life, if one dreads Death, and if one does not even
desire to die in order to possess in Heaven this Justice which one cannot
possess upon Earth? For the Felicity of a Christian cannot be perfect unless
his Charity is also perfect; and the perfection of Charity is no other thing
than this Eternal Justice, which consists in knowing God and in possessing him
perfectly. It Is for this reason that the true Christians look not upon all the
things of the Earth but with the eye of Faith, nor love them but with the
Spirit of Charity. Now Faith and Charity do not link themselves to that which
is perishable. He who practices these two Virtues, possesses temporal Goods,
without permitting himself to be possessed by them. He gathers Riches, but it is
to distribute them liberally to the Poor. He has care of his Health without
being disquieted, as well knowing that all the precautions one takes to
preserve it are useless, and sometimes even criminal, when one submits them not
to the orders of Providence. Although his Honor is dear unto him, he ceases not
to suffer calumnies with patitience. He is tender for his Friends, without
having effeminate complacencies for them. Finally, he resembles a Traveller in
all things, who comforts himself when the weather is bad, or his lodging
incommodious, because he prepared himself for all sorts of sufferings, and for
that he expects no repose but in the end of his journey. Thus, let detraction
decry him, let poverty oppress him, let sicknesses torment him, let the loss of
Friends afflict him; the desire of Death and the Hope of the other Life render
his Soul unmovable amidst all these miseries. This Desire and this Hope are as
two Ankers, which resist the most furious Tempests, and which defend his Heart
against the Violence of Passions, and against the blows of Fortune.

Article VI. There are an infinity of other suchlike Thoughts and Expressions
in St. Augustine. But it will perhaps suffice to have related these which we
have collected from many passages of his Writings to serve for the Foundation
and for the Principles of this Work.
THis holy Doctor drew from the sacred Scriptures and from the Tradition of
the Church, the substance of these Maxims: and the Fathers who went before him,
Tertul.
or they who followed him, have explicated themselves in the same manner upon
the same subject.

Tertullian says, That the Christians were distinguished from all other men by
the Desire of Death, That they look upon it as a Grace which is to crown all
their Graces, and That it is principally that which they demand of God every
day in their Prayers.

What, I pray you, is the Idea we ought to have of Christians? In Apol. and
passim.
The Christians are certain people ever-more ready to die; who have this
thought imprinted in their Spirit and this desire engraved in their Heart; who
look upon Death as the end of their servitude and the beginning of their
happiness. It Is, as one would say, a People and a Nation of men distinguished
from all others by the contempt they have of Life. Moreover they are ready to
lose it; and that which afflicts others comforts them; for they know that
Baptism has already separated them from the World, and therefore they are glad
when Death comes to deliver them out of it for evermore. They conceive it to be
a want of Faith for one to testify the least fear of Death in the most
dangerous diseases, or at the sight of the most cruel torments. Is there
question of suffering for God? One may perceive Joy painted in their
countenances, they disdain the Tyrants, they encourage their Executioners, they
cast themselves with alacrity into the flames. All that prolongs their Life,
retards their Felicity. Let Us go die, say they, we are Christians, we glory in
it, and the glory of a Christian is to die courageously for his Master; to
happy we, who being the Disciples of Christ Jesus, may die as he did.

True Christians, says Tertulian in another place, desire with an extreme
passion to break the Chains which tie them to the Earth, and to go to reign in
Heaven with Christ Jesus. Our Soul, it is true, is no longer a slave to the
Devil, since the Savior of the World has ransomed it; but our Body is yet
under his empire. He can raise Persecutions against us, and expose us to the
rage of our Enemies. Shall we fear him for so small a matter? Shall we not have
the courage to free our selves from his power? What is it that Death has so
terrible in it, since Christ Jesus has showed us the example of dying well?
There is no other way to come to the Kingdom which he has prepared for us.
Lets die with him, O Christians, if we will reign with him. These thoughts are
the ordinary entertainment of the Faithful, and the continual object of their
vows. The Pagans are confounded, and the Devils despair, but the Angels rejoice
at their resolution.

This Constancy which the Christians testify in affronting Death, and this
contempt they have of Life, are so linked to the Spirit of Chrystianisme, that
even although the Son of God should not have expresty signified that Christians
ought to demand to die in demanding the Coming of his Kingdom; yet they would
not have ceased to offer up to him this Petition So true it is, that the sole
character of Christian ought to inspire a continual contempt of Life, and an
ardent desire to possess the Kingdom which Christ Jesus has promised to his
Elect.

Article VII. That which Tertullian has so well expressed in few Words, has
been very largly explicated by St. Cyprian in many passages of his Writings;
and Principally in the Discourse he composed upon Mortality. We have collected
some Maxims of this great-Bishop concerning this subject, S. Cypri.
and particularly of the eagerness which true Christians ought to have to get
forth of this Life.
The First Maxim of St. Cyprian; That the Christians who fear Death, are Unjust
and Unreasonable, since in saying to God every day in the Lords Prayer, Thy
Kingdom come, they desire our Lord to hasten their Death.
WE may say that they who fear Death, show plainly that they know not the prime
Principles of Christianism. It Is surely to have little love for Christ Jesus,
to apprehend the arrival of his Kingdom. May not one say, That we are the
Enemies of the Son of God, and that we fear he should ascend his Throne to
punish them who have offended him? What is there more unjust and more
unreasonable than to wish every day that the Will of God may be accomplished,
and yet to complain when it is accomplished? Nevertheless it is this disorder
into which most of us fall. We do as those bad Servants and those rebellious
Slaves, who must be trailed against their will into the presence of their
Masters. We pass forth of this Life rather by necessity than by submission; and
by such a cowardly repugnance we make it plainly appear that we have no Faith,
nor any Hope to be rewarded by him who calls us.

Surely I cannot comprehend how it is possible that a Christian Soul can divide
her-self into such contrary Sentiments. For if the Captivity of the Earth does
yet please us, why do we pray that the Kingdom of Heaven may come? To what end
do our Lips pronounce so frequently such holy Prayers, in which we demand of
God that the day of our glory and of our triumph may arrive? Is it that we had
rather serve the Devil upon Earth, then reign in Heaven with Christ Jesus?
Either let us change our belief, or else let us change our language; let us
speak like Pagans if we will live like Pagans. Let us dread Death, if we hope
for nothing after Death. But why should we not despise this Life, if we expect
a better? Let Us make it appear that we submit our-selves to Faith, and that we
are fully persuaded of the truth of the Promises of Christ Jesus.

The Second Maxim of St. Cyprian: That it is no wonder if Infidells and Wicked
people fear Death; but that this Weakness is not tolerable in Christians.
LEt him dread to die, who has not obtained as we have a new birth of the holy
Ghost, and who not being regenerated in the Waters of Baptism, shall be cast
headlong into the Flames which can never be quenched. Let him dread to die, who
has not the sacred Unction, and who has not been marked with the adorable and
wholesome sign of the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. Finally, let him dread to
die, who in the delay of his Death find's also the delay of the punishments
which expect him after Life. But he who is truly a Christian, and who loves
God, can fear nothing, and ought to hope all. Death is not a Death for him, but
a Life. It Is not a destruction of his Being, it is a changing of estate which is
to end all his Miseries. Since Death has been joined to the source of Life,
which is Christ Jesus, it has lost all its malediction and all its bitterness.
It has changed those horrible names which affrighted us, to take the pleasing
names which comfort us. Now the Christians call it a Sleep which charms our
displeasures, a Passage which conducts us to the Celestial Country, a happy
Ship wreck which casts us into the Haven. So long as man was yet in the first
state of Innocence, Death was a punishment wherewith the Divine Justice
threatened him if he should fall into Sin; but in the state of Grace, it is a
Sacrifice by which it purifies the Just, and renders him worthy of Eternal
Glory. Formerly, to terify man, it was said, to him; If thou Sinnest, thou
shall die; and now, to support him and to encourage him in the sufferings of
this Life, it is said unto him: If thou die not thou will Sin; and the
Apostles exhort us to comfort one another by the consideration of the nearness
of Death and of the Coming of Christ Jesus.

The Third Maxim of St. Cyprian: That Christians ought not to love the World
because the World hates Christians: and That when Death delivers them from all
commerce with the World, it is a subject of Joy for them.
It Is for him who finds his delights in a worldly Life; to desire to remain
long in the World. It Is for him whom the World keeps as it were enchanted by
the charm of pleasures, to desire not to go forth of the World. But since the
World hates true Christians, why do you who are Christians love the World which
loves not you? Why do you not rather love Christ Jesus who loves you? and who
calls you to crown you with all sorts of Goods? Why do you not frequently
consider, that you have renounced the World by the Vows of your Baptism; and
that you stay not in the World during the time of your life, but as a Stranger
during his Journey? Hate then the World, since the World hates you; and desire
that happy day in which you shall pass into the true place of your repose,
there to enjoy the liberty of the children of God.

The Fourth Maxim of St. Cyprian: That Death ought to be considered by
Christians as a passage from the miseries of this Life to a glorious
Immortality.
It Is certain that the Servants of God will not enjoy a perfect Peace till
Death shall deliver them from all the miseries of this World, and until they
are arrived to that happy Haven, where an eternal Tranquillity reigns. It Is
the sole means which is left us to possess that Peace without trouble, that Joy
without sorrow, and that Pleasure without disgust, which we in vain seek to
find elsewhere. So that we ought to be so far from fearing Death which
procures us so many Goods, that on the contrary we ought to rejoice when it
approches. In effect, this Life is it any other thing than a Combat and a
continual Temptation? Let the most happy persons of the World examine
themselves, and then let them speak sincerely; they will avouch that their
purest Joy is evermore troubled by some pensiveness; that all their Sweets are
intermixed with bitterness; that their Honors are accompanied with vexations
and solicitudes; and finally, that Evils and Goods are linked together with an
inseparable colligation. Yet if Man has any desire in this unfortunate Life,
it is surely a desire to be happy. It must needs be that he has formerly had in
himself an original greatness, whereof there remains in him only say ruins
upon which he strives to re-build some kind of Felicity. All his thoughts aim
at this end; but he knows not distinctly either the Happiness he has lost, or
the way he must take to recover it. His Soul conducts him always toward Heaven
from whence she derives her birth, and his Senses dragg him always toward the
Earth, whereof they are formed. He neither knows what he is, nor what he would;
and like to a Vessel floating at the mercy of the Winds and of the Waves, he
serves for a wethercock to fortune and to his own cupiditie. Let him fortify
himself with the wisest Maxims of Philosophy; let experience, a good wit, and
an human reason, guide him (...) his actions; let him make choice among all the
goods of the Earth, of them which are least subject to change, and which are
most capable to render a man happy: all his labor vanishes into smoke, he will
repent him-self of his choice, he will seek after other goods, and those other
goods will deceive him. But when will he be able to stop his affections; what
means will he find out to preserve them, and to preserve himself? Ever since
this blind Love of Life has carried men on to invent Remedies to prolong it,
have they met with any one against Death? Why then do they not look upon it
rather as an infallible Remedy against their Disquiets, and as the wholesome end
of all their Evils? Ah, it is that they are not truly Christians; it is that they
know no other Life than this; it is that they doubt of Gods promises, which
never deceive us, and that after so many dismal proofs of the uncertainty of
the things of this World, they love rather still to deceive themselves than to
acknowledge that they are deceived. But the true Disciples of Christ Jesus,
being persuaded of the truth of his Words, and enflamed with his love, have no
difficulty to undeceive themselves from the vanities of the World, to contemn
Life and even to take an extreme pleasure in seeking after Death; because they
are assured that no one can be perfectly happy, S. Gregory of Nazian.
until he dies for Christ Jesus, and until he reigns with him in his Heavenly
Kingdom.

St. Gregory of Nazian, in his Funeral Orations, furnishes excellent thoughts
concerning the obligations which Christians have to despise Life and to desire
Death: and particularly in the Elogium he composed for his Brother Cezarius.
WHen I consider the happiness which our Kindred have acquired by dying, and
the little they have lost in loosing this unhappy Life; so far am I from
afflicting my self, that I feel my self, transported with joy; and I say to
God: When shall it be, O Lord, that you will take us, as you have them, out of
this strange Land, and that we shall go into our lovely Country to join our
selves with them who are there arrived before us? When shall it be, that Death
shall put us in a condition to partake with them the pleasures of Paradise, and
to lead together an eternally happy Life? In effect, my Brethren, what can we
expect during the short time which remains of our Life, but to see day after
day more miseries, to-suffer more evils, and to c^mmit more Sins than we have
hitherto committed.

It Is therefore this consideration, and not the loss of our Friends; it is the
danger of offending God to which we are exposed during our Life, and not the
grief for their Death, which ought to be the true subject of our Tears. Let Us
weep, my Brethren, but let us weep as David did, for that our Pilgrimage is
prolonged. Lets afflict our selves for that our Exile is not ended. Lets weep
because we love a Life subject to so many miseries, and which incessantly
exposes us to lose the Grace of God. This is, my Brethren, a just cause (...)
our sighs and tears. (...) therefore sigh over our selves with the holy
Apostle, and let us say, 2 Cor. c. 4. and 5.
This base Cottage built of clay, wherein we now lodge, shall it never be
destroyed? Shall we not soon dwell in that other house which is not made by the
hand of man, and which shall endure eternally? For how long shall we yet ly
oppressed under the weight of this mortal Body? And till when must we trayl
after us in all places a living Sepulcher, where our Soul is as it were buried
in the Flesh, and infected with a corruption greater than that of real Graves?
(...) my Brethren, if the ^^^th of Sin is not the subject of your griefs and
affliction, you have no subject that is legitimate. But that which ought to
cover us with shame, is, That we love this Life, all miserable as it is, and
that we make much of this Body which detain's our Soul captive. It Is true, that
we are unwilling to offend God; but we are willing to continue in a state of
offending him; at least it is that which we desire when we desire to Live. Do
you then know for what a true Christian ought not to afflict himself? I repeat
it over again to you, a true Christian ought not to afflict himself (...) he
lives too long. (...) thing that delays his (...) delays also his happiness:
but what happiness? A happiness which is pure in its enjoyment, immense in its
greatness, and eternal in its duration: Finally, a happiness which comprehends
the possession of God himself, and which consequently surpasses the
intilligence and the desire of man. Behold that which ought to make us sigh
without creasing toward Heaven, and to say with the Prophet; Psalm. 118 v. 81.
My Soul languishes, O Lord, she falls almost into a swoun in the expectation
of your Salvation.

For my own part, through (...) of God, I fear (...) my Body should (...),
since it is nature is to be perishable. I am persuaded that the ruin of that
which is material and terrestrial in me, cannot choose but be very
advantageous unto me. Let Us leave to the wicked the care to flatter a Body
which kills the Soul, and which one cannot keep long alive. Those unhappy
wretches taste not the goods of the Spirit, because they have no feeling of Hope
for another Life. And surely I do not at all wonder that they place their
sovereign good in this mortal Life, in Health, in good cheer, and in the other
pleasures of the senses. But for us, my Brethren, who are convinced that all
those goods are but vanity, and that they will be dissipated in less time than
the dew of the morning; let us say with the Apostle, would to God that by a
lively Faith and by an ardent Charity I had so mortified my Body, that it were
not capable to detain my Soul: for if I could totally bury my self with Christ
Jesus, I should be assured to be resuscitated, and to live with him eternally.

Article. IX. S. Gregory Nisse.
St. Gregory Bishop of Nisse, has made a Discourse to show: That we should be
so far from lamenting them who go forth of this Life, that we ought to envy and
desire their happiness. He proves this Truth by many reasons, which we give in
brief; and in the end be explicates it by an excellent comparison of the state
of men in this present Life, wiih the state of an Infant enclosed in his
Mothers Belly. He says afterward, That they who lament the Death of their
Neighbor, or who are afraid to die, are as little reasonable as Children who
cry when they are born into the World, because they are not sensible of the
happiness they have in being delivered out of the most dismal of all Prisons.
THey who excessively afflict themselves at the Death of their Kindred and
Friends, Orat. de mortuis. To 3.
are for the most part very weak Spirits, who suffer themselves to be ledd by
the movings of Nature and of Custom. They weep ordinarily, because it is the
custom to weep upon such occasions. They grieve for themselves. in the person
of another, because in losing him they lose some advantage which they reaped
from him; or else, they weep because they fancy a false honor of appearing to
be of a tender and good nature. There is moreover a certain pleasure in Tears,
and one delights to draw compassion or esteem from others by weeping. Finally,
in whatever manner we weep over the Dead, it is always a weakness; and we should
never fall into it, if we gave our selves time to consider, That the orders of
Providence are unalterable, and that human things change incessantly. For is it
not a folly to grieve for the Dead as if they could have lived always; and to
live so, as if one were never to die?

To get forth of this error, we need only to consider a little the difference
there is between the solid and infinite goods we hope for in heaven, and Goods
so vain and so short which we possess upon Earth: and we shall clearly see,
That if Christians ought to weep, it is not for that their Friends are too soon
dead, but for that they themselves live too long. For the greatest of all
miseries, is to languish in the World amidst all manner of Evils, and to be for
a long time deprived of the happiness which those very Friends possess whose
loss we lament.

I demand therefore of you, my Brethren, in the first place, wherein do you
believe that Man's sovereign Good does consist? For if we will reason acccording
to the Rules of Christian Philosophy, the only Good which deserves to be eall'd
Good, is that which belongs to all, and for always. The Pagan Philosophy which
reasons only upon false lights, gave formerly the name of Good to such things
as regard only either men's Bodies of their Fortunes. But is it not a horrid
blindness, to establish the soverain Good in Beauty, in Strength, in Dexterity,
and in such other like exterior Qualities? These wise profane people, did they
not perceive that these things, which are given but to a few, diminish with
age, perish in a short time, and are accompanied with so many misfortunes, that
one must be very stupid not to aspire after a better happiness? Did they not
see, I say, what we now see, That Riches, Dignities, and even Crowns, which
without doubt raise men to the highest pitch of this false Felicity, pass from
one Family to another; that the most elevated Thrones fall down to the ground;
that the most glittering Fortune is but a smoke which is dissipated in an
instant, and which leaves nothing else behind it but the smut of the bad
actions which were done to acquire it? These men who affected the name of Wise,
were they senseless enough not to know, That the best grounded Glory is subject
to the darts of Detraction, and that the people, by one and the same
capriciousness, sets up and pulls down the reputation of the greatest men? If
one makes use of Treasures, they are consumed; if one hides them, they are
useless: But what matters it whether it be Covetuousness or Prodigality which
makes us poor, since the miseries which accompany poverty are not so
unsupportable as are the disquiets which attend upon riches? Finally, these
Wise persons who had so great a knowledge of human things, could they not
comprehend that all the Goods of this Life are mere illusions; they who had
every day the experience thereof? Ha, my Brethren, it was because Faith did not
clear them: it was because in the darkness of Paganism Pride being the soul of
all their thoughts and of all their actions, they sought in themselves a Good
which cannot be found without renouncing those false Goods and ones own self.

It is not so with Christians; they seek their sovereign happiness in Humility,
in the contempt of Life, and in their self-annihilation: because they are
persuaded that one possesses all in possessing God, and one possesses not him
but by uncloathing ones self of all things; and by consequence, that one must
make no other provision for Heaven but that of good Works; For there one shall
neither suffer hunger, nor cold, nor the injuries of Air, nor the cruelties of
the wicked. One shall not there be embusied in laboring nor in sowing the
earth, in sailing on the Sea, in building Palaces, in traficking, in pleading,
in filling the Spirit with Sciences, in inventing laws, nor in causing them to
be kept. There will neither be War, nor Process, nor Tyranny, nor Malady, nor
Poverty: and as the Goods there will be without end and without mixture, so
nothing can there either corrupt or change them.

Surely, when I consider the weakness, of them who afflict themselves for their
Friends departure out of the world, and who themselves fear to follow them, I
cannot sufficiently admire it. If a man, after he had passed the time of his
tender Youth in an obscure Prison, and lived as it were in a continual night,
should be displeased with them who obtained his liberty to go forth to
contemplate the Sun, the Stars, the Earth covered with fruits, and the other
Beauties of the Univers, and finally to place him in a full liberty: what would
you think of this man who had such strange humors? Without doubt, my Brethren,
you would believe that he had lost his Wits, and you would strive to cure him
of so extravagant a folly. Permit me to tell you that your selves are in the
same state, and that your error is perhaps more deplorable than his. You are
displeased at the happiness which your Friends enjoy in being delivered out of
this, miserable Prison of the Body, and your selves fear to go forth of it to
go to contemplate in his glory the Creator of the Sun, of the Stars, and of
all the Beauties of the Universe.

For my part, I avouch to you that I cannot conceive the cause of so great a
straying in the human spirit, unless it is that the criminal curiosity of the
first man has plunged all his posterity in such a profound ignorance, that men
know not even what is convenient for them. One may say that we are become like
unto a Child, who being yet shut up in his Mothers Belly, has not so much as
the use of his Senses. This Child has Eyes, and he sees not, he has Ears, and
he hears not; he has a rational Soul, and he knows not; he neither understands
what he is, nor what must become of him; finally, he has no knowledge of Life,
which nevertheless is the sole Good in which he ought to be concerned. Is it
not true that if this Child could reason, he would surely judge that Nature had
not furnished him with all these faculties and all these organs, to be always
deprived of their functions? That having a Mouth, he was not to be nourished
like a Plant? That having Feet and Hands and all the other parts which compose
his Body, he was not designed to be always a lump of Flesh, nor to live among
nastinesses, and to be close shut up in a Dungeon? Is it not true, I say, that
by making these reflections, he would assuredly come to the knowledge of the
Life he was to lead upon Earth? But because this Child does not reason, that
which should rejoice him, afflicts him: he receives as an Evil all the
advantages of his birth and of his liberty; and as if he lost a great Good in
going forth of his Mothers Belly, he complains as soon as he comes into the
World.

Behold, if I am not deceived, an image very much resembling these weak men,
whom I undertook to convince. Now if there is any of them who hear me, who is
of the number of those blind persons who will not see the light: Ah, my dear
Brethren, I conjure you to take some compassion of his blindness. It Is surely a
shame for a Christian to lament for the Death of his Friends, and to fear his
own Death. This weakness is only pardonable in a Child. Let us then open our
Eyes, let us act as reasonable men, let us live like Christians, It Is high time
to conceive a horror of our Prison, and to shake off the chains which detain
us in it. Let Us reflect that there is another Life than this; let us awaken our
Faith; let us excite our Hope, and finally let us comfort our selves; lets
rejoice that our near Relations have acquired an eternal Happiness by the loss
of a miserable Life: lets burn with a holy Desire of Death: let us seek with
ardour and receive with joy, that which will put an end to our afflictions, and
give a beginning to our Felicity.

Article X. Among all the Fathers of the Church, St. Ambrose is one of them who
has spoken best of Death. He made a particular Treatise De bono mortis, Of the
good of Death: S. Ambrose.
where he says, That it frees us from the miseries of this Life, and from the
servitude of Sin. He teaches, That it is Death which procures Immortality to our
Soul, and a glorious Resurrection to our Body: and finally, That it is Death
which gives us the means to testify our Gratitude, our Love, and our Zeal to
Christ Jesus. Whence he concludes that if we have Faith, we ought to desire
Death.
Life is a burden, the weight whereof oppresses us; and Death is the only
succor which can discharge us of it. Life is a punishment, and Death is the
sole means which remains for us to be released of it. Did one ever see Slaves
and miserable Wretches fear to be set at freedom and to be comforted? It Is from
Death alone that we must expect this Comfort and this liberty.

Now if we ought to love it, because its frees us from the miseries of Life;
ought we not to love it more, because it delivers us from the bondage of Sin?
For the most innocent of men is a Sinner as long as he is living; he must die
to the end he may sin no more; and his Death is no less the end of his Sin,
than of his Life.

But Death does yet much more; it breaks not the bonds of Sin, but to procure
us the glorious liberty of the Elect. It Is Death which re-unites men to their
beginning, makes them find their greatness and their felicity in the loss of
their Lives. It Is Death finally, which delivering them from corruption,
introduces them into an incorruptible and eternal Life. For as soon as Sin had
given birth to Death, God drew from thence the Resurrection; to the end that
Sin ceasing by Death, Nature might always subsist by the Resurrection; and that
man dying to the Earth and to Sin, might live eternally in Glory. Then this
Word of the sacred Scripture wild be accomplished: Death has been absorp'd and
destroyed by an entire victory: 1 Cor. 15. v. 55.
and we shall be able to say with the Apostle: O Death, where a thy victory? O
Death, where is thy sting?

But the greatest advantage which we derive from Death, is, That it gives us
the means to imitate the Charity of Christ Jesus, and to do for him in some
sort the same thing he has done for us. We may be in dying the Victims of his
glory, as he has been the Victim of our Salvation; and we may testify our
gratitude by voluntarily offering to him this Sacrifice. In effect, how will it
be possible for us to satisfy otherwise our so great obligations? And moreover,
if we well consider it, Romans 8.
What proportion is there between the sufferings of the present Life, and the
felicity of the other Life; between the torments of Death, and that immortal
glory which God is one day to discover in us?

Article XI. An Excellent Doctrine of St. Ambrose, which establishes two
manners of Living and of Dying set down in the Sacred Scripture. The first is
that of just men, who Live of Life, that is, who being in the Grace of God,
enjoy the Life of Body and of Soul: And the second, is that of Sinners and
wicked men, who Live being dead, and who leading an exterior life upon Earth,
are dead interiourly before God, As to the two manners of dying, the One is of
them who die of death, that is, who in dying impenitent, endure a double Death,
that of the Soul, and that of the Body: and the Other is of the Sole
Predestinate, who die to live; which is understood of the Elect, who endure the
corporal Death with patience and with joy, to go to possess an eternal and
glorious Life.
WHen it is said in the sacred Scripture, That the man who shall keep Gods
Commandments, De Paradiso. c. 9.
and shall exercise Justice and Mercy toward his Neighbor, Ezech. 18.
shall live the Life: we must not believe that the Holy Ghost made use without
design of such an extraordinary expression. To live the Life or of Life, is to
have a double Life, One of which is exterior and corporal, and the Other
interior and spiritual; it is to lead the life of a Man and of an Angel both
together; it is to enjoy at the same time Health and Grace; it is to live of a
general Virtue, which includes all the natural and supernatural functions;
finally, it is the estate in which good people live upon Earth: an Estate truly
happy for the time; but from which one may fall, unless one labors continually
to disengage himself from all adhesions to Life, by the thought and by the
desire of Death.

On the contrary, to die the Death or of the Death, Genesis 2. Exodus 21.
what is it else, according to the language of the Scripture, but to suffer a
double Death, of the Body and of the Soul? I mean, to be deprived of the
ordinary use of this transitory Life, and of the possession of eternal Life?
And this is it which makes the misery of the reprobate, who for having over
much loved a criminal Life, die miserably in their crimes.

There is moreover among Christians another manner of dying, which is of them,
who die to life, or who die in living; that is, who are dead and living both
together. And these are they who live of the life of the Body, who enjoy a
perfect health, who have beauty, strength, and dexterity; and yet who are dead
to the Life of Grace, and are not animated with the Spirit of God. It Is of
these men that it is said in the Scripture That they descend alive into Hell.
And it is in this sense that the words of the Apostle are to be understood;
Psalm. 54.16.
The Widow who lives in delights is dead, 1 Timothy 56.
although she seems to be living. And it is also the deplorable state of the
wicked in this life, out of which they may nevertheless get forth by sincere
penance.

Finally, the fourth kind of Christians, in relation to Life and to Death, and
the most happy of all, is of them who live by Death; such are all the Holy
Martyrs, who expose not themselves to die but in hopes to live: the Body dies
for a time, and the soul lives for an eternity. Ah, my Brethren, let us beware
of being like to them who live outwardly being dead within. Let us desire to be
rather of the number of those happy Dead, who die in appearance to live in
effect. This was the sentiment of St. Paul in those celebrious Words: I desire
to be disengaged from the bonds of this Body, Philip. 1.23.
and to be with Christ Jesus. It was also the thought of David, when he
exclaims in one of his Psalms: Alas! Psalm. 119.5.
how irksom is my exile! I live here as a Stranger; my Soul is troubled to
remain so long among the Enemies of peace. Behold this is properly the state of
the Predestinate, who are afflicted at their stay upon Earth among the snares
and the miseries wherewith this Life is replenished, instead of going to enjoy
in Heaven those infinite Goods in their full greatness as well as in their
eternal duration; and which are the sole object of their Hope and of their
Desires.

Article XII. The Homelies of St. John Chrysostom are full of excellent
Instructions concerning Death. We have made choice of such as seemed most
proper for this Work.
1. S. Chrysostom.
Instruction of St. John Chrysostom; where he shows what it is to be a
Christian, and that his principal Character is to desire and to love Death.
A Christian evermore considers himself upon Earth as a man going onward in his
way; Hom. 24. in Epist. ad Hebr.
In Psalm. 119.
and the continual reflection which he makes upon this quality of a Stranger and
of a Traveller, Ad Theod lapsum. c. 3.
is the foundation of all his Virtues. For he who has sojourned upon Earth as
a Stranger, shall be a Citizen in the Kingdom of Christ Jesus. What is the care
of a Traveller? It Is to cumber himself with nothing but what is necessary for
his journey, to take the path which is shortest and most secure, to use all the
diligence he possibly can, and not to fix his heart upon any thing he finds in
his way, because he reserv's all his affections for his dear Country.
According as he draws nearer to it he feels his impatience increase to arrive
at it; and as soon as he discovers it, he is so transported with Joy that he
forgets the pain he has endured, and the dangers he has incurred: or if he
keeps them in his memory, it is but as a valiant Champion remembers his wounds
after he has gained the Victory.

In effect, what is it that a Christian can love or fear upon Earth, which is
not unworthy his affection or his fear? Can all the favors of fortune give him
a more glorious Title than that of Son of the most High, and of Brother of
Christ Jesus? For it is Christ Jesus himself who honors with this quality all
them who have received his Word. And when the Pharisees say, that it is to
commit a Blasphemy to give this honor to men, Jesus answers; John. 10.34.
Is it not written in your Law, I have said, you are Gods? Can the Scripture
fail? Wherefore, O Christians, labor so long as you please to agrandise your
selves in the World: Endeavor to become Rich, Learned, Conquerours, Princes,
Kings, if you will. Procure even, if it is possible, that your Kingdom may be
extended over the whole Earth: what is there in all this which can be compared
with the Kingdom which God has promised you?

You have therefore nothing to hope for in the World; Let us see now what you
have to fear: Hunger or Thirst, say you? But has not God said: Mat. 5.6.
Blessed are they who are Hungry and Thirsty, for they shall be satisfied? Is
it Poverty? He has also said; Blessed are the Poor, for the Kingdom of Heaven
belongs to them. v. 3.
Do you fear Injuries, Persecutions, Afflictions, Sicknesses? On the contrary
it is Written; Rejoice, give your minds to gladness, v. 11. and 12.
you who endure courageously all these things for the glory of our Master,
because you shall receive an ample reward in Heaven.

You have then nothing else to dread, O Christians, but the delay of these
rewards. And what can forward them but Death? It is not therefore an Evil, as
men of the vulgar sort believe; on the contrary, it is a Good for them who have
Faith; not an ordinary Good, but the greatest of all transitory Goods. For if
our sovereign Good is to possess the Celestial Kingdom, our greatest Good is
surely that which hastens the possession hereof.

Wonder not therefore after this, O you Sensualists, if a Christian fully
persuaded of these Truths, run's to Death with more ardour, than you run after
Pleasures. Be no more surprised that he disdains your promises, that he
despises your threats, that he treads under his feet your Idols, and that he
triumphs over your Tyranny. Know that it shall sooner be drained dry in
inventing torments, than the constancy of Christians will be shaken with your
cruelty: because Death is a desirable Good for them who hope another Life, and
because our Kingdom is not of this World. John. 18.36.
For were our Kingdom of this World, we would fight to defend it against our
Enemies.

Nevertheless, do not fancy that the Christian remains upon the Earth,
altogether stupid and insensible, as the trunk of a barren tree, which expects
nothing but the mortal blow which must separate it from its roots. It Is true
that the Christian desires Death, because it will end his pains: but yet he
ceases not to make a holy use of Life He employs all the moments thereof in
good works; but whatever he does in this Life, is only to procure him a happy
end of it. For these holy Desires of Death do not hinder him from cherishing
his Neighbors, from serving his Friends, from loving his Brethren, and from
acquitting himself of all Christian duties, more faithfully than they who
perform them having only profane ends in their Friendships. But does God ordain
that he should quit them to come to him? he is evermore ready to depart: and
although, according to the resentments of Nature, his Heart is as much
afflicted in being separated from his Friends, as his Body in being separated
from his soul; yet he ceases not to desire to be separated from them, to the
end he may always possess them with God; and he prefers this eternal enjoyment
before a possession of longest durance, from which one can only derive a weak
and uncertain consolation. Wherefore he says at all times with the Apostle:
Christ Jesus is my Life; and Death is a gain for me. Philip. 1.21
Unhappy man that I am! Who will deliver me from the bonds of this mortal Body,
Romans 7* 24.
that I may no longer be fastened to any thing but to Christ Jesus?

It Is in effect the property of a Christian and of a Child of God, not to tie
himself to things present and perishable, that he may sooner go toward his
Father, who stretches forth his arms to receive him. This tender affection and
this holy impatience, spring from the purity of a good Conscience. He who is
enflamed with the love of eternal Goods, is not puffed up in Prosperity, nor
cast down in Adversity. He is as it were above the Earth, and dwells already in
Heaven; he conserves a Spirit evermore equal in the inequality of his lives
events: Finally, he is like him, of whom it is said in Scripture:

You stick not either at the Benedictions, or at the Maledictions of the World:
but you are as an Angel of our Lord. 2. Reg. c. 24. v. 17.

2. Instruction of St. Chrysostom: That we should be miserable if our Life were
never to end; and that if we had a faithful and true belief of the
Resurrection, we should not only not dread Death, but we should ardently desire
it.
WHen God gives us Life, In cap. 12. Genesis Hom. 32.
it is by an action of his Omnipotency; but when he gives us Death, In Cap. 5.
Genesis Hom. 21.
it is by a wholesome effect of his Bounty. What would Life be without Death? A
long sequel of miseries, an eternal Banishment, an infinite Punishment, In
Cap. 5. Genesis Him. 67.
and almost as cruel as that of Hell. For what more painful torment could be
inflicted upon them who love, Sermon. in Verba Pauli, De dormientibus nolo vos.
Ser. 29.
than to separate them for ever from their beloved object? If this Maxim is
true, in sensual love, is it not infinitely more in the Divine love? A Heart
deeply engaged in this love, to which one should say, you shall remain always
upon Earth, and you shall never see God; would it not have cause to esteem it
self almost as miserable as the Damned? It is therefore truly said, That if
Death is the chastisement of Adams Sin, it is also the greatest favor that God
could grant to the Children of Adam after his Disobedience.

Before the coming of Christ Jesus, Death was frightfull, because men were its
slaves, and that they could not obtain of God any more then temporal rewards
for their good actions. But since he has ransomed us by his precious Blood,
since he has loved Death and made an alliance with it; it is not only no
longer an Evil, but it is the greatest of all Goods, it is the source of all
imaginable happinesses. Thus the fear of dying ought to be considered as a
weakness of Nature, and not as an effect of Reason. It Is true that all
Creatures have an extreme desire to conserve their Being; but this desire is
not pardonable, except only in such people who know nothing of any other Life
than this. The true Christian who hopes after this Death a more noble and a
more happy Being than this first Being which he received by being born into the
World, not only desires not to conserve it, but burns with impatience to loose
it, that he may acquire the possession of a soverain Felicity.

There is no truth which Christ Jesus preached and assured more authentically
than the Mystery of the Resurrection: Ib. and Sermon. de tridua Domini Resurrec.
and there is nothing also which the Enemies of Christianism have more
thwarted. All the World agrees that Christ Jesus died: 1 Cor. 18.23.
The Jews looked upon his Cross as a Scandal, and the Gentiles as a Folly. But
as for the Resurrection, they all absolutely deny it: only the Christians
believe that, and God gives to them all sorts of proofs thereof, He permits
that Soldiers should be placed around his Sepulcher; he rises forth of the
Tomb in their presence; the Stone is overturned; the Earth trembles; the Guards
are affrighted; the Women find him not where they had laid him; and the Angels
assure them that he was risen: He appeared to his Disciples in particular, in
public, in diverse places, in many encounters: He stays with them Forty days,
he there drinks, he there eats; and when one of them protests that he would
believe nothing of it, unless he could see him with his Eyes, and touch him
with his Hands, our Savior presents himself unto him, shows him the Wound of
his side, will have him to put his Finger into it, and finally forces him by
this last proof to cry out: I doubt no longer; John. 20. v. 28.29.
you are my Lord and my God. Thou have believed, answered Jesus, because thou
have seen: Blessed are they who believe without having seen. Can one desire
testimonies more evident and more authentical of his Resurrection? If we are
Christians, we must believe it: If we will be Happy, we must believe it without
seeing it any otherwise than by the Eyes of Faith. What Happiness ought we to
expect from the Rusurrection and from the Promises of Jesus Christ? Is it not
to be resuscitated as he is, that we may reign with him? But to have a share in
his Resurrection and in his Kingdom, we must necessarily die. Death therefore
is an inestimable advantage and happiness: and thus, we ought not to dread it,
but with all our hearts to desire it.

What advantage can we find by living longer? Old age and the Infirmities which
accompany it, do they not render us imsupportable to others and to our selves?
Consider an old man overwhelmed with years, his spirits dejected, his Body
extenuated, his face full of wrinkles, his eyes half shut up, his voice
trembling, his head hanging down toward the Earth, as it were seeking for a
Sepulcher wherein to be buried: Is not this a kind of Monster in nature? But
that which is here more monstrous in him, is the desire to live in despite of
so many incommodities, and to trail along his Soul captivated and burdened
with such heavy chains. Strange blindness of man! This passion is more violent
in the very caducity and feebleness it self, than in the most tender
youthfulness. Whatever tie a man advanced in age has for his dignities and for
his treasures, he would willingly destrip himself of all to prolong his Life
for some years; and he would employ these years in acquiring other honors and
other riches, of which he should destrip himself. Madd man! Weak Worm of the
Earth! Reffuse of the Universe! Learn that in so deplorable an estate thou have
nothing more to desire but Death, nor any thing to hope for but the
Resurrection!

Sermon. 20. in verba. De tormientibus.
An Engraver has made a fair Statue; he finds it afterward to be eaten with
Rust, and spoiled by the injury of time. The love he has for his own work,
moves him to take compassion on it; he breaks it in pieces, casts the metal
into the fire, and frames a Figure fairer then the former. This is that which
God did, having seen that Man who was his Image and his Headwork was disfigured
by Sin. By what right and upon what account, O thou ungrateful and insolent
creature, thou unfortunate work of the hand of the Allmighty, thou kneaded
vessel of clay; by what right dare thou murmr against the God who created
thee; since instead of this gross form which is subject to corruption, he will
give thee another perfect and incorruptible? Our Lord, Jer. 18.6.
says the Prophet, has commanded me to go down into the house of the Potter. I
found him turning a Vessel upon the wheel; but the work was spoiled as soon as
it was out of the hands of the workman: he broke it in pieces, and made another
as himself pleased. And shall not I have the same power as has this Artist?
And the people of Israel, are they not in my hands as the Clay is in the hands
of the Potter? O man, what art thou, adds the Apostle, who dare dispute
against God? Romans 9.20*
The Work, can it say to the Workman who formed it, Why have you made me so?
Let us therefore thank him for the Life he has given us, perishable as it is,
since it is the first favor we have received from his Bounty. But let us look
upon it as perishable, and let us demand of him a holy Death, as the happy
passage to that immortal Life which he has promised us.

Article XIV.
3. Instruction of St. Chrysostom: That Death is that which most humbles man:
and That Humility being the foundation of all the Virtues, it follows that to
be virtuous we must incessantly meditate on Death, talk of it at all times,
familiarise our selves with it, visit Sepulchers, and assist dying persons;
because nothing does more edify and comfort than to see the Saints die; and
nothing more deterrs from impiety, than to see the wicked die.
WHether Man labors to acquire Glory, In c. 5. Genes. hom. 67.
or to raise himself into Dignities, or to heap up Riches; Ser. de fide and
lege not.
nothing does so much humble him and makes him better to resent the vanity of
all these things than Death. A Conqueror who makes whole Provinces desolate,
and who breathes nothing but Blood and Murder, may in vain blind himself with a
fond passion of rendering his reputation immortal: if Death which he brings into
all places has spared him for some time, yet he is no less sure to die, and to
see the course of his conquests cut off by the same lot by which he has made
thousands perish before his eyes. What avails it to this Magistrate, to this
Minister of State, to this Favorit, to have a troop of adorers attending him,
to have honor given him, and to hear himself praised to the skies? It Is in
vain for Flatterers to endeavor to raise up their birth by alotting to them
Ancestors they never had; It Is frivolous to labor to justify their conduct,
which the Public condemns; and to predict to them a long Prosperity, which so
many accidents can overturn: Death, the faithful counselor of those people
to whom none dares speak truth, presents it self unto them at every hour, in
public, in private, in the height of their employments, and even amidst their
pleasures; but in a shape much more terrible than it appears to ordinary
persons; and reads to them this affrighting Lesson: Remember Man, that thou art
made of Earth, and that thou art to return to Earth. I have there laid all thy
Predecessors: Know that had not God commanded me to leave thee hitherto in the
World to exercise the Good and to punish the Wicked, it is long since that the
horror of thy crimes would have obliged me to take thee from off the face of
Earth. The Rich and the Covetous are no more exempt from these threats, than
the Ambitious; and although they are perpetually taken up with the care of
keeping their treasures, they cease not to hear the voice of Death, which
secretly whispers in their Ears: Luc. 12.20.
To morrow I will fetch back thy Soul. All thou have been heaping up so many
years, shall be dissipated in the space of Six Months by thy Heirs: Lawsuits
shall consume one part; Riot shall swallow up the other part: and among all thy
Successors, not one shall be found who will so much as remember to pray for
thee. Thus it is that the very wicked receive instructions from Death, and that
they learn of it to humble themselves in the enjoyment of their false Goods; to
which they would adhere yet more than they do, if they were not averted by
these wholesome advertisements.

But this Lesson has never more force than in the mouth of dying persons.
Certainly, there is nothing more edifies a Christian and affords him greater
comfort, than to see a man breath forth well his last breath, in producing acts
of Piety, of Love, and of Confidence toward God. The tranquillity which
appears in his countenance, is an effect of the quiet of his Conscience. The
Charities which he has exercised, the services which he has rendered to the
poor, the Pardon which he has granted to his Enemies, his Watchings, his
Fastings, his Mortifications, and finally all his good works, are as so many
Angel-Gardians encompassing his Soul, to defend her against the assaults of the
Devil. In this estate he explicates his last will without any trouble of
Spirit; he comforts and instructs them who assist him; he demands of them to
join their Prayers with his; and after the tender embraces of the Cross of his
Redeemer, he renders up his Soul upon that adorable instrument of his dear
Saviors Passion; his Life is extinguished as a Light which has no more
nourishment; his beautiful Soul fly's to Heaven, and his Eyes are closed with
that peaceable Sleep of the Just, which does not separate the Soul from the
Body, but to reunite them one day in Eternity. What Christian well persuaded of
the truth of his Religion, would not desire to die in this manner; and would
not avouch that this Death is more desirable a thousand times than Life?

The Death of the Wicked is a far different Lesson; but which does no less
instruct them who know how to make their profit of it. One may there observe
visible signs of Gods anger, a terrible effect of those celebrious Words of
the Scripture: You who have had no other Gods but your own passions, and who
have contemned my Counsels and my Chastisements, wicked wretches, I will
render speedily unto you with usurie the taunting scoffs which you have darted
against me. When you shall be in the arms of Death, I will abandon you to
despair and to fury. I will no otherwise look upon you than with disdain, and I
will take pleasure to insult over your misery with a mocking laughter. In
effect, those Athiests who braved Death when they conceived it to be far from
them, are a thousand times more weak than others, when it is near at their
doors. The remorse of their Crimes begins to gnaw their Hearts, and yet their
Ears are shut against all holy instructions. They listen to nothing but what is
said concerning their Sickness; they complain of the insufficiency of the
Remedies, and quarrel with all that come near them; their Eyes are wandering
and sparkling with rage; and their Mouth even yet vomits forth Blasphemies.

In this fearful estate all the world leaves them; their House falls to the
pillage of their Heyrs or of their Domestics; nothing is looked after but to
secure their Goods, and to preserve their Offices and their Dignities, whilst
their Soul is abandoned for a Prey to the Devil; And very frequently, of all
the Riches they possessed upon Earth, there is scarcely found enough to bury
them after their Death.

Article XV.
4. Instruction of St. John Chrysostom: That we ought to have as great a joy to
go forth of the World, as Criminalls have to get forth of Prison, when the news
is brought them of the Princes favor.
WE are to put our selves in an estate to be ready to open the Door to Christ
Jesus at the first knock he gives at it. For besides that our Resistance would
be bootless against him who has broken Hell-gates in pieces; our long delay in
obeying, will make us lose the advantage which we may derive from our Death.
But to the end we may avoid this Evil we need only to represent frequently to
our selves, That we are in this World as Prisoners who expect every hour the
grace of the Prince to be released out of their Prison. Romans ^
For we have not re ceiv'd the spirit of servitude, but we have received the
spirit of adoption of the Children of God, by which we cry, my Father, my
Father. 2 Timothy 1.
Let us then say to him with Job, not with a spirit of Fear, but of Confidence
and of Courage, of Love and Wisdom: Lord, Job. 7.12.
is it not long enough that my Soul languishes in the chains which keep it
fettered? Is it an untamable Monster? Is it as furious as the Sea, that you
should shut it up in so strait a Prison? On the contrary, it is your Image; you
have created it free; you have ransomed it from the bondage of Sin, you have
adopted her; you have promised her your Kingdom; why delay you then to give it
her? Are you not weary to hear us sigh and sobb within our selves, in
expectation of the Divine Adoption, Romans and.
which is to be the Redemption and the Deliverance of our Bodies?

In effect, we who are Brethren of Christ Jesus, and designed to reign with
him, shall we be so remiss as to prefer our chains before the Crown which he
has prepared for us? Yet I much fear that there are many of these remiss
Christians who are so fast fettered to Life, that they have none but base and
servile Inclinations. The sacred Scripture assures us, Eccle. 4.
that there are some who shall go forth of the Dunjoon to ascend to the Throne;
Sap. 18.
and others who shall pass from their Prison into another more obscure. They
are the Children of darkness, they are blind, and they are senseless wretches,
unworthy ever to enjoy the Light. Is It not they whom the Prophet Isay threatens
when he pronounces these terrible Words: Isa. 14.19.
The Sepulcher shall not be for you a place of rest, nor an inviolable
Sanctuary. You shall one day be drawn forth of it, as they pull from the Earth
the trunk of an useless Tree. You shall be confounded with them whom the Sword
of our Lord has exterminated, and who shall be cast into the depth of the
Abysmus, as rotten carkases. Rouse up your self then, O Christian, to get forth
of your Captivity; as a Criminal assured of his pardon, runs at the first noise
he hears, to lay hold of the good news. This Impatience which you shall testify
to go toward God, will much contribute toward the obtaining pardon for your
Sins; and will keep you evermore disposed to go to render him an account: to
the end that Death, which steals upon you as a Thief, These. 5.
may never surprise you.

Article XVI.
5. Instruction of St. Chrysostom: That if we lived as true Christians, without
tying our selves to the pleasures of the Earth; if we embraced the Cross of
Christ Jesus by renouncing all the Wantonnesses and Delicacies of the World; we
should find no difficulty to conceive, That Death is of all Good things the
most desirable.
WE live not, my dearest Brethren, Hom. ad pop. Anti^c.
we live not with an austerity worthy the name of Christian. We love with
excess this soft and delicious Life; and it is by so bad a disposition that our
Heart becoms more and more insensible of the holy desires of Death. But if we
passed our days in Fasting, in Watching, and in a voluntary Abstinence from a
thousand frivolous and dangerous things; if we took care to curb the violence
of our Passions, to exercise our selves in the laborious ways of Virtue, to
treat our Body hardly, 1 Cor. 9.
and to bring it into subjection, as the Apostle speaks: we should not be
perplexed with all the vain disquiets which self-love brings upon us, nor
should we any longer obey its irregular motions. Finally, if we walked in the
narrow and painful way which the Gospel shows us, we should have such an
impatience to get to the end of the course, that we should never stay upon the
fond amusements of the World; and nothing would more lively touch us than the
desire to finish such a dangerous journey. The Champions observe in all things
so exact a temperance, 1 Cor. 9.
and yet it is but to gain a corruptible Crown, whereas we labor to deserve an
incorruptible one. Let us run therefore in such sort as that we may winn the
Prize. Let Us disengage our selves from the fetters of Sin, which so straightly
bind us, and let us run with patience, that I may make use of the same Apostles
terms, Heb. 12.
in this carriere which is opened unto us. Let us fix our Eyes upon Jesus, the
author and finisher of our Faith, who in stead of a quiet and happy Life which
he might have enjoyed in the World, Romans 6.
loaded himself with shame and with contempt, Ephesians. ^*
and endured the torment of the Cross, Col. 3.
not staying upon the Earth but to show us the way which leads to Heaven.

Will you moreover see lively examples, and behold with your own Eyes the truth
of my Words? Take a turn into the Desert, and there from the tops of the
mountains contemplate those Solitary. Men, who pass the days and the nights in
continual Mortifications, and who voluntarily shut up themselves in those
dismal Grotts, only to cut off all commerce of all the rest of the creatures.
You shall not find any one there, who sighs not incessantly with an impatience
to die, Hom. 14. in Epist. 1. ad T^uoth.
because they well know that the end of their Life is the end of their
Miseries. As they have nothing to fear upon Earth, and as they possess nothing
but their Soul and their Body; so they look upon Death as an advantage which
puts them in possession of Christ Jesus. When they understand that some one
among them is dead, there is a universal Joy amongst them all: No one daring to
say, Such a one is Dead: but they all say, Such a one has finished his Course.
At this happy tidings they chaunt forth Canticles of Joy to the praise of God,
humbly demanding of him for themselves the grace of a speedy and holy Death. In
effect, as the Gladiatours have an extreme desire to get forth of the Theater
where they are perpetually exposed to new Wounds; so they who lead an austere
Life, and see themselves perpetually exposed to the Temptations of Sin, burn
with a desire to put an end to their combats, and to be delivered from the
labors of this miserable Life, in order to enjoy a repose which shall never be
interrupted.

Article XVII.
6. Instruction of St. John Chrysostom: That the Death of Christ Jesus ought to
have cured us of the dread of Death: and that the Ceremonies of the Church in
the Funerals of the Faithful, should afford us Comfort and Joy, both for them
and for our selves.
ST. Paul says, That before the birth of Christ Jesus, Hom. 4. in Ep. ad Heb c.
2.
Death reigned in the whole Univers, and that its Empire was extended over all
the Nations of the Earth: Then Man began not to live but to Die, without
passing to a better Life. But the Savior of the World has triumphed over
Death by dying; he has destroyed its Tyranny even to the gates of Hell; and
those ghastly places to which it fled, have acknowledged the power of our
Deliverer. In so much as after his Passion and his Resurrection, one cannot be
his Disciple without loving Death, as he loved it. Thus my Brethren,
strengthened by his Example, we have no longer any cause to trouble our selves
when we think of that last hour; and we should do amiss to make now such
complaints as our forefathers did before the coming of our Redeemer.

What do we see upon Earth, Job. 14.
said Job, more wretched than Man, He is born of a Woman amidst pains, he lives
a short time and suffers much; his best days pass away as a shadow, and he
never remains constant in the same estate; Were it not better for him, never to
have been? At least, there remains some hope in the Wood when it is cut down;
the Stem thereof buds forth afresh, and its Branches become more thick and green
than before: But as for Man, when the Woof of his life is once broken off, it is
for evermore. He comes naked forth of his Mothers womb, and he shall return
naked into the womb of the Earth. What remains there of man when he has
served for food to the Worms? Could he not behold the Light, but upon this hard
condition, that he must in a moment after be plunged in the darkness of the
Tomb?

Behold what was the langage of men before the coming of the Messiah. But
Christ Jesus has visited us in these darknesses: he has drawn us forth of
this shadow of Death wherewith we were encompassed: he has caused our Life to
spring from our Death: he has opened us a passage to Eternity, by passing
himself first by a Death ignominious in appearance, but in effect glorious.
Thus, he fought Death with its own weapons, he has pulled out its sting,
(...). 23.
he has destroyed it by it self: Heb. 11.
he has subdued the Prince of Death, and finally he has cast it headlong into
an eternal Abysmus: ^ Cor. 25.
and by this Victory he has wiped off the Tears, and rased the disgrace of his
people from the face of the Earth. Isay. 25.


Let us not, my Brethren, lose the advantage which he has given us over Death:
Let us have no horror of a thing which God has rendered to useful and so
glorious unto us. Romans 8.
We who possess the first fruits of the Spirit with hope to be delivered from
this subjection to corruption, and to be made partakers of the glory and of the
liberty of the Children of God. Let us remain firm in Faith, let us generously
brave Death: If we look on it with Eyes of Faith, we shall find nothing in it
that is terrible; but on the contrary it will appear to us sweet and agreeable;
and in the end we shall grow familiar with it. But we must look upon it at all
times, and be acquainted with it, if we will find it pleasing unto us. We must
love it and desire it, by the example of our dear Master, who loved it for our
sakes.

When I behold on one side to what degree of honor Christ Jesus has raised
us, and on the other side when I consider to what lowness we debase our
selves, I am altogether confounded at our remisness and negligence. I see many
among Christians who fear Death, not only for themselves, but for their
Friends. This weakness is so visible among us, and even among persons who seem
to have much piety, that the Pagans publicly mock at it. For, say they, if the
Christians believe in God whom they adore, why fear they to see him? and if
they love him, what induces them to shun the only thing which according to
their own doctrine, must unite them eternally unto him?

It Is certainly to give occasion to the wicked, to esteem all that we say of
the eternal Goods, and of the Resurrection of the Dead, to be mere Fables.
They less regard what we preach, than what we do. You destroy by your actions,
what we endeavor to establish by our discourses; for they judge rather of the
Religion of Christ Jesus by your Life, than by our Instructions. In effect, all
the frights which you make appear, show plainly that you have little confidence
in the Word of God. When the Apostle S. Paul says; I desire to die, Philip.
1.23.
and to be united to Christ Jesus, he teaches us what should be the continual
desire of all true Christians. Thus when you testify so great an apprehension
of Death, you make known to the whole world, that your Faith is feeble and
languishing; we see that you fear to obtain that which you cannot demand with
too much ardour; and that instead of practicing the precepts which you have
heard, Heb. 1.
your Heart resembles those balf-open Vessels which let out all one pours into
them.

For the rest, I bless God for that he will have his Church make use in the
Funerals of the Dead, of such holy and august Ceremonies as condemn your
remisness, and which convince you of your little Faith. For why think you do we
there sing Hymns and Psalms, and set up lighted Cierges and Torches, but to
teach you to look upon your Brethren, whilst we are burying them, as upon
victorious Champions, whom we ought to accompany with honor and with pomp in
their triumph? What truer subject of Joy can we have for them, than to be the
witnesses of their liberty and of their victory? What have we else to do or
say, but bless God for having called them to himself, and for having crowned
his own Gifts in them by a happy Death? Do we not thereby testify the
acknowledgment of this favor, by Words the most holy that can be found in the
Scripture? Finally, is it not for this reason that we cause our Churches to
echo forth Cantieles of praise and of jubilation? Surely there is nothing in
all the Ceremonies which invite you not to a holy alacrity. For as
Ecclesiasticus says, Singing accords not with tears and lamentation. Eccle. 91.

Believe me, my Brethren, do not look upon Death as a frightfull thing. For if
you are solidly Christians, if you are persuaded that there is another Life, if
you believe the Resurrection of the Dead; you will easily comfort your selves
in the loss of your Friends, and you will wish that your selves may soon pass
forth of this Life so full of dangers and of myseries, where one does nothing
but suffer and Sin. Cor. 6.
Do not therefore any longer dishonor your name by such shameful weaknesses:
but acting as faithful Ministers of God, render your selves recommendable by a
great Patience in Evil, and by a courageous Contempt of Death; be as if you
were always dying although yet living; as sad, and yet always joyful; as poor,
and yet possessing all in the possession of God, who is promised unto you.

Article XVIII. An Exhortation of St. John Chrysostom; where he speaks against
remiss and imperfect Christians who dread Death: and instructs courageous and
perfect Christians to desire it.
YOu who make profession to believe in Christ Jesus, can you love the sweets of
this Life? Sermon. de non timenda morte. c. 24.
Can you dread the bitterness of Death? O you remiss and faithless Christians!
have you forgotten the example of Christ Jesus our good Master, and do you
doubt whether you must die as he did? The true Christians have made themselves
always known by the holy desires of Death; but they have not acquired this
generous disposition by any other means than by unshackling themselves from all
the Goods of the Earth. When one has once with a sincere heart renounced them,
Life is a small matter; and one will consider it rather as a punishment, than
as a pleasure. It Is therefore for this unfettering of the Heart that we must
labor, and it is that wherein consists the perfection of a Christian: For as
for Death, besides that it is unavoydable, it is to be desired by them who have
never so little Faith: and although at first it is repugnant to Nature, yet
Grace overcomes by little and little that repugnancy; and makes us love at last
that which before gave us a horror. Hear what the Apostle St. Paul, 1. Et 2.
ad Corinth.
says: You who are enrolled in the sacred warfare of Christ Jesus, ought to
have no other care than to stand to your Arms, and to fight upon all occasions.
A Soldier does not involve himself in the employs of the Civil life, to the end
he may he wholly embusied in satisfying him who has enrolled him. Now the
Warfare of Christ Jesus, is to endure constantly Watchings, Fastings, Poverty,
Injuries, Imprisonment, Wounds, and Death it self, for the glory of his holy
Name.

It Is true, that the Christian Moral appears at the first view too severe to
senfual men: but if one examin's it with a Spirit untyed from the secret
interest of self love and of Concupiscence; one finds nothing so reasonable and
so advantageous to the common good of all men, nor even so profitable to
particular persons, whether it be for their conduct or for their comfort. In
effect, what Religion is there in the world which proposes a more perfect Model
than Christ Jesus, whose Life is more pure, whose Miracles are more evident,
and whose Doctrine is more wise and more disinterressed? Do but compare it with
that of the most prudent Philosophers, and of the most renowned Lawmakers; and
you will find that in all the Words and in all the Actions of Christ Jesus
there is a Character of Sanctity and of Divinity, which his Enemies themselves
cannot choose but aeknowledge; whereas in the other Doctrins, human Wisdom is
always interwoven with some extravagancy, with some gross interest, with some
contradiction, or with some error.

Since therefore we make profession to follow the Lessons of so good a Master;
let us endeavor, O Christians, to imitate him in all things. Let Us leave
Sensualists to enjoy their Sensuality: this enjoyment is so small a matter, and
lasts so short a time, that we ought more to pity than to envy them. Let Us
leave the World to reign; it is here it is Kingdom, ours is not yet come. What
has our Joy common with the Joy of the Earth? The World will lament whilst we
laugh, and we shall one day mock at it is tears, as it this day mocks at ours.
The difference there is between it and us, is, That it being in our own power
to rejoice as it does, we do it not, because we acknowledge the vanity of all
its pleasures: but it cannot enjoy the pleasures of Eternity, because it has
despised them: on the contrary it shall be plonged in dreadful darkness, where
pains and gnashings of teeth shall never end, but shall be the continuing
signs of its sufferings and of its despair. Let us weep then, my Brethren,
let us weep whilst the World rejoices; let us weep for it is being in joy, because
Charity so ordains; and let us be so far from loving Life as the World does, as
to run to Death which it loves not; because Death is not unhappy for us as it
is for it: but on the contrary it will end all our unhappinesses. Psalm. 29.
In the Evening we are drowed in tears, and in the Morning we shall be in an
eternal joy.

Let us never forget, That our true pleasure ought to be to despise all vain
pleasures: and that our solid happiness is to believe there is none solid but
with God. Ah, Christian, if thou considerest thy condition as thou ought,
how will thou dare to complain of living without pleasure, thou who art obliged
to die with pleasure?

Article XIX. As St. Jerome is one of the Doctors of the Church, who has
testified the greatest desire of Death; so we have few Ecclesiastical Authors
who have spoken so clearly as he, either of the Advantages which Death brings
to Christians, or of the obligation they have to prepare themselves for it, S.
Jerome.
and continually to think of it. Behold in what manner this great Saint
explicates himself concerning it, in several places of his Writings.
THe greatest mark of an irregular Life, is never to think of Death: and when
we think but seldom of it, it is a certain Sign that we have yet but very little
Virtue and Piety. Epist ad. Prin. ad Euriam. ad. Paulinum* and alibi.
As Death is the end at which all men must arrive, so the thought of Death is a
faithful guide to conduct us with safety unto it. For the Scripture has said,
That if we remember the last days of our Life, Eccles. 7.40.
we shall never Sin. Surely then we run an hazard to sin often, if we do not
think that we must die. We fall into the same misfortune as do those Travelers
whom the night has surprised in a Forest, and who have strayed out of their
way. Every one of them takes a several track, and the farther they go the more
they swerve from the right path. Christ Jesus has showed us the way: He has
said, I am the Way and the Truth. His Light conducts us amidst the darkness;
his Voice calls us. He serves us for a guide, but it is by the pathway of
sufferings, and by the track of Calvary that he leads us: and all they who will
follow him, must as he did, carry their Cross, and prepare themselves to die.

This different disposition which men have in regard of Death, is the most
visible Character of their predestination or of their reprobation. And it is
that which Christ Jesus has showed us in the Parable of the Virgins. For he
says that those five foolish Virgins did not enter to the Marriage of the
Bridegroom, because they had not put themselves in a readiness to receive him:
How can one explicate these marriages and this preparation, but of the Joy of a
Christian Death, and of the holy disposition which one ought to have for it? He
teaches us at the same time, that the five Wise Virgins being totally
replenished with these holy thoughts, deserved to have room in the house of the
Bridegroom, and there to celebrate the Marriage Feast, the joy whereof shall
last for all Eternity,

He who would not do good when he could have done it, shall be justly punished
with an impotency of doing it when he would do it. He who would not think of
Death during his Life time, shall not be able to think of the true Life at the
hour of Death. And what does it avail a man to avoid the remembrance of an Evil
which he cannot shun, and to love that which he is not sure to possess one
moment? What does it avail him to adhere to a life which flies from him, and to
fly from Death which seeks after him? Man, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 38.
spins his days, as the Spider spins her Web. Isai. 59.
After many turns and returns, wherein he consumes himself with his own labor,
Death comes, which ruins all his work; and then it appears not so much as that
he ever was.

Article XX. St. Jerome teaches us the temper we ought to keep in the disgust
of Life, and in the desire of Death.
We have added this passage for the Comfort of good people, who naturally fear
Death.
NOthing is more ordinary to man, In Amos c. 5. etalibi.
than to be cast down in afflictions, to be weary of living, and to wish to
die. But all they who find themselves in this disposition, do they believe that
they are for this more perfect than others? On the contrary, they ought to be
ashamed of it, as of a defect of Faith and a want of Courage. Not but that Life
is despicable, and that it is even meritorious to contemn it; but that we
should be so far from conceiving a disgust of it when it is full of
afflictions, as that we ought then chiefly to cherish it as a means given us by
God to do penance. If Death is to be desired, it is in a delicious Life, where
sometimes our condition exposes us to sin, as it were, against our will; it is
in a long prosperity where we may have just cause to sigh for passing our life
unprofitably, and perhaps criminally upon Earth, and for vainly spending the
precious time which is only lent us to merit Heaven by our sufferings. For my
part says the Apostle St. Paul, If it is permitted to boast, 1. Cor. 12.
I averr that I glory of my pains and of my afflictions, to the end that the
power of Christ Jesus may dwell in me. I feel a satisfaction and a joy in my
Infirmities, in Injuries, in Poverty, in Persecutions, in the pressing
Adversities which I suffer for my Savior: and when I am weak, it is then that I
find my self most strong. The contempt therefore of Life is not always a
certain mark of our Faith and of our Piety; it is sometimes a weariness of
suffering for God, sometimes a sadness which the austerity of devotion casts
into the Heart: we are ashamed to leave it, and we want courage to persevere in
it. If the Soul is not supported by an extraordinary Grace, the disgust of all
things and even of Piety it self which is insinuated by little and little, and
the Imagination which black's it self by dismal thoughts and by desires of
dying, brings her to the brinks of Despair. Those persons who have lately
sequestered themselves from the World, are more exposed to this misery than
others; until the Divine love has filled up all that emptiness which the
separation left in their Spirit. For whatever endeavor these persons use,
Nature never endures the yoke of Grace without violence; it is in vain to tame
this Nature by the continual exercises of piety, by mortifications, by
rigorous penances; for that inward Law of the Body evermore resists the law of
the Spirit; and in the combat which is fought between them, although the Spirit
gets the victory, yet it is sometimes weakened, and foiled in its own conquests.
Then we would die, because we find no more pleasure in living: and in these sad
desires it is Nature which acts and not Grace; Nature is willing to discharge
herself of Life, as of a Burden which is to her insupportable. Always to
fight, says she, always to languish, always to suffer! Ah; is it not something
worse than to be dead?

I know it by my own experience, Brethren, and if it may be permitted me to
glory in my infirmities, and to make use of the terms of the Apostle, I would
tell you what I have done to quell these revolts and these impatiencies of
Nature. Eusebius, of the Death of S Jerome; relating his own Words.
Finding that the memory of the divertisements of my youth followed me every
where as my shadow, and troubled my most innocent occupations; I shut up my
self in a dismal Grot amidst the vast Deserts of Siria, where the Rocks
scorched with the ardours of the Sun furnished our Solitary Hermits with places
of retrait, which are common to them with the Savage Beasts. I confess that I
could not enter there without horror, but the occasions of offending God
appeared to me more horrible than that Solitude. Nevertheless in a dwelling so
dreadful, where I nourished my self only with wild Roots, my Imagination
ingenious to persecute me ceased not to entertain it self with the delights of
the Roman City. I passed the day in sighing, and the night in weeping for my
Sins. But the more I strove to quench with my Tears the secret fire of my
Concupiscence, the more that rebel was enkindled even in the marrow of my
bones. If sometimes the wearinesses of my penance forced me to abandon my self
to sleep; I paid not that tribute to Nature but against my will: and to free my
self quickly from it, I suffered my body to fall to the ground, it being
extenuated with watchings, and as it were broken with all sorts of macerations.
I had no other Pillow than a Stone, no other Garment then a Hayr-cloath, no
other Drink than Water, nor other Food than Herbs and Roots: and when the
weakness of my Stomach obliged me to eat them boiled, for a more easy
disgestion; I durst not satisfy my hunger, fearing to commit an excess in
making good cheer. This Abstinence and the heat of the Climat joined to the
ardour of my temper, had dried me up like a Skeleton; and one might have
counted all the Nerfs through a Skin more tawny than that of the Ethiopians. In
this sad estate, I had more horror of my self, than of the Scorpions and of
the Serpents which were round about me; and yet my Spirit would escape on a
sudden even amidst my most holy Meditations, and quit Prayer to dream of the
Roman Dames, running over all the assemblies I had frequented formerly, where
the Devil had laid his mortal Baits to entrap Chastity. Then being irritated
at the revolt of my Senses which these thoughts had excited against me, I
massacred my breast with a thousand blows, and I left not off striking it,
until the Grace of our Lord had calmed my Passions. He knows what my sorrow
was after such strange Conflicts. I blushed with shame. Life was insupportable
unto me. All the corners of my Grot, all the Rocks of my Solitude, seemed to me
so many Censurers of my Life and so many Witnesses of my Weaknesses. For this
cause I often changed my habitation, hoping to find out some one where I might
have more quiet, but my evil did not change, because I bore every where about
me the subject of my disquiet. I avouch that in the height of my torments I
ardently desired to die, and that I could have wished it had been permitted me
to go forth of the World. When one day I was pressed with this thought more
violently than I was wont, I took up the Book of the sacred Scripture which was
my sweetest comfort, and as God would have it, I fell upon that passage where
the Prophet Amos says these terrible Words: Joel. 2.11.
Accursed be they who inconsiderately desire the day of our Lord. Soph. 1.15.
Who urges you thus to desire it? That day of our Lord is a day without Light,
Amos. 1.18.
a day of darkness and obscurity. When you shall be weary of your misery,
overwhelmed with infirmities, persecuted with temptations, rejected by the
injustices of others; when you shall be disgusted with the whole World, and
irksom to your self; expect the hour of our Lord with patience. Amos. ^.19.
For what does it avail a man to shun the meeting of a Lion, if he falls into
the paws of a Bear? S. Ierom.
It is not in his power to hinder his Soul from going forth when that hour
shall be come; Eccl. 8.8.
and he has no right to hasten or to slacken the day of his Death.

After this sacred Instruction, I suffered Life patiently, being resolved to
employ all the moments thereof in doing good works; and being persuaded that we
may well desire Death, but that it is not permitted us to advance or further
it, nor even so much as to demand it of God with overmuch impatience; because
although we ought to contemn Life, yet we must not omit to conserve it.

Article. XXI. An Excellent Instruction of the same St. Jerome: That Death
ought to be looked on as an order of the Divine Providence, rather than as an
effect of human Infirmity: and that so we ought to die by Obedience and by Love.
A True Christian looks upon Death not only as upon a subject of consolation,
Lib. 9. in Isaiam; and alibi.
but moreover as upon an object of love and of respect; because it must be
granted that it is God who makes us live and die when he pleases; and that the
end of our days is more an effect of the Divine Will, than of human infirmity.
For if the fall of the least Sparrows happens not without the order of God, as
himself says in the Gospel; we ought to believe by a stronger reason, That the
last fall of our Body never happens but according to the immutable decree of
his Will. We should therefore look on Death with Love, considering it as an
effect of the eternal Providence. We must take from it that which Nature finds
horrible in it; and think that God sends it not to them whom he loves, but to
the end they should always love him.

In effect, the greatest testimony he can give them of his love, is to withdraw
them out of the World and to free them from the slavery of their Body and of
Sin, to render them Saints and make them eternally happy. I say yet much more,
we are in some sort made partakers even upon Earth of this happiness, when we
submit to his will with this Confidence. And as the last mark we can give of
our Love toward God, is to receive Death with an entire Obedience, and even
with Joy, when it summons us to go forth of the World: so the most perfect act
of our Faith and of our Piety toward Christ Jesus, is to resign our selves
before hand to what ever God shall ordain of our Life and of our Death. Let us
therefore with David say to him: Ps. 89.
Behold we are ready, O Lord, Cut of the thread of our miserable Life when you
please. And surely, what is the duration of our days? They pass away more
speedily than the Word: We live ordinarily but Seaventy Years, and the stronger
scarcely pass Fourscore. But should our Life endure a Thousand years: before
your eyes, a Thousand years are no more then yesterday which is past and gone:
Death hurries them away as a Whirlwind, and they disappear as a Dream. So that,
how long soever our Life is, it will be counted for nothing, unless it is
pleasing to you. Grant then, Sap. 3.
O Lord, that we may count our days by our Good Works, and that we may know
their shortness, to the end we may acquire Wisdom of Heart.

Article XXII. St. Jerome, or the Author of some Epistles attributed to him,
which are placed at the end of his Works; urges this Doctrine yet farther; and
teaches, That a Christian ought not only not to dread Death, but that he ought
also to desire it and to love it if he will imitate Christ Jesus.
It Is a small matter not to dread Death, since Pagan Philosophers, who imagined
they lost all in losing Life, were free from this fear. Is it a matter of more
difficulty to overcome Death with the Christian Faith, than with the profane
Philosophy?

Let us familiarize our selves with this Bugbeare; it affrights only them who
dare not look near at hand upon it. But it suffices not to learn to die, when
old Age or Diseases threaten us with Death. It Is in the flourishing years of
Youth, and in the vigor of Health, that we should most seriously apply our
selves to this study. For who told us, that we should have time enough to
prepare our selves thereto? Since it is blows are unavoydable, let us resolve to
endure them. So many Martyrs, so many Virgins have affronted it with courage,
why shall we not imitate them? God does not always demand these bloody
Sacrifices: but as for the sacrifice of our Will, he demands it every hour; and
I dare say that there is more merit to offer unto him our Life in all the
moments wherein he conserves it unto us, than to lose it once by the cruelty of
the Executioners.

Let us aspire yet to a greater Perfection, since we are Christians. Let us
change our Dread into Desire, and our Aversion into Affection. We have the
honor to be Heyrs to a Man-God, who has changed the punishment of our Crime
into a Sacrifice of Piety. Let us desire Death as he desired it: lets love
Death, and lets seek it even between the arms of the Cross, as Christ Jesus
there sought it. Lets render to him in dying the same Obedience which he
rendered to his Eternal Father. Finally let us rejoice to go to find our Master,
since we are his Disciples. Let us depart with alacrity to come to our Father,
since we are his Children. For if we have no love for him, nor Desire to be
near him, we are supposititious Children, Children of darkness; unworthy to see
the Light, and to reign one day with Christ Jesus.

Article XXIII. The order of time demands now that we return to St. Augustine:
For besides the Principles of Doctrine, upon which we in the beginning
established the whole design of this Treatise; there are moreover found in his
Writings an infinity of pithy passages, where he repeats and deeply prosecutes
this matter. S. Augustine.

An Excellent Moral of St. Augustine against them who fear Temporal death, and
who do not apprehend Eternal Death.
ALL men are apprehensive of the Death of the Body; Tract 49. in Joan.
but few there are who fear the Death of the Soul. All the World strives to
hinder that first from seizing on them, which nevertheless will infallibly one
day come upon him; and scarcely and one labors to avoid that Death of the
Soul, Epist. 45. ad Armamentarium.
which will no less infallibly follow unless timely prevented. Was there ever
any greater extravagancy than this? For the Death of the Body is but the shadow
and the Image of the Death of the Soul. The Man who must necessarily die upon
Earth, uses all his endeavors not to die there; and the same man who is
designed to live eternally in Heaven, uses no diligence to render himself
worthy of that happy Life. Thus, having a will to do that which he cannot, and
having no will to do that which he ought, his endeavors are useless and
criminal. When he attentively considers that Death is inevitable, he troubles
and disquiets himself to retard it at least for some Months: But why does he
not rather consider, that by leading a holy life, he would secure an infinite
happiness, he would suffer no disquiet, and that he should die even with joy,
because he might justly hope to live happily in Eternity? We expose our selves
daily to contempt, to a thousand perplexities, and to all sorts of vexations,
and even to the dangers of losing our Lives, in seeking out the means to
conserve it. And this passion of living long, does so strangely blind men, that
they sometimes die with the sole-fear of dying. To fly from a furious Beast,
they cast themselves headlong into a River. To avoid a Shipwreck, they throw
their Victuals into the Sea. Fear does that in them which rashness could not
do. An affrighted man knows no longer any danger. Such a one to escape the kind
of Death which he dreaded, exposes himself to a thousand Deaths more terrible
than that wherewith he was threatened.

What torments does not the Iron and the Fire cause them to suffer, who put
them selves into the Chirurgions hands? They endure to have a part of their
Body cut off, to save the other. A man who loves his health, submits himself as
a Slave to all that the Physicians ordain him to do or suffer: and although he
knows the vanity of their Art, he omits not to obey them in all things; nor can
his own experience, nor the uselesness of their applications, nor the
uncertainty of their skill, undeceive him. This man more sick of Imagination
than of any other Disease; feeds himself with a false hope of being cured,
try's all sorts of remedies, and hastens his Death by the Medicines which are
given him to prolong a little while his Life. But the most horrible of all the
effects which are caused by so blind and so irregular a passion, is, That Men
to live a little longer, adventure sometimes to offend him mortally, who is the
very Source of Life. For fearing to lose a Life which must necessarily end,
they lose a life which must never end. And yet God commands us but few things,
and those very easy, to deliver us from the true Death; which we nevertheless
neglect to put in practice. We our selves only are to be blamed if we obtain
not a Life which will eternally preserve it self without the help of men, and
whereof our Enemies can never deprive us. But as for this death which we so
much fear, we cannot possibly avoid it, and are most sure to suffer it, though
never so much against our will.

Article XXIV. A pithy reflection of St. Augustine, upon the shortness of this
Life, and upon the Eternity of the other; to stir up Christians to unfetter
themselves more and more from the Earth, and ardently to breath after Heaven.
O Men, In Psalm. 36. Sermon. 107. de diversis.
who are engaged in the course of this Life, and who prepare your selves to end
it well: do not bound your consideration only upon the places through which you
must pass; consider that place where you are to arrive. You shall indeed suffer
much in this journey, but you surely shall come at the end to an eternal rest.
Cast your Eyes upon the recompense which is prepared for you, and you will look
with contempt upon the miseries you endure on Earth. For if you compare the
Evils you suffer, with the felicity which is promised you; you will be
astonished that such light and short pains, should procure you a happiness so
great, and a felicity so infinite.

In effect, my Brethren, it seems that an exact Justice would require that one
should not purchase an Eternal repose, but by an Eternity of pains; and it
seems that you ought to labor and suffer without end, to enjoy a happiness
which has no end. But also on the other side, if your labor should have no
end, how should you obtain an endless recompense? It is therefore necessary
that the pains should last but for a time; to the end that they being ended,
you may taste a pleasure which shall never end.

God might, without overmuch rigor, exact of us much longer pains, and much
harder labors for the Eternity of pleasures which he promises us. Yes, my
Brethren, If you Labors and our Tribulations were to last many Ages; If God
should prolong our miseries for the space of a Thousand years: What are a
Thousand years in regard of Eternity? Is there any proportion between the Finit
and and the Infinite? One cannot compare with Eternity either a Thousand years,
or Ten-times an Hundred Thousand years, nor Millions of Millions of Ages, if we
were designed to live all that time.

But that which should exceedingly comfort us, is, That God would not have our
pains to be either long or extreme. Life is so short that it cannot make a man
for any long time miserable: But what do I say, miserable? I am sure, That if a
Man is good, the interior joy and sweetness which God gives him to taste of
amidst the bitterness of this Life, do more touch him, than all his Pains and
all his Afflictions.

Article XXV. A most true and edificatory observation S. Augustine, That God by
a particular mercy, besprinkles the greatest Sweets of this World with
bitterness; and permits that his Elect should be afflicted with Diseases, with
contradictions, and with Calumnies, thereby to give them cause to contemn Life,
and to desire Death.
A Soul which has not yet a sufficient courage to walk without weariness in
the way of Heaven; Tract. 6. in Joan.
seeks among the goods of the Earth for some mitigation of the pains which she
meets withal in her march. In Ps. 83. and passim.
The difficulty which this Soul finds in keeping her self in a continual
disposition to follow the Divine Inspirations, makes her to roam after that
which she conceives capable to untire her in her labors. This is one of the
nicest temptations which persons of piety endure. But God who by a singular
mercy never abandons his Servants and will unfetter them from this Life,
frequently intermixes bitterness among those things which we esteem to be the
most innocent. Why think you does he sometimes render the Goods of the Earth so
unsavory, but to take from us the gust of them, and to make us desire the
Goods of Heaven? And when God will exercise his Elect, and hinder them from
dwelling upon any object which may divert them from their Salvation; be takes
pleasure, if we may say so, in raising against them Afflictions both within and
without, and in giving them occasions at every moment to merit new degrees of
Glory, by new actions of Patience and of Love for Christ Jesus.

Perhaps should he less frequently send them Mortifications, their zeal would
cool and relent: at least one may be assured that they would have less Merit.
And it is a very particular favor of God, when he makes us employ profitably
for the other Life, all the days of a Life so short as this is.

We see how they who walk faithfully in the narrow way of Heaven, are upon
earth as the Grapes are under the Press, according to the thought of the
Prophet. They crush the Grapes, they tread them under their feet, to draw from
them a Juice which serves for the Life of men: In like manner they oppress,
they persecute the Just in the World; they are incessantly exposed to all sorts
of injuries and miseries: but God so permits it, in order to draw from thence
Good Works which serve for the perfection of the Christian, by disengaging him
from all that is material and impure within him, to elevate him to that
soverain honor which the World cannot give him.

Article XXVI. St. Augustine teaches in many places of his Writings, as an
assured Doctrine: That the most solid virtue of Christians, and the most
visible character of the Predestinate, is to sigh continually in the
expectation of Death, and in the hope of another Life.
It Is not for this World, In Psalm. 53.145.247.148.
that you are Born and Regenerated in Christ Jesus: It Is for Heaven. It is the
Celestial Kingdom you are to seek for: Tract. 5. in Joan. etc.
The sorrow for being so long separated from so great a Good, is that which
ought to cause all your Sighs and all your Tears. Interior sighing is a gift
of the Holy Ghost: When we are once enflamed with his Love, how shall we choose
but sigh and languish in this our Banishment, knowing that we have no true
Country but Heaven; and that this exile which separates us from it, is the
punishment of our Sin? Carnal Christians who breath nothing but the Goods and
the Pleasures, of the Earth, and who content themselves with a vain and
transitory Felicity, are afflicted at the loss of Goods, at sicknesses, at
Imprisonments, at Banishments, at Shipwrecks, at Calumnies. They sigh, but
their sighing proceeds from their self love, and from the adhesion they have to
earthly Goods. It is not the Holy Ghost, nor the love of Celestial Goods which
causes their affliction; it is the sorrow for their losses which makes them
lament. But Faithful Souls, who aspire only to the soverain Good, who desire
nothing but to be separated from the impurities of the Body, sigh in the most
peaceable enjoyment of all perishable Goods; and it is the Holy Ghost that forms
these Sighs in the bottom of their Heart, to the end they may be advertised by
this interior sadness, of the vanity of all worldly pleasures. He who looks
upon them in this estate only with Carnal Eyes, is persuaded that a true
Christian leads a very unhappy Life, and this error has averted many from
piety. But if they could comprehend the consolation which God mingles with
these Sighs, the secret satisfaction which he spreads in the Soul of a good
man, the peace, the pleasure, the joy which is tasted even amidst the tears
poured forth in these transports of Divine Love; they would surely change their
opinion. But certainly, Sensual Souls cannot penetrate into these Mysteries:
they must have felt these Celestial sweetnesses who will rightly conceive them.
Happy and holy Experience, how powerful art thou upon Hearts! Divine
transports of the Love of Christ Jesus! it is you which give a contempt of this
Life; it is you which make Death to be desired; and you more persuade this truth
in a moment, then can all the reasonings of human Wit. If once I am raised
above the earth, John. 12.32.
I will draw all to my self, says Christ Jesus. But, Lord, whence comes it that
you draw not all, and that it seems as if the fruit of your sacred Passion were
imperfect? Ah! It Is because the weight of our sins is yet stronger than the
Adamant which draws us: It Is because we have not the courage to quit all that
we have of terrestrial. For had we never so slender a disposition to bend our
selves toward Heaven, thou O Lord, would quickly draw us thither by the
power of thy Grace. Give us, we beseech thee this disposition; and since it is
impossible for man to raise himself above the Earth, but by the Cross which
elevated thee upon Calvary, in the view of all Nations; Grant, O Savior, that
we may embrace this Cross with as much Gratitude for thy Bounties and Mercies,
as thou have had Compassion for our Miseries.

Article XXVII. A Comparison between true Christians and the faithful
Israelites, in which St. Augustine shows, That as the first coming of the
Messiah was the object of the continual Desires and Devotion of the true
Israelites, so the second coming of Christ Jesus should be the scope of the
most solid Piety and of the most fervent Desires of Christians.
THe Elect whom the Sacred Scripture names the Children of God, In Psalm. 136.
and 143.
and the Reprobate whom it calls the Children of Men, or Children of the Earth,
have lived after a very different manner. The Reprobate limit their hope to the
present World, and expecting no other Felicity than that of this Life, Hom. 50.
and alibi.
embusy themselves in building Towns, and in establishing a permanent fortune
upon Earth. Cain, the head of the Reprobate, first founded a City which he
called by the name of his Son. Nembroth raised the Tower of Babel, and built
Babylon. But we read no such thing of the Children of God. It is not said that
they built any Town, on the contrary they fled from Towns, they walked
continually from place to place; and when by the order of God they stayed in any
Country, they lodged under Tents in the open Fields, to avoid the corruption
of the World, which is a kind of contagious Disease gotten by commerce with one
another. Such was the Life of Abraham, of Isaac, of Jacob, and of other holy
Patriarks. Moses lived in a like manner, in conducting the people of Israel in
the Desert, after he had freed them from the Captivity of Egypt. All the events
of his passage, 1 Cor. 10. Heb. 7.8.9.
were (according to the thought of S. Paul) but a Figure of that which was to
befall the Elect, who are the true Isralites chosen by God from all Eternity.
Wherefore if we will be of this beloved troop whereof our Savior speaks in the
Gospel, we must not pass our Life in building Palaces, and in raising great
fortunes upon Earth. Let us not imitate the ingratitude and Blindness of these
Hebrews, who made to themselves Gods according to their own capricious brain,
who repined at their servitude, and who upon every little incommodity happening
in their Journey, murmured against their Conductour, and preferred their
slavery of Egypt before all the goods which he gave them hopes of in the Land
of Promise. On the contrary, they who were truly touched with the desire of
that dear Country, endured with undanted courage all the difficulties of their
voyage, in hopes to arrive one day at that place of repose and plenty which
Moses promised them. But so long as they remained Captives, they ceased not to
sigh and weep upon the banks of the Babilonian River; they hung their Harps
upon the branches of Trees; and when they were entreated to sing Canticles of
Mirth, their answer was; Psalm. 1 36.
Alas! how can we sing being in a strange Land? Rather let our Tongues be dried
up, and all the Strings of our Harps broken; than that we should be induced to
sing in a place of tears and lamentation.

Sion was but the Figure of the Church, and the captivity of Egypt was but the
Image of the Tyrany of the Devil. The true Israelites knew well that they could
not enjoy an entire liberty until after the coming of the Messiah* Therefore
it was that they made so many vows and Prayers to see the arrival of that happy
days, foretold by all their Prophets. And that Nation had evermore such ardent
desires for the coming of their Redeemer, that even in their greatest blindness
and when they crucified the true Messiah, they still continued their Prayers,
and demanded of God that he would send him to deliver his people. Let not us
imitate these blind and self opinion'd Jews. Let us acknowledge Christ Jesus
for our Deliverer. Let us courageously support the toyls of our Pilgrimage. Let
us look upon the World as upon a Wilderness, through which we must pass with
all sorts of pains and incommodities: and when we shall be ready to enter into
our Celestial Country, let us Render Thanks to our Redeemer, for that after
having delivered us from the bondage of the Devil, he has moreover the
Goodness to send us Death, to accomplish the breaking of our Fetters.

Let us then, In Psalm. 66.
my Brethren, prepare our selves to meet the coming of our Saviors Kingdom;
for that it will come is most certain. It is, I say, most certain, that he who
came once in an estate of contempt and of humiliation, will come another time
in an estate of greatness and of Majesty. It is certain, that he who came to be
judged by the World, will come one day to judge the World. Let us now adore him
in his humiliation, to the end we may not be affrighted one day by that
terrible preparation of greatness and of Majesty, wherewith he will come to
Judgment. If we love him whilst he has yet his Arms stretched forth on the
Cross, we may deserve to contemplate him in his Glory. He will divide his
Kingdom with them who have sincerely desired that his Kingdom should come, and
that his Will should be don. Why then desire we not to have it come? Why do we
not accomplish his Will? His Will is no other than that of his Father who sent
him. Let us avouch Christ Jesus before Men for our Master, if we will not have
him to disavow us before his Father for his true Children. But it is not enough
for obtaining an entrance into the Heavenly Kingdom, to say to him with our
Mouths, Mat. 7.21.
Lord, Lord, We must fulfill the Will of his Father, which is also his Will:
Now the Will of my Father, says Christ Jesus, is, that all they who see the
Son, and who believe in him, should have Eternal Life, Job. 6.40.
and I will raise them up at the last day. Let us then believe in him with our
whole Heart, and let us look upon him for the present with Eyes of Faith and of
Love, to the end we may behold him face to face in a blessed Eternity. S.
Isidor.


Article XXVIII. An Instruction of St. Isidore of Damiet to all Christians, to
excite them to a perfect desire of Death.
SOme persons even the most pious persuade themselves oftentimes, In Epist.
passim.
that they have no longer any tie and adhesion to Life, nor to any thing of
this World. But it is an Error to fancy that one is entirely untyed from it, if
he feels not in his Heart a true desire of Death. Let him who believes himself
to be in so perfect an estate, enter seriously into himself, and he shall
undoubtedly perceive that the Will of Man reigns yet in his Soul, and that he
is not totally uncloathed of the love of Life. Let him severely examine himself,
let him question himself, and ask of his Soul: Do we no longer fear Death? Does
nothing fasten us any longer to Life? If we were to die within one Year, within
one Month, within one Day; if we were to die in this Moment; should we be ready
to render an account to God of our Actions? And should we have no reluctance to
quit our friends, our relations, our dwelling, our works? For we adhere to all,
and this adhesion is sometimes more violent for small matters than for the
greatest. Yet, if there remains any thing that chains our Will to the World,
the Love which we have for God is not perfect. Our Life upon Earth is a
continual Warfare. We bear Arms for the Glory of God. He commands us to march,
to fight, to pour forth our blood for him. Why shall we not do for an Eternal
Recompense, that which men do for the reputation of a few days? Let us then
seriously examine our selves, and let us see whether our heart is wholly
submitted to this holy discipline of the Warfare of Christ Jesus. Let us see,
whether according to St. Paul's precept, we have taken for the Armor of our
breast and back, Faith and Charity; These. 5.8.
and for our Helmet, the Hope of Salvation. For if our submission is perfect,
our Love will also be perfect, and Death will afford us joy, instead of giving
us terror.

Article XXIX. St. Eucherius Archbishop of Lion, exhorts Christians to observe
attentively the different agitations of human Passions, the shortness of Life,
and the uncertainty of Death, to the end they may never engage themselves in
the tumults of the World, S. Eucherius.
and that they may be evermore prepared to die.
HAve you never contemplated from the Seashore, Epist. ad Valerianum.
the combat of the Winds disputing among themselves for the Empire of the
Waves! That dreadful bellowing of the Billows, which rush one upon another and
push them with such violence against the Rocks, whilst the mountains of Water
and of Froth seem to ascend to the skies, and then suddenly to descend to the
abysmus? Does not this sight inspire I know not what horror, which is
nevertheless accompanied with some pleasure; and which insensibly engages the
beholder to meditate upon those mervails? This is the most lively and the most
resembling Image we can find of the Agitations of the World. But to behold them
well, we must stand upon the Shore, and consider according to the spirit of
God, the joys and the afflictions, the hatred and the freindship, the quarrels
and the reconciliations, the fortune and the misfortune of men, the flux and
the reflux of their interests, of their designs, and of all their actions; how
they do and undo, how they seek and shun the same things; how one generation
succeeds another; how the Grandfather makes place for the Father, and the
Father for the Son; not any of them thinking seriously during the whole course
of their Life of the rapidness of this motion which trails them toward their
Death. Certainly, this spectacle is a learned Lesson for them who know how to
make their profit of it: and we may say, that it also affords some
satisfaction, when one reflects upon himself, and finds that he is exempt from
that trouble which overthrows the reason of all the rest of men. Happy
Tranquillity, Adorable Peace of the love of Christ Jesus! How sweet is it to
them whom you have timely placed in the haven of their Salvation; to behold in
safety the fury of the Tempest, without fearing either the winds, or the waves,
or the rocks, or the quick sands? But as for us, who have escaped Shipwreck by
a sincere penance: we, I say, who know the dangers out of which you, our good
God, have delivered us; give us we beseech you a holy horror upon the sight of
this terrible spectacle of the Tempests of the World, and an ardent desire to
be freed from them for ever by a Christian Death. And surely we must not expect
to enjoy a perfect calm, so long as we sojourn upon Earth. Should we live
longer, we should not be more happy. The Life of our Fathers is ended, our own
slides daily away. Let us make place for them who are to follow us, a little
sooner or a little later, the difference is small, for they will not long
survive us. Finally, in the same manner as the Surges of the Sea follow, push,
and press upon one another by a precipitated motion, and as the Waves which are
raised up highest fall down afterward the lowest, to make room for a second,
the second for a third, which is driven away by an infinity of other followers,
all which in the sequel come to be dissipated upon the shore: even so the Life
of one man succeeds that of another man; one is elevated and the other is
humbled according to the capriciousness of fortune. But by how much their
elevation is higher, by so much the abysmus into which they sink is deeper; and
all terminate in Death.

Article XXX. S. Fulgen.
St. Fulgentius and S. Paulinus prove, That Death is a Recompense for the Just,
and a Chastisement for the Impious: That the length of Life is to be computed
by the number of Good Works one has performed, and not by the number of days
one has lived.
THe bad man trembles at the bare Name of Death. Has he the least
indisposition? Fulg. Epist 5. ad Gall.
He believes it is a mortal Sickness. Paulin. Ep. 37. ad Pam.
If one talks to him of God, he falls into a fury. He complains of the
impotency of Remedies. He is pierced with the apprehension of the least danger.
His Soul, Prove. 12. and 28.
says Solomon, is perpetually perplexed with vain terrors. Sap. 3. and 4. etc.
He flies when no one pursues him. But the Just looks upon the danger without
being affrighted, and marches on like a Lion, who is secure of his strength and
of his courage. Nothing that befalls him, contristates him: and if he were
threatened even with Death, he would be so far from being afraid, that he would
rejoice at it; because his Heart is in the hands of God, and for that the
torment of Death does not touch him. It seems to the eyes of the unwise, that
the Just man dies; his departure out of the World appears to them an
affliction. They imagine that the way he takes in separating himself from
others, will bring him to nothing; whereas it is but a passage which leads him
to peace and to repose. Although he endures a cruel Death before men, yet God
replenishes him with a certain hope of Immortality. He suffers a little, to
gain much. Our Lord has tried him by these pains of short durance, and has
found him worthy of his Love. It Is Gold which he puts into the melting vessel
to refine it. It Is a Victime which he sanctifies by the Sacrifice, to make it
revive one day in Eternity. The day will come, when the Just shall possess the
glory of Heaven, and he shall shine more brightly than the Stars: we shall
behold him judging Nations, and bearing sway over the people, for he is the
Child of the most High. He shall share with him in his Kingdom, and the Lord of
the Just shall reign Eternally. They who have confidence in him will understand
this truth, they shall repose in his bosom, and shall enjoy the Peace which he
has prepared for his Elect.

But as for the Wicked, who have despised and injured the Just, and who have
withdrawn themselves from God, they shall be chastised according to their
crimes. How unhappy are they, to have abandonned Wisdom, and shaken off the
yoke of Justice! For all their hopes will be vain, their labors will be
unprofitable, and their works will remain imperfect. If they have Wives they
will be dishonest; if they have Children, they will be unnatural; A curse shall
fall upon their families, and the posterity of Adulterers shall be
exterminated. It Is in vain for them to boast of their Riches, of their Power,
of their Health. Should they live longer than other men, all the years of their
Life shall be counted for nothing at the day of their Death. If they die old,
their old age shall be disquieted with the remorse of their Conscience; and the
World growing impatient to see them so long upon Earth, will look upon them
only with contempt, and perhaps with indignation. If they die Young, they shall
be deprived of the advantages they might have had in the World, and of the hope
of the heavenly Good. Finally, the Death of the wicked is the ruin of their
race; it is a desolation without hope, a night without light, an Abysmus of
miseries, where nothing dwells but a dismal nothing and an eternal horror.

These sentences of the sacred Scripture make us see, That only Impious and
Infidells need to fear Death. but that Christians who are endued with piety,
should be so far from fearing it, that they ought even to desire it. Certainly,
a happy Life does not consist in living a long time, but in living in a perfect
submission to the orders of Providence. What does it serve us to continue upon
earth even to a decrepit age? Is not Innocence of Life to be preferred before
the duration of Life? and is not purity of manners more worth than old age? The
Scripture speaking of the Just man who dies young, has said; That he was
snatched speedily out of the World, Sap. 4.11.
lest the Master of error should seduce his spirit, and lest Malice should
corrupt his Soul. But because he became perfect in a short time, v. 13.
it is as if he had lived many Years: and God to whom this Soul was agreeable,
hastened to withdraw her from the midst of iniquity, wherewith the whole Earth
is replenished.

Article XXXI. As St. Gregory the Pope was himself very infirm and sickly; so
he speaks and writes frequently of Death. He is one of the Ecclesiastical
Authors who has filled his Works with the strongest reflections upon this
subject. We have drawn out four or five of them, which best relate to our
proposed Design.
I. Reflection of St. Gregory, S. Gregory.
That the Continual view of Death is the most assured means to lead a holy and
quiet Life.
HE who seriously considers what he ought to hope for or to fear at the article
of Death, Moral. in c. 17. Job.
must needs act with great circumspection, and have a continual apprehension of
falling into Sin. That last hour which he has evermore present before his
Eyes, renders him truly living to the Eyes of God. He fixes upon nothing that
is perishable. He desires nothing of all that which men who live without
Reflection, seek with so much earnestness; and the disposition wherein he
places himself every hour, as if he were then to die, makes him to look upon
himself as already dead. For Life is by so much the more holy and more perfect,
by how much it has relation each moment to Death. Holy Scripture teaches us,
Eccles. 7.
that the more men study this Lesson, and contemplate themselves in this
Looking-Glass which flatters not, the farther they are from falling into the
snares of Sin.

Article XXXII. 2. Reflection of St. Gregory: That naturally all the Desires and
all the Actions of man tend to Death: That Grace should do that in us which
Nature does of it self: That according to the thought of Job, Life resembles
the day of a hireling, a pilgrimage, a warfare, where no one enroll's himself
but to die in fighting against the Enemies of our Salvation.
THe Sick person who lies languishing in pain and in sadness, Lib. 2. Mor. c.
3. Lib. 12. c. 3.
expects with impatience the return of the day; but the Sun which brings the
Light, brings no remedy to his misery; on the contrary it diminishes one day of
his Life. The Hireling finds the hours of his labor overlong, and blames the
Night for coming on so slowly. The Covetous man counts with discontent all the
moments. which retard his revenues. The Ambitious man who has conceived great
designs, would in order to hasten the success, hasten the years of his Life.
The Husbandman makes vows to see his Harvest ripen. Finally, it seems that men
demand nothing but to be Old, although they apprehend nothing so much as Old Age.
In Winter we wish the return of the Spring. Scarcely is the season of Flowers
past over, but we desire that of Fruits. In Autumn we say that Winter has it is
pleasures. Thus it is that the Spirit of Man, unquiet and insupportable to it
self, carries on its vain desires from one time to another, and not enjoying
the present, anticipates always upon the future, and marches by a secret
impatience toward his Death. What we do by a hidden motion of Nature, why
shall we not do by the Inspiration and by the Succor of Grace? Grace
incessantly advertises us, that this Life is short and miserable, and that we
ought to aspire to another Life which is everlasting and happy. Sometimes the
sacred Scripture teaches us this Verity, by comparing Life to a Pilgrimage,
wherein we are to make what speed we are able. Otherwhiles it compares it to a
Warfare, whereinto we enroll our selves to die in fighting against the Enemies
of Christ Jesus. At other times it represents Death unto us under the Parable
of a Hireling, who tills the Vinyard for the price of his days labor. O
Christians, when the Evening shall come, let not us imitate those indiscreet
Vignerons, who complained that they had born the burden of the day, and endured
the heat of the Sun. Let Us not presume that we have deserved a larger
recompense than they who have labored less time than we. It belongs to the
Master of the Vinyard to distribute his Wages as himself pleases. At what ever
hour he calls us to his service, let us labor as long as the day lasts. Our
Lord knows well how to pay unto each one what appertains to him. Mat. 20.12.
Perhaps the last shall be first, and the first last, because there are many
called and but few chosen. Let us expect the hour of payment with Patience and
with Humility. That hour, O Christians, is the hour of Death; for this Death
which we so much dread, is the period of our pains, and the time of our reward.

Article XXXIII. 3. Reflection of St. Gregory: That they who have the World,
love some reason to fear the end of it; but that they who serve Christ Jesus,
ought not to apprehend the destruction of the World: on the contrary, they
ought to endure with patience, War, Famine, Pestilence, Detraction,
Persecution, and the other Scourges wherewith the hand of God chastises men;
because these are the signs of the second coming of our Savior.
IF the scourges of God fall upon your Head, lift it up, and look toward
Heaven; Hom. 1. and 13. in Evan.
because your Redemption is near at hand. Behold the Fig Tree, and all other
Trees, Luke 21.
when their fruit begins to be formed, you say that Summer is coming on. So
when you shall see all these things arrive, which the common sort of men
account miseries, know that the Kingdom of Christ Jesus approaches, and that
Christians ought to rejoice thereat as at the greatest of all good things;
because they shall never possess the Kingdom of God, until that of the Devil,
which is the World, shall be destroyed. It belongs therefore to them only who
have the love of the World rooted in their Heart, who look not after eternal
Life, who even fancy that there is none: It only belongs, I say, to those
wretched Children of the World, to afflict themselves for the end of the World.
But as for us, who are the Children of God, who know that our Patrimony is not
upon Earth, but that it expects us in the glory of the Eternal Father; we
rejoice to see an end of the Worlds Tyranny, which has already too long
lasted. Heaven and Earth shall pass, Luke 21.33.
but my Words shall not pass, says our Lord. Those are the works of his Hands;
they shall perish, but our Lord will remain; Heb. 1.11.
They will wax old as a Garment; They will change their form as a Cloak: But he
who created them will be evermore the same, Ps. 101. v. 26.27. etc.
and his years will have no end. The Just shall dwell with him, and their
Posterity shall be eternally happy.

Article XXXIV. 4. Reflection of St. Gregory: That there are few Just who can
truly say with St. Paul: God forbid that I should glory of any other thing than
of the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ; because the World is dead and crucified
for me, as I am dead and crucified for the World: That although the major part of
good people employ all their Life to die to the World, Gal. 6.14.
yet it frequently falls out that the World dies not to them; but on the
contrary that it strives to corrupt them by its flatteries and by its
illusions. From whence this holy Doctor takes an occasion to exhort Christians
to be willing to go forth of this place which is so dangerous, and to desire
Death as the sole Remedy of all their Evils.
THere is no Just Man who does not acknowledge himself miserable during this
Life, Morol. l. ^. c. 2.3. etc.
and who considers it not as a painful and perilous Pilgrimage. He knows that
the Dignities and the Riches of the World are things perishable. But what ever
experience he daily makes of them, they cease not to leave in his spirit the
same impression which the sight of a delicious Country leaves in the Spirit of
a Traveller. He does not absolutely prefer it before his native Land; but he is
less impatient to get home to it. What should press us to leave Life, will some
one say, if we make good use of it? Our Lord has given us Goods, let us employ
them for his Glory* He forbids not the enjoyment o^ Honors, when one referr^
them all to him. What har^ is there in hearing our Praises published, so long
as w^ cease not to praise God (...) Thus does the World endeavor to seduce the
Jus^ man by subtle stratagems which it disguises under the appearances of
Virtue. Bu^ a true Christian grounde^ in the love of Christ Jesus speaks
another Language. (...) you Honors of the World says he, you Riches, Health,
Commodities of Life, I am not to look upon you but as the obstacles of my
Salvation. In this sad voyage which I make upon Earth, my Soul sends forth
continual sighs for the length of her exile, nor can she suffer with patience
that which separates her from her dear Country. What a remisness, what an
imprudence is it, to stay upon the Earth for the exercising of an Office and
Dignity which torments us, to distribute our Goods which are capable to corrupt
us, to acquire a Praise which may make us proud, and perhaps for some other end
which is yet more vain and frivolous? Ah, my Soul* do not thou adhere to any
worldly thing; thou will not there meet with any thing which is not unworthy of
thy affection. Remember the nobility of thy origin, thou come from Heaven;
the Earth is not for thee: God did not create thee to animate eternally a lump
of Flesh. Death will ere long destroy this Body, in which thou take so much
complacency: but its loss ought not to afflict thee, God will one day repair
it. It Is Sin which thou ought to dread, there is thy Death, and a terrible
and irreparable Death. Thou will be exposed to the danger of this Death so long
as thou sojournest upon Earth. Go forth of it then, my Soul, go forth of thy
Prison; separate thy self from thy Body: for I burn with a desire to die, that
I may go to live eternally with my Lord Jesus.

Behold what are the sentiments of perfect Christians. They have learned in the
School of so good a Master, that even they who most desire to die,
notwithstanding that they are already dead to the World, yet the World ceases
not to live to them, and to ly every where in wait to entrap them, sometimes by
applauding their Virtues, and other times by extolling their Actions. It
besieges them, it pursues them, it enchains them by secret confidences, by
continual visits, by an ardent seeking of their freindship. All these things
seem only to tie an innocent knot, and which may have a very good end.
Nevertheless the danger is great, and it is a temerarious confidence to expose
ones self thereto without an extreme necessity. The World loses nothing in this
traffic; on the contrary, it serves it very frequently for an honest Veil to
hide its Vices: but the Just man runs a great hazard thereby, and sits down
always with the loss. The Devil, who is but too ingenious to deceive us,
employs a thousand subtle crafts, disguises himself into all manner of shapes,
and even into that of Virtue, in order to seduce us. At first he distills light
distractions, little solicitudes, vain desires, unprofitable curiosities, which
diminish by little and little the fervor of our devotions, and which estrange
from our memory the thoughts of Death. Then the same Spirit which cools the
Love of God, enkindles insensibly in our Soul those former affections which
repentance and Charity had there as it were stifled and buried. Alas? how few
Just persons are found who entirely imitate S. Paul in this double Death of the
Christian to the World, and of the World to the Christian! Where are they whose
Conscience renders to them the same testimony as it did to this great Apostle,
and who have put themselves into a perfect liberty, by breaking not oniy all
the Chains which kept them fast tied to the World, but moreover those which
tied the World to them. For it is not enough to have despised and abandoned the
World; we must so order it, that the World may despise and abandon us. This is
that which the Apostle intends to teach us, when he says: The World is dead and
crucified for me, as I am dead and crucified for the World. The World was
crucified to him, because it was dead in his heart, and was no more any thing
to him but the object of his contempt and of his hatred: but besides this, he
was also crucified to the World, because having made appear an insensibility
for the concerns of the Earth, the world ceased to seek after him, and did no
longer so much as think of him.

If we take not heed, we shall find that even in the most retired professions,
in the greatest disgust of the vanities, of the infidelities, and of the
corruptions of the world, when we fancy that we are for ever freed from them;
yet there still remain some roots thereof in our Heart. We hold no more of the
world, but it holds us yet by imperceptible bonds. We make a show of shuning
it, and yet we are not sorry that it should seek after us, and that it should
come sometimes to trouble our solitude, which would otherwise appear to us
dismal and insupportable. Finally, with a mean Virtue one may forget the world,
but one must have an extraordinary Virtue to wish to be forgotten by the world.
This is that which holy Souls aim at, which are perfectly unfettered from the
world, They not only suffer themselves not to be drawn by the World, but
moreover they draw not the World to themselves. And it is to them that may be
applied the saying of S. Paul: Man and the World are reciprocally Crucified,
one in regard of the other; because they not seeking one another, nor mutually
loving each other, are as two dead things which can no longer have any
communication.

But alas! how few there are who can come to he happiness of this double Death?
The greatest Saints, all crucified as they are to the World, cannot without the
succor of an extraordinary Grace, crucify the World entirely in themselves.
Therefore it is that they incessantly mortify themselves, and they cry out with
David: Lord, Psalm. 90.
save my Soul from the Ambushes of her Enemies; defend her against the cunning
of deceitful Tongues: deliver me from the snares of the Hunters, and from the
corruption of the World. For although the Just man flies the World, and is
perfectly disengaged from it, he evermore apprehends that he has something in
himself which engages the world to follow him. But if God covers him with his
Wings, (to make use of the Royal Prophets words), what ever endeavors the
world makes to seek him out, it will not find him; or if it finds him, 'twill
find him Dead as to all earthly concerns, doing nothing to please it, nor to
allure it, being deaf to it is praises, insensible to it is blandishments,
indifferent to its interests, without curiosity, without pretention, without
disquiet, doing good for goodness sake, and little caring to have confederates
or admirers of his Virtue. On the contrary, if in laboring for Gods glory, he
increases his own glory, he will so far humble himself in his own interior and
before others; that the aversion which he will testify against all flatteries,
will foyl his Flatterers. Finally, the World, which will not entertain any
traffic with the Just but upon some motive of interest or of pleasure, will
cease to seek after him; and finding there no more nourishment to live upon,
will die and crucify it self in him. For it is most certain that the World is in
that, like unto the Sea, which swallows up and detains within its bosom the
living Bodies, but rejects the dead carcasses and leaves them upon the sands.
So, the World lays hold upon that only which is yet living and sensible for it,
and abandons that which is devoyd of feeling and of Life for all such things as
any way concern it.

Article XXXV. A pithy Description made by the Great St. Gregory, of the
Necessities and of the Miseries of the Body and of the Soul. From whence this
holy Man concludes, That men should desire to die, in order to enjoy a better
Life, in which they shall be no longer exposed either to Sorrow or to Sin.
ONe cannot express all the Miseries to which Man is exposed by Sin. Lib.
Moral. in c. 7. Job.
His Body is subject to a thousand sorts of infirmities; it is exposed to the
injuries of the Air and of all the Elements, to Dangers, to Diseases, to the
ignorance of Physicians, which is some* times more to be dreaded than the
Diseases themselves. The natural Heat which sustains his Life, devours its
proper substance as soon as it wants nourishment. If he reposes, sloth renders
him unweldy; if he is employed, labor drains him; if he eats, the meat
overcharges him; thirst dries him up, the excess of drink makes him brutish;
sleep oppresses him, watching wearies him; cold pinches him, heat stifles him;
and that which eases him of one incommodity, casts him presently into another.
Finally, on which ever side he turns himself, he is tormented by the Evil, or
by the Remedy.

The Soul has no less weak nesses and miseries than the Body. You see her one
day deceived by Hope, and on the morrow troubled with Fear; Anger transports
her; Sadness dejects her, Joy dissipates her, Envy gnaws her, and nothing
contents her. One Passion follows another; and sometimes for one that is
destroyed, there spring up a thousand. The sacred Scripture compares this
agitation to the dreadful Tempests which are raised upon the Waters: Isa. 57 20.
Who can then, says the Prophet, number all the Waves of the Sea! Nevertheless
it is yet a harder task to count the desires of Man, who goes astray in the
error of his Heart, Jacob. v. 6.
He will, and he will not at the same time the same things. He seeks with
impatience what he has not, and he is presently disgusted with what he
possesses, Vice is followed with remorse; Virtue is accompanied with pains; he
knows not to which of the two he should apply himself. His first motion
inclines him to Good, and yet he does the Evil by reflection, at the same time
when he condemns it. The Apostle St. Paul says: Romans 7.18.
I find in my self a Will to do Good, but I find not the means to accomplish
it. For I do not the Good to which I have a will, and I do the Evil which I
would not. There is nothing good in Man. He is submitted both together to the
Law of God according to the Spirit, and to the Law of Sin according to the
Flesh. God and the World draw him by turns. He is a Compound of all that which
is most motley in Nature, always and in every thing unlike to himself, His
manners, his opinions, his desires, all his actions, all his thoughts, are in a
continual instability. Finally, one may sooner stop the course of the Winds,
and the rapidity of a Torrent, than fix his inconstancy by the sole force of
Reason. Thus, the more our Soul examins her self, the less she knows her self.
Who am I, for example, I who make so many reflections upon others? What is the
Beginner that stirs all the parts of my Body? By what means do they come to
know the orders of my Will? How can they execute them with so much readiness?
But this will, what makes it spring up in me? Whence proceeds this intelligence
which guides it, these lights which clear it, these darknesses which sometimes
encompass it? It walks upon the wings of the winds, upon the points of the
Waves; it penetrates the highest Heavens; it descends into the center of the
Earth; it carries its curiosity into every corner; and yet the most common and
the most sensible objects hide themselves from its knowledge: in a word, it
knows not what it self is. Man thinks, and he knows not what it is to think; he
reasons, and he cannot say what reason is. The Soul is united to the Body, and
she conceives not how she is united to it; she enters not there, and she goes
not from thence when she pleases; the matter which she animates, serves her for
a Prison; and by an inclination opposite to her nature, she loves this Prison
which keeps her captive. The Senses which should be in all things subject unto
her, revolt incessantly against her, deceive her, and corrupt her. It Is an
assembly of qualities which are mortal and immortal, which are corruptible and
incorruptible. Water is not so contrary to Fire, as these Qualities are
contrary among themselves; yet all agree together in one and the same subject,
notwithstanding that it is impossible to say either what makes their mutual
intelligence, or what breaks it. One cannot number all the kinds of Diseases
which may separate the Soul from the Body; and yet the Soul acts as if nothing
were able to separate her from it. She heaps up designs upon designs, hopes
upon hopes, and there needs no more than a blast to overturn all. O Man, thou
confused Pile of uncertainties and of miseries, Eccles. 7* and 8.
learn not to pry into that which is above thee, since thou know not thy own
self, since thou art ignorant of that which is proper to thy self during thy
Life, and in this little number of days designed for thy Pilgrimage upon Earth,
which pass as the shadow of a smoke: It Is the Wisest among men who has said:
No one knows how he is to finish his course. And even as the Fishes are caught
by the hook of the Fisher, and Birds are taken in the Nets of the Fowler; so
Men fall into the ambushes of Death when they least dream of it. What is Man, O
my God, that he should by you be so highly honored? Why do you east your eyes
and employ your thoughts upon a Vessel so feeble and so full of iniquity? Job.
7.19.
You visit him in the Morning, and presently you exercise him by strong
Trials. He has scarcely begun to see the day light, before he falls into
Darkness. Psalm. 15.
His Body is but a heap of dust, and his Life fleets away as the Grass: it
blooms in Morning like the Flowers of the Field; and in the Evening the
smallest blast of wind withers it: it dwindles away, and there remains no track
of the place where it but now flourished. It seems as if after you had formed
man, you had abandoned him to his own conduct. Eceli. 15.
You have set before his eyes the Water and the Fire, Life and Death, Good and
Evil, to the end you might leave him the liberty of choice which is almost
always unlucky to him. There are none who have understanding Psalm. 13.
and light. There are none who seek God. They are gone astray from the right
path. They are all corrupted. There is not any one who (of himself) does good,
no, there is not one. Lord, why do you leave them to be a prey to their
Passions, and to the hardness and malignity of their own Heart? Know you not
that our fall is inevitable, as soon as you withdraw your hand from holding us
up? Do not then estrange your self from us, O Lord, you who are our only prop
and our strength. Draw us out of the mire of the World, that we may not sink
down and be drowned in it. Deliver us from those worldlings, who have made
choice of this present Life for their portion. S. Gregory.
Overwhelm them with an abundance of your riches and of your treasures,
wherewith they may satiate their cupidity. But as for us, who have placed our
treasure in Heaven, our Heart is where our Treasure is. Grant then, O my God,
that we may perfectly renounce all the goods of the Earth, and that we may
surmount all the miseries of our Nature. 2 Cor. 4.
Grant that we may carry evermore in our Body the death of our Lord Jesus, to
the end that the Life of Jesus may appear also in our Body. For we who live for
him, are every hour delivered up to Death for him, that we may live eternally
in his Glory. S. Climacus.


Article XXXVI. St. John Climacus distinguishes the desires of Death which the
Devil suggests unto us, from those which Grace inspires: and of this Doctrine
he composes one degree of his holy Ladder; Degree. 6. n. 4.
where he shows, That the Meditation of Death is the most profitable of all
Spiritual practices.
AS all apprehensions of Death are not criminal; Degree. 8. n. 3. and 4. Ibid.
8.
so all the desires of Death are not always lawful. According to Nature, Man
dreads to die, and Christ Jesus himself was apprehensive of it; to make it
clearly appear to men, that he had taken upon him all the weaknesses of
humanity, and that there were two Natures united in his Person. If God had not
given to the Soul this natural adhesion for her Body, she would not remain
there shut up one instant. This adhesion is therefore an order of Providence,
and not a disorder of Sin. But to know whether the Desires or Fears of Death
are criminal or commendable, we must examine the reasons which move us to dread
it or to desire it. There are some who by a motive of Despair desire to die,
when they find themselves oppressed with sickness or with affliction: and these
are very faulty, in not receiving these chastisements from the hand of God with
patience and humility. Others, after they have embraced a Penitent Life, are
discouraged, and grow weary of suffering for the expiation of their Sins: and
these surely are very unhappy, for they lose the fruit of all the good works
which they have formerly performed. They have kept their Lamps along time
lighted, and they let them go out at the hour perhaps in which the Bridegroom
is ready to come. Others there are, who being puffed up with a vain
presumption, imagine that they are arrived at the soverein peace of Soul, and
have gotten a com^eat victory over all their Passions, because they have no
longer any fear of Death. They perceive not that this Pride is a thousand times
worse than the fear of Death, and that the malice of our invisible Enemies is
so great, 7. Degree n. 68.
that they convert the seeds of Virtues into Vices. Some others more
conformable to the Spirit of Christianism, seeing that the violence of their
evil Customs makes them to relapse incessantly into Sin, desire Death with
thoughts of repentance and of humility. These sentiments are laudable, 22.
Degree n. 25.
and yet they are but the beginning of Christian perfection. One arrives at
this perfection, when being dead to all the affections of the World, to the
World it self, 6. Degree. n. 20.
and to Sin, one desires to die upon no other motive than only to be entirely
united to Christ Jesus.

It Is by this mark that one may know the difference between the natural
apprehensions of Death, 6. Degree. n. 6.
and the fear which proceeds not from the feeling of Nature; between the
Impatience which comes from Despair, and the desire which the hope of a better
Life produces. For he who has not renounced all created things and his own
will, 6. Degree. n. 20. and* 11.
betrays himself; and is like to a Soldier who should present himself with his
hands tied in the day of Battle.

They who during their Lifetime have their Heart and Spirit linked to Heaven,
26. Degree. n. 106.
mount up to Heaven after their Death. But they who have had their Soul linked
to the Earth, descend under the Earth. 26. Degree. n. 377.
The goods and the honors of the World are as so many rotten steps of a
Ladder, upon which the humble man cannot set his foot without putting himself in
danger to lose his Humility.

He who voluntarily resigns himself to Death, and who expects it without fear,
6. Degree. n. 12.
has some Virtue: But he who at every hour desires it, may pass for a Saint.
We cannot live holily one sole day, if we do not desire that it may be the last
day of our Life, rather than to offend God in it. The continual thought of
Death extinguishes at last all Vices. And as a perfect Charity renders a man
exempt from falling into Sin; so a perfect Meditation of Death renders him
incapable to fear any thing but the Judgments of God. Ib. n. 14.
And surely there is reason to admire, that the Pagans themselves have said
something not unlike unto this; when they declared, That Philosophy or the love
of Wisdom is nothing else but a continual study of Death.

Article XXXVII. St. Bernard teaches us, That Hope is the portion of true
Christians, and that this Virtue enables them to suffer patiently all the
evils of this Life, and to Love and Desire Death.
THe Children of darkness sleep in the night season: Ser. 6. in Ps. 90. and
alibi.
but as for us, my Brethren, who are Children of light, let us watch in
expectation of the days coming in which we are to sleep the sleep of Death. S.
Bernard.
Let us arm our selves with a holy Hope to fight against this drowsiness of the
World. Let Sensualists shut their eyes against the beams of this Hope, and let
them repose in the wantonness of a voluptuous Life. Let them say, we are in
peace and in security; who can discover us? what can trouble the enjoyment of
our pleasures? The day will come, when they shall be overwhelmed with an
un-foreseen ruin, as a Woman is surprised by the pangs of Childing. How
terrible are your judgments, how incomprehensible are your words, ^ap. 17.
O Lord? Whilst the Wicked insult over the holy Nation of your Elect, and
flatter themselves that they shall always domineer; a stroke of your hand lays
these fugitive slaves in the dust, who fancied they could steal themselves from
your eternal Justice. They who were seen to triumph over your Patience, are all
enwrap'd in the shadows of a long and dismal night, as many Criminalls are
fast linked together with one and the same Chain. As for us, O my God! who have
no share in their Sleep, nor in their Blindness, we lift up our Eyes
incessantly toward Heaven from whence we expect our help. You O Lord, Psalm. 15.
are our good, and all our portion. This part which is fallen to our Lot is
rich and delicious. Our hereditary share is of an incomparable excellency. S.
Ber.
It Is for this that our Heart rejoices, and that we sing with alacrity,
because you will not leave the Soul of the Just in Hell, nor will you suffer
him whom you have made holy, to see corruption.

Thus, O Lord, the inheritance of the Children of Jacob is more worth than the
riches of the Children of Esau: for when they should possess the whole Earth,
when the Goods which the World promises them should be great; the possession
thereof is not peaceable, the duration is but short, the end is uncertain, and
the loss of them is followed with an infinite number of miseries. Let him who
rests assured upon the darkness and upon the uncertainty of this Life, learn
that Death has no respect for Treasures, for the greatness, nor for the glory
of men. It neither pardons the luster of birth, De morum conversione.
nor of manners, nor of age; except only that it is at the door of old men, and
that it lies in wait for young ones. To ground ones hope upon all these things,
is to imitate that senseless person of whom the Gospel says: He built his house
upon the Sands, Mat. 7.29.
the Rain fell, the Rivers overflowed, the Winds blew, and setting upon this
house, it was soon overturned,, and great was its ruin, because it was hurried
away before its time, and when the owner thought least of it. The Torrent has
devoured all even to the foundations. Job. 21.
What a folly is it to consume in a perishable work the time which one ought to
employ in acquiring an eternal happiness? Do we not consider that this Life is
but a Vapor which vanishes? O thou Ambitious person, have thou obtained at
last the Dignity for which so many years thou underhand laboured'st? The weight
of it will quickly oppress thee. O thou Covetous man, have thou stuffed thy
Coffers with money? Take care of losing it, and beware of Theives: the Harvest
has been plentiful, pull down thy Barns to build greater, change and
re-change thy Edifices, toil, heap up, pole and pillage on all sides, and then
sit down and say: L^^ (...) 19.
O my Soul, how happy are we now? We have Goods in store for the whole
remainder of our Life. Ah! how long will this Life yet last? Perhaps not one
Year, perhaps but one Day, perhaps but a Moment; and perhaps in that fatal
Moment in which thou make in thy Soul these vain projects of a long
possession of all these Goods, God will re-demand this Soul; and then; who
shall enjoy the fruit of thy labors?

It is not so with them who place all their hope in God, who uncloath
themselves of all affection to worldly goods, who are evermore ready to quit
the Earth and always enflamed with the desire of the Heavenly goods; because
they have heaped such goods together as the Worms cannot devour, nor the
Theives purloin from them. The blind Lovers of the World believe that we in
this estate lead a life here below full of bitterness: but it is because the
blindness of their Spirit renders them incapable to conceive the sweetnesses
wherewith the Love of Christ Jesus incessantly fills the Soul of the Just, even
whilst she is yet a captive within the Prison of her Flesh. Surely, we must not
imagine that this Paradise of inward delights whereof God gives sometimes a
taste even in this world to his Elect, is a place which is sensible and
material. It Is not the feet, it is the motion of the Heart, which conducts to
this enclosed Garden, to this sealed Fountain, which causes to issue forth of
the only source of Wisdom, the living water of the four Virtues. In this
delicious place, Hope makes us feel the excellent Odours of this tree of Life,
of this Pomegranet-tree of the Canticles, more precious than all the trees of
the Forests, under the shadow whereof the Bridegroom delights to refresh
himself. There it is that one tast's by advance with a holy greediness, the
incomparable pleasures of the Divine Love. Nevertheless, these pleasures which
the eye of the sensual man cannot behold, and which the spirit of the World
cannot comprehend, are not counted among the rewards of the eternal Life, it is
but a pay of the temporal Warfare. Taste, says David, and acknowledge the
delights of our Lord. Ps. 33, 8.
It Is a Manna which satiates, without giving any disgust.

But, O Christians, let not us imitate our Fathers, who fed upon the Manna and
are dead: let us make provision only to continue our Journey, and to get
strength to overcome the difficulties of the way. An incorruptible Food expects
us in Heaven: it is that Celestial nourishment after which we must have an
insatiable hunger. Let us demand of God that he will introduce us to this
delicious banquet of the Lamb without blemish, where we shall sit at his Table
in the company of Saints and of Angels in a happy Eternity.

Article XXXVIII. S. Bernard proves, That to the end we may not fear Death, but
may endure at with patience, and even receive it with Joy; we must prepare our
selves daily for it by sincere Repentance: That by this means Grace overcomes
Nature: That what appears so terrible to a sinful man, becomes pleasing to a
just man, but particularly to them who have embraced the Religious and solitary
Life.
It Is a constant truth, the more one mortifies himself, De div. Ser. 18. in
Cant. Ser. 26*
the more one hopes for Mercy, and by consequence one less needs to apprehend
Death. A Christian who mortifies his Body, In Vigil. Nativ. Ser. 2 and Tract.
de Vita Solit^ria.
who entirely disengages himself from the Earth, and who exercises himself in
all sorts of Virtues during his Life, feels his Courage and even his Joy
redoubled, when he is to die. He looks on Death as a Sanctuary and a secure
Harbor. He leaps over this passage which is so short, as a Bridge to thwart
the impetuous torrent of this Lives bitterness. Finally he desires Death as the
term of his banishment, as the day in which he is to shake off his fetters, and
to free himself for ever from the miseries which oppressed him.

Now if God gives this Grace to persons remaining in the World, he gives it yet
more abundantly, to good Religious, and such as are truly Solitary; because
they have embraced a profession, into which they enter by a Spiritual Death, by
separating themselves from all things which affoard any adhesion to the Life of
the Body. In effect, what is it that a true Solitary person can fear in Death?
or rather, what will he not there find to desire? He learns in his little Cell
to uncloath himself of all that is in the World. He makes it in his retrait his
continual study to contemplate the felicity of Paradise. A Cell and Heaven have
a near relation to one another: what is done in Heaven, is done also in a Cell:
one is there employed upon God; there one enjoys God and the society of
Angels; there one leads a Life altogether Celestial. The Cell is a holy place,
it is a sacred Mountain, where the Soverain Master of the World, uncloathing
himself, if we may say it, of all his Majesty, frequently entertains himself
with his Servant, without witness, without reserve, as one friend with another.

And even as the Temple is the Sanctuary of God, so the Cell is the Sanctuary
of a true Religious man. Whether his, Soul raises up her self to the enjoyment
of the blessed. Eternity, either by fervent Prayer, or by a holy. Death, she
finds a short and easy way from the Cell to Heaven. The weight of earthly of
affections hinders not her flight thither. The Love of God wherewith she is
enflamed lifts her above the Earth by a secret force like that of the Adamant.
They who are in so sublime an estate, have not only acquired Sanctity, but
moreover the perfection of Sanctity, and the very height of perfection it self.
But let them give thanks to the Author of these Favors with a profound
Humility. For as Pride caused the most perfect Angels to fall from the height
of Heaven, so the same Pride has caused many Solitary persons to perish. If
God inspires us with a contempt of this Life, and an ardent desire of Death;
let us attribute to his sole Bounty such Sentiments which are so contrary to
our Nature, and let us humbly expect that he will hear our Prayers.

Article XXXIX. Reflections of St. Bernard, concerning the contempt which
perfect Christians ought to have of Health and of Life. From whence he takes
occasion to speak of the Patience they are to practice in their Infirmities,
and of the Joy which the continual thought of Death affords them, if they are
true Disciples of Christ Jesus.
Hypocrates pretends to teach us the method of preserving and prolonging our
Life: Scr. 30. in Cant.
Epicurus seeks the means to make us pass it over pleasantly: But Christ Jesus
instructs us to despise it and to lose it, or to render it more short and more
painful.

Which side will you take? To which of these Masters will you become Disciples?
In my Judgment the choice contains no difficulty; I am not in pain to
determine my self, either concerning the Sentiments which I ought to follow, or
concerning the Doctrine which I am to propose unto you. I am no Disciple either
of Hypocrates or of Epicurus; I am the Disciple of Christ Jesus, and I speak to
the Disciples of Christ Jesus. I should be a Prevaricator, if I should teach
you other Maxims than his. Hypocrates undertakes to preserve the health of the
Body; Epicurus would banish from it all sorrow, and cause Pleasure to reign in
the Soul: On the eontrary, Christ Jesus my Master ordains us to endure
Sicknesses, to love Sorrows, and to shun Pleasures. Thus, the Physician ayms
only to entertain for a long time the union of the Soul and of the Body; the
Philosopher thinks on nothing but how to render this Union delightful; and
both of them finally confine their spirit to this mortal and perishable Life,
which they cannot with all their Science either prolong one day, or exempt one
hour from miseries. But Christ Jesus, who levells his Doctrine only at an
immortal Life, and who knows that the Labors and Pains of the transitory Life
are absolutely necessary to deserve the repose and the pleasures of Eternity,
speaks of nothing but of hating our selves and of loving sufferings and Death.
Does he not tell us in the sacred Scripture: He who has a desire to save
himself, John 12.26.
let him lose himself; and he who shall lose himself for the love of me and of
the Gospel, shall save himself? And what is it to lose ones self, if it is not
to abandon ones self to the misfortunes and to the pains of Life, as a Martyr;
or to afflict ones self by voluntary Mortifications, as a Penitent? For it is a
kind of Martyrdom to suffer constantly Sicknesses, or the injuries of Fortune,
and to Mortify the Flesh by a severe Penance, and by a continual meditation of
Death.

We have hereupon the example of the Holy Fathers, I pist. 384.
and of our blessed Predecessors. Why think you did they make choice of shady,
low, and moist Valleys for the building of their Monasteries? It was surely to
the end that the bad Air causing frequent Infirmities to befall the Religious
there residing, those sicknesses might exercise their Patience, and render
Death to them more familiar and more desirable. In a word, my Brethren, the
Science of the saints consists in suffering for some time Pains and
Afflictions, Sermon. 21. de dversis
in order to acquire a happyness full of Joy and of Rest in Eternity.

Article XXXX. Although the Book of the Imitation of Christ is in every ones
hands, yet it will not be unprofitable to extract out of it some pithy
passages, concerning the contempt of Life. There is, if we may say it, a
Moisture and an Unction of Sanctity in all the Words of that Author, Imitation
of Chapter
which penetrate even to the bottom of the heart, and which give an admirable
Idea of the Death of the Saints. There is surely Just cause of admiration, that
so many persons of Piety, who continually read this Work and approve of it,
should still nevertheless passionatly love Life, and tremble with fear when one
speaks to them of Death.
FAir day of Eternity, which art not darkened by the return of Night; Calm and
clear day, in which sparkle all the lights of soverain truth! Lib. 3. c. 48.
and cl 20.
Celestial City, Happy habitation of the Saints, Residence full of joy, Place
of rest and of delights, Lib. 1. c. 23.
the possession whereof is not troubled by any of those changes which overthrow
the felicities of the Earth: Lib. 3. c. 49. etc.
When will this happy day shine for us? When, O Lord, shall we see this dear
Country? And why do we not uncloath our selves even at this hour of every
thing that hinders us from arriving there? Alas! the brightness of that day
shines not yet to us but only afar off. We make our interview of it only
through the thick darkness of our ignorance: Whilst the Citizens of that holy
Jerusalem. abandon themselves to the transports of their joy, and incessantly
chant forth Canticles to the glory of the Most high, to the glory of his thrice
holy Name; the Children of Eve, unfortunate Heyrs of her Chastisement, creep
upon the Earth, and sigh at the length of their banishment.

Is that called a Living which we live here below? All our days are full of
darkness, of bitterness, and of sorrow. Our Soul is there upon the rack through
a continual fear of Sin. Our Heart is there disquieted by a thousand
solicitudes, dissipated by curiosity; transported by ambition, blinded by
error, beaten down by labor, beseiged by temptations, effeminated by
delights, languishing in poverty, in Sicknesses, and in all sorts of
Calamities. O Man! acknowledge that if it is grievous unto thee to die, it
ought to be yet more grievous unto thee to live.

O the Strange stupidity of the human Heart amidst so many miseries! Man is to
day, and to morrow he appears no more. Nevertheless he scarcely ever thinks of
the uncertainty of his condition. Senseless that he is, he makes projects for
many years, as if he were assured to live a long time, he who has not one sole
day certain. How many men have we seen whom Death has surpised in the height
of their great enterprises? How often have you heard say, of them who were seen
yesterday so flourishing: One of them was murdered, the other was drowned,
another died in playing; and he who seemed to have most health, expired sitting
at table? One should never have done, if one should run over all the manners of
Death, wherewith daily and dismal examples strike our eyes; and yet what
profit do we make thereof? He surely is wise and happy, who passes on his Life,
without adhering to it; who sees all it is moments slide away, as if each of
them were to be the last; and who prepares himself at the beginning of each day
with the same care which he would take upon the day of his Death! One acquires
this happy foresight by the contempt of the World, by the desire of advancing
in Virtue, by a sincere repentance, by a blind obedience to the orders of
Providence, by an uncloathing and despising of ones self, accompanied with a
firm resolution to suffer all for Christ Jesus. Let us say to him with St.
Paul; Lord, 2 Timothy 4.
I am as a Victime which has already the aspersion to be sacrificed: the time
of my departure draws near, I have finished my course, and no more now remains
for me, but to expect the crown of Justice which is reserved for them who have
fought valiantly. Behold the state in which a true Christian should be settled;
Ibid.
for he who has not fought according to the Law, shall not be crowned.
Wherefore, make your profit of the strength which God has given you: and
whilst you you are in health, lay up a treasure of good works for the other
Life. Perhaps you will not be any longer in the state of performing them, when
you shall fall into sickness and infirmity. You are not surely so great a fool
as to fancy you shall always enjoy health. Alas! how the sentiments of man
change in the bed of Death: All that he esteemed great in the World, appear
then to him little and despicable: the sin which seemed to him small and
inconsiderable becomes great and monstrous. But the change of his reason serves
him no more but to plunge him in Despair.

Learn this sacred doctrine from the mouth of Christ Jesus: Lib. 3. c. 49.
He who loves his Soul shall lose it? Joh. 12.15.
Do not imitate those self-lovers of whom the Apostle St. Paul speaks with
execration. Tim. 3.
For nothing is worthy of your love but God alone; no, not even your own Soul,
2 Pet. 3. Jud. 10.8.
which is the most perfect image of the Divinity: Mat. 16.26.
If you love it, you shall lose it; and if you lose your Soul, Mark. 8.
what will it avail you to have gained the whole World? For having once lost
your Soul, by what exchange can you recover it? But we shall never comprehend
this truth, unless the love of Jesus serves us for our Master. O love of my
God, when will thou clear my spirit? When will thou set my Heart on fire? When
shall I enjoy thy delights? When shall I contemplate the glory of thy Kingdom?
Comfort me in my Banishment. Sweeten my Affliction. I sigh after nothing but to
be with you, my beloved Lord, for all the comfort the World offers me, does but
augment my impatience and my sorrow. When I have a will to raise up my self
toward Heaven, my Passions draw me toward the Earth. Tottering between two so
opposite motions, I am a burden to my self, and I desire ardently to die, that
so there may be an end of all these combats which put me in perpetual danger to
be overcome by the Enemy of my Salvation. If I had still any affection for the
World, I would entreat you to leave me in it: but since I have settled all my
affections upon you, what is there that should stay me upon Earth?

If God does you the favor to afford you these feelings, do not attribute them
to your self: Romans 12.
I exhort you not to elevate your selves beyond that which you ought, in the
sentiments you have of your selves; but to contain your selves within the
limits of moderation, according to the measure of the gift of Faith which God
has imparted to each one of you. Jer. 13.
It Is to me alone to whom glory appertains, says our Lord. Do not glorify your
selves, because I have spoken unto you. Give to me the glory of all, before
darkness surprises you. By this means you will profit more and more in Virtue,
and I will give you a taste of all the sweetnesses of a holy Death.

Article XXXXI. The admirable Praises which St. Laurence Justinian gives to
Death: from whence he concludes, that it is no wonder if the most perfect among
Christians are they who most desire it.
WE need not mervail that the Faithful who are penetrated with the Love of
Christ Jesus, De incendijs Divini amoris.
desire to die; S. Laurence.
since he has rendered Death desirable by dying for us. In effect, it is no
longer a punishment, it is a favor, and a favor by so much the greater, by how
much the sooner obtained. For that which was a chastisement of Sin, is now a
temporal recompense of good Works. We ought therefore to look now upon it as
the object of our sweetest hopes, and not as the subject of our Fears. O Death!
thou art no longer bitter, thou art no longer cruel to the Disciples of Christ
Jesus, as thou were formerly to the Children of Adam. Let us bless our Lord,
for having made the most terrible of all Evils, to be so wholesome and so
universal a remedy, which frees us from all sorts of infirmities and miseries;
which exempts us from the misfortunes of poverty, from the outrages of our
enemies, from the attacks of envy, from the disquiets of avarice and of
ambition; in a word, from the tyranny of all our passions: etc, (which is yet
more desirable) which exempts us from Sin. Death having thus changed its
nature, Christians have no longer any aversion against it; but on the contrary,
they desire it as much as other men dread it: and they invite to their
assistance that which the World avoyds as the cause of its destruction.

Now although all true Christians have these thoughts, we must nevertheless
acknowledge that the Saints are infinitely more pierced therewith. As they have
more love for Christ Jesus, they have also a greater desire for Death. The
ardour of this Love gives them such an absolute contempt of Life, and such an
impatience to get out of it, that there is not a moment in which they wish not
the separation of their Soul from their Body. Nothing more nearly touches than
these Words of David, when having his Heart transfixed with the darts of Divine
Love, and as it were transported out of himself by a happy and holy fury; he
exclams: Psalm. 83.^.
My Soul languishes and is consumed with a desire to enter into the house of
our Lord. My Heart burns with an ardent thirst to enjoy God, the living God;
and my Body is dried up in this desire. Happy they who placing in you all their
confidence, have no other thought but to advance themselves toward you, O
Lord: for one sole day in your House, is more worth than a Thousand any where
else. I had rather be the last, and upon the step of the door in the House of
my God, than dwell in the tents of the Wicked. In effect, it seems that a Soul
enflamed with the desire of seeing her God, unties her self from her Body by
continual Ecstasies; and, to make use of David's expression, Melts away in these
transports, Psalm. 21.
as Wax melts with the heat of the Sun.

They who are arrived at so high a degree of perfection which renders them
equal to Angels, forget oftentimes to take such nourishment as is necessary for
their Body; because they are devoured by a Hunger much more pressing than that
which is satisfied by food. The Spiritual aliment which fills them, takes from
them all gust of corporal sustenance; and the flames of Charity do so stifle in
them the flames of concupiscence, that they become insensible, both as to the
necessities of the Body, and as to the pleasures of the Earth. O Lord, said a
great Saint, Why do we preserve with so much precaution a miserable Life?
Should we not laugh at a Prisoner who should spend all his time in raising up
the walls of his Prison? Yet, this is that which men do, when they pamper their
Bodies. Since we must die to see you, O God, and since no one can entirely
possess you but by losing his Life; I accept the condition even from this hour.
Do that to day which you will do one day. Behold I am ready to follow you, and
I demand of you this chief favor, That I may see you to the and I may die, S.
Teresa.
and that I may die to the end I may see you eternally. S. Aug.


Article XXXXII. It may perhaps seem strange that we should place the thoughts
of St. Teresa in a collection of those of the Fathers. But the Writings of this
great Saint are replenished with so sublime a piety, that one may compare them
in this point to the most beauteous Works which the Spirit of God ever dictated
to men. Wherefore we conceived that it might not only be permitted, but that it
would prove profitable to insert here some of the admirable Sentiments she has
left us upon the meditation of Eternity, and upon the desire of Death.
O Jesu, soverainly amiable, A pious exclamation after Communion.
sole object of my affections, shall I always languish with the impatient
desire of seeing you? What solace will you give to a Soul, which nothing upon
Earth comforts, and which can take no rest but in you alone? O that this
banishment is long? O that Life is irksom to one who burns with the desire of
possessing you! I die because I cannot die. You know it, O my God, you who died
for the love of me, know whether it is to live when one long expects what one
loves!

No, my Life is not a Life, it is a continual torment, it is a fire which
devours, it is a punishment which would be as terrible as those of Hell, if one
had lost the Hope of seeing an end of it. O Life, thou enemy of my happiness,
Life more cruel a thousand times than Death! why is it not permitted me in this
moment to break the chains wherewith thou keep me in captivity. But I
preserve thee because my God protects thee. I have a care of thee, because thou
belongest to him. Do not then any longer abuse his bounty nor my obedience, and
cease at last to oppose thy self to the impatience of my affection.

O desirable Death, and too long expected! O Sanctuary, inaccessible to all the
tempests of the World, happy end of our miseries, destruction of Sin, beginning
of our true Life, make haste to deliver me from the Death of the World. O let
me die, to the end I may not die. It Is the Death of Sin which I dread. It Is the
Life of Grace which I desire. But this dread and this desire consume me in such
sort, that I do not live, and yet I cannot die. My Life is all out of me,
because all my Hope is in Christ Jesus, who has promised unto me a better Life.

Alas! It is very true, That Love is more dreadful then Death. Cant. 2.
O Love of Jesus, how piercing are your darts? how stinging are your wounds?
The rudest blows of Death are endured with less difficulty than yours. There is
too much of it, O Lord, there is too much; Turn a little aside your looks, Cant.
6.
for I want strength to support them. Either burn me no longer, or make an end
to reduce me into ashes. How will you have my Soul to divide herself between
that which you demand of her, and that which my Body requires of her?

Be gone from me, O all you Earthly Consolations; a Heart wounded with the Love
of Jesus, cannot be cured but by Jesus. All human Remedies are too weak to
assuage a Divine Sickness. It Is you my Savior, who cure and who wound when you
please. O Faithful Bridegroom of the Faithful Soul, with what bounty, what
sweetness, what pleasure, what ravishments, what testimonies of tenderness, do
you heal the hurts which your Love has made in us.

O my Soul, let us expect yet a little, and he will take compassion on our
languishing condition. His impatience is no less then ours; we sometimes
believe him to be far off, when he is very near at hand. Behold him descending
from the mountains, and traversing the hills, he runs, he flies to draw near
unto us, he knocks at the door, he calls us. Enter, Lord, I slept, but my heart
watched: Alas! I was ready to follow you, and you have stoll'n your self from
me. I seek you, and I find you no more. I call you, and you do not answer.

What have we done, my Soul, who has driven away your Bridegroom? Is it not
that our impatience displeases him? Is it not that we love him overmuch, or
that we love him not enough? For he is a Jealous God, Exodus 34.
who will be loved more than all things, and will have us love nothing but
himself. Perhaps he will surprise us. These. 2.2.
His day comes when it is least thought on, as the Thief who comes in the
night. Let us expect with humility that dreadful day. If Jesus loves us, he
will not slack his coming; if he does not love us, he will come but too soon
for us.

The Conclusion of all this Collection. S. Aug.

As at the beginning of this Treatise we drew from St. Augustine Principles to
establish this Proposition; That perfect Souls desire Death and receive it with
Joy; we thought fit to finish this Collection with a discourse wherein the same
holy Doctor shows, That all people by their proper Interest ought to desire to
depart out of the World.
YOu complain that Truth is trampled on by the tricks of Lying and Falsehood.
Lib. 22. de Civ. c. 30.
You say, O Christians, that they who make profession to be the Masters or the
Disciples of Truth, do basely abandon it, Ser. 64. de Verbis Domini.
and that its beauty which is altogether Divine cannot fix the inconstancy of
its Lovers. Why then do you not aspire to Heaven, Ser. 6. inter Communes.
where Truth glittering with all its beams triumphs over falsehood and malice,
and frees them who love it, In Psalm. passim.
and frees them who love it, from all injustice and violence?

You declame against the iniquity of men, who neither regard desert nor virtue,
who bestow Offices upon birth or favor, and who slight the good people
without confering on them any reward. Why then do you not aspire after the
glory of the Blessed in Heaven, where happiness corresponds to the pains they
have endured, where Crowns are proportioned to the Combats they have fought,
and finally where rewards follow the good Works they have performed, and where
the most holy are most honored?

Kings cannot exercise their magnificence and their Liberality, which are
their most shining virtues, without being very often deceived by outward
apparences. As they know not the true spirit of their Subjects, they cannot
discern their true deserts. They frequently favor Vice, when they intend to
render Justice to Virtue. But the God whom we adore, cannot be deceived. He
reads in the Heart of them who serve him. He discerns all our actions; and as
he beholds all the motions of our Will, he also lets not impiety pass without
punishment, nor Virtue without reward.

You complain of the hardness of your condition, you murmr for that you must
always fight, you grieve to be incessantly encompassed with enemies, you bear
them about you, you nourish them within your selves, and you are the theater of
this intestine War, where the Flesh is continually at strife with the spirit.
On which ever side the victory falls, you cannot rejoice, without being
afflicted at the same time for some loss. Leave then this wretched dwelling,
where Life is a continual temptation and a perpetual combat. Desire Death,
which will be the end of all these miseries. Sight after that agreeable
habitation, where the Saints enjoy a perfect victory, and a peace without
molestation. Do not any longer complain that in despite of all the care you
take to bring one part of your self to agree with the other part, yet their
differences are daily renewed: Or if you will complain, let this your complaint
serve at least to make you march more speedily toward that place of peace,
where you shall agree with your self, and be in a perpetual repose.

Finally, you love Life, but you would not have it to be made up of miseries
and of sorrows. Shall God make Life for you after another manner than it was
for his own Son? To come to that Life which you demand, you must be gone out of
this. Christ Jesus himself has showed us that we must acquire it at that rate.
Why seek you not that dwelling, where the Life which you desire has his
habitation? From the first moment in which you shall possess Heaven, you will
no longer fear either poverty, or misery, or disease, or death. Why then do you
not that, for the enjoyment of so happy a Life, which you do for the prolonging
of this other unfortunate Life? You abstain from Meats and from Divertisements
which are hurtful to your health. Why do you not as much for that Life which
will never be troubled with any sicknesses? And yet the solicitudes you have to
preserve your Body, will not warrant it from Death. All that you can pretend
to, is to die a little later. Ah! my dear Brethren, can it be possible that you
should do less to live eternally? No I cannot believe it; and you will testify
without doubt by your actions, by your sufferings, and by the Holy Desires of
Death, that you have a Faith and Hope for another Life.

What would you give to be exempt from all incommodities, and to be assured to
live always? Is it not true, that all whatever you possess, would not suffice
to purchase so great a good, although you were Lord even of the whole Universe?
Yet this so great and excellent a good is to be sold: You may buy it, if you
will: the price ought not to affright you: it will not exceed your abilities:
you shall pay no more for it then what you are able to give: you may purchase
it by an Alms; you may acquire it by some other good Works; you may deserve it
by a good desire; finally you may obtain it by a penitential Life, and by a
holy Death. Do not then despise a happiness which depends only on the will to
possess it. And if you have any spark of zeal left in you to promote your true
Interest and to procure your own Salvation; seek a dwelling where Truth is
victorious, where Sanctity is honored, where Peace is immutable, and where
Life and Felicity are Eternal.

Approbation.
SInce the Death of the Just gives us the liberty to render to their memory
what we ow them; we may say that the Reverend Father Lalemant, Prior of St.
Genovefe, and Chancellor of the University of Paris, having studied and
endeavored by the meditation and the practice of such Truths as the Spirit of
God ^nspired into the greatest men of the Church, to make Death familiar unto
him: this Collection of the most pithy thoughts which the holy Fathers had
concerning Death, is one of the most considerable Monuments which remains ^o us
of his sublime virtue. It were ^o be wished that every one would follow the
example of this great person in reading his Works, and that they would learn to
die Christianly, by seeing how he prepared himself thereto. The esteem which
people most elevated by their condition and their deserts had of his Piety, and
his extraordinary Qualities, did not at all lessen the contempt he had of Life,
and the desire of Death, which always appeared in him, according to the example
of the Apostle. Thus hi^ memory shall be evermore in veneration to all them who
will rea^ this excellent Work.

It Is the judgment which I gave at So^bon: the first of March, 1673. Signed,
Colbert.

FINIS.

