A DISCOVRSE Betwixt LIEUTENANT COLONEL JOHN LILBURN Close Prisoner in the
Tower of London, AND Mr HUGH PETER: Upon May 25. 1649.

Published by a friend, for the Public benefit.

MAT. 7. 15, 16. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in Sheeps
clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves.

Ye shall know them by their fruits: Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of
thistles?

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1649.

A DISCOURSE betwixt Lieut. Col. JOHN LILBURN, close prisoner in the Tower of
London, and Mr HUGH PETER; upon Friday May 25, 1649.
THis present Friday Mr. Peter's, with one Doctor Maysey of Kingston, and a
Captain of M. Burton's Congregation that I have known formerly in Major General
Craford's Regiment of Foot, with the Lieutenant of the Tower, and my Keeper,
came into my Lodging, where they found my wife and my self at dinner; and after
salutes of each other, Mr. Peter told me to this effect, That he had at or near
the Custom house, received an affront, for which he came to the Lieutenant of
the Tower for reparation, and so was resolved to see me, being here, and kill
two birds with one stone; and being newly come from sea, and hearing I was
here, he merely came to give me a visit, out of no other design in the world,
but merely a bare visit. I replied to this purpose; Mr. Peter, I know you well
enough, and you know that I know you to be one of the setting-dogs, or
stalking-horses of the great men of the Army, with fair and plausible pretenses
to insinuate into men when they have done them wrong, and to work out their
designs when they are in a strait, and cover over their blots that they have
made, when they grow so visible, that they cannot well be hid, but will appear
to their shame.

He wondering that I entertained him with such a guage for his friendly
visiting me (as he called it) I told him in effect, it was no halting before a
creeple, for I knew him well enough, and those to whom he belonged.

But he sat him down and ate and drunk with me, and fell a wondering at all
the stirs here, and what should be the cause of the late blood that was shed. I
told him in effect, his great Masters could better inform him of that then I.
Said he, They say, Your bustling has occasioned it. Truly Sir, I say, their
injustice, oppression and tyranny has done it: and I am sure, I fetched not
them out of White Hall, or any other of their Lodgings; but they fetched me out
of Winchester-house, out of my bed and habitation, from my wife and children,
and carried me to their thing called a Council of State, who (like a company of
righteous Judges, the clean contrary way) committed me to prison in the nature
of a Traitor, before ever they let me see accuser, accusation, prosecutor, or
witness, or any due process of Law: and yet time was, when the King impeached
Kimbolton and the five Members, and preferred a Charge of seven Articles
against them of high treason in the highest nature, recorded 1. Part Book Decl.
page 35. and only failed in a single punctilio of due Process of Law, that
they cried out, it was such an invasion of the peoples Liberty, that four or
five peccavies and recantations from him, recorded in their own Declarations,
would never serve their turn: but yet forty times more illegalitie exercised by
themselves upon me, must be legal, just, and right in your great, just and
righteous Masters, that now have a prerogative and privilege, they can neither
say, do, nor act evil, although they commit me to prison without any crime
pretended, or without ever letting me see accuser, or accusation, prosecutor or
charge; and yet into the bargain, deal worse with me then ever the Heathen and
Pagan Romans dealt with Paul, who had nothing but the depraved light of Nature
to guide them, and yet in all his imprisonment never forbad or hindered any of
his friends to visit or relieve him, although he were accused for a pestilent
fellow, and a turner of the world up side down: but they lock me up in a close
room, with sentinels at my door, and will not so much as at a distance let me
speak with my friends; nay, and for several days would not so much as let me
see my wife: And yet, Mr. Peter, these are your religious, godly, conscientious
Masters. And if this be the fruits of their saint-ship and religion, I do
assure you, the Devil is as good, if not a better Saint: for he believes and
trembles, which is more then I think they do: and if the Sun shining upon the
dunghill, make it stink, whether is the fault in the Sun or the dunghill?

So, being at dinner with a Summers diet, the Lieut. of the Tower told me, I
fared suitable to my allowance. What? says Mr. Peter, Do they give him
allowance? I, says the Lieutenant, they would allow him twenty shillings a
week, and he refuses it. Sa^d I to this purpose, Sir, forty shillings a week
(as diet is now) will not provide me such meat: and besides, Mr. Peter, do your
great Masters think, that my captivity shall make me value my self at the rate
of such a scoundrell fellow (having been a Lieutenant Colonel in their Service)
as to accept of twenty shillings a week, when the King (whom they beheaded for
a Tyrant) allowed to the meanest ordinary man that ever he sent hither, three
pound a week. I am sure, they have five times the Kings Revenue, and things are
twice as dear as they used to be: And if they will imitate him in all his
baseness, nay, and far out strip him, I will hold them to it a little, to
imitate him in some of his virtues; and therefore, unless they will allow me
the allowance that is the custom of the place, I will have none of it: and you
may tell them from me, I scorn to be fed by them with a bit and a knock.

A little after, Mr Peter casting his eye upon my Law Books, takes up one of
Cook' s Institutes, and professed, I was merely gulled in reading or trusting
to these Books, for there was no Laws in England.

I answered to this effect, That I did believe what he said; for they (meaning
his great Masters, Cromwell, Fairfax, etc.) had destroyed them all.

Nay, says he, I tell you, there never was any in England.

No (said I)? and taking up my Statute-book, I turned him to the Petition of
Right, and asked him whether that be a Law or no?

No, says he, it is none: and I would fain have you to define what Law is.

Mr. Peter, said I, I will not take upon me to define what Law is in your
sense, or in my own; but I will turn you to a definition in the Parliaments
sense in their own book of Declarations; which I read to him, as follows: The
Law is that which puts a difference between good and evil, betwixt just and
unjust: If you take away the Law, all things will fall into confusion, every
man will become a law unto himself; which in the depraved condition of humane
nature, must needs produce many great enormities: Lust will become a law, and
Envy will become a law, covetousness and ambition will become laws; and what
dictates, what decisions such laws will produce, may easily be discerned. So,
Mr Peter, here is a definition of Law by the Parliament in the days of their
primitive purity, before they had corrupted themselves with the Commonwealths
money. And elsewhere it is their language, That the Law is the safeguard, the
custody of all private interests; your Honors, your Lives, your Liberties and
Estates are all in the keeping of the Law: without this every man has a like
right to any thing. And elsewhere the Law is called that right line that
discovers that which is tort crooked, or wrong; the Law is that right line
that measures it self and a crooked line: the Law is the best birthright the
Subject has; for thereby his Goods, Lands, Wife, Children, his Body, Life,
Honor, and Estimation are protected from injury and wrong, being the surest
sanctuary that a man can take, and the strongest fortress to protect the
weakest of all. To every one of us there comes a greater inheritance by right
and the Law, then by our Parents. Yea, and it is further said by their Oracle,
It is a miserable servitude or bondage where the Law is uncertain, or unknown.

He answers to this effect, I tell you says he, for all this, there is no Law
in this Nation, but the sword, and what it gives; neither was there any Law or
Government in the World, but what the Sword gave and set up.

Unto which I Replied to this purpose, Mr Peter, I look upon you as one of the
principal Guids of the Army, and a man that does from time to time speak very
much the sense of the Leaders of the Army, being you lie in their bosoms, and
know their secrets, and is much used by them, to trumpet abroad their
Principles and Tenants; But Sir, let me tell you withal, if your reasoning be
sound and good, then if six Thieves meet three, or four honest men, and because
they are stronger then they, rob them, that act is righteous, sound and good,
because their swords are stronger then the others; and if any Power be a just
Power that is uppermost because it is up, I wonder how you of the Army, and
they of the Parliament can acquit your selves of being Rebels and Traitors
before God and man, in resisting and fighting against a just Power in the King,
who was a Power up, and fenced about with abundance of Laws so reputed in the
common acceptance of English men, by the express Letter of which I am sure of
it, all those who ever they be that shall rise in Arms against him, are ipso
facto Traitors; and I would feign know, if it were not for the preservation of
the Laws, that holds out the peoples Liberties and Freedoms, that the
Parliament and Army engaged in Theirs, against the King a just Power, because
he was up upon your own grounds; what can you or any other make rationally to
be the ground of the the Wars? But Sir, in short and in plain English, let me
tell you, that if there be now no Law in England, nor never was, that then you
and your great Masters, Cromwell, Fairfax, and the Parliament, are a pack of
arrant bloody Rogues and Villains, in setting the people together by the ears,
to fight for the preservation of their Laws, in which their Liberty is
contained (which is the principal declared cause of the War from the
beginning to the end of the War never) if there were no such thing in being as
Law in England: At which Mr Peter was much startled, and much condemned my
harsh language, though it be far short of what Christ himself used to his
(viz. Mr Peter's) brothers, the Scribes and Pharisees, upon the like occasion,
Mat. 23. 14. where he says, Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for
ye devour widows houses, and for a pretense make long prayer; therefore ye
shall receive the greater damnation: and in Verse, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29,
30, 31, 31, 32, he says, Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for
ye pay tithe of mint, and anise, and cummin, and have omitted the weighty
matters of the Law, judgment, mercy, and faith: these ought ye to have done,
and not to leave the other undone. Ye blind guids, which strain at a gnat, and
swallow a camel. Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for ye make
clean the outside of the cup, and of the platter, but within they are full of
extortion and excess. Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse first that which is within
the cup and platter, that the outside of them may be clean also. Woe unto you,
Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for ye are like unto whited sepulchers,
which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's bones,
and of all uncleanness. Even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men,
but within ye are full of hypocr^sie and iniquity. Woe unto you, Scribes and
Pharisees, hypocrites; because ye build the tombs of the Prophets, and garnish
the Sepulchers of the righteous, and say. If we had been in the days of our
Fathers we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the
Prophets. Wherefore ye be witnesses unto your selves, that ye are the children
of them which killed the Prophets. Fill ye up then the measure of your Fathers.
And in the 8th of John, when the Jews in their works and actions denied Abraham
and God to be their Father, and yet in words owned them both for their Father,
verse 39. 41. Christ in the 44 verse, tells them plainly, Ye are of your father
the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do: he was a murderer from
the beginning, and aboade not in the truth, because there is no truth in him.
When h^ speaks a lie, he speaks of his own: for he is a liar, and the
father of it. And the Apostle Paul's Exhortation to his Followers, is to
reprove such notorious hypocritical workers of iniquity sharply.

But after he had sufficiently condemned my language in speaking plain English,
which I say, is the whole current of the Scripture to incorrigible dissembling
men as they are: he again and again protested and desired the Company to bear
Witness, that he in saying, there was no Law in England, did not speak the
sense of the Army, but his own proper opinion, and also protested, he had no
design in coming to me, but a bare visit; and wondered I would be so hot at
him for his love; and he was far enough from any of their Designs: I Replied
to this purpose, Mr Peter, You know I know you well enough, and I tell you, in
a Play, every Player has his part, yea even the seeming Fool, and many times
they Act with a seeming violence, and against one another; but they all Center
in this end to get the Spectators money from them; I leave you to make
Application: And I tell you moreover, the last year, when the stirs began, when
Sir John Maynard, and the four Aldermen were prisoners here at the Tower, You
came and took up your lodging at Col. Whits, under pretense of reposing your
self, and being nigh your businesses, being bound in all haste to New England
as you said, although you never intended it, I am confident of it, in the
least, but merely came hither upon a Design finely colored over, to work a
compliance in Sir John Maynard, and the four Aldermen to your great Masters,
that so seeing the City baffled of their Liberty, they might come off with as
little loss of Reputation in their deliverance as might be; and I believe some
such thing if not worse in the bottom of your visiting of me at this time: But
he Replied very bitterly and earnestly, again and again, calling God to
witness, he had no design the last year upon Sir John Maynard, and the
Aldermen, in his coming to the Tower, nor upon me in his coming to visit me;
and told me, I need not be so passionate, there was no fear of the loss of my
life: To which I Replied, to this effect; Sir, I know you, and your Masters so
well, and that you have so couzoned and cheated all Parties and Interests that
ever you dealt with, so visibly and evidently, never keeping either faith,
promise, or engagements with any of them, longer then it served your present
turns; it being beyond a maxim long since amongst some of you so to do, that I
do protest unto you, both for you and them, I will not believe one word ye
say, swear, or protest, but the more earnest you or they are in any of them,
the more jealous I will be of you; and therefore know this for hereafter, that
where ever I meet your Masters, or any of their under depending tribe, I will
be upon my Guard, as though I were amongst a company of the arrentest cheaters
and deceivers in the world; by whom I hope I shall never be cozoned any more
with credulity and honesty; for I will never hereafter believe you, though I
should be glad you would deceive me once again in doing good to the poor
Nation, for it is easily in you power; but I believe you will never do it; and
for my life, if I were to lay it down to morrow, I would scorn to beg or
entreat for it, from any of your Masters; and if it be in no danger, it is no
thanks to them, for I am confidently persuaded in my very heart, it is not mine
an hour longer, then they dare take it away, either by hook or crook, but it
may prove a choke pear to them, when ever they go about it. But Sir, said I, I
thought I had been safe enough, when I squared my actions by the Rules of those
Laws that they have often sworn, declared, and promised year after year, and
month after month to maintain and defend; and make as the standard or
touchstone betwixt them and the people, as they have done with the Petition of
Right, etc.

I but says he, I will show you your great mistake in that particular, and
that your safety ^^es not therein: so I longed to hear that. Well, says he,
their minds may change, and then where are you? I but Sir, said I, I cannot
take notice of what is in their minds to obey that; but the constant
Declaration of their minds, (without ever so much as in any one Declaration
contradicting it) as that they will maintain the Petition of RIGHT, and the
Liberties therein contained, must be the rule of my obedience: And the
Petition of RIGHT, by reason of their constant Declarations to preserve it, I
make the rule of my obedience and actings amongst men, and think I shall be
safe thereby: but when they shall publicly declare, They scorn the Petition
of RIGHT, and will neither maintain that nor any other Laws or compacts amongst
the men of this Nation, but what flows daily from their wills and pleasures; I
shall alter my mind, and expect no benefit by the Petition of RIGHT; but when
that is, let me tell you, I shall rather desire to live in Turkey under the
great Turk, then in England under your Religious Masters at White Hall and
Westminster, for there is no such Tyrant or persecuter in the world, as an
Apostate, that one turns his back of Justice, Righteousness and truth: But Mr.
Peter, as for things at present, tell your Masters from me, That if it were
possible for me now to choose, I had rather choose to live seven years under old
King Charles his government, (nothwithstanding their beheading him as a Tyrant
for it) when it was at the worst before this Parliament, then live one year
under their present Government that now rule: nay, let me tell you, If they go
on with that tyranny they are in, they will make Prince Charl^ have friends
enough, not only to cry him up, but also really to fight for him to bring him
into his Fathers Throne, that so they may have their just desires of perfidious
cruel bloody Tyrants, and the people of the Land some ease and rest from their
insupportable burdens and oppressions: Yea, and for my particular, I must aver
unto you, I had rather by many degrees choose to live under a regulated and
wel-bounded King without tyranny, then under any Government with Tyranny. Here
is the substance of my discourse with Mr. PETER, saving I pinched him a little
particularly upon his great Masters large fingering of the Commonwealths
money, which was no better then Theft in them, and State-Robbery in the
highest, (as I told him.) I but, says he, ^reton has got none: Then, said I,
former Reports are false; and besides, if he have not, what need he, when his
Father-in-law gets so much for them both, as 3 or 4000 l. per annum at one
clap; with well-nigh twenty thousand pounds worth of wood upon it, if
Parliament men's relations may be believed: besides, the People that know them,
know the Father and Son piss both in one gullie; though they seem sometime to go
one against another, yet it is but that they may the more easily and thoroughly
drive on the main design of them both: viz. To make the People slaves. And so
farewell Mr. Peter.

Finis.

