ENGLANDS NEW CHAINS DISCOVERED: Or The serious apprehensions of a part of the
People, in behalf of the Commonwealth; (being Presenters, Promoters, and
Approvers of the Large Petition of September 11. 1648.)
Presented to the Supreme Authority of England, the Representers of the people
in Parliament assembled.
By Lieut. Col. John Lilburn, and diverse other Citizens of London, and Borough
of Southwark; February 26. 1648 whereunto his speech delivered at the Bar is
annexed.
SInce you have done the Nation so much right, and you^ selves so much honor
as to declare that the People (under God) are the original of all just Powers;
and given us thereby fair grounds to hope, that you really intend their Freedom
and Prosperity; yet the way thereunto being frequently mistaken, and through
have or error of judgment, those who me^^ the best, are many times misled so
far to the prejudice of those that trust them, as to leave them in a condition
nearest to bondage, when they have thought they had brought them into a way of
Freedom. And since woeful experience has manifested this to be a Truth, there
seems no small reason that you should seriously lay to heart what at present
we have to offer, for discovery and prevention of so great a danger.

And because we have bin the first movers in and concerning a^ Agreement of the
People, as the most proper and just means for the settling the long and tedious
distractions of this Nation, occasioned by nothing more, than the uncertainty
of our government; and since there has bin an Agreement prepared and presented
by some Officers of the Army to this honorable House, as what they thought
requisite to be agreed unto by the People (you approving thereof) we shall in
the first place deliver our apprehensions thereupon.

That an Agreement between those that trust, and those who are trusted, has
appeared a thing acceptable to this honorable House, his Excellency, and the
Officers of the Army, is as much to our rejoicing, as we conceive it just in it
self, and profitable for the Commonwealth, and cannot doubt but that you will
protect those of the people, who have no ways forfeited their Birthright, in
their proper liberty of taking this, or any other, as God and their own
Considerationss shall direct them.

Which we the rather mention, for that many particulars in the Agreement before
you, are upon serious examination thereof, dis-satisfactory to most of those
who are very earnestly desirous of an Agreement, and many very material things
seem to be wanting theren, which may be supplied in another; As

1. They are now much troubled there should be any Intervalls between he ending
of this Representative, and the beginning of the next as being desirous that
this present Parliament that has ately done so great things in so short a
time, tending to their Liberties, should sit; until with certainty and safety
they can see them deivered into the hands of another Representative, rather
than to eave them (though never so small a time) under the dominion of a
Council of State; a Constitution of a new and unexperienced Nature, and which
they fear, as the case now stands, may design to perpetuate their power, and to
keep off Parliaments for ever.

2. They now conceive no less danger, in that it is provided that Parliaments
for the future are to continue but 6. months, and a Council of State 18. In
which time, if they should prove corrupt, having command of all Forces by Sea
and Land, they will have great opportunities to make themselves absolute and
unaccountable: And because this is a danger, than which there cannot well be a
greater; they generally incline to Annual Parliaments, bounded and limited as
reason shall devise, not dissolvable, but to be continued or adjourned as shall
seem good in their discretion, during that year, but no longer; and then to
dissolve of course, and give way to those who shall be chosen immediately to
succeed them, and in the Intervals of their adjournments, to entrust an
ordinary Committee of their own members, as in other cases limited and bounded
with express instructions, and accountable to the next Session, which will
avoid all those dangers feared from a Council of State, as at present this is
constituted.

3. They are not satisfied with the clause, whereas it is said, that the power
of the Representative shall (...) to the erecting and abolishing of Courts of
Justice; since the alteration of the usual way of Trials by twelve sworn men of
the Neighborhood, may be included therein: a constitution so equal and just in
it self, as that they conceive it ought to remain unalterable. Neither is it
clear what is meant by these words, (viz.) That the Representatives have the
highest final judgment. They conceiving that their Authority in these cases,
is only to make Laws, Rules, and Directions for other Courts and Person;
assigned by Law for the execution thereof, unto which every member of the
Commonwealth, as well those of the Representative, as others, should be alike
subject; it being likewise unreasonable in it self, and an occasion of much
partiality, injustice, and vexation to the people, that the Lawmakers, should
be Law-executors.

4. Although it does provide that in the Laws hereafter to be made, no person
by virtue of any Tenure, Grant, Charter, Parent, Degree, or Birth, shall be
privileged from subjection thereunto, or from being bound thereby, as well as
others; Yet does it not null and make void those present Protections by Law, or
otherwise; nor leave all persons, as well Lords as others, alike liable in
person and estate, as in reason and conscience they ought to be.

5. They are very much unsatisfied with what is expressed as a reserve from the
Representative, in matters of Religion, as being very obscure, and full of
perplexity, that ought to be most plain and clear; there having occurred no
greater trouble to the Nation about any thing than by the intermedling of
Parliaments in matters of Religion.

6. They seem to conceive it absolutely necessary, that there be in their
Agreement, a reserve from ever having any Kingly Government, and a bar against
restoring the House of Lords, both which are wanting in the Agreement which is
before you.

7. They seem to be resolved to take away all known and burdensome grievances,
as Tithes, that great oppression of the Countries industry and hindrance of
Tillage: Excise, and Customs, Those secret thieves, and Robbers, Drainers of
the poor and middle sort of People, and the greatest Obstructers of Trade,
surmounting all the prejudices of Ship-mony, Pattents, and Projects, before
this Parliament: also to take away all Monopolizing Companies of Merchants, the
hinderers and decayers of Clothing and Cloth-working, Dying, and the like
useful professions; by which thousands of poor people might be set at work,
that are now ready to starve, were Marchandizing restored to its due and proper
freedom: they conceive likewise that the three grievances before mentioned,
(viz.) Monopolizing Companies, Excise, and Customs, do exceedingly prejudice
Shiping, and Navigation, and Consequently discourage Seamen, and Mariners,
and which have had no small influence upon the late unhappy revolts which have
so much endangered the Nation, and so much advantaged your enemies. They also
incline to direct a more equal and less burdensome way for levying moneys for
the future, those other forementioned being so chargable in the receipt, as
that the very stipends and allowance to the Officers attending thereupon would
defray a very great part of the charge of the Army; whereas now they engender
and support a corrupt interest. They also have in mind to take away all
imprisonment of disabled men, for debt; and to provide some effectual course to
enforce all that are able to a speedy payment, and not suffer them to be
sheltered in Prisons, where they live in plenty, whilst their Creditors are
undone. They have also in mind to provide work, and comfortable maintenance
for all sorts of poor, aged, and impotent people, and to establish some more
speedy, less troublesome and chargeable way for deciding of Controversies in
Law, whole families having been ruined by seeking right in the ways yet in
being: All which (though of greatest and most immediate concernment to the
People, are yet omitted in their Agreement before you.

These and the like are their intentions in what they purpose for an Agreement
of the People, as being resolved (so far as they are able) to lay an
impossibility upon all whom they shall hereafter trust, of ever wronging the
Common wealth in any considerable measure, without certainty of ruining
themselves, and as conceiving it to be an improper tedious, and unprofitable
thing for the People, to be ever running after their Representatives with
Petitions for redress of such Grievances as may at once be removed by
themselves, or to depend for these things so essential to their happiness and
freedom, upon the uncertain judgments of several Representatives, the one
being apt to renew what the other has taken away.

And as to the use of their Rights and Liberties herein as becomes, and is due
to the people, from whom all just powers are derived; they hoped for and expect
what protection is in you and the Army to afford: and we likewise in their and
our own behalf do earnestly desire, that you will publicly declare your
resolution to protect those who have not forfeited their liberties in the use
thereof, lest they should conceive that the Agreement before you being
published abroad, and the Commissioners therein nominated being at work in
persuance thereof, is intended to be imposed upon them, which as it is
absolutely contrary to the nature of a free Agreement, so we are persuaded it
cannot enter into your thoughts to use any impulsion therein.

But although we have presented our apprehensions and desires concerning this
great work of an Agreement, and are apt to persuade our selves that nothing
shall be able to frustrate our hopes which we have built thereupon; yet have we
seen and heard many things of late, which occasions not only apprehensions of
other matters intended to be brought upon us of danger to such an Agreement,
but of bondage and ruin to all such as shall pursue it.

Insomuch that we are even aghast and astonished to see that notwithstanding the
productions of the highest notions of freedom that ever this Nation, or any
people in the world, have brought to light, notwithstanding the vast expece of
blood and treasure that has been made to purchase those freedoms,
notwithstanding the many eminent and even miraculous Victories God has been
pleased to honor our just Cause withal, notwithstanding the extraordinary
gripes and pangs, this House has suffered more than once at the hands of your
own servants, and that at least seemingly for the obtaining these our Native
Liberties.

When we consider what rackings and tortures the People in general have
suffered through decay of Trade, and deernesse of food, and very many families
in particular, through Free Quarter, Violence, and other miseries, incident to
war, having nothing to support them therein, but hopes of Freedom, and a
well-setled Commonwealth in the end.

That yet after all these things have bin done and suffered, and whilst the way
of an Agreement of the People is owned, and approved, even by your selves, and
that all men are in expectation of being put into possession of so deer a
purchase; Behold! in the close of all, we hear and see what gives us fresh and
pregnant cause to believe that the contrary is really intended, and that all
those specious pretenses, and high Notions of Liberty, with those extraordinary
courses that have of late bin taken (as if of necessity for liberty, and which
indeed can never be justified, but deserve the greatest punishments, unless
they end in just liberty, and an equal Government) appear to us to have bin
done and directed by some secret powerful influences, the more securely and
unsuspectedly to attain to an absolute domination over the Commonwealth: it
being impossible for them, but by assuming our generally approved Principles,
and hiding under the fair show thereof their other designs, to have drawn in so
many good and godly men (really aiming at what the other had but in show and
pretense) and making them unwittingly instrumental to their own and their
Countries Bondage.

For where is that good, or where is that liberty so much pretended, so deerly
purchased? If we look upon what this House has done since it has voted it
self the Supreme Authority, and disburthened themselves of the power of the
Lords. First, we find a high Court of Justice erected, for Trial of Criminal
causes; whereby that great and strong hold of our preservation, the way of
trial by 12. sworn men of the Neighborhood is infringed, all liberty of
exception against the tryers, is overruled by a Court consisting of persons
picked and chosen in an un-usual way; the practice whereof we cannot allow of,
though against open and notorious enemies; as well because we know it to be an
usual policy to introduce by such means all usurpations, first against
Adversaries, in hope of easier admission; as also, for that the same being so
admited, may at pleasure be exercised against any person or persons whatsoever.
This is the first part of our new liberty. The next is the censuring of a
Member of this House, for declaring his judgment in a point of Religion, which
is directly opposite to the Reserve in the Agreement concerning Religion.
Besides the Act for pressing of Seamen, directly contrary to the Agreement of
the Officers. Then the stoping of our mouths from Printing, is carefully
provided for, and the most severe and unreasonable Ordinances of Parliament
that were made in the time of Hollis and Stapletons reign, to gag us from
speaking truth, and discovering the tyrannies of bad men, are refered to the
care of the General, and by him to his Marshal, to be put in execution; in
searching fining, imprisoning, and other ways corporally puni^^^^g (...) that
any ways be guilty of unlicensed Printing; They dealing with us as the Bishops
of old did with the honest Puritan, who were exact in geting Laws made against
the Papist, but really intended them against the Puritan, and made them feel
the smart of them: Which also has bin, and is daily exercised most violently,
whereby our Liberties have bin more deeply wounded, than since the beginning of
this Parliament; and that to the dislike of the Soldiery, as by their late
Petition in that behalf plainly appears. Then whereas it was expected that
the Chancery, and Courts of Justice in Westminster, and the Judges and Officers
thereof should have bin surveyed, and for the present regulated, till a better
and more equal way of deciding controversies could have bin constituted, that
the trouble and charge of the people in their suits should have bin abated:
Instead hereof, the old and advanced fees are continued, and new thousand
pounds Annual stipends allotted; when in the corruptest times the ordinary fees
were thought a great and a sore burden; in the mean time, and in lieu thereof,
there is not one perplexity or absurdity in proceedings taken away. Those
Petitioners that have moved in behalf of the people, how have they bin
entertained? Sometimes with the complement of empty thanks, their desires in the
mean time not at all considered; at other times meeting with Reproaches and
Threats for their constancy and public affections, and with violent motions,
that their Petitions be burnt by the common Hangman, whilst others are not
taken in at all; to so small an account are the people brought, even while they
are flattered with notions of being the Original of all just power. And lastly,
for completing this new kind of liberty, a Council of State is hastily erected
for Guardians thereof, who to that end are possessed with power to order and
dispose all the forces appertaining to England by Sea or Land, to dispose of
the public Treasure, to command any person whatsoever before them, to give
oath for the discovering of Truth, to imprison any that shall dis-obey their
commands, and such as they shall judge contumatious. What now is become of that
liberty that no man's person shall be attached or imprisoned, or otherwise
dis-eased of his Freehold, or free Customs, but by lawful judgment of his
equals? We entreat you give us leave to lay these things open to your vie^, and
judge impartially of our present condition, and of your own also, that by
strong and powerful influences of some persons, are put upon these and the
like proceedings, which both you and we ere long (if we look not to it) shall
be enforced to subject our selves unto; then we have further cause to complain,
when we consider the persons: as first, the chief of the Army directly contrary
to what themselves thought meet in their Agreement for the People. 2. Judges of
the Law, and Treasurers for moneys. Then 5. that were Members of the Lords
House, and most of them such as have refused to approve of your Votes and
proceedings, concerning the King and Lords. 2. of them Judges in the
Star Chamber, and approvers of the bloody and tyrannical sentences issuing from
thence.

Some of your own House, forward men in the Treaty, and decliners of your last
proceedings; all which do clearly manifest to our understandings that the
secret contrivers of those things do think themselves now so surely guarded by
the strength of an Army, by their daily Acts and Stratagems, to their ends
inclined, and the captivation of this House, that they may now take off the
Vail and Cloak of their designs as dreadlesse of what ever can be done against
them. By this Council of State, all power is got into their own hands, a
project which has been long and industriously labored for; and which being
once firmly and to their liking established their next motions may be upon
pretense of ease to the People, for the dissolution of this Parliament, half of
whose time is already swallowed up by the said Council: now because no obstacle
lies in their way, to the full establishment of these their ends: but the
uncorrupted part of the Soldiery, that have their eyes fixed upon their
engagements and promises of good to the People, and resolve by no threats or
allurements to decline the same; together with that part of the people in City
and Countries, that remain constant in their motions for Common good, and still
persist to run their utmost hazards for procurement of the same, by whom all
evil men's designs both have, and are still likely to find a check and
discovery. Hereupon the grand contrivers forementioned, whom we can particular
by name, do begin to raise their spleen, and manifest a more violent enmity
against Soldiers and People, disposed as aforesaid, than ever heretofore, as
appears by what lately past, at a meeting of Officers, on Feb. 22. last, at
White Hall, where after expressions of much bitterness against the most
Conscientious past of the Soldiery, and others, it was insisted upon, (as we
are from very credible hands certainly informed) that a motion should be made
to this House for the procurement of a Law enabling them to put to death all
such as they should judge by Petitions or otherwise to disturb the present
proceedings; and upon urging that the Civil Magistrate should do it* It was
answered, that they could hang twenty ere the Magistrate one. It was likewise
urged that Orders might be given to seize upon the Petitioners, Soldiers, or
others, at their meetings, with much exclamation against some of greatest
integrity to your just Authority, whereof they have given continual and
undeniable assurances. A Proclamation was likewise appointed, forbidding the
Soldiers to Petition you, or any but their Officers, prohibiting their
correspondencies: And private Orders to be given out for seizing upon Citizens
and Soldiers at their meetings. And thus after these fair blossoms of hopeful
liberty, breaks forth this bitter fruit, of the vilest and basest bondage that
ever English men groaned under: whereby this notwithstanding is gained (viz.)
an evident and (we hope) a timely discovery of the instruments, from whence all
the evils, contrivances, and designs (which for above these eighteen months
have been strongly suspected) took their rise and original, even ever since the
first breach of their Promises and engagements made at New Market, Triploe
Heath, with the Agitators and People. It being for these ends that they have so
violently opposed all such as manifested any zeal for Common Right, or any
regard to the Faith of the Army, sentencing some to death, others to
reproachful punishments, placing and dis-placing Officers according as they
showed themselves serviceable or opposite to their designs, listing as many as
they thought good, even of such as have served in Arms against you: And then
again upon pretense of easing the charge of the People, disbanding
Supernumeraries, by advantage thereof picking out, such as were most cordial
and active for Common good; thereby moulding the Army (as far as they could) to
their own bent and ends premised; exercising Martial-Law with much cruelty,
thereby to debase their spirits, and make them subservient to their wills and
pleasures; extending likewise their power (in many cases) over persons not
Members of the Army.

And when in case of opposition and difficult services, they have by their
creatures desired a Reconciliation with such as at other times they reproached,
vilified, and otherwise abased; and through fair promises of good, and
dissembled repentance gained their association and assistance, to the great
advantage of their proceedings: yet their necessities being over, and the
Common enemy subdued, they have slighted their former promises, and renewed
their hate and bitterness against such their assistances, reproaching them
with such appellations as they knew did most distaste the People, such as
Levellers, Jesuits, Anarchists, Royalists names, both contradictory in
themselves, and altogether groundless in relation to the men so reputed;
merely relying for relief thereof upon the easiness and credulity of the
People.

And though the better to insinuate themselves, and get repute with the People,
as also to conquer their necessities, they have bin fane to make use of those
very principles and productions, the men they have so much traduced, have
brought to light: yet the producers themselves they have and do still more
eagerly malign than ever, as such whom they know to be acquainted to their
deceipts, and deviations and best able to discover the same.

So that now at length, guessing all to be sure, and their own (the King being
removed, the House of Lords nulled, their long plotted Council of State
erected, and this House awed to their ends,) the edge of their malice is
turning against such as have yet so much courage left them as to appear for the
well establishment of Englands Liberties: and because God has preserved a
great part of the Army untainted with the guilt of the designs aforementioned,
who cannot without much danger to the designers themselves be suppressed, they
have resolved to put this House upon raising more new forces, (notwithstanding
the present necessities of the People, in maintaining those that are already)
in doing whereof (though the pretense be danger, and opposition, yet the
concealed end is like to be the over-ballancing those in the Army, who are
resolved to stand for true Freedom, as the end of all their labors, the which
(if they should be permitted to do) they would not then doubt of making
themselves absolute seizures, Lords and Masters, both of Parliament and People;
which when they have done we expect the utmost of misery, nor shall it grieve
us to expire with the liberties of out native Country: for what good man can
with any comfort to himself survive then? But God has hitherto preserved us,
and the Justice of ou^ (...) integrity of our intentions are daily more and
more manifest to the impartial and unprejudiced part of men; insomuch that it
is no small comfort to us, that notwithstanding we are upon all these
disadvantages that may be, having neither power nor pre-eminence, the Common
Idols of the world; our Cause and principles, do through their own natural
truth and luster get ground in men's understandings, so that where there was
one, twelve months since, that owned our principles, we believe there are now
hundreds, so that though we fail, our Truths prosper.

And posterity we doubt not shall reap the benefit of our endeavors, what ever
shall become of us. However though we have neither strength nor safety before
us, we have discharged our Consciences, and emptied our breasts unto you,
knowing well that if you will muke use of your power, and take unto you that
courage which becomes men of your Trust and condition, you may yet through the
goodness of God prevent the danger and mischief intended, and be instrumental
in restoring this long enthralled and betrayed Nation into a good and happy
condition.

For which end we most earnestly desire and propose, as the main prop and
support of the work, that you will not dissolve this House, nor suffer your
selves to be dissolved, until as aforesaid, you see a new Representative the
next day ready to take your room; which you may confidently and safely insist
upon, there being no considerable number in the Army or elsewhere, that will
be so unworthy as to dare to disturb you therein.

2. That you will put in practice the self-denying Ordinance, the most just and
useful that ever was made, and continually cried out for by the people; whereby
a great infamy that lies upon your cause will be removed, and men of powerful
influences, and dangerous designs, deprived of those means and opportunities
which now they have, to prejudice the public.

3. That you will consider how dangerous it is for one and the same persons to
be continued long in the highest commands of a Military power, especially
acting so long distinct, and of themselves, as those now in being have done,
and in such extraordinary ways whereunto they have accustomed themselves,
which was the original of most Regalities and Tyrannies in the world.

4. That you appoint a Committee of such of your own members, as have bin
longest established upon those rules of Freedom upon which you now proceed; to
hear, examine, and conclude all controversies between Officers and Officers,
and between Officers and Soldiers; to consider and mitigate the Law-Martial;
and to provide that it be not exercised at all, upon persons not of the Army:
Also to release and repair such as have thereby unduly suffered, as they shall
see cause: To consider the condition of the private Soldiers, both Horse and
Foot in these deer times, and to allow them such increase of pay, as
wherewithal they may live comfortably, and honestly discharge their Quarters:
That all disbanding be refered to the said Committee, and that such of the Army
as have served the King, may be first disbanded.

5. That you will open the Press, whereby all treacherous and tyranical designs
may be the easier discovered, and so prevented, which is a liberty of greatest
concernment to the Commonwealth, and which such only as intend a tyranny are
engaged to prohibit: The mouths of Adversaries being best stopped, by the
sensible good which the people receive from the actions of such as are in
Authority.

6. That you will (whilst you have opportunity) abate the charge of the Law, and
reduce the stipends of Judges, and all other Magistrates and Officers in the
Commonwealth, to a less, but competent allowance, converting the overplus to
the public Treasury, whereby the taxes of the people may be much eased.

7. But above all, that you will dissolve this present Council of State, which
upon the grounds forementioned so much threatens Tyranny; and manage your
affairs by Committees of short continuance, and such as may be frequently and
exactly accountable for the discharge of their Trusts.

8. That you will publish a strict prohibition, and severe penalty against all
such, whether Committees, Magistrates, or Officers of what kind soever, as
shall exceed the limits of their Commission, Rules, or Directions, and
encourage all men in their informations and complaints against them.

9. That you will speedily satisfy the expectations of the Soldiers in point
of Arrears, and of the people in point of Accounts, in such a manner, as that
it may not as formerly, prove a snare to such as have bin most faithful, and a
protection to the most corrupt, in the discharge of their trust and duties.

10. That the so many times complained of Ordinance for Tyths upon treble
damages, may be forthwith taken away; all which, together with due regard
showed to Petitioners, without respect to their number and strength, would so
fasten you in the affections of the people, and of the honest Officers and
Soldiers, as that you should not need to fear any opposite power whatsoever:
and for the time to come, of your selves enjoy the exercise of your Supreme
Authority, whereof you have yet but the name only; and be enabled to vindicate
your just undertakings; wherein we should not only rejoice to have occasion to
manifest how ready we should be to hazard our lives in your behalf, but should
also bend all our studies and endeavors to render you Honorable to all future
generations.

Febr. 26. 1648. Being ushered in by the Sergeant at Arms, and called to the
Bar, with all due respects given unto the House, Lieutenant Colonel John
Lilburn, with diverse others, coming to the Bar next the Mace, with the Address
in his hand, spoke these words, or to this effect, as follows.
M. Speaker,
I Am very glad that without any inconvenience unto my self, and those that are
with me, I may freely and cheerfully address my self to this honorable House,
as the Supreme Authority of England (time was when I could not) and it much
refreshes my spirit, to live to see this day, that yon have made such a step
to the Peoples Liberties, as to own and declare your selves to be (as indeed
you are) the Supreme Authority of this Nation.

M. Speaker, I am desired by a company of honest men, living in and about
London, who in truth do rightly appropriate to themselves, the title of the
Contrivers, Promoters, Presenters, and Approvers of the late Large London
Petition of the 11. of Sept. last, (which was the first Petition I know of in
England, that was presented to this honorable House against the late
destructive Personal Treaty with the late King) to present you with their
serious apprehensions; And give me leave (I beseech you) for my self and them,
to say thus much; That for the most part of us, we are those that in the worst
of times durst own our Liberties and Freedoms, in the face of the greatest of
our adversaries; and from the begiting of these Wars, never shrunk from the
owning of our Freedoms, in the most tempestuous times, nor changed our
Principles: Nay Sir, let me with truth tell you, that to the most of us, our
Wives, our Children, our Estates, our Relations, nay our Lives, and all that
upon earth we can call Ours, have not bin so highly valued by us, as our
Liberties and Freedoms; which our constant Actions (to the apparent hazard of
our Blood and Lives) have bin a clear and full demonstration of, for these many
years together.

And M. Speaker, give me leave to tell you, that I am confident our Liberties
and Freedoms (the true and just end of all the late Wars) are so deer and
precious to us, that we had rather our Lives should breath out with them, than
to live one moment after the expiration of them.

M. Speaker, I must confess I am to present you with a paper, something of a new
kind, for we have had no longer time to consider of it, than from Thursday
last, and Warrants (as we are informed) issuing out against us to take us, from
those that have no power over us; we durst not well go our ordinary way to
work, to get Subscriptions to it, lest we should be surprised before we could
present it to this honorable House, and so be frustrated in that benefit or
relief that we justly expect from you; and to present it with a few hands, we
judged inconsiderable in your estimation, and therefore choose in the third
place (being in so much have as we were to prevent our eminent and too apparent
ruin) in person to bring it to your Bar, and avowedly to present it here: And
therefore without any further question, give me leave to tell you, I own it,
and I know so does all the rest of my Friends present; and if any hazard should
ensue thereby, Give me leave resolvedly to tell you, I am sorry I have but one
life to lose, in maintaining the Truth, Justice, and Righteousness, of so
gallant a piece.

M. Speaker, We own this honorable House (as of right) the true Guardian of our
Liberties and Freedoms; and we wish and most heartily desire, you would rouse
up your spirits (like men of gallantry) and now at last take unto your selves a
magnanimous resolution, to acquit your selves (without fear or dread) like the
chosen and betrusted Trustees of the People, from whom (as your selves
acknowledge and declare) all just power is derived, to free us from all bondage
and slavery, and really and truly invest us into the price of all our blood,
hazards, and toyls; Our Liberties and Freedoms, the true difference and
distinction of men from beasts.

M. Speaker, Though my spirit is full in the sad apprehension of the dying
condition of our Liberties and Freedoms: Yet at present I shall say no more,
but in the behalf of my self and my friends, I shall earnestly entreat you to
read these our serious Apprehensions seriously, and debate them deliberately.

Friends,
This we have adventured to publish for the timely information and benefit of
all that adhere unto the common interest of the people, hoping that with such,
upon due consideration, it will find as large an acceptance, as our late
Petition of Sept. 11. 1648. And we thought good (in regard we were not called
in to receive an answer to the same) to acquaint you, that we intend to second
it with a Petition sufficiently subscribed, we doubt not with many thousands,
earnestly to solicit for an effectual Answer.

FINIS.

