An Hue-and Cry AFTER THE Fundamental LAWS and Liberties OF ENGLAND

Occasionally written upon the stealing of one of the grand Assertors of Them
out of Newgate, by a Party of men on horseback, pretending themselves to be
Soldiers, raised and paid by the People of England (not for the Subversion,)
but the preservation of the said Laws and Liberties, etc.

Together with some Queries, and brief Resolves, touching the present state of
Things: Written for the consolation of the Saints now reigning.

By a Well-wisher to the Saints now reigning on earth, had they had the
patience to have staid till the People had chose them, or that Christ the King
of Saints above -- had settled the Government upon them.

Europe, Printed in a year of Melodius Discord, To the Tune of the Cross and
the Harp, when the Servants are Princes, and the Masters are Slaves.

A Hu-and Cry after the fundamental Laws and Liberties of England, etc.
YOU are immediately upon sight hereof, to make your ^epair to all suspected
places within your several Limits in Jurisdictions, and there to mak^ diligent
search and enquiry after a Cabinet of Jewels o^ inestimable worth and value,
which has been purchased with the Blood and Treasure of our Ancestors; and not
only ^o, but within these 12 years it has cost this Nation many millions of
Treasure, besides the lives of some hundreds of thousands of English men, whom
the world (to succeeding Ages) will admire for their gallantry in the several
Battles and Co^fl^cts during the late Destroy in intestine wars, in defense of
the said Jewels, heretofore called and known by the Fundamental Laws and
Liberties of England: part of which Laws and Native Rights are contained in
Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right; the excellency of which Law, might
Englishmen enjoy the benefit of them, as all along this War they have been
promised, would make English men the happiest Nation in the world,
notwithstanding there are many essential things concerning the Privileges and
Immunities of the good people of England, which is not contained in the said
Magna Charta, and Petition of Right; yet so excellent are those things
contained in those Laws, that were the people suffered to enjoy, which is their
Right by Law, then would England be the freest people in the world: This is
mentioned, because the said Laws were ratified and confirmed by diverse Kings of
this Nation, and in particular by the late King Charles, whom the late
Parliament put to death for a Tyrant, for violating the said Laws, thereby
degenerating from a King into a Tyrant, as all Supreme Magistrates do that
cease to rule by known Laws and Rules, merely by his Arbytrary Will and Power.

And here by the way it would be enquired, whether the Name of a King can make
the people Slaves, or whether the Name of a Parliament, though legally chosen,
make the people free, seeing that Parl. that are legally called to the Supreme
Trust, may betray their Trust, and so degenerate into Tyrants, as well as Kings,
and so the Tyranny be more absolute, and more evil then that of Kings,
considering that Evil or Tyranny in a Community, is worse then Unity: because
that it cannot in Reason be imagined, that one man can possibly contrive so
absolute a Tyranny, as where there is a Spirit of Tyranny working in a
considerable number of persons in a body, etc. And therefore in your search and
inquiry, you are to take diligent notice, whether any person or persons being
the peoples servants, viz. being declared by themselves the Parl. of the
Commonwealth of England, whether they have by themselves, or their Substitutes,
at any time since their coming to the management of supreme Trust, any way
violated, or endeavored to violate any of the said Privileges or Immunities
belonging to the good people of England. One special Pearl belonging to the
said Cabinet bear these words, No free man shall be taken ^r imprisoned, or be
disseized of his freehold, or liberty, or free Customs, or be outlawed or
exiled, or any ways destroyed, or be past upon, or any way dealt with, but by
the Judgment of his Peers, that is, by a Jury of 12 sworn men of the
Neighborhood. No man from henceforth shall be attached by any Accusation, nor
fore-judged of his life, limb, nor his Lands Tenements, Goods, Chattels, into
the Kings or Parliaments hands, against the Form of the great Charter, and the
Law of the Land, etc.

From henceforth no man shall be taken by Petition or suggestion made either to
King or Parl. unless it be by Indictment or presentment of good and lawful men,
where such Deeds be done in due manner, or by process made by Writ Original at
the Common Law. Nor that none be put out of his Franchises or Freehold, unless
he be duly brought in to answer, and judged of the same by the Law. And if any
thing be done contrary to this Statute, it shall he holden for nothing.

Herein may be clearly discovered the Supremacy and Excellency of the Law of
England; wherein is enacted, commanded, and confirmed, That whatsoever should
be done contrary to the Law, shall be of no force. Nay further, No man of what
estate or condition soever he be shall be put out of Land, Tenement, or taken
or imprisoned, or dis-inherited, or put to death, without being called to
answer by due process of Law.

By these, and many other such marks, and badges of Liberty you may see in the
Cabinet: And because it is more then strongly suspected, that some Grandees
pretending to Honesty, and to common Right and Freedom, and upon and by means
of the said public pretenses, have enlarged their possessions by the Ruins of
the Public: I say it is upon good grounds suspected, that some of the said
Grandees are guilty of endeavoring the subversion of the said Laws and
Liberties of England; and instead thereof to introduce an Arbytrary Government.
And therefore it is thought fit to leave you, and all the good people of
England these following Instructions for your ease and benefit in your said
search and Enquiry.

In the first place you are to consider the case of Mr. John Lilburn,
Gentleman, what manner of proceedings has been had against him, since these
public Liberty-pretending Times, viz. Since the Parliament was broken a
pieces by Col. Pride, by advice and consent of the General and Council of
Officers, merely pretending, that Necessity had constrained them to take that
course, they knowing no other way to secure the peoples Rights. Now if you
look, as you ought to do, upon Mr. Lilburn's Case, as the Case of every free
born English man, you will find that the people of England, never in the worst
of Times, received the like wounds in their Laws and Liberties, as they have
done since the said Purge first. Then you may consider the cause of his late
Banishment, which was nothing but for doing what in him lay (by Advice) to
right a Gentleman greatly wronged in his estate, which, in any English man's
judgment, deserves no Punishment, much less Banishment.

Secondly, consider the manner of proceeding against him: First, the Business
was referred to a Committee to examine, and report to the House, and right or
wrong, the House proceeded to vote his Banishment upon the said Report,
although many of the said Committee might justly be suspected of Partiality,
and greatly to favous Sir Arthur Haslerig's Cause, and as much to
discountenance Mr. Lilburn's Cause. So that Mr. Lilburn had no manner of legal
process, whereby he might make any just defense for himself, which they (I mean
his Adversaries) and indeed Adversaries to the just Rights and Privileges)
very well knew he would do, in case it came into any Legal Court where he might
have the liberty of Defense: and therefore an Arbytrary Committee must do the
work, being both in persons and office fitly qualified for such a purpose; and
therefore they bring in their Report, upon which the House proceeded to Vote,
as follows.

Resolved upon the Question, That the Fine of 3000 l. be imposed upon Lieu.
Col. John Lilburn, to be paid to the use of the Commonwealth, That he be fined
2000 l. more to be paid to Sir Arthur Haslerig for his damages, and 2000 l.
m^re to be paid to James Russel, Edward Winslow, William Mollins, Arthur Squib,
Esquires, four of the Commissioners for compounding, that is to say, to each of
them 500 l. for their damages.

Resolved upon the Question, That Lieu. Col John Lilburn be banished out of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Territories thereunto belonging, and,
not to return into any of them upon pain of being proceeded against as a Felon;
and in case of such Return, shall suffer death accordingly. Did ever England
know the like proceedings against one of its Natives: and therefore I can but
wonder at the Kentish men's flattery in their late Petition against Tithes: in
the preamble of which Petition they say, That the glory of Christ's appearings
are eminent in this Change, and that it is the Noon: But what Will that might
be that has such a Noon of Darkness, Hypocrisy, Self-love, Envy, Injustice,
and what not that is evil, as you will better perceive, if you consider the
cruel and just dealing exercised upon him the said Mr. John Lilburn, both as to
the matter and manner of his Banishment, and since hi^ Return. And first as to
the manner of his Banishment. Consider that the Law of England judges n^ man
before he be heard, as to his Defense; and therefore no Judgment could be
legally given in Parl. against him as is pretended, because that before any
Judgment can be given in Law against any English man for any Crime, there must
be either an Indictment, Presentment, or some Information against him.
Secondly, the party accused must either appear before that Court, or be
outlawed for not appearing. Thirdly, if the party appears, he must either
confess the Crimes or Misdemeanors whereof he is accused, or else plead to the
Indictment, Presentment, or Information, and come to trial thereupon. Now if
you consider the manner of their proceedings against Mr. Lilburn, you will soon
find, that instead of coming to a legal Hearing, and what proof they had
against him to prove any matter of Fact, he was only called in to the Bar to
receive his Sentence of Banishment; and whereas by the good old Law of England
every punishment ought to be proportioned to the Offense, so that a man ought
not to have the punishment due to a great Offense inflicted upon him for a
small Offense; nor a small punishment for a great Offense: neither ought any
man to be ruined by any pecuniary Muct or Fine, but every man ought to be
preserved in his estate, as saving to the Merchant his Merchandise, and ^o the
Villain his Wainage, and so every man ought to be preserved in a way of Tr^de,
or other Calling. Now whether they dealt so with Mr. Lilburn, let the world
judge, who was fined 7000 l. which was far more then ever the Gentleman was
worth, though it cannot be denied but he has deserved more of the
Commonwealth, then some of those among whom the thousands and ten thousands
have been divided, and Parks and Mansion houses was bestowed. Secondly,
consider the manner of proceedings against him since his Return, and you will
find abundance of malice against the person of the Gentleman, if not an anso^
^ure endeavor to subvert the said Laws and Liberties; which if once effected,
the good people of this Commonwealth will have nothing left to defend them in
their lives, liberties, and estates, but the absolute Wills of those now
endeavor the subversion of the said Laws. What else was the meaning that such
endeavors was used to tie him up to a simple Plea of Guilty or not guilty, and
to stave him off from his Plea of Oyer, or a Hearing upon the whole matter;
which if it had been granted him, there needed to have been no Jury impanelled
for the Matter, which the Bench very well knew; for the pretended Judgment upon
which that pretended act was Grounded was no Judgment, but some Certain
Arbitrarie votes; and if the Judgment was no Judgment then sure the Act should
be no Act, and so the whole Matter must fall to the ground, but when by their
Menaces of the Press, and still persisting in their Refusal to grant him the
Oyer, he was Constrained to Join Jssue and to Cast himself upon the Jury for
his Trial and the Jury brought in their verdict according to their Oaths and
their Consciences, in which verdict they brought him in not Guilty, wherein
they did approve English men, and Honest men as no doubt others would have done
as well as they, if they had been such as were prejudiced against him in one
kind or other.

But now being acquitted by a Jury of 12 Sworn men of the Neighborhood it was
expected he should have been enlarged Speedily upon it, as by the Law of the
Land he ought to be, but Contrary to Expectation he was detained in Newgate
till the 28 of August upon which day Early in the Morning betwixt 3 and 4 of
Clock he was fetched by a party of about 100 horse from Newgate and Conveyed to
the Tower of London, and there kept Close prisoner and no man suffered to come
near him, and no cause of his deteinement known or expressed in any warrant of
commitment, as ought to be, if Legally they have any thing against him,
wherefore it is strangely to be suspected they have some design either to try
him by some Arbitrarie Court or other seein^ English men will act according to
their Consciences, and not to serve the wills of men how great in power soever,
and so by Erecting some Arbitrary high Court and to trample under foot that
most Just way of trial by Juries and then farewell the L^^es and Liberties of
England, neither are they content having (...) prisoner in the Tower of London
but much striving (...) have the Jury fined, if not imprisoned, for not
forsw^ri^g and that by those men that in a late Declaration tells (...) they
were required to take upon them the Supreme (...) hou^ (...) the 3 Nations
(its no matter by whom) and that they will be as (...) of the Lives Liberties
and Estates of all others as of their own (...) posterities whom they expect
still to be G^verned by Succe^ve parliaments.

Now Let the world judge whether the Actions of men be answerable to their
protestations; can any man imagine, that if any one or more of them should have
undergone so severe a trial for their lives and being acquitted by a Jury
would have been Content to be still detained in prison, and no cause shown
wherefore; and not only so, but to be hurried from out of their beds by a
part of horse, and conveyed to the Tow^r; and there to be kept cl^se Prisoners
in the custody of their greatest enemies. This I can hardly believe; and
therefore what M^chivel said of Alexander the sixth, may be said of these men;
Alexander the sixth says he never did any thing else but d^c^ive men, and
never meant otherwise; yet never was there a man would protest more
effectually, nor aver any thing with more Sollemn, and observe them less then
he. Nevertheless his cozenages thrived well enough because he knew how to play
his part cunningly, Now whether these men knew how to act their parts cunning
or not is the Question; and therefore in your Search and Enquiry you are to be
dilligent and Impartial, especially among the great Ones, Because one of the
Grandees said not long since that he knew not whether there were Any
fundamental Laws or not, if there were any he thought two Lines of them could
not be found, now it is strongly to be suspected that he is one of the
violaters of the said Laws and therefore he would persuade the people not to
Look for the Maintanance of the said Laws, by telling them that there are not
two Lines of them to be found, and therefore they Must be Irrecoverably lost,
and therefore if the said party Can or may be found he ought to be apprehended
upon Suspicion.

You are also to make Dilligent Search and enquiry into all Histories and
Records of Antiquity, and especially into the Reign of Queen Marie for a
president and Parralell case, to justify the now Governers in their late
proceedings againg Mr. John Lilurbn, which if you do, which is much feared you
shall be Exceedingly well Rewarded for your pains because the Aturney General
is thought to be very busy in drawing up an Answer to to the Charge of High
Treason Exhibited againg himself in the uper bench by Squire Elsliot, and for
Mr. Hall it is thought that he is Taking of Physic and spitting his plums to
Cheer his throat that the next time he comes to the bench, either the Court or
himself may understand what he says, and the Grandees themselves have work
enough to cut out for the rest, except some few who have scarcely Read beyond
the first of Matthew, or the 3 of Luke, and therefore it is no work for them,
All which if you perform, you do both State and people an excellent piece of
service, and may expect your Reward; and for your so doing this shall be your
sufficent warrant. Given under our hands Signed by populer order and appointment

Anonimus.

FINIS.

