THE CASE OF THE TENANTS OF THE MANOR of EPWORTH In the Isle of AXHOLM in the
County of LINCOLN.
Truly stated in brief by Lieu. Col. John Lilburn, and others of the
Freeholders there, on purpose to inform every man in the justice and equity of
their Case. And to prevent the many mis-informations of M. John Gibbons, and
the Drainers, and their Participants.
IN the year 1626, the Tenants of the Manor of Epworth were seized of a right
of Common of Pasture appendant to their Free-holds, and of Turbury in all the
wast grounds belonging to that Manor, which had descended to them as their
Inheritance, with their Free-holds, the same having been enjoyed successively
by the Tenants of the said Manor for above three hundred years, by virtue of a
Grant from one John de Mowbray, Lord of that Manor, in the Reign of Edward the
third; and it is most undoubted in the law, that the Lord of a Manor cannot
improve any Commons or Wastes, where the Tenants enjoy Common appendant to their
Free-holds by Grant.

Yet the late King about the said year 1626. preten^^ing to improve the Wastes
of the said Manor, by color of the Stature of Merton, agreed with Sir
Cornelius Vermuden to undertake the w^^k of Draining the Wastes of the said
Manor; and it was conditioned that he should begin the work within three
months after the late Kings Commissioners had agreed with the Tenants and
Commoners of the said Manor for their right; whereby, it was consessed by the
late King, that he could not improve the said grounds until the Commoners had
consented.

The late Kings Commissioners treated with the Tenants of the said Manor, and
demanded 7400 Acres of their Commons, but the Tenants would not consent to
draining on those terms, being unwilling to part with their ancient,
Inheritance, those Commonable grounds being extraordinary good for Milch Kine,
and feeding fat Cattle, and breeding young Cattle, though not for Corn, and the
greatest part of those grounds being much the better for grass, for the
over-flowings of water, in the Winter, and worth more to remain for grass, then
to be plowed for corn.

But Sir Cornelius Vermuden, and the Participants, having purchased of the late
King, the Manor of Hatfield, and endeavored the draining the Level of
Hatfield Chase, and the Wastes of 14 Manors ad acent to the Manor of Epworth,
and (as they confess in their late Petition to the Council of State) having
spent 100000 l. in draining those Manors, which they say must all have been
lost, if Sir Cornelius Vermuden had not drayned through the wast Lands of the
said Manor of Epworth; therefore they were not content with the liberty of
cutting their drains through the grounds of Epworth Manor. But the late Kings
Commissioners agreeing with the Drainers, would without the consent of the
Commoners of the Manor, take from the Commoners above 7400 Acres out of 13400
Acres, under pretense that they had drayned their Commons for them; whereas in
truth, as they are forced to confess to the Council of State, they were forced
to drain all the wast grounds of the other 14 Manors, through the Manor of
Epworth, and cut not one drain for draining Epworth wastes, yet they would and
did take by violence from the Commoners near eight thousand Acres, and called
them seven thousand four hundred, and set out for themselves all the best
ground, most part whereof before any drayning, was worth sixteen shillings by
the Acre yearly, to have been let, and they left to the Commoners only the
worst ground; and the drainers entered by force upon part of the said 7400
Acres. Yet the Commoners used all lawful means to preserve themselves in their
ancient possessions; and when the drainers had enclosed some of their
Commonable grounds, they still put in their cattle, and when they were
imponded, they brought their lawful Writs of Replevin, that they might try
whether they were Trespassers or not. But the Barons of the Exchequer, by their
Order of the 21 of November. in the tenth year of the late King, being 1634.
caused all suits of the Commoners upon Writs of Replevin, to be staid; and the
Sheriffs were commanded to forbear all proceedings upon any Replevins that
should be brought by any of the Commoners, whereby they were without hope of
any relief by the law, to recover their right; and being so desperate, they
strived to defend force with force, and so to keep their possession: but the
drainers under pretense of the late Kings authority, still increased their
force and violence against the Commoners, to take away from them the whole 7400
Acres; and the Commoners endeavoring to defend their own possession, were by
the Tyranny and injustice of those Times condemned as Rioters, and Forces
brought against Them by the Sheriff, who killed some of them. and wounded
others, in taking their possession from them, and then the Drayners brought the
Commoners into the Star Chamber, and Indicted them in the then Kings Bench, and
caused Fines of many Thousand pounds to be set upon them as Rioters, and so
vexed Them with Pursevants, That many of them durst not adventure to lie in
their own houses; but hid themselves in the fields to save them from
Imprisonment.

And the Commoners being thus persecuted, and under such cruel vexation and
Tyranny, some of Them were persuaded to submit Themselves to such Order in the
Case, as the Kings Attorney General should make, and to yield obedience to the
Orders of the Star Chamber, and Injunctions of the Court of Exchequer; and were
promised, That thereupon they should be free from the Fines and Issues returned
against Them, and some of Them so submitting in fear of their utter undoing,
The Barons of the Exchequer to draw, or rather force the rest to submission,
Ordered upon the 13. of February, in the 11. year of the late Kings Reign,
being 1635. That the Sheriffs of the County of Lincoln should forbear to Levy
any the said Issues and Damages upon the Lands and Tenements, Goods and
Chattels of Ezech^as Brown, and several others that had submitted, thereby
Terrifying every man that would not submit, to have his Goods and Chattels
distreined for Issues that far exceeded their Estates: And thereupon the
Drayners Bribed the Commoners Solicitor with Fourscore pounds, and then he Told
the Commoners that had not submitted, That they could not any way preserve
Themselves from the Issues to be Levied upon Them, but by subscribing to a
Note, wherein they should promise to submit to such Award or Order as the then
Kings Attorney General should make in the Case; and in fear of ruin, some
few did then subscribe to such a Note, (not knowing, as many of Them have since
answered upon their Oaths in the Exchequer unto what they did subscribe) and
then the Drayners procured an Order of the Exchequer of the Thirtyeth of May,
in the Twelfth year of the late King, being 1636. That whatever end or Order
the Kings Attorney General should conceive or make in the Case, should be
confirmed by the Decree of that Court.

And the Drayners having as aforefaid by cruel usage of the Commoners: and
Terrible Threats and Menaces procured ^^me subscriptions to a Note of
submission to the Kings Attorney Generals Order in the Case, they increased the
number of Names, by writing the same Men's name Twice. Thrice, and some Four
times over, and by adding the Names of about Fourscore that had no right to the
Man or of Epworth, and so multiplied the number of Subscribers to 370. And then
procured in the 12 Year of the late King a Decree in Exchequer, as if it had
been by consent of Parties, That the Drayners should enjoy and be settled in
the possession of the said 8000 acres, called by the name of 7400.

Now under color of that Decree, the Drayners did enjoy the said 7400 Acres
about Ten years, until 1643. and about 4000 Acres thereof they enjoyed about
Eight years more, until 1651. It Is true indeed, the Commoners being in Arms
for the Parliament in 1643. did take advantage of the Time; and as they had
been put out of possession by force, and could not through the Tyranny of those
Times have any Legal Remedy; so by force they put Themselves into possession
again of above 3000 Acres: Yet in 1646. the War being over, the Commoners
intended to recover their Right legally, or else legally to have been evicted;
and therefore in several of their Names commenced their Suits against the
Drayners Tenants, on purpose to try the Title to those Grounds; but the
Drayners not daring to abide the Test of the fled law, in to the
Exchequer-Chamber by a Bill of Equity, and procured Injunctions to stop the
Commoners proceedings at Law to try their Title, and there on purpose to vex
and weary out the Commoners by delays and expense, they kept Them in continual
trouble until this year 1651. some of the Drayners boasting, That the Commoners
should never have a Trial at Law.

And it must be confessed that some of the Inhabitants in the Isle of Axholm,
especially of the poorer sort, conceiving Themselves highly injured by such
unsufferable delays and charges in that vexations Suit for pretended Equity,
were impatient, and took their possession of the whole by force of multitudes,
as they lost it by force, and in their rage the multitude did foolishly throw
down many poor houses, that the Drainers had built for their Tenants upon the
enclosed ground (but that folly of the multitude none of the most discreet
Commoners and tenants of the Isle do justify) yet the chief tenants of the
Manor finding the ground to be left free from any of the drainers tenants, have
quietly and peaceably entered upon their ancient Commons, and desire nothing but
a legal trial, which the Honorable Barons of the Exchequer have Ordered to
permit, after five years waiting for it, and a Jury is come out of
Lincolnshire on purpose, and do attend the trial daily, though the Drainers
endeavor by all means possible, either by favor, or pretense of riots
committed by some of the Commoners, or power of the Attorney General, or any
other ways to prevent the Trial; and the Commoners are, and shall be ready and
willing to submit to the judgment of the law in the Case.

But the Drainers object against the Commoners, two things.

First, That they have made an improvement by draining the Wastes and Commons of
the Manor of Epworth, and that it will be a great prejudice to the
Commonwealth, to suffer the improvement to be lost.
To this the Commoners answer, That the Drainers by cutting through the Manor
of Epworth, to drain fourteen adjacent Manors, have made some of the Commons
of Epworth Manor, fitter for corn then formerly, though upon considering the
whole matter, that is, the profitableness of that ground for grass all the
Summer (Cattle of all sorts being commonly fed fat upon it for the Butcher) and
the profit that the Commoners had by the Navigation upon the River Eidle, and
the profit of fishing and fowling: It is very doubtful upon the proofs,
whether there has been any improvement made of those grounds to a greater
profit then formerly; but the Commoners are of opinion, that considering the
loss of the Navigation upon the River Eidle, there is less profit to be made
upon the grounds now by corn, then could have been made formerly by feeding
cattle.

Yet the River Eidle being now destroyed, and the old Drains also stopped up,
the Commoners conceive that the new Drains that they have cut through the
Manor of Epworth, for the draining Hatfield Chase and other Manors, must be
maintained to keep the Commons dry; and therefore the Commoners are resolved
to contribute their share to maintain the Drains; and for that purpose the
Trustees chosen by the Commoners, have contracted with some Freeholders of
their own Manor, to undertake for their own share, to maintain the Drains and
to drain some other of their Grounds for them, and have for that purpose
allotted 2000 acres of ground to those Freeholders that have undertaken the
work (though they did offer the Drainers 4000 acres to do the same work for
them, and to have been at peace with them, and they refused it) so that the
Commoners are resolved to keep up the improvement, if any be, to the best
advantage of the Commonwealth.

2. It Is Objected that the Drainers have spent a vast sum of money in draining
the Commons of Epworth Manor, and so ought in equity to enjoy some part of the
Grounds for their satisfaction, though the Commoners have Common by grant,
against which they could not have improved.
To this the Commoners answer, that the Drainers never expended one penny upon
draining the Commons of Epworth Manor; the two Drains that they cut through
them, being cut on purpose for carrying the water from 13 Manors, besides
Hatfield Chase into the River of Trent, and their Charge not being augmented,
either in cutting those Drains deeper or wider for draining Epworth Manor; and
the drainers confessed lately in their Petition to the Counsel of State, that
they had expended 100000 l. in draining other Manors before they begun with
Epworth, and that they had lost all their cost, if they had not cut through
Epworth Manor to vent their water into Trent; yet Mr. Attorney General still
tells the Barons that 150000 l. is spent upon draining the Manor of Epworth; as
if all had been spent upon that; when in truth not one penny has been spent
upon that only, nor in relation at all to the draining of that Manor, though
they cutting their drains for Hatfield Chase through Epworth Manor, by
accident it is made somewhat dryer, and the Navigable River spoiled, and the old
drainer stopped up.

Secondly they answer, that in case they had cut all the Drains that are cut in
the manner of Epworth, only for draining the wastes of that Man nor, yet they
have received double, and almost treble whatever those drains could cost them,
they are abundantly reinbursed, all their cost and charge about the manor of
Epworth, if all the charge of the works of drainage in it be set upon its own
score only; by the Drainers own proof the land is made worth sixteen shillings
an Acre yearly; but reckon it at ten shillings an Acre, and they enjoyed for
above ten years 7400. Acres by their own account, which amounts to 37000.
pounds; and for seven years more they enjoyed 4000. Acres, which amounts to
14000. pounds, which in the whole amounts to 51000. pounds; and all the drains
cut in the manner of Epworth, are not in length above 8 miles, and it is not
possible that it should cost 1000. l. a mile for cutting, and suppose the heads
of the Sluices, and and mending of the Banks, of Bickers dike, cost them 5000,
pounds, (though this is all double if not treble reckoning) yet surely they are
sufficiently reimbursed, both their money and their damages, so that they
cannot in equity claim any thing neither in truth could they if they had not
been reimbursed, because they would adventure to try their skill upon other
men's grounds, without their leave or consent.

Now the Tenants of the manor of Epworth, leave it to every indifferent man,
to judge, whether they ought not to be permitted to try their title at law;
notwithstanding, any pretenses of equity on the Drainers side, or any pretenses
of Riots by some of the multitude, in entering by force, and they appeal to
every man's Conscience, whether they have not had hard measure from first to
last, these many years: only Mr. Attorney General, has one argument for the
Drainers, which is not answered, that is, The Drainers will pay a fee Farm
rent, to the State of 240. pounds per annum, for their shares in this Manor,
but this needs no other answer, then this. That the subscibers of this or any
other of the Freeholders of Epworth Manor will give the State double the
rent, if they will settle upon them or any of them 3000. pounds per annum,
which the Drainers crave in this case, as a boon from the Barons of the
Exchequer.

Signed, by Mich. Monkton, Peter Clarke, and John Thorpe, three of the Trustees
for the tennants within the Manor of Epworth, on the behalf of all the said
Trustees and Tennants; And also by me John Lilburne being a Freeholder there,
and trusted by the rest of the Freeholders to negotiate their said cause, and
by Daniel Noddel, their Solliciter in the cause for almost six years.
November 18. 1651.
FINIS.

