The Banished man's suit for Protection To his Excellency The Lord General
CROMWELL, Being the humble address of Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn.
May it please your Excellency,
SInce your self with your Council of Officers in your respect to the welfare
of this Commonwealth, were pleased to dissolve the late Parliament, I have made
many humble addresses to your Excellency for a Pass to return to my native
Country; having suffered extraordinary much under the late Parliaments sentence
of Banishment. But being informed that such addresses are conceived only fit to
be made to such an authority as shall succeed the late Parliament in their
Legislative Power: And my condition being such, as could not admit of time to
expect the issue of new addresses to be made to the succeeding Power, being in
such daily and hourly hazard of my life where I had my residence beyond the
Seas; only because I had faithfully served the Commonwealth, that it concerned
my life, either speedily to resolve upon a perpetual banishment into some
foreign Country, where none should know me; hoping there to live securely in an
utter obscurity and uselessness to my generation, and a burden to others for
my bread; or otherwise to run the hazard of returning to England without a
Pass, or promise of protection.

And my disposition led me to choose the last, not without much wavering in my
thoughts, in regard of some provocations which I believe I have even lately by
Letters put particularly upon your Excellency: yet I hoped and believed that
the harshest and most disgustfull passages in them might possibly be construed
to be the fruits of my highest passions, when my reason was clouded, not only
by my sad and most heavy sufferings, but also by the misapprehensions of your
Excellencies actions and intentions, which I could not have the knowledge of
beyond the seas, but as others misrepresented them unto me; hereupon I hoped
that God in his mercy to me, and my poor ruined Family, might incline your mind
so to conceive of all former passages of whatsoever nature.

And then finding that your Excellency with your Council, had declared that you
would take upon you the care and protection of all Englishmen living godly,
quietly and peaceably until the great trust of the Government of this Nation
be vested in such as are chosen for the same. And in the midst of all these
thoughts, it being much upon my spirit that God by his providence would restore
me to my native Country; and my heart being filled with a strong faith in the
goodness of God, and his protection in my endeavors therein. Thereupon I
resolved, come life, come death, to cast my self, my life, and all that is left
me in this world besides (under God) upon your Excellency, presuming upon your
protection, at least until those that are chosen for the Supreme Authority be
settled therein, and their answer be given to my humble address. I confess I
judged my self an Englishman, and amongst my Countrymen, capable of your
Excellencies promised protection, being absolutely resolved to live as quietly
and submissively to the present and succeeding Power as any man, having no
other resolutions, intentions, nor thoughts then to live godly and peaceably
with my poor distressed Family; and to study to serve the Commonwealth, if
those trusted with the Government thereof, should at any time conceive me fit
for their Service; or otherwise to confine my self to the most private life.

This I desired to make known unto your Excellency by my wife (the bearer
hereof) and my true Friend Mr William Kiffin, the first hour of my return
hither from Callis to London (in one day, in the privatest manner I possible
could) and they having waited for, or upon your Excellency several hours this
morning; and your great Affairs preventing their audience, I presumed thus to
declare it in writing, lest any misconstruction should be made of my sudden
return: the true occasions of it, and my ends and intention therein, being
nakedly and bonafide, herein fully declared, and only according to the
integrity of my heart in these real expressions; I humbly hope for, and confide
in your Excellencies goodness to protect,

From my present lodging in little Moor-fields in London, Tuesday this 14. of
June 1653. My Lord, Your Excellencies most humble Servant, John Lilburn.

London, Printed by Tho. Newcomb dwelling in Thamestreet over against Baynards
Castle.


