A Conference with the Soldiers.
OR, A Parley with the Party of Horse, which with drawn drawn sword, entered the
Sessions at Mr. John Lilburn's Trial.
Gentlemen,
WHat are you? Are you Englishmen, and true English soldiers raised for
maintenance and defense of the ancient Rights and Liberties of England, [the
chiefest whereof are peaceable, free, and unforcible legal Trials, for men's
lives and estates] if you are such [as you ought to be] how is it that as a
party of armed soldiers you enter the place and legal Courts of Justice, with
horse and swords drawn, and in the very face thereof, cuting, beating, haling
by the hair of the head and trampling upon the people peaceably there, as is
their right, to see that all men have justice come them.

Can you imagine that in so doing you do not over-aw, affright, and terrify
the Jury men present? and, in effect, tell them Mr. Lilburn's blond must now be
had, and that right or wrong they must find him guilty: But, dear friends, what
is this ye do? Was ever such a thing done in the late Tyrants time? Nay, when
in any time was the like violation of the liberties of England?

And what is it moves you thus to do, in his case, more then in all others? Is
it because you are commanded so to do? Think you that will suffice to justify
your actions at the Day of judgment before the most just and Al-seeing God? who
has made you men, furnished with judgments and consciences, able to
distinguish between good and evil; and not beasts to rend and tear, fetch and
carry, terrify and affright, kill and destroy, without demanding a cause, or
making some scruple for conscience sake Make you no difference between enemies
in Arms, or in open Hostility, and peaceable people, when you are commanded?
The Lord work upon your hearts.

You would be offended any should say you are not Christians: Christians judge
nothing before the time: you, by this your violent appearance, doom him to
death, before any thing is legally proved against him: whereas Christians, in
doubtful cases, ought to judge the best; and all things, before proof, are to
be esteemed at least doubtful.

But you judge, possibly, as you are told by some who thirst after his blood,
that his crimes are notorious and evident: Good christian soldiers be not
deluded; nor delude your selves; for you cannot but know, that the worst the
Parliament laid to his charge, was no more, but that he had scand^lized Sr
Arthur Haslerig, and the Committee of Haberdashers Hall; and published a
Petition (offered to the House) before they had read it: And for this, mark how
they senten'd him (for its your own case) they fine him more than twice his
estate; to wit, 7000 pounds, banish him for ever, and enact him to die as a
Fellon, without benefit of Clergy, if he returned: This was their Judgment; and
no marvel: for his Adversaries were his Judges; and this without once hearing
what he could say in his own defense; so hasty were they to be rid of him and
cause they had: for had he staid, he was like enough to prove those things
called Scandals, real Truths, to the hazard of Sr Arthur's new-gotten huge
Estate, and to the laying open the foulness of some of the Committee; and which
yet fearing he may live to effect, is now one main cause his life is so
violently persued.

You have heard much of the unrighteous Judgments of the Council Table, High
Commission, and Star Chamber; but never in the worst of their Times was the
like unto this: And are all those Courts justly thrown down? And have you and
your Officers routed the Parliament, that made this most cruel Judgment, and
Act; and can you now thus violently appear to justify his Trial thereupon, in
such sort, as if you would force them to find him guilty: And in so doing, do
ye not draw his innocent blood upon you; yea, though the Jury should acquit
him, as, if they have any conscience or fear of God in them, they must do, and
no doubt will; as fearing him that can kill the soul, more then you (that would
your conscience permit you) can only kill the body.

But it is to be doubted, there are other matters that raise your hatred
against Mr. Lilburn; for a certain libellous book has been officiously
dispiersed and read to and amongst you and the rest of the Army, intimating,
That Mr. Lilburn has been tampering to bring in Charles Stuart; and this (the
more effectually to deceive you) under the Ouches or diverse Witnesses. But,
dear friends, in this also you are not to be hasty in belief; for you know the
like was published before his Trial at Guild Hall, by the Council of State, to
inrage the Soldiery and honest party against him, and not one word proved
true: So when you shall understand what wretched perjured Creatures those
Witnesses are (mentioned in that book) you will grieve at the horrid
wickedness of such devilish stratagems: Besides, a person of unquestionable
credit with the chief of your Army, hearing of the mischievous slander of Mr.
Lilburn, has offered, and is ready at all times, to depose upon oath, that
during Mr. Lilburn's residing beyond seas, and since the War with Holland, he
had the best and truest Intelligence of all proceedings there, from him, and
most advantageous for the State of England; Which Mr. Lilburn certainly had
never done, if he had had any design for Charles Stuart: But if you believe
those false aspersions, only so long as that through your passion and violence
you shall occasion his destruction, his deadly enemies by you obtain their
bloody desires, and you contract matter of sad repentance for ever.

The holy Scriptures Rule to Soldiers, is, that they accuse no man falsely; but
to act violently, or earnestly, upon a Report, is no less in Gods sight.

They are also to offer violence to no man; much less to a prisoner: toward
whom, the very Heathen Soldiers, in Paul's Case, have left you, and all
Christian Soldiers, a great example of care and tenderness.

On therefore! be not worse then Romans unto him; Be not like Danes or Normans
to the People, and Courts of Justice: Be not like men who have made ship wrack
of all good Conscience: But be unto all in all your demeanor as becomes
Christians; full of Mercy; full of Compassion: And cease not to persuade with
your Commanders, to find you Employment more agreeable to your Understandings
and Consciences; it being in all Cases more safe to obey GOD rather then MAN.

The Publisher to the Reader.
COuntryman, I pray thee take notice of two things in this place; first that
those lying and false informations lately published against Mr. Lilburn are
printed for or by the council of States-Printers, or Booksellers, viz. H.
Hills, G. Calvert, and T. Brewster, and so in reason may be judged to be
Printed by the authority of the Council of State themselves or by the Authority
of their Supreme Lord, Master, and Creator the General.

2dly. I pray thee observe the persons from whom those informations or
depositions came; first from one Isaac Burkinhead alias Rogers, as he named
himself beyond the seas, a most profane, deboist, drunken Rogue, who in his
conversation beyond the seas to delude the Cavaliers, and to make them believe
he was really as they were, in his cups made no scruple, as some of his own
comrades have credibly reported, to take a glass of beer or wine, and in their
presence to drink it, and wish that might be his poison if he were directly or
indirectly an Agent, Intelligencer, or Well-wisher to the Parliament of
England, the Council of State, the General, or Mr Scot or any appertaining to
them, or that wished them well.

The second person named as informer is Captain John Titus, a man of so vicious
a life in his Cavalier way, for whoring, drinking, swearing, and for-swearing,
as the world has scarce his fellow, whose several perjuries upon Judicial
Records in England, are said by some of his own kindred not to be a few.

The third witness, is one Capt. John Bartley, an Irishman or Rebel, and a
grand Traitor and Pyrot for the late E of Derby, and who, as beyond sea he
averred, could not be permitted in England to live, and who had no way to
preserve himself, his wife, and children from starving beyond sea, but to
combine with Mr Lilburns great adversaries and their Agents, to do as wickedly
to Mr Lilburn as he has done.

The fourth witness is one Rich. Foot, a young delboist, wicked, and profane
rogue, that robbed and stole from his brother, who lives near Blackwell-Hall,
betwixt 2 and 3 hundred pound in gold, and run away beyond sea with it, of a
great part of which he being checked of by one Harbin, or the like name, Mr
Lilburn out of his respect to one Col. Gamet, and Mr Ralph Parker, did the best
he could to assist them in getting some part of it again, and did, but always
scorned to discourse with such a thief and rogue as the said Foot upon
State Affairs.

The fifth witness against Mr Lilburn is one Staple-Hill, which the publisher
knows not; but in Mr Lilburns name and behalf earnestly desires as much liberty
to publish a full and absolute answer to those most false, lying, base, roguish
Cavalier informations, as there was given to the sellers thereof, and then
shall leave himself to the honest judgment of the Reader, to consider whether
are baser follows, Mr Lilburn, or his mighty and great adversaries, that employ
such notorious known rogues to tell lies and false-hoods on purpose to destroy
the innocent.

FINIS.

