The LIER laid open In a LETTER, First Written to a Friend in the Country, at
his desire, for his private satisfaction: And now Printed for the Public.

Touching a late PAMPHLET, INTITVLED, Hamiltons: AND Particularly, of the
present DUKE OF HAMILTON, (Now General of the Scottish ARMY) to get the Crown
of SCOTLAND.

London, Printed in the Year, 1648.

An Answer to a Letter forged by some Malicious Person against the Illustrious
Lord, JAMES Duke of HAMILTON, now General of the SCOTTISH ARMY; And the Right
Honorable WILLIAM, Earl of LANERICK His Brother.
SIR,
IN satisfaction to your desire touching a malicious Pamphlet lately forged,
and published against Duke Hamilton and his Brother the Earl of Lanerick; I
shall show you briefly and ingeniously my opinion thereof; Sine amore et odio,
which blinds and transports most judgments.

The first part thereof concerning some of Duke Hamiltons Predecessors is
borrowed from Buchanan, who is known by all judicious impartial men of the
Scottish Nation, to have been suborned by the Earl of Murray then Regent, to
defame Queen Mary and her Posterity, make them odious to the people, and
incapable of Government, according to his pernicious principles now revived in
this Island, (whether first invented by Jesuits, or some Sectaries about the
year of God 1536. is not material to our purpose, since both Join issue in it;
and like Herod and Pilate, agree against the Lords Anointed;) to make way for
the settling of the Crown upon his own head, and transferring of it to his
Posterity; as by Buchanan his Dialogue, De jure Regni apud Scotos, his
Detectio, and History may appear: As also by the Charge, which the Earls, of
Murray, Morton, and others gave in to Queen Elizabeth against Queen Mary; and
as King James declares plainly in his Basilicon doron.

And perceiving that this could hardly be effectuated so long as the race of
Hamiltons, the next undoubted lawful Heirs remained, who stood firm to the
Queen: He caused Buchanan to defame them also in his Libels for that same end,
forfeited and banished them for their Loyalty; and as Buchanan, to insinuate
his calumnies the better, took his rise from King James the fifths minority; so
does this Pamphleter now, and yet makes only use of him, when he serves his
turn, building upon his own raw invention, when Buchanan makes not for it;

As when he instances Sir James Hamilton executed for Treason, Buchanan does
not charge the Earl of Arran to have had any hand in it, neither was he ever
accused thereof; the said Sir James of Evendale being known to be a profuse
wicked man.

Again, Buchanan in terminis charges the Clergy, as the chief hinderers of King
James the Fifth his meeting at York with his Uncle Henry the Eighth of England,
for fear he should have induced him to shake off the Popes Authority as himself
had done a little before; and that the Marriage with the Lady Mary might have
been a means to procure it: as they likewise hindered the Marriage of Mary
Queen of Scots with Edward the Sixth, agreed upon under the Great Seals of both
Kingdoms: The Queen Mother and Cardinal Beaton who ruled all then, sending her
to France; which this Pamphleter charges most injuriously upon the Duke of
Chastle-rault, whereas it is conspicuous that he obtained that title, and 1200
Franks pension (which this Duke keeps still) from the French King, for
resigning the Regency to the Queen dowager, being that he was made Regent, not
by a private faction (as the Pamphleter says) but by the Three Estates of the
Kingdom, in opposition to a forged Will of the late Kings, which Cardinal
Beaton obtruded, the Duke being inclined then to the Protestant Religion, and
most popular, as both Buchanan and John Knox in their Histories do testify,
and impute his after change in Religion to the Queens side, to his Brother the
Abbot of Paseley, after Archbishop of St Andrews; and M. David Panter his
Secretary, after Bishop of Rosse, who returning from France, got in great
favor with him, over ruled him, being of no great intellectualls, and caused
remove of all his ancient servants, and placed their own creatures about him:
And it is very plain, that if he had been a man of an aspiring spirit to the
Crown, he would never have given up his Regency; but all his actions shows him
to have been a humble man, and of no ambition, and more inclined to a private,
than public way of life.

And for his eldest Son the Earl of Arran, he was known to be distracted, and
died so without marriage, and Lord John the second Son, this Dukes
Grandfather, never was a suitor to the Queen that I can read in any but this
Pamphleter, though I cannot see, that it had been a Crime in either to have
been suitors, more than it was for the Lord Darnely to marry her.

As for the Kings murder afterward, when the Earl of Morton suffered for
concealing of it, a clear Discovery was made, who were the chief authors of it,
and actors in it; the Duke of Chastle rault and his Sons having small hand in
the Government at that time, and standing fast to the Queen, when others rose
in Arms against her in prosecution of that Design.

As for the Earl of Murrayes death, Bothwel-haugh that perpetrated it, flying
after to France, professed that he did it out of a private revenge, because the
Earl of Murray had taken his Estate unjustly from him, and could not be induced
by large rewards to kill a great man there, neither could there ever be any
legal proofs brought against the Duke, his Sons, or Archbishop Hamilton, (who
was most illegally and barbarously murdered, concerning the Kings murder and
Regents death:) though much attempted by the Faction of the times out of malice
to them for their Loyalty to the Queen, and consequently to the Prince her Son,
whom the Faction set up in his Cradle, to destroy his Mother, under color of
his Authority invested in them, which, how much he abhorred, he declared fully
when he came to years of understanding: and many of the chief Actors, did not
escape Gods judgment; And here I must observe, how this Scribler would seem to
be a Royalist, and yet runs himself upon Sectarian Antimonarchical Rocks, that
make inevitable Shipwreck of all Monarchical power.

Where he says, That the Queen was put and kept in Lochleven a prisoner, by
command of Parliament, and that the Hamiltons took a course to relieve her, and
suppress the King and his party; he will not deny, but the Queen was their
lawful Sovereign by the Law of God, and by near 107 Descents; by what law
then, of God, or that Kingdom, could a party of her Subjects imprison, and
disthrone her? Was it Treason in my Lord Hamilton, Duke of Chastle-rault to
relieve her, and employ all his power to defend her? Let them cite the Law; I
demand of him, Would it be so now, to rescue the King out of the Isle of Wight?
But he answers, That it was to suppress the King her son, and the Nobility,
that did adhere to him: This is a poor subterfuge, the Prince was in his
Craddle, not fully 18 months of age, and what hand could he have in the ruin
of his Mother, to make a President for his own? the matter is clear to any
reasonable man.

The Hamiltons would have restored the Queen according to the duty of their
allegiance without wronging the young Prince in his just succession; nay, for
the better preserving of his Royal Person to come to it in his due time,
according to the Law of God, and of that Nation. But such was the perfidious
guilt of the Earls of Murray, Argile, Morton, Ruthen and others, that it could
not be done without their destruction; therefore they labored to keep the
power in their own hands, in the name of the Infant King, and to destroy the
Queen and Hamiltons, to put the crown upon the Earl of Murraye's head, the
young King being in his custody to make away when he found time.

And besides, King James His Authority, (which is of great force with the
judiciously learned,) all the Earl of Murrayes proceedings, do clearly
demonstrate his intended usurpation of the Crown; for from the first beginning
of that Rebellion he was head of it, and all along acted covertly, making the
Earl of Argile to own it openly, and made still a show to be for the Queen his
dear sister, abusing of her goodness, and getting into places of greatest trust,
the better to betray all her Counsels to Argile, and the Lords of the
congregations absenting himself ever from the execution of all the plots
contrived against her, which himself was chief author and abettor of, until at
last she was imprisoned, and disthroned; and then when he thought all sure, he
took off the mask, raised an Army openly, defeated her in Langside field, and
enforced her to fly into England for safety, in regard of his most violent
prosecution: to the disgrace both of her, the young King, and the Scottish
Nation, charging her with many base aspersions, that could not but reflect upon
her Son, and subjecting her honor and life to the judgment of a foreign
Prince contrary to the fundamental laws of that ancient free Kingdom, never
subject to any but their own Kings: and at the same time forfeited and banished
the Hamiltons, Lord John and Lord Claud being reduced to that extremity, that
they were constrained to go on foot disguised through England to France; such
an influence and correspondence the Earl of Murray had then with Queen
Elisabeth, that they durst not be known there.

Some Two Years and odd Months after the Earl of Murry being killed by one
of the name of Hamilton out of his private revenge (as I touched before) the
Earl of Lenox got to be regent; and continued the persecution of the Hamiltons,
out of an old quarrel that had been between these families for the death of
John Earl of Lenox in King James the fifth his minority (but withal still under
the pretense of the murder of the late King and Regent) and so did the two
succeeding Regents, the Earls of Mar and Morton, to keep the power in their
own hands, and debar my Lord Hamilton from his just Right, the Regency being
due to him by the Laws of the Kingdom, as next of blood to the young King.

Thereafter Captain James Stewart a man of a violent and hot Spirit, coming in
favor with the young King, studied to raise his fortune, (being a Soldier of
fortune) upon the continuance of the Hamiltons ruin, and first begged the Ward
of the Earl of Arran, being a Lunatic; and afterward got himself to be made
Earl of Arran: Thus for many years the Hamiltons suffered exceedingly for their
loyalty; until at last a great part of the Nobility, and Gentry, not being
able to endure longer Captain James his oppressions, rose in a body, called
home Lord John Hamilton, and Lord Claud his Brother, and rescued the King at
Striveling out of his hands.

At which time Lord John, venerable for his comely person, and gray hairs
(occasioned by his great afflictions) falling upon his knees to kiss his
Majesty's hand, was taken up, embraced, and called Father by him; who being
overjoyed with the Kings presence, and kind reception, fell again upon his
knees, and could not express for tears, his joy mixed with grief, that he
should have been enforced to take that way to come to His Majesty's Presence,
humbly begging pardon, if he had given any offense to his Majesty thereby. The
King being much moved with his passionate expressions and manner of his
carriage, took him up again, embraced him, and desired him not to be troubled,
assuring him that he was now come to years, to discern what he and his family
had suffered above all others, for their fidelity to his Mother, and should
reward it, if God spared his days.

And soon after created him Marquis of Hamilton, made him a Privy Councellor,
and desired much his advice in all business of Weight; but he being of retired
disposition waved as much as he could the Court, to enjoy a private contented
life in the Country. Some of the furious Ministers wrote to him the famous 17
day of December, 1596. when they stirred up the hot-headded Zelots in Edinburgh
against the King, to come and be head of their faction, which they called God
and the Kirks Cause, which was a fair occasion for him to have embraced, if he
had been more ambitious then loyal; but he flatly refused, advising them to
submit to their Sovereign; sent their Letters to the King, and offered his best
assistance to suppress them, and so continued all his time most passionately
affectionate to his sacred Majesty's service, which leads me to observe this
Libellers malice in his Postscript against him, most injuriously, and upon no
ground, unless he do with some of our times interpret the greatest loyalty to
be treason, as he asserts plainly in some parts of his discourse, and
particularly in the Postscript, to bring home his conclusion grounded upon
false Premises, against my Lord Hamiltons Predecessors, and to make way for a
more easy belief, in the Readers of these things, that he libels against the
Duke himself, and his Brother, to whose parts I am now come, (not esteeming it
needful to insist upon the Noble disposition of the Dukes Father, not mentioned
by the Pamphleter, and the faithful service that he did to King James in the
general Assembly at Perth, and in His Majesty's Royal Family.)

The first arrow wherewith he thinks to wound my Lord Dukes honor, is drawn
from that Levy for Germany, about seventeen or eighteen years ago, and carried
on with a longwinded story concerning the Lord Rae, Ochiltrie, and others.

Sir, it is well known, that in that public trial, before the Marshal Court,
between the L. Rae, and David Ramsey, and at the Council Table between Major
Borthuik, and M. Robert Meldram, he was acquitted; David Ramsey being known to
be no better then a mad man, and the other esteemed a man of no stable spirit,
both very unlikely to be entrusted by so prudent a Statesman, (as the Duke is
thought to be) in a business of that nature. The Lord Raes concealing of the
business so long, makes it suspicious, that if he could have obtained a lease
of Orknay (which it should seem, the Lord Duke either crossed him in, or did not
^ive him that furtherance which he expected, there had never been a word of it.
And Major Borthuik (as I have been informed by them that knew him) was a bare
Soldier that would have raised a fortune any way. The Lord Ochiltrie, son to
Captain James Stewart, formerly mentioned, being of a desperate estate, is
confessed by the Pamphleter, to have gone far beyond his information, and
consequently to suffer justly (whatsoever he says to the contrary.)

The second arrow that he shoots at my Lord Duke, takes its flight from the
beginning of the troubles in Scotland, about which time my Lord Duke being
employed by His Majesty as his Commissioner into that Kingdom, to settle all
differences there, left no means unattempted to advance His Majesty's service,
(whatever this Scribler falsely surmiseth to the contrary) and notwithstanding
so great a mountain of opposition as he then met with, did employ his uttermost
power with all fidelity, wisdom, zeal and courage for His Majesty's interest,
(his now enemies themselves then being Judges:)

Immediately after he has shot this second arrow, page 16. perceiving it to
fall short, he feathers it of new with some Articles once in preparation (as he
says) by the House of Commons here in England against my Lord Duke, but this
embrio wherewith this ardelio seems to please himself very much, proved
abortive, like one of his births, who has conceived mischief, and brought
forth falsehood; and the truth is, that my Lords unsained zeal and unwearied
fedulity to promote His Majesty's Interest in both Kingdoms, was that which
rendered him obnoxious to the fury of the times in both, and might have cost him
dear, if he had not taken some fair prudential ways to save himself, when the
King was not able to protect him: As for this Pamphleter, to draw conclusions
from the event and success of things, which is only in Gods hands, and many
times follows the worst or weakest councels, savours of too much spleen.

-- Careat successibus opto,
Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putet.
And to drive on Consequences from, perhaps, it may be, it seems, and such
dialectical mediums, and suppositions, as also upon foolish Prophecies, which
like Sybiliaes Oracles have ever diverse senses, and are interpreted at pleasure
with additions, diminutions and alterations, relishes too much malice. As this
of Cadyow, which is laid by him as the corner stone of his accusation, -- was
made use of by the Zealots, against the Dukes Father, when he was His Majesty's
Commissioner in the general Assembly at Perth, with the addition of the word
Kirk, thus; When Cadyow shall be King (interpreted by) them the Kings
Commissioner) he shall mickle woe to the Kirk bring.

But this word Kirk is now omitted by this Libeller, he following, for his own
finister ends, the footsteps of his Father the Devil.

As for my own part, I profess to you, Sir, that I look upon these pretended
Prophecies no otherwise, then upon the cheats of Wizards, though there may be
sometimes cunning policy in them, to abuse the simple credulous people.

His last arrow flies high, but how far wide, and how much, in this last
aspersion, his tongue is like a razor that cutteth deceitfully; will appear by
this true narration, which I shall briefly give you, as follows.

In the year 1643. upon the Dukes arrival at Oxford from Scotland, out of his
Zeal to His Majesty's Interest; some Doegs then of both Nations conspiring
together, and being led with a most perverse and ungrateful spirit (diverse of
them being raised by his means to their highest and best fortunes,) most falsely
and injuriously laid to his charge things that he knew not, acting the part of
informers, accusers and witnesses; whereupon a process was drawn against the
Duke, but when the same was given into Sir Robert Holborne (that late famous
Lawyer) to see how far it would strike against my Lord Duke: In plain terms he
affirmed it was of no weight, withal adding, there was never greater injustice
done to a Peer of this Realm; for which plainness and candor, the said Sir
Robert Holborn was like to have suffered deeply: Besides, to this day there
never was, neither then could be any real proof made against him. And though
my Lord Duke, during his abode at Oxford, did from day to day most humbly
supplicate access to His Majesty for clearing of himself; yet the said combined
faction (well knowing, that if the Lord Duke had got access to His Majesty, he
could as easily have shook off their forged accusation, as Saint PAUL did the
Viper from his hand;) prevailed by their multiplied malicious Suggestions,
subtle insinuations, and the influence of their abettors, over the Kings good
nature, as to get my Lord removed from Court, and committed to Pendennis, where
he endured a long and tedious imprisonment with great Patience, his good
conscience being a continual feast to him.

Now least I should trespass upon your patience, and transgres too far the just
limits of a Letter, I shall shut up the Dukes part with this, That all that the
Pamphleter has packt together in his Letter, is but a fardle of gross lies and
false aspersions, whereby, if that he has not ly'd himself out of all credit
with all men of any candor or ingenuity; I report my self to any who has not
the pearl of prejudice in the eye of their judgment; As also that he proves
himself a Libeller in not putting his name to the charge, according to the Laws
of that Kingdom.

To draw toward a conclusion, page 21. he shows no small particular spleen
against the Earl of Lanrick in the citation of two passages that could not drop
from the mouth of any rational man, much less from one of my Lord Lanricks
wisdom and temper: The passages he takes upon him to confirm by my Lords
horoscope (wherein it seems he is versed) and with a Peut-estre and his bare
affirmative; as his Peut-estre, has no strength in it, and his affirmative no
credit, so I hope none will fancy my Lord Lanrick of so mean a capacity, and
credulous a brain as to place so great confidence (as the Pamphleter speaks of)
in a horoscope, much less to glory in the same, contrary to the Canons of the
Primitive Church, and practice of all good Christians, nay even the Laws of
some Pagan Emperors. Sir, as for the nature of Horoscopes in general, I have
spent some time in the search of it, but could never find any certain grounds
to build upon, and can instance an hundred failings for every truth has fallen
out.

Lastly I conceive this Pamphlet (as things stand) to have been unseasonably
vented, to the no small encouragement of all disaffected to his Majesty and
Monarchical Government, and the grand discouragement of all well affected to
his Majesty's service and interest; yea even to divide and disturb them. But to
wind up all, my Lord Duke being made General of the Scottish Army, not by a
private Faction, but by the Estates of that Kingdom assembled in a full and
free Parliament, I am confident (and so desire you to be] that his Graces
faithful, vigorous and active prosecution of that high and weighty employment
now laid upon his shoulders, will prove, (by the blessing of him who is the
Lord of Hosts the Panpharmacon of all our distempers and diseases, turn all our
water into wine, speak this conjurer (for so he takes upon him to be page 23.
dead, falsify all his panick predictions, undeceive many who out of their too
much credulity and no less partiality, have apprehended and entertained diverse
groundless fears and jealousies of my Lord Duke, and in the end fatal to none
but this upstart Merlin and his pertinacious Proselites: My Lord Duke having
nothing before his eyes, nor prising any thing upon earth more dear to him then
the settling of Religion in its power and purity, his sacred Majesty's
restoration to his Royal Throne and Dignity; the firm union of both Nations;
and the peace and tranquillity of all these so long bleeding and distempered
Kingdoms: which the God of Peace speedily accomplish and I presume that you and
all the lovers of truth, justice and peace, will say A men to the Prayer of

SIR, Your observant Friend to serve you, 510: 1610.
Postscript.
I forgot (being in haste] to show you how that the Author of the Pamphlet does
Page, 20, and 21. intimate himself to have been very inward with the King at
Newcastle, to be a man of no vulgar intelligence, and as confident as a
Secretary of State; but as he plundered Buchanan in the first part; so he
discovers the like, or more interest then Buchanans plundered mare and clokebag
in the last part.



FINIS

