TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS ADAMS Lord Major of the Metropolis of England,
the renowned City of LONDON.
Right Honorable,
THe concurrent desires of people of all sorts, (except of such as raise their
own particular interests out of the common ruins) for recovery of our peace,
and the pantings of many lying under the power of the oppressor for
deliverance from war, have of late by the good hand of God upon our public
counsels and forces, thriven up to hopes, and those hopes to presages, that it
will be an Honorable note upon your Name in time to come, to have had the good
hap within your view (before you give up to another the Ensigns of your
Honor) which is the general vote of all the true hearted Patriots of three
Kingdoms, that is a well compounded, and compacted happiness, made up of
three of the most desirable blessings of humane society, which are consistent
with the condition of mortality; and they are these,

1. A sincere and through reformation of Religion, in Doctrine and worship of
God.

2. A Discipline and Government established according to Gods word, and the
example of the best reformed Churches: whereby, with the assistance of Divine
grace, we may be better (then heretofore) secured from relapses into
irreligion, heresy, schism, and profaneness, which have been the great
crimes and curses of the last precedent, and present times, though (through the
cunning workings of Satan) the evils now in course (with some degrees of
improvement from bad to worse) are taken by some to be the remedies against
foregoing corruptions.

3. A third thing (which in order of dignity is the last, though in most men's
affections it be the first) is, that according to the prescript prayer of the
Apostle, we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, 1 Timothy ^.1. he adds in all
godliness and honesty; but both these have been virtually premised in the
two precedent particulars. This will be of so much the sweeter taste to all, as
either by actual suffering, or by affectionate sympathy they have taken the
deeper draught of the bitter cup of furious hostility.

That none of this hopeful expectation may fail of effect, it will be
requisite that every one (for his part and to his power) endeavor to make it
good by all the good means, and helps, which conduce to the comfort and
safety not of a few, but of the whole Common weal, in each of the Nations now
so much shaken, and in danger also to be broken in pieces.

1. By making an holy Covenant with God, and by being steadfast in the Covenant
when we have made it; so we may engage his favor, and power to our party, to
be not only a friend, and Patron to us, but an enemy to our enemies, and an
adversary to our adversaries, Exodus 23.22.

2. By being at union among our selves, and studying as much to uphold it, as
the seditious Shebaes on the other side plot the setting of discord betwixt the
dearest brethren; and if it be not to be looked for, that all, who are equally
concerned in the same Cause, should unanimously consent in that course which
may carry it on to desired success; yet there may be a fivefold union among
us, which may give strength unto, and maintain the reputation of the great
Design it hand, viz. a through reformation both in Church and State.

The first union is of the two Sister Nations, according to our solemn League
and Covenant, which must be preferred before all either factions, or questuo^s
interests of any particular party whatsoever.

For as no two Nations under heaven have more and stronger bonds of union, then
we of England, and our Brethren of Scotland, being bounded, and surrounded by
the Sea, as one entire Island, united under one King, under one Title in the
Kings Royal style [the King of Great BRITAINE] united yet more in Language,
and Religion and most of all in our late Covenant for a general Reformation of
Church and State, and mutual association and assistance against all malignant
combinations; So nothing is more enviously observed by our common enemies then
these many obligations of union betwixt us, nothing more cunningly contrived,
or more seriously pursued by them, (and I wish some among our selves had
neither hearts, nor heads, nor hands in the plot) then to dis-joyne us, and to
make us, not only perfidiously to fall off from performance of our common
Covenant, but with the same hands which we have lifted up to the most High God,
to fall one upon another, as the confounded and accursed Midianites, Judge.
7.2^. and when by such wickedness we are brought to a weakness, which may be
easily subdued (but God forbid, we should be both so bad, and mad as to act a
Tragedy upon our selves, to set forth a Comedy for such malicious spectators,
as would make their greatest mirth of our most grievous misery) we must expect
the execution of the bloody and destructive design, resolved on in Ireland:
which a knowing Intelligencer has reported of the rebels there in these words:
The Irish Remonstrance. p. 31.
This Kingdom, viz. Ireland, settled and peopled only with sound Catholics,
thirty thousand men must be sent into England to join with th^^rench and
Spanish forces; and the service in England perfor^^, then they will jointly
fall upon Scotland for the reducing of that Kingdom to the obedience of the
Pope, which being finished they have engaged themselves for the King of Spain,
for assisting him against the Hollanders. Wherein, though they reckon without
the Lord of Hosts, who only commands both Peace and War at his pleasure, and
swayeth the success to which side he will, yet this discovers their design of
unpartiall perdition of the Protestant party; and the discovery thereof should
be a motive of more confirmed union among our selves.

The second Union is that of the Parliament and City; whereof we have had such
happy experience, ever since the unhappy hostility betwixt the flatterers of
the King, and friends of the Kingdom, that we are bound to bless God for it,
and to pray for the continuance of it, both for our own time, and for the ages
to come.

The third is the Union of the Parliament and Assembly of Divines; whose
recipr^call, and proportionable respects, (which I mean not in an
Arithmeticall, but in a Geometrical Proportion) give much countenance and
authority to what is propounded to the people in their names; for so the
command of the one will be more awful, the advice, direction, and resolution
of the other more useful, throughout the whole Kingdom.

A fourth Union is betwixt the Assembly of Divines and the City Ministers; who
may the more easily accord and agree together, because many of them be but the
same men under several relations; and most of them are swaid by the same
principles of truth and piety, and involved in a society and participation of
the same duties, hopes, and hazards.

The fifth Union is betwixt the City Magistracy and the City Ministry, to
which both ingenuous, and religious correspondence does dispose them; for no
where in the Protestant Churches (so far as I have read or received by
report) are good Ministers better accepted of, or more respectively used, then
in this City, nor by any Citizens more then by those who are most worthy of
honor; and is cannot but be the desire, as well as the duty, of godly
Ministers, to advance them as much as may be in the estimation of the people;
and to press upon them obedience according to their duty, and dependence, for
conscience sake.

And though it be obvious to common observation, how much the Magistrates
favor makes for the Ministers honor, and succor, it is not unknown, nor
unobserved by the wise, that the Ministers have been very serviceable to the
Civil State, and to the Military too, not only by their supplications to God,
for good success to all their public undertakings, and their happy
proceedings in all their warlike marches, and motions, as at the removal of
the Arc. Numb. 10.35. Rise up Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered, let
them that hate thee flee before thee; but by their informations, and
soli^itations of the people, to engage both their estates, and persons, in the
Cause of God, and their Country: and I could name such at have b^^^ looked on
by the blood sh^tten ^yes of professed enemies, and fained by them (by way of
most hateful repr^ach) at the Authors of the Rebellion of whole Counties,
that is, (in the true sense of their charge) the perswaders of them, not to
betake themselves to a divided party, but to unite in the union of the King and
Parliament.

And I am sure that some of them who have been envied, and reviled in Print (by
libellous Schismatics) as growing rich upon the revenues of fat
sequestrations, (when by a just account they have come short of a competent
subsistence) have been offered both riches and honor in the Kings name, by
persons of eminent degree, to employ their parts in his Majesty's service (the
terms were no worse, the intention likely not so good) and have modestly, and
yet resolutely refused them, then when it seemed both most profitable, and
honorable to a^cept them, and not a little dangerous to withstand rewards,
when there was power to call for observance by minatory commands.

And it was then an advantage visible enough, which the King had above the
Parliament (as the Pope has above a Council) that the dispo^all of Church
dignities was held in right, and exercised in fact, as a branch of the Royal
Prerogative; whence arose the Proverb which made so many Ecclesiastical
Courtiers, No fishing to the Sea, No service to the King; and by the power and
Court Countenance that such had over the inferior Ministers, both they by the
Prelaticall Clergy, and the people by them were made more obsequious and
serviceable to whatsoever constitutions, and impositions, which came upon them,
whether from the Civil or Ecclesiastical Authority. And though we have cause
to multiply our benedictions, as David did, 1 Samuel 25.^2, 33. Blessed be God,
and blessed be the Parliament, and blessed be their advice, not only to
themselves, but to all the Kingdom, that the heavy yoke of the domineering
Hi^rarchy is taken off our necks, yet betwixt the Magistrates and the people,
the godly Ministers of the Kingdom (and ordinarily the Ministers of this City
especially (for the Synod of Divines is an extraordinary Assembly) will be
always as least instrumentally profitable for the promoting, and upholding of
a conformity and commodious correspondence on both sides, according to the
Relations, wherein for the glory of God, and the public welfare they are
mutually obliged to each other.

In pr^posall of these particulars to your Lordship, I shall not be thought to
present you with an impertinent discourse, by any thus will consider bow much
the union of three Kingdoms depends upon the union of this Metropolis, or
mother City with the Parliament above it, the Ministry within it, and all the
sister Cities, and daughter Towns and Villages round about it; and how much
the union of this City now depends upon your Honor, and I doubt not but that
by Gods special providence your Honor was reserved for such a time as this,
when by a prudent, and zealous, and authoritative endeavor for the cure of the
manifold distractions among us, you may be a blessed means to keep off the
destruction from us, which is threatened by our Savior to a Kingdom, (and
there is the like danger to any either City or family) given over to division,
Matthew. 12.25. wherein your Lordship and your Venerable Colleagues may have the
deepest share in suffering, according to the measure of your eminent prelations
in honor, and estate, above ordinary Citizens, if (which God forbid) violent
and unruly spirits should not be circumscribed with the virge of your awful
authority.

To this end though the Presbyterian Government may be very subservient, and
the Ministers of the City will be always ready, (as their faculties furnish
them with ability, and their duties oblige them with diligence) to serve your
Honor, yet since that is set up but in part, and for a good part subject to
dispute, (as your power is not, for it is wholly complete, and no way
questionable) the through reformation of this spacious and populous City, next
under God, and the Parliament, will more depend upon your head for counsel,
your heart for affection, and your hand for execution, then on any humane help
or means, whatsoever it be.

And if in regard of newly emergent mischiefs, (for Satan infus^th into his
Agents new fancies, and devices, and stirs them up to dangerous Innovations
every day) you find not ready remedies for all present, or imminent evils,
within the bounds of your municipall Charters, you are so near the wellhead,
and spring of Civil Government (the Legislative Senate at Westminster) that
you may easily, and speedily procure a supplement of power, for any service
that may conduce to the safety of the Parliament, and City, and (with both) by
consequentiall operation, and virtuall influence, of many millions of subjects
within the three Kingdoms, united in the most Sacred bond of our solemn
Covenant; which may with more i^genuiti^ be desired, and with more facility be
obtained, because thereby the Parliament it self may be the better secured,
both from contemp^, and tumult, which may justly be feared from such an
insolent, and violent generation of fanaticke, and some frantic Enthusiasts,
and other fiery spirited Separatists, who account it the height of their
Evangelicall zeal, to bring down the highest and most eminent Worthies of the
State for true piety, prudence, dignity, and power, under the feet of confused
Anarchy, and popularity.

Wherein that they mean to make no reserves of reverence for the supreme
Senate of the Kingdom, nor to allow any protection by privileges of
Parliament, is clearly discovered in that most seditious Pamphlet (besides many
others) called Englands Birthright. For notwithstanding the present, pressing,
and imperious necessities of the Commonweal, requiring the raising of supplies
in extraordinary ways for its own support, and preservation from perpetual
ruin, and notwithstanding the exemplarie justice of the Parliament, upon their
own members of both Houses, (to which may be added to their glory, and the
Kingdoms comfort, their most just and impartial provision against oppression
of the people, either by themselves, or their substituted Committees) the
Libellous (and in respect of some passages of his Book, I may say blasphemous)
Author, taking no notice of any thing that may be justly pleaded for the
proceedings of Parliament, labors to represent them to the people as a
combination of most grievous, and ^ngratefull oppressors.

I will set down his own words, but so as the Scripture does the blasphemies
of Satan, or Rabshakeh, and other such like The word comes of Saraph, which
signifies to burn, and of that is derived the noune Saraph, (with the only
difference of a long vowell for a short) which is used for a fiery serpent,
Isa. 14.29.
S^raphicall slanderers, that they may be as odious, as their disposition is
dangerous to all good men, if they had as much power in their hands, as there
is gall in their hearts, their tongues, and pens; the Title of this out-lashing
Libell is set down in these words.

For an Antidote against such calumnies see M. Prinnes Book entitled The Liar
confounded.
Englands birthright justified against all arbitrary usurpation, whether Regal
or Parliamentary, or under what vizor so ever. With diverse Queries,
Observances, and Grievances of the people, declaring this Parliaments
proceedings to be directly contrary to those fundamental Principles, whereby
their Actions at fast were justifiable against the King, in their present
Illegal dealings with those that have been their best Friends, Advancers, and
Preservers: And in other things of high concernment, to the Freedom of all the
Freeborn people of England.

What ever the man is, the B^^ke is no hypocrite, for it i^ th^s^^^ within,
which it seems without. For page the 33. he puts this Qu^re (and his
Queres are implicit resolutions on the wrong side.) Whether is it not agreeable
to law, justice, equity, and conscience, that there should be a Parliament
once every year, and more often if need require? whereby he means that this
Parliament has sat too long already, for a little after he charge them,
that many of the Members have betrayed their trust, and those that remain
ingrosse Law-making, and also Law-executing into their own hands, contrary
both to reason and to the true intent and meaning of the Law; and within a few
lines, he goes on thus: By which manifest abusing, negligent, and not true
using the Laws, oppressions, mischiefe^, and grievances are no less (if not
far more) increased then they were before the Parliament began; and many
times by the powerful Interest of a faction in the Parliament, to save some
one, two, or three of their Members undeserving credits, they so violate the
known, unrepealed, and declared Law of the Land, yea and their own Votes,
Ordinances, Declarations, and Protestations, as if they had never made them; I
say all these things considered, ought not the Freemen of England, who have
labored in these destroying times, both to preserve the Parliament, and their
own Native freedoms, and birthrights, not only to choose new Members, where
they are wanting, once every year, but also to renew and enquire once a year,
after the behavior, and carriage of those they have chosen.

And having page 44. aggra^^^ed the condition of the times by taxes and
impositions, instancing in the Trade of Ha^makers, he concludes with this
enclamation (which may serve for an incentive to seditions tumult) O ^ruell,
pitiful, and intolerable bondage, no longer to be endured, suffered, or
undergone, the burden being heavier then the poor laborers can bear!

And that we may know of how lawless a Sect himself in, and those whom ^e
plead^ for, he pr^fesseth himself a litter enemy to Lawyers, first (...) the
writer of a loose sheet of paper, under the Title of Advertisements for the
new election of Burgesses for the House of Commons (by the name of a worthy
Author) as a Caveat against filling up elections with such kind of men, making
the knowledge of the Law of nouse for making of a Statesman, since it is, says
he, a confined and Topicall kind of learning, calculated only for the Meridian
of Westminster Hall, and reaching no furthen then to Dover; for transplant a
common Lawyer to Calice, and his head is no more useful there, then a
Sunne-Diall in a grave. Whereas it is notorious to the world that sundry As the
L. Ver. M. I. Seld. Will. Pr. (and some others) whose excellently learned labo^
praise them i^ the gates.
professed Legists have been qualified with other learning, and that both with
great variety, and in an eminent degree, above other men.

Having impeached their heads, he comes down to their hearts, and hands, and
taxes these for ill conscience, as the other for ignorance. Lawyers (says he)
being a bold, and talkative kind of men, will intrude themselves into the
Chaires of all Committees, where (being accustomed to take fees) they will
underhand protect Delinquents, and their concealed estates with tricks and
devises. He knows sure very little of the manner of Committees; for no man
can thrust himself into such an employment, but is thrust into it by the major
part of the Committee; but there needs none Apology, where the Antilogie is
none other then a most rash and unreasonable calumny; and my present purpose is
but to note how headstrong and unruly, how refractory to Government, and Law,
the Sectaries are already; to what an height of insolence would they grow, if
(which they press for) they should be permitted a toleration by public
Authority? It may be some among them in time would take upon them as the proud
and rude Rebel Wat Tyler, in Richard the Seconds time, who presumed, among
other most lewd and impudent demand^, to S. Daniel continuation of the History
ad Rich.K 2. p. 5.
propound this for one, That all Law might be abolished, affirming with an
execrable oath, before Night all the Law of England should pass through this
strait, (clapping his hand upon his mouth.)

But I must take my hand from this Table, lest I trespass against the public
Interest, in detaining your Honor too long in beholding this Sciographie or
shadow-draught of pernicious Sectaries, sixce it is a time rather of action,
then of speculation; and yet if your Honor have any spare hours for further
information in the various, and dangerous turnings, and windings of the spirits
of Error, (whom Satan in these last and worst times has sent out, not by
couples, as our Savior sent out his Disciples, Mar. 6.7. but almost by
Legions, to seduce simple souls, to trouble our public peace, and to
reproach and retard the reformation desired) I should make bold to offer to
your view an M. Robert Baylie his Disswasive from the errors of the time;
wherein the Tenets of the principal Sect of the Independ: are drawn together
in one Map: Printed for Sam. Gellibrand at the Brazen Serpent in Paul's
Churchyard.
exact delineation, or description of the whole body of Schismatic, and
Heretical noveltie, drawn by a very skillful and faithful hand, and newly
published to undeceive the English, especially the people of the City, of whom
many are miserably misled, and more will be, if both Magistrates and Ministers
do not watchfully overlooke them, and seriously sot themselves to prevent
their increase: Wherein your Lordships prudence, and power, (beginning betime,
and continuing your care in a proportionable tenor, until your Office expire,
(which is the expectation of all that know the soliditie of your judgment, and
stability of your spirit) may prevail very much, though it be but for an
year; for how great matters in how short a time have been attempted and
accomplished by that worthy General Sr. Thomas Fairfax, undertaking, and
prosecuting the war (with a courageous and constant resolution) not as a
Trade to enrich himself, but as a Remedy to deliver his Country, from partly
present, and partly imminent miseries?

And for that purpose your Lordships Sword in the City may be of very great
use, as his in the field; and that with both the Sword of the Lord may be
associated, as with the Sword of Gideon, Judge. 7.18. and his power may still
support your state, protect your person, and promote your proceedings to most
happy success, is the hearty desire, and shall be the daily prayer of

Your Honors most humble servant, JOHN LEY.

An Advertisement to the Reader to prevent mistaking in the variety of
Petitions.
IN the Postscript of the late Answer to Mr. Burton from Aldermanbury,
entitled The door of truth opened, there is an Apologetical Reply to his tart
reproof of a London Petition in these words: There is one thing that Mr.
Burton mentions in the Page 2. ante med.
Narrative, which though it concerns not Aldermanbury, yet we must not wholly
bury it in silence, and that is concerning the late large Petition for the
speedy establishment of Religion: Of which he speaks very dishonourably, as
also of the Petitioners, as of men led with blind obedience, and pinning their
souls upon the Priests sleeve. We leave it to the Petitioners to answer for
themselves. For our parts we conceive that no Reader, unless blinded with
prejudice, can charge them with blind obedience. For the Petitioners do not
desire to have the Model of that Reverend Assembly established, but the
government of Christ established, a Model whereof, etc. These words, a Model
whereof, etc. come in with a Parenthesis, and the sentence is complete without
them, all that they affirm about the Model is that the Reverend Assembly has
framed a Model of the Government of Christ according to their ability, and
presented it to the Parliament. And who but he that has pinned his faith upon
an Independents sleeve, can except against this? But if Mr. Burton be
displeased with the Model of the Reverend Assembly, we would entreat him that
he at last, after so long expectation, would set forth his Model.

Which some have mistaken, conceiving both parties speak of the late Petition
sent from the Common Council of London, whereas there be these differences
betwixt them.

1. That Petition is of a different style, tenor, and date from this of the
Common Council, for it was brought forth to light before this later was
conceived.

2. That has the Parenthesis (a Model whereof the Assembly of Divines, etc.)
specified in the Exception and Answer; the Petition of the Common Council has
no such clause in it, as I am informed, for yet I have not seen it.

3. That was never presented by the Petitioners to the Parliament, this of the
Common Council was.

4. The Petition of the Common Council was not printed, that was priuted, both
in a single sheet, and in the Book called Truth it is Manifest, p. 130. Which I
note in this place, because having denied that the Petition of the Common
Council was yet printed, a Gentleman of quality said, he would show it me
presently, and produced for proof the Book forementioned.

5. Lastly, the former Petition had not so good acceptance with the Parliament,
as the later partly has had, and partly may be further hoped for, when the
Honorable Houses have opportunity to make their return unto it.

The Contents.
Section I. OF the Author and Title page of the Quere, and Deter mination upon
it. Page 1. Sect. II. Of the Title page. p. 3. Sect. III. The matter and scope
of the Quere, and resolution upon it. p. 7. Sect. IIII. Reasons against the
present settling of government taken from conscience, answered. p. 12. Sect. V.
The Argument against the speedy settling of Church government taken from
e^ample of the New Testament in general, answered. p. 14. Sect. VI. The
Argument against the speedy establishment of Church government taken from
Christ's description, answered. p. 17. Sect. VII. Master Colemans experimental
exceptions against the severity and rigor of the Presbyteriall government,
answered. p. 20. Sect. VIII. The Argument against the speedy setting up of the
Presbyteriall government taken from Christ's practice, answered. p. 23. Sect.
IX. Reasons taken from rules and considerations of prudence, answered. p. 26.
Sect. X. The Negative Argument taken from want of experience of the New
Clergy, answered. p. 32. Sect. XI. Objections against the Reasons for the not
establishing Church government, propesed, and answered, as Objections against
M. Saltm. his Tenet in the Quere, with Replies to his answers. The first
Observation, his Answer and the Reply unto it. p. 36. Sect. XII. Objection
second, answered; with a Reply to that Answer. p. 38. Sect. XIII. An
additionall Answer to some exceptions of M. Saltm. (taken out of M. Prins
Vindication) against the present establishment of Church government, in his
late Book entitled, The opening of M. Prins New Book called a Vindication. p.
45. Sect. XIIII. The Objections taken from a supposed needlesnesse of the
Presbytery, answered. p. 47 Sect. XV. Of M. Colemans Interi^ist is all
Magistracle. p. 51. Sect. XVI. The Objection of eager contestation for Church
Discipline, and (...) p. 53. Sect. XVII. The Objection of inefficacie for
holiness of life in such as live under the Presbytery, answered. p. 57. Sect.
XVIII. Showing what might be retorted upon the Antipresbyteriall party, but
concluding for unity and peace with allegation of M. Buroughs his
propositions of reconciliation and accord: and some other particulars tending
thereto. p. 61. Sect. XIX. Further grounds and hopes of union in the Churches
of the Sister Kingdoms of England and Scotland, with Answers to the Objections
that are made against it. p. 64. Sect. XX. An Appendix to the precedent
Examination, being an Apologeticall Narrative of the Petitions of the Common
Council of the City, and Ministers of London, presented to both the Honorable
Houses of Parliament the 19. and 20. days of November, 1645. with a
Vindication of them, and the proceedings in them from the scandalous aspersions
of the weekly Pamphleters, especially of him who miscals himself the Moderate
Intelligencer. p. 71. Sect. XXI. The occasion of the Petitions of the Common
Council and Ministers of London, and the presenting of them to the Honorable
Houses of Parliament. p. 77. Sect. XXII. The offensive acceptance of them by
the Parliament as the weekly Newes-makers falsely report it: Cautions premised
before their confutation. p. 79. Sect. XXIII. A Copy of the Ministers Petition,
and the Intelligencers scandalous consure upon it. p. 84. Sect. XXIIII.
Britanicus taxed for traducing the Petitioners. p. 89. Sect. XXV. An answer to
the Intelligencers commination of the Petitioners. p. 92. Sect. XXVI. The
misreport of the Diurnall and Weekly Account confuted, and the loose sheet
called Perfect Passages convinced of absurdity and sedition. p. 93. The
Conclusion. p. 97. The Postscript, or after reckoning with the Moderate
Intelligencer, and Mercurius Britanicus. p. 99.
Errata.
PAge 70. lin. 10. after the word taken in the Parenthesis read the words and
indeed it is, and blot them out in the following line: page 84. lin. 2. after
the word trial, for of read to: and lin. 3 after the word plainly for to read
as: and p. 97. lin. 20. after the word lives read long: and lin. 21. for it was
a read upon this: and p. uit. Marg. after the word called put out Lilbi^ues.

AN EXAMINATION AND RESOLVTION OF the New Quere.
SECT. I. Of the Author, and Title page of the Quere; and Determination, upon
it.
OF the Author I have not much to say, save that when he was sent for
examination to the Committee of Divines, I found him well qualified for parts,
and gifts, to be employed in the Ministry; and as he was entertained by us
with beseeming civility and courtesy, so did he carry himself toward us with
an ingenuous modesty; and we met, and parted with mutual acceptance: After
that, he was pleased to own me as his Friend, and to honor me as his Censor,
with a request to peruse some papers of his which he intended to publish; yet
to this day I never saw them, unless they were graduates from his pen to the
press; and so I might read them, and not know them to be the same: whether he
changed his mind concerning his own pains, or my perusal, or wanted a
convenient opportunity to bring, or send them unto me, I cannot resolve, nor
will I conjecture; but I will take his invitation of me to play the Critic
with him, for some more authority to examine his divulged dictates, then others
have, who have none other interest in them then that of an ordinary Reader.

Upon this intercourse betwixt us, having heard adverse opinions, and reports
of his impression, in the present difference of discipline, I thought I had
acquaintance enough with him, to put a Question to him, Whether he were an
Independent or no? (a Title by some of our dissenting brethren That proud and
insolent title of Independencie was affixed unto us, as our claim, the very
sound of which conveighes to all men's apprehensions the challenge of an
exemption from all subjection and dependence; or rather a Trumpet of defiance
against whatsoever power, spiritual or civil; which we do abhor and detest.
Apolog. Narrat. p. 21.
abhorred, by others Mr. Whites Book which he calls Truth gloriously appearing,
etc. in the Title page and fol. 2. page 1. of the Epistle Dedicatory, and fol.
2. p. 1. of the Epistle to the Reader.
owned, and honored) he told me, he was not, but that he had a latitude of
charity for them of that way; and so have I also.

Since this answer, I had some glympse of more inclination in him to that side,
then he acknowledged before, by his Dawnings of light, which have lately shone
forth to a full discovery of his mind, in his book which he calls The
opening of Master Prins Vindication; wherein he has laid himself so open to
the view of them that read it, that none of them can doubt but he is an
Independent at least, and at best not well affected to the Discipline so much
desired, (as in the first page of his New Quere he has phrased it) for in his
Epistle Dedicatory, to the worthily much honored Major General Skippon, he
makes the Controversy of these times to be but this, that some would walk
more close with Christ, some can be content like Peter to walk at more
distance, and to follow him afar off, and to stand warming themselves with
the multitude in the Common Hall; and let the world judge betwixt us, which is
of best report. Who he means by such as walk close with Christ, and who by
those that walk at more distance, we may gather by his answer to the
Vindication, Page 24. Of the opening.
where he says, That our Parishes are not constituted, nor yet the government,
according to the Gospel order; which he referres, for their original, (by way
of reproach) to Dionysius Bishop of Rome, Anno 276. and in England to Honorius
Bishop of Canterbury, while he endeavors to prove the particular a. p. 33. ad
page 37.
gatherings, and separations of Congregationall meetings to be a fruit of the
spiritual antipathy betwixt grace and nature, flesh and spirit, and that their
pure and unmixt communion is the ordinance of Christ; of which (after he has
laid a charge upon the Presbyterial Churches) he says, As I know not any such
things among them, so I will make none Apology for them, because that would
bring them within the compass of some thing like a crime, and I know nothing
but well by them: By which comparative censure he bewrays himself to be
partial to one side, and prejudicial to the other; and to that I profess my
self a Servant, whereto he shows himself to be no friend; yet in defense
thereof, I will not entertain him as an enemy; for my Genius has always
been very averse from jarres, and it is the less disposed to quarrel with him,
because I see he deals not so harshly with Mr. Prin, as most of those
polemicall Penmen have done, who have written against him; and to give him his
due, in all that I have seen set forth in his name, I find him rather
opiniative, than passionate, and more luxuriant in new notions of his brain,
then exorbitant in the passions, or perturbations of his spirit.

I premise thus much, that you may not mistake my mind in my contestation with
him in this cause, as if I took him for an enemy, because he tells what he
takes to be a truth; for whatsoever different apprehensions we have in our
heads, I wish we may have nothing in our hearts, which may tend to effect, or
foment any alienation of affection betwixt us. For it is my desire, and shall
be always a part of my care, that while I seek after a controverted truth, I
may not turn aside from a certain duty; which is, in meekness to deal with
a brother that is contrary minded; so far as may not prove to the prejudice
of what in conscience I am bound to undertake, and to manage also to the best
advantage. This for the Author and for the Title page besides (for the Authors
Name is a part of it) it is as follows.

SECT. II. Of the Title Page.
A New Quere at this time seasonably to be considered, as we tender the
advancement of Truth and Peace.

He knew very well how the Athenian humor of listening after news prevails
with our people of all sorts; and therefore being to fish in troubled waters,
he puts upon his hook that bait, at which it was like many would be nibling.

Next he says, It is at this time seasonably to be considered, as we tender
the advancement of Truth and Peace. He commends his New Query to acceptance in
two respects: 1. As seasonable. 2. As much importing the advancement of Truth
and Peace.


For the first; he says it is at this time seasonably to be considered. So it
is, now it is published; but it was very unseasonably offered: and I marvel
that he, who has written a whole book of policy, should be so unpoliticke as
to think it seasonable, to set forth such a Quere, and so to resolve it; such
it tends to retard the establishment of Government, whereto the Parliament is
so much engaged, not only for the thing it self, but for a timely
proposition, and imposition of it by their civil sanction.

For the first, that they intend to set up a Church government, we have it, 1.
From their express profession, December 15. 1641. We do here declare, that it
is far from our purpose or desire to let loose the golden reins of
Discipline, and Government in the Church, to leave private persons, or
particular Congregations to take up what form of service they please; for we
hold it requisite, that there should be throughout the whole Realm a
conformity in that order, which the Laws enjoin according to the word of
God. So in the first Remonstrance of the Honorable House of Commons. page 25.

2. from the first Article of the solemn League and Covenant, published by
Authority of Parliament, September 21. 1643. Wherein they, and all others that
take it, do covenant to endeavor the reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms
of England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government,
according to the word of God, and the example of the best reformed Churches.

3. this Covenant was ordered again by the Honorable House of Commons,
Januarie 29. 1644. to be publicly read every Fast day, and to be set up in
every Congregation in a fair Table, where every one may read it; and to this
are set the names of Master Speaker, and 243. more of the Honorable House of
Commons.

And for the second, that they mean to expedite the settling of Government
with all convenient speed, we have good cause to conceive.

1. Because they have bestowed already very many days in consultation about it.

2. They insist in the same consultations still.

3. They (according to the eminence of their wisdom) apprehend many and great
evils, that grow both in number, and power, by Doctrines of Libertinisme, which
necessarily require the restraint of a reformed Church Government.

4. They have already set it up.

1. In their Ordinance of Ordination, set forth the last year.

2. In an Ordinance for making London a Province this last year, dividing it
into several Classes, and for choosing a Committee for trial of Elders to be
chosen, and Rules to be observed for orderly proceeding in the same; and this
before this Quere came forth.

3. Since that, they have advanced further, by a Vote and Order for choosing
Elders forthwith in particular Congregations.

4. And last of all, they have published an Ordinance, with rules and
directions for suspension from the Sacrament, in cases of Ignorance and
Scandal.

Yet they cannot make that speed with the Government, which by most is desired,
and very much desired by themselves (as we of the Assembly can witness, who
have often been sent to by that Honorable Senate to quicken our work, and to
ripen our debates to a full resolution) because as with us the liberty of
speaking (wherein every one is free to propose, and prosecute any doubt)
prolonged the Government in our hands; so the like liberty in the Honorable
Houses (or rather our liberty is like theirs, it being the Prototypon)
lengthens the debates, and delays the Votes of that most Honorable Senate;
and so much the more, because they are more in number then we in our Synod; and
because their determinations are final, as ours are not.

And though that which is published do not yet reach home to our full
satisfaction, we hope it is in the way toward further perfection; which cannot
reasonably be expected in the first Essays of frames, and forms of
Government; for we may say of Jerusalem as well as of Rome, that it was not
built in a day, though in time it became the perfection of beauty, the joy of
the whole earth, Lam. 2.15. Such we pray God that fabric may prove, which is
under the hands of our Honorable and holy Nehemiahs; and Lord polish, finish,
and establish the work in their hands, yea the work of their hands establish
thou it, Psalm. 90.17.

The other particular he propounds to make his Quere more plausible, is the
reference it has to two precious things, viz. Truth and Peace; both which are
upheld by Government, Church Government; and without it, for truth we have
abundance of errors, and heresies broached among us, which divide men into
manifold Sects and Factions; and where they are multiplied, there can be no
peace, without a treacherous toleration, which will resolve at last into an
Anarchy and confusion.

Having premised this, he puts his Quere thus.

Whether it be fit according to the Principles of true Religion, and State, to
settle any Church Government over the Kingdom hastily, or not; and with the
power commonly desired, in the hands of the Ministers. First, he puts the
case according to the Principles of Religion, and State: which if he had well
considered, he might have thought the Parliament for the one, and the Assembly
of Divines for the other, (competently qualified, each in their profession, for
resolution of such a doubt, especially since it is a chief part of the
public work of them both, to drive it to its issue) might have prevented
such a Quere as this, from a private Divine.

Secondly, he suggests a suspicion, as if the Parliament were driving on the
Discipline and Government of the Church in Jehu's Chariot, with furious haste,
whereas both Parliament, and Assembly have much ado, to ward off imputations
of procrastination, and delay; for debating so long, and determining so little,
whereof we have rendered the reasons before.

Thirdly, he presents it as a gravamen, or of some dangerous consequence, that
the power should be put in the hands of the Ministers, whereas Ministers put in
for no more power as their due, either from the Magistrate, or over the people,
then is consonant to the Scripture, and the principles of prudence; and if
less then that be allowed them, since it is from God, and for God, not for
themselves, God rather then they will be unworthily dealt withal; and if it be
commonly desired, (as he says) it is the less liable to his, or any man's
exception.

Hereto having put his name, (which to me is of a savoury relish, by what I
have tasted of his other Writings) he closes up his Title page with the
Testimony of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 10.8. in these words, Our authority (which
the Lord has given us for instruction, not for destruction); the ordinary
reading or rendering of the original word according to the literal sense, is
edification; (...).
but he refused that, and took the word instruction, which is metaphorical;
either because he thought the Paranomasie more pleasant to the Reader, or less
profitable for the Ministers claim to Church Government; for edification
imports more power then instruction does; and he thought there would have
been too strong an intimation of Authority in the first substantive of his
quotation if it had not been allayed with a weaker word then the Grammatical
construction brings with it: and for the other word destruction, if it be
taken in a symbolicall sense to his resolution of the Quere, it implies two
things, which are of strong prejudice against the Government of the Church:

1. That it is a destructive thing,

2. That being such, it should neither be set up by the Magistrate, nor
exercised by the Minister, nor received by the people: whereas indeed the
severest act of discipline is salutary, and preservative to the better part of
man; and though it be destructive to the worse, it is not to be rejected, but
co nomine to be admitted; both these we make good by the authority of the same
Apostle he cites, though not in the same Epistle, deliver such a one unto
Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day
of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 5.5.

This for the Title Page of this New Quere.

SECT. III. The matter and scope of the Quere, and resolution upon it.
NOw for the Discourse it self, the drift whereof is to prove the Negative;
viz. That it is not fit, according to the Principles of Religion and State, te
settle any Church Government over the Kingdom, etc.

For this he pleads in eleven Paragraphs, which stand for so many reasons for
support of his Opinion; but they are set out rather with a Rhetorical breadth,
then a Logical strength; and he seeks to cover the truth with a broad hand,
which he cannot crush with his clutcht fist.

I will endeavor to present them rather according to the natural vigor (be it
more or less) that is in them, then according to the artificial color he
has put upon them; about which the matter of greatest difficulty is to
marshall them in a right method, which must be mine, though the reasons be his,
and yet it shall be so far his, as may consist with good sense, and the order
of proceeding: and therefore I will divide them into the two heads, to which
his Title page directs me:

Into reasons 1. Of Religion, and they are taken 1. From faith. 2. From
Conscience. 1. Positively, misguided to a popish compliance. 2. Negatively, not
working any good upon the conscience.
3. From Christian examples 1. In general, of the New Testament. 2. In
particular, from the example 1 Of Christ his 1. Description. 2. Practice.
2. Of his Apostles.


2. Of Policy, taken from 1. Rules or considerations of prudence, which are
three. 1. The more time for trying of spirits, and proving of all things, there
is the less danger to that State of erring in things received and authorized,
etc. 2. There is no Religion established by State but there is some proportion
in the two powers, etc. 3. Our parties or dissenting brethren being now
together and clasped by interest against the common enemic, this foundation of
common unity is such, as may draw in both affections and judgments, if not
too suddenly determined, etc.
2. Examples of practice 1. Negatively. 2. Positively.




The first reason, (taken from the rules of faith) because it is the clearest
and comes nearest to his negative conclusion, though it stand too far off
either to build, or uphold it. I will propound his own words, The rules laid
down in the word for practical obedience are 1. p. 3.
these in part, Let every one be fully persuaded in his own mind, Romans 14.5.
and, whatsoever is not of faith is sin, verse. 23.

Now the settling of any government upon a people who are yet generally untaught
in the nature and grounds of it, is to put upon them the practice of that
wherein it is impossible they can be persuaded in their mind, and so either on
a necessity of sin, or misery.

Answ. If Mr. S. had minded, as he ought, what he was to prove, he should have
planted his reason directly against the enioyning, or imposing of a Government,
rather then against obedience to it; and so the Scriptures alleged should
have been made remoraes to the erecting of a government, thus:

Those that set up a government whereof they are not fully persuaded im their
mind, and which they cannot do in faith, do sin. But they that now set up a
Church government, with power commonly desired in the hands of Ministers, do
set up a government whereof they are not fully persuaded in their minds;
Therefore in so doing they sin.

The mayor proposition has warrant from the forecited places; but the minor is
that wherein the weight or weakness of the Argument does consist; and that
cannot be proved, nor can, without breach of charity, be supposed of such as
have taken so long time, made use of so many learned and faithful Counselors
(discussing and resolving all points of difficulty by the Scripture) to be
soundly grounded both in conscience, and prudence, for what they set forth,
touching the government of the Church.

Secondly, if we take this reason to stand immediately against obedience, and
consequently against commands or impositions, it will be somewhat more formal,
but every whit as feeble, thus:

That whereof every one (under government) cannot be persuaded in his own
mind, and whereto he cannot yield (...) obedience of faith, may not be set up
or settled in the Church.

But of the government of the Church, with the power commonly desired, every
one under government cannot be fully persuaded in his mind, nor submit to it of
faith; And therefore it may not be set up, or cannot at all be set up without
sin.

Here the Minor proposition granted, the Mayor must be denied: For it is flatly
repugnant to religion and reason, and makes as much against the former
Protestations of the Parliament, and the late Covenant of three Kingdoms; yea
against all assurances of either kind, as against the Government in question;
for there will be always some that will be scrupled with any thing that is
publicly established.

Object. But says he, 1. p. 3.
The people are generally unt aught in the nature, and grounds of this Church
Government; and therefore to put upon them the practice of that whereof it is
impossible they can be fully persuaded in their minds, is to put them upon a
necessity either of sin or of misery; To which,

The Answer is so easy and ready, that it may be some matter of marvel an
ingenious man (as Mr. Saltmarsh is) should make such an Objection; for

1. The Church Government desired, is no other then (for the chief parts of
it) has good warrant from the word of God.

2. For what is of less moment, if it be not directly deduced out of
Scripture, it is not repugnant to the Scripture, but agreeable to grounds of
prudence, and the example of the best reformed Churches.

3. For the practice of Government, it belongs not to the peoples part (as he
puts the case), to be active in it; but to the Ministers, and Elders, and they
are not to enter upon the exercise of their authority before they be
sufficiently informed in it: and thence it is that (though there be an Order
given for it): they that should officiate in it make a pause, and deliberate
upon it, before they set upon the practice of it.

4. For the people, so far as concerns their compliance or correspondence
with the government, they are to be instructed in it before they yield
submission to it; for that purpose the Government is proposed by parts, and by
degrees, so as it may be best apprehended by all; and the Preachers appointed
to teach both the offices of the Gevernours, and the duties of the people, so
as each may perform his part without scruple, or doubting.

5. If any after this information out of weakness remain unsatisfied, be is
not (as this Writer resolves) put upon such a dangerous Dilemma, as either to
make choice of sin by obeying, or of misery by refusal to obey; for such as
(not out of wilfulness, or faction, but out of tenderness of conscience)
cannot comply with the rule, are not presently to be ruled with the rod, 1 Cor.
4.21. but with meekness to be instructed though they be contrary minded, 2
Ti^i. 2.25. and with so much longsuffering and patience to be forborne, as may
not be injurious to the truth of God, and prejudicial to the peace of the
Church.

6. Whereas he would have the general ignorance of the people touching
government a roason to suspend the setting of it up, it may rather be pleaded
for expedition in the work; for if it be not set up, the people cannot know it
practically; and while it is unknown unto them, it is impudently slandered by
some, and impotently yielded by many others, to be injurious and tyrannical;
whereas if it had been experimentally known as it is, it would have been
before now both honorable, and amiable in the eyes of them, who are not
prepossessed with prejudice against it.

7. For those two Texts which he alleges for deferring the Government (and
if there be any weight in them as to that purpose, they make against it not for
a time only but for ever) I commend to his consideration, and wish he would
preach and press to his people when the government is set up, (as I hope it
shortly will be) or rather beforehand to prepare them for it, such Scriptures
as these; We beseech you brethren to know them which labor among you, and are
over you in the Lord, and admonish you: and to esteem them very highly in
love, for their works sake, 1 These. 5.12, 13. Let the Elders that rule well be
accounted worthy of double honor, especially they who labor in the word and
doctrine, 1 Timothy 5.17. Remember. them which have the rule over you, who have
spoken to you the word of God, Heb. 13.7. and verse. 17. Obey them that have the
rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls, as they
that must give account, that they may do it with i^y, and not with grief.

Thus much for his first Paragraph, which may deserve the first place, and a
fuller answer then any of the rest, because it brings more appearance of
proof, both by Scripture and reason, then any of the other.

SECT. IIII. Reasons against the present settling of Government taken from
Conscience answered.
THe next reason for adjourning or putting off the Government to a further
time, is taken from Conscience; and that in two respects.

1. In that the conscience hereby, that is, by a speedy setting up of
government, is mis-guided to a compliance with a 2. p. 3.
Principle of Popery against the National Covenant.

Answ. It is very strange that any one, who remembers the National Covenant
(as he takes upon him to do that cites it) wherein we are bound sincerely,
really, and constantly to endeavor the reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms
of England and Ireland in Discipline and Government, in the first Article of
it, should from the same Covenant plead for delay in the establishment thereof;
and yet more strange, that he should do it under the title of Popery, which in
the next Article of the Covenant is disavowed; which (if his reasoning were
right) were such a contradiction, as would argue the composers and penners of
the Covenant to be men of most pitiful simplicity.

But wherein appears this Popery? Why, in 2. p. 3.
bringing the people under a Popish implicit obedience; and he confirms it by
experience: 2. ibid.
We know it by e^eperience (says he) that the people have been ever devoted
to any thing that the State sets up, all the disputes or conscience of the
common people ending in this, Whether it be established by Law, or no; and
going usually no higher, or further then a Statute, or Act of State for their
Religion. To which I answer.

1. For that he says of implicit Popish obedience, it is very impertinently
applied to the Discipline, or Government in question; since (as I have showed
in what I said to his first reason) it is so ordered already that therein
instruction must preced, or go before observation; nor shall any one be bound
to act in that particular any further then according to his light.

2. For his observation upon experience, it makes as much against matter of
Doctrine as mattes of Discipline; and more against the Authority of the
Parliament then the authority of Ministers; since They, not Ministers, make
Statutes, and establish Laws; and if the people be so apt to idolize a
Statute, or an Act of State, (but I believe they more often offend in defect
then in exeesse of respect unto them) it will be the duty of such as have the
Legislative power (wherein he that finds the fault is fittest to do the office
of an Admonitor unto them) to suspend their authority for matter of Religion,
and to ordain and decree nothing of that subject to be received or observed.

2. A second reason, which has reference to Conscience, he brings in upon
experience thus:. 5. p. 4.
We have found by experience that the speedy settling of Government upon a
Nation, has made reformation take little root, save in the outward man, or
formal obedience; because they received not reformation in the power of the
word; but of the State, which went not so deep into the conscience but they
could part with it at any time upon a Law: And he concludes his observation
with a patheticall interrogation: O then why do not days speak, and
multitude of years teach knowledge?

To this may be replied:

1. That if he mean it in respect of our own Kingdom (and that experience is
most like to come within his cognizance) the fault was not in the over-speedy
settling of a Government, but in the choice of a wrong Government: viz. that of
Prelacy, which by an Act and Ordinance of Parliament, and by the National
Covenant is cried down.

2. If when Discipline is established, Doctrine were abolished, or for a time
suspended and silenced, there were some force in this exception of Mr.
Saltmarsh; but Doctrine goes on where Discipline comes in; as a School
master is at the same time in Office both a teacher, and a corrector of his
scholars; and so the power of the word may go deep into the conscience, and
the Discipline or Government is rather an help, then an hindrance to that
operation: for,

3. The Discipline or Government is as an hedge or wall about the Doctrine of
Religion; a goad or spur to the means of grace, to bring men under the power
of the Words operation; a curb to licentious courses; all which conduce much
to the keeping of the conscience void of offense toward God and man: and though
with many the reformation reach no further then the outward man, yet that is
not to be imputed to the Discipline which brings them to the Word, but to their
own corruptions, and Satan's sleights, and deceits which hinder the Words
kindly and saving work upon them.

4. Where the Discipline has been rightly chosen, and timely established, God
has blessed it with better fruits; as in the Kingdom of Scotland; whence it
is that that Church has had the favor and honor from God, to be free both
from heresy and schism, where with we of this Kingdom and State have
abounded so much the more, as the Discipline bath been the more delayed; which
agreoth to Mr. Saltmarsh his politic observation in these words: M. Saltmarsh
his practice of policy, pol. 81. p. 69.
When places of authority be likely to be vacant (much more when authority it
self is at a nonplus) be ready in project with a successor; long interregnums
or interstices, (i.) intermissions in government, are the Winter and ill season
of a State, where the nights are long, and the days short.

5. And lastly, for his Epiphonema with the words of Elihu forementioned which
are taken out of Job 32. verse. 6, 7. Why do not days speak, and multitude of
years teach knowledge? they make nothing for his purpose; for the meaning of
them is not that Government, or Discipline, or any other useful thing should
not be with all convenient speed established, but that the ancient, with whom
is wisdom, Job 12.12. the gray headed and very aged men, Chap. 15.10. who have
had the experience of many days, and years, should be heard and heeded in
matter of advice, and consultation, before such green-headed Counselors as
Rehoboam followed to his ruin, 1 King. 12. verse. 13, 14.

SECT. V. The Argument against the speedy settling of Church Government taken
from example of the New Testament in general answered.
A 3. p. 3, 4.
Third head of exceptions against the speedy (so he calls it Paragraph 5.
though the word hastily please him better in the body of the Quere) setting up
of Government is taken from Christian examples.

Contrary to 1. The New Testament in general 2. In particular to 1. The
example of Christ, and that two ways, in respect 1. Of his description,. 6. p.
4. 2. Of his practice,. 3. p. 3, 4.
2. The example of the most ancient Christians, and excellent Ministers of
Christ. 1. As of John Baptist; Christ's forerunner. 2. The Apostles his
followers.




1. For the general; 4. p. 4.
We never read in the New Testament of a Government settled upon any, that were
not brought first under Gospel obedience by the power of the Word and Spirit,
which thousands of Congregations in this Kingdom are not; for as in material
buildings, stone and timber are not to be clapped together without hewing and
squaring, so not in the spiritual; and whereas in the Temple there should be
neither axe nor hammer heard, because things were fitted before hand, and so
laid together, I question how this could be in our Congregations now; I believe
there would be now more of the axe and hammer heard, then of the building seen^.

Answer.
1. Here he argues from the example of the New Testament negatively; which,
(considering the difference and disproportion of the times) is very
impertinent. For the conversion we read of in the New Testament was from
Paganism and Judaisme to Christianity; and while men were Jews or Pagans,
they were incapable of a Christian Government; our Congregations in England
consist of professed Christians; who, as such, are capable of, and liable to a
Gospel Government, without which the sanctification of the Sabbath, the
preaching of the Word cannot be well ordered, nor either of the Sacraments
rightly administered.

And though in thousands of Congregations there be many whom the power of the
Word and Spirit has not brought to Gospel obedience, it is no cause why a
Gospel Government should not be established over them; nay rather it is reason
why it should be hastened upon them; and we may impute the profaneness of the
people to the want of it, or of some parts of it, whereby Church Governors may
be enabled to put a difference betwixt the holy and the profane, the unclean
and the clean, Ezekiel. 22.26. For the rod of Discipline, 1 Cor. 4.21. may have a
salutary operation in the Church, as the rod of correction in the family, Prove.
23.13, 14.

2. He makes a comparison betwixt a material and a spiritual building; See 11.
as in the material building stone and timber are not to be clapped together
without hewing, and squaring, so not in the spiritual; of which words (if I
rightly understand them) the meaning is, that Churches must be gathered and
made up only of holy, reformed Christians, which are as hewn or squared
stones; to which I answer:

1. That similitudes may illustrate a truth proved, or to be proved, but they
prove nothing.

2. That conformity betwixt material and spiritual things is not to be
carried too far; similitudes, (as the common saying is) run not on four feet.

3. There is this difference betwixt the building of the spiritual and
material Temple, that in the spiritual there is nothing but what is
homogencall, and of one kind, all squared and living stones, but in the
material the foundation and walls are made up not only of hewn and squared
stones, but of others, yea many pieces of stone which are but as rubbish, have
their use in the material building.

4. And yet we may say of those whom he accounts rough and unhewen stones,
that they are in part squared toward a conformity to the rest of the building
(in that they submit to the Gospel rule in many particulars) though they be
not so exactly squared, or so perfectly polished as others.

5. Upon this difference the best stones are not to be taken from the rest to
make up a building by themselves, as in separated Congregations many pretend,
but perform not; for of those who separate from others as from profane
persons, diverse are not only rather gilded Hypocrites then golden Christians;
but they are sundry of them such as for want of charity and humility Christ
would not own for his disciples, Ioh. 13.35. Matthew. 11.29. and who for railing
and covetousness, and other reigning sins of an haynons guilt ought to be
discarded from Christian society, as well as a fornicator, a drunkard, or an
idolator, 1 Cor. 5.11.

Lastly, To conclude with a Negative Argument from the Now Testament, as he
began his fourth Paragraph, (and against him it is good Logic, as an
Apocryphal Text is good proof against a Papist.) Let him show any example of
such a separation as he aims at, in the New Testament; where when there was a
mixture of holy and profane, (as there was in the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor.
11.21.) the Apostles, or Evangelicall persons, gathered out the holy part to
make a separated Church from the r^st, as many do now adays.

That which follows, concerning Axes and Hammers not heard in the building of
the Temple of Solomon, has a mysterious truth in it, but not to the purpose
for which he produces it; for it imports that the spiritual Temple is built
up chiefly by the soft whisperings and secret motions of the Spirit; whereof
men hear no noise, nor can take notice; and what is this to what he would
have?

SECT. VI. The Argument against the speedy establishment of Church Government,
taken from Christ's description, answered.
THen for particular example he propounds Christ's example, and therein
observes first his Description, secondly, his Practice. For the former, he
says, The setting up of Government,. 6. p. 4.
is against the nature of Christ's Description of himself, and against that
sutablenesse he presses for among all such as should submit to his
Commandments; He shall not strive nor cry, neither shall any one hear his
voice in the streets, Matthew. 12.12. My yoke is easy, and my burden is light,
Matt. 11.29. His Commandments are not grievous; neither do men put new wins
into old bottles.

Answer.
In these words we have reason pretended, and Texts of Scripture annexed as
suitable to it, but how impertinently, will be easily apprehended by such as
please to observe.

1. That his reason, if it have any force, is not against a speedy Government
alone, but against Government at any time; for if it be contrary to the nature
of Christ, it is liable to that exception whenever it is set up, and worthy
presently to be cried down again; but we add further.

2. That if there be a difference betwixt the Description of Christ and Church
Government it is no marvel, for Christ as a Savior came to suffer, to be
under government both just and unjust; He made himself of no reputation, and
took upon him the form of a servant, and humbled himself, and became
obedient to death, even the death of the Cross, Philip. 2.7, 8. which is
cross, and quite contrary to the condition of Government.

3. That neither is Christ so remiss as not to take upon him a Government in
his Church, for he is the Head of it, Ephos. 1.22. and the Head does, may, nay
and must govern the body; nor is his Government so meek, but that he has an
iron red to dash in pieces like a patters vessel, Psalm. 2.9. those that are
wilfully wicked; as well as a golden Scepter to call those into his prefence,
who are gracious in his eyes, Esther. 5.2. and though coming to suffer, he
descended to the low condition of a servant, Philip. 2.7. (as has been said)
and to the lowest kind of service, washing of the feet of his own servants,
Ioh. 13.5. yet sometimes he took upon him to be a Lord; and as Lord of his
house, with a scourge of small cords drove the chafferers out of the Temple,
and the oxen, and sheep sold by them there, and overthrew the Tables of the
money changers, Ioh. 2.14, 15. And that we may not think he is made all of
lenity and meekness, even the^^: where he is called a Lamb, a formidable
wrath is ascribed to him, which makes mighty men, and military men, free men
and bond-(...) to seek to hide themselves from him th^^ sits in the Throne,
and from the wrath of the Lamb, Rev. 8.15.

^.Nor is the Government or Discipline so unsuitable (in regard of severity) to
the description of Christ, as in the protended disparity is sluggested, for it
is to be administered with the spirit of meekness in admonition, to such as are
humble and conscientious in their way, as well as with the rod of Discipline,
to those who are (...).

^.For the places of Scripture produced in the close of this Paragraph, they
are all quite besides the Question, or very little to the purpose. For which
they are brought; for the first, Matthew. 12.19. He shall not strive nor cry,
nor shall any man hear his voice in the streets; it shows the singular
patience, and meekness of our Savior, when he was under the pursuit and
persecution of his enemies; as in the 53. of Esaias he was oppressed, he was
afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth; he is brought as a Lamb to the
slaughter, and as a sheep before the shearers is dumb, so opened he not his
mouth, v. 7. Yet at other times he took liberty to speak, and authority to
reprove very sharply, as Matthew. 23. from verse. 13. to 35. as if out of his
mouth had come the sharp two edged sword, in the apparition to John the
Divine, Revel. 1.16. For the second place, My yoke is easy and my burden
light, Matthew. 11.29. and the third, ( His Commandments are not grievous, 1
Ioh. 5.3. which is so like unto the former, that one answer may serve for both)
they make nothing against a speedy, but against a grievous Government; and yet
surely, though the Evangelicall yoke of our Savior in regard of the rigorous
yoke of the Law of Moses, (which neither we (said Peter) nor our forefathers
were able to bear, Act. 15.10.) be easy, and yet more easy by the assistance
Christ gives his servants to bear it, (whence it was that the Apostle
professed, that he took pleasure in infirmities, in necessities, persecutions,
in distresses for Christ's sake; for when I am weak, said he, then am I strong,
2 Cor. 12.10. When he was weak in himself, then was he strong by the support
of Christ.) Yet is his yoke in it self, to those that are not by him enabled
to bear it, very burdensome; as where Christ requires the plucking out the
right eye, or cutting off of the right hand, that is, of any concupiscence or
contentment (which becomes a scandal or an offense to the soul) if it were
as dear unto us, as a right eye, or right hand; Matthew. 5.29, 30. and the
denial of a man's own self, and taking up his cross to follow him, Matthew.
16.24. the hating his nearest kindred, not only in a collateral, but in a
directline, whether above or below him, yea, and his own life also, Luke. 14.

The last place is, neither do men put new wine into old bottles, Matthew. 9.17.
Whereof it is hard to make any sober sense, which may serve to stay the
Government at Discipline for a moment; and how it belongs to the resolution of
this New Quere is hard to find out, though by a sober and serious consideration
of the Case. If his meaning be (which he should not have put his Reader to
study for) that a new Government should not be put upon those, who have long
been accustomed to the old, lest it make a breach upon their conscience, or
patience, as new wine will by its working be like to break crazie bottles, if
they be stopped while it is in working, then it makes rather for the continuance
of the Prelacie, then against the setting up of the Presbytery, and not
against the Government, or Discipline at this time only, but at any time; for
whenever it comes, it will be new Wine at the first, and the longer it is
delayed the older will the bottles be into which it must be put: but the truth
is, the Government is neither so new as he would make it, nor will there be any
violent working by it to the breaking of any bottle, or vessel, unless it be
a vessel of wrath fitted to destruction, Romans 9.22.

His last words in this Paragraph, and the next to those but now rehearsed are,
all which cannot be fulfilled in the Parochial congregations. All which? all
what? why, what is forementioned, what is that? the Discipline of Christ, the
sutablenesse he presses for, his meekness, and silence, his easy yoke, and
light burden, his Commandments not grievous, and the putting of new wine into
new bottles, all which (says he) cannot be fulfilled in Parochial
Congregations: what language is here? what sense? what Logical connection, that
may join the premises and conclusion together to beget a thought of compliance
with the resolution of the Quere? Conceiving the Penner to be a sober man, I
must think in this passage the Printers brain might be troubled with the fume
of new wine, to conclude with nonsense for a rational consequence: and I
believe no new wine and old bottles, how new or old soever, can worse agree
together then the foregoing evidence and final sentence of this Paragraph.

SECT. VII. Master Colemans experimental exceptions against the severitie and
rigor of the Presbyteriall Government answered.
But does not Mr. Coleman complain of the Presbyteriall Government as too
severe and domineering, and that upon his own experience, and thereupon
forecast some strange fears, and strong prejudices against it?

Yes, and he does it in these words, I will tell you, says he, both what, and
whence my fears are; I fear lest the Presbyteriall Government should incroach
upon the Civil; and I also fear lest it should Prelatically tyrannize; and
these my fears arise from Scotland, and from London.

1. From Scotland, I my self did hear the Presbytery of Edenborough censure
a woman to be banished out of the gates of the City; was not this an
incroachment?

Answer.
It may be not, for there might be Civil Magistrates in the Presbytery; and
they, (as Civil Magistrates, not as Presbyterians,) might inflict such a
Censure upon her; or upon proof of notorious lewdness, they might say, she
was not worthy to be suffered to live in the Town; and therefore that she
deserved to be banished out of it: but that the Presbytery did, as a
Presbytery, authoritatively take upon them to banish her, he does not affirm,
much less confirm by any good evidence; and I am credibly informed, On
monday, November 3.
that some of the Reverend Commissioners of Scotland have confidently gainsaid
that report to his face.

And what if that were one exorbitant act, and usurpation upon the Civil
power? will that one act make void the right of a power which is Presbyteriall?
And what if a Civil Magistrate should take upon him to preach, and administer
the Sacraments, as Vzziah would have burned incense, 2 Chronicles. 26.16. would that
make a forfeiture of all Civil authority? Mr. Coleman will not say it, nor
can he prove what he pretends, by such an incroachment, against the
Presbytery. But for this I leave him to his Antagonist, the religious,
learned, prudent, and modest Commissioner of Scotland; who, I doubt not, will
do the Cause and himself right against Mr. Coleman his exceptions in time
convenient.

2. From London; Presbytery (says he) with us here is scarce yet in its
infancy, we have had but one or two preparative meetings, and yet in them we
had as Prelaticall a trick endeavored to be put upon us, as the nature of the
business could possibly bear; and when I stood up to plead for an equal
interest, and to prevent such usurpations, the grave Prelaticall checks of
knave and fool were at least whispered for mine entertainment: Hence these
fears.

Answer.
He does not show what Prelaticall trick that was; but as (since he has
explained his speech to a reverend Brother of the Assembly) it appears upon
examination, that he was much mistaken both in the person he suspected, and in
the motive and intention of the speaker; so that it was so far from being a
Prelaticall trick, that it was neither a trick, nor Prelaticall, no nor
Presbyteriall neither; for what if the spirit of Diotrephes be in a single
Presbyter without a Presbytery? I am sure that meeting (which he means) was
no formed Presbytery, none such as was endowed with, or assumed any power of
Ecclesiastical censure; if it had, neither he nor his opposite would have
been suffered in such incivilitie of language, as he has expressed.

Nor is it reasonable to entitle the extraordinary excesses of particular
persons to any sort or society of men; for there be some and but some, in all
Professions, who are very masterfull in their opinions, and forward to engage
in terms of contradiction, and when they are once heated with a fond affection
to their own fancies, ( which is the more blown up by the breath of an
opposite) they are not masters of their own words, nor can they exercise any
reasonable rule either upon their spirits, or speeches; and sometimes they
second their precipitancie in both, with such a pertinacie of will, and
stoutnesse of stomach, that they choose rather to cast firebrands about, to put
Nations and Churches into a dangerous combustion, then quietly to compose any
personal quarrel of their own, though never so inconsiderately stirred up by
them; this is the extremity of that malignant and mischievous practice, which
God professes especially to hate, Prove. 6.19.

And for the opprobrious terms he complains of, if he had the patience to
bear them when he heard them, and did not reciprocate one contumely for
another, (as some say he did) he should have had the prudence (and to that)
should have advised him, had I been of his counsel) to have buried them in
silence; and not for that which was but whispered in the ear, to propose it to
public view, that every one may read the reproach of K. and F. put upon him,
in print.

SECT. VIII. The Argument against the speedy setting up of the Presbyteriall
Government taken from Christ's practice answered.
A Second exception reduced to the example of Christ in his practice is that 3.
p. 4.
Christ Jesus himself could as easily have settled his Government by miracle,
as any can now by Civil power, if there had been such a primary, or moral
necessity of establishing it so soon upon a people scarce enlightened for any
part of it. But we see the contrary, first in himself, he taught long, and
John before him, and so the Disciples, and the gifts for Government were not
given till he ascended, and the model for Government was not brought forth but
by degrees, and as people fell in, and were capable of the yoke, and would
mould more easily to the Commandments of Christ; and whether then or no, is
yet a Question (which some have sit the debates to) though not with me, who am
fully persuaded of the power of order which the Apostle ioyed to behold; though
a power with as little dominion in government, as tradition in worship.

Answer.
1. The acts and times for the Divine providence toward his Church are
various; and the reasons of them many times reserved to God: he could, no
doubt, have governed his Church in the first age of the world, by the scepter
of his written word, but there was no Scripture till God wrote his Decalogue or
ten Commandments in Tables of stone, Exodus 31.18. and if the Book of Genesis
were written before, it was yet after the birth of Moses, (for he was the
Penman of it) who was not borne till the year of the world, 2373. all this
while God had his Church, and no written Law for the government of it. Yet when
he brought the Israelites out of Egypt, (which was in the year, 2454) the next
year after, he gave direction for the building of a Tabernacle; and to the
Moral Law forementioned added Laws Ceremonial, and Judicial; diverse of
which were not to be put in execution until their coming into Canaan, which
was well near forty years afterward; so far was he beforehand with the
government of his Church of the new edition.

2. Whereas he says, that Jesus Christ could have as easily settled the
government of his Church by miracle, as any can now by Civil power; we grant
it, yea and more, that he could have done it without a miracle; and yet more,
that he did so, when he chose Apostles and gave them the keys of the Kingdom
of heaven, Matthew. 16.19. for remission and retaining of sins, Ioh. 10.23. and
set down a rule of graduall proceeding with offenders, Matt. 18.15, 16, 17.

3. If it be said, that this was late in the Ministry of our Savior, and
therefore we must take his example, not only for the thing it self, but for
the time; this will make more for the Anabaptisticall delay of Baptism, then
for delay in Discipline or Government: for he was not baptized until he was
about thirty years of age, Luke 3.23. but he began to set up a government of
his Church within the compass of his public Ministry, which at the most
lasted but four years space, and many learned men confine it to three years
and an half, or thereabouts. As for John Baptist, his time was shorter, for he
was beheaded in the second of the four years forementioned; nor did it belong
to his Office to set up a government in the Evangelicall Church, but to prepare
the way of the Lord by preaching repentance unto the people, Matthew. 3.3. Isa.
40.3.

4. Whereas he says, the gifts of government were not given till Christ
ascended; to that it may be answered:

1. That he ascended forty three days after the period of his public
Ministration, which added to the years forementioned, make but small
difference as to the government in question.

2. That though he gave them an increase of gifts for government, as he did for
preaching, he put his Apostles upon neither of those offices without competent
gifts, and qualifications for them.

5. For the model of government, which he says was brought forth by degrees,
as people fell in and were capable of the yoke; I would know what model he
means; if he mean any model of Christ or his Apostles (as it appears he
does, for says he, against Mr. Colemans opinion, I am fully assured of a power
of order, which the Apostle rejoiced to behold, Col. 2.5.) I ask whether this
be given by tradition, or contained in the Scripture; I suppose he will say of
Government (as well as of Worship) not by tradition, but by the written word;
and if so, though it were but young in the time of Christ, or his Apostles, it
is very ancient to us; (for we have no part of the written word but it is
fifteen hundred years of age at least) why then should that which is so old
in constitution, be thought too soon to be put in execution at the present?
especially since (besides the direction for it in the Scripture) we have had
these many years several patterns of it, in many reformed Churches in the
Christian world.

Nor do our brethren of Scotland (though they assert it from Scripture to be
the will of God) expect that the Parliament should establish it Jure Divino.

M. Gelaspi^ his brotherly examination of M. Colemans Sermon. p. 32, 33.
If they shall in a Parliamentary, and Legislative way establish that thing,
which is really and in it self agreeable to the word of God, though they do
not declare it to be the will of Jesus Christ, they are satisfied.

If it be best, (as his words imply) that the government be brought in by
degrees, so it is in the present reformation; for it has by soft and slow
degrees passed the debates, first of the Assembly, and afterward of the
Parliament; and as for approbation, so for execution, it passes by degrees the
Civil sanction, which authorized first an Ordinance for Ordination, after that
a Directory for worship, a good while after that was the City of London, and
the Parishes annexed made a Province, and divided into Classical Presbyteries,
and then with some intermission of time was a power granted to choose a
Committee for trial of Elders; and now lately a Vote and an Order for the
choice of Elders in every Parish; and since that an Order or Ordinance touching
admission to, and rejection from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: and yet
there remain other parts of government to be added to them, which we hope will
be authorized in time convenient, and the sooner the better.

SECT. IX. Reasons taken from rules and considerations of prudence answered.
THus much for his Reasons which respect Religion: Now for the Politic part
of his Quere, in 1. Rules or considerations of Prudence. 2. Examples of
practice.


His rules of Prudence in the general are three; the first he lays down
thus:. 7. p. 5.
The more time (says he) for trying of spirits, and proving of all things,
there is the less danger to that State of erring in things received, and
authorized, and of involving it self into the designs of Ecclesiastical
power, then which nothing has sooner broken the Civil power; as may be seen
in Popish Kingdoms, and our late Prelaticall. There can be no great danger in
the not sudden incorporating the two powers. Since Moses is not alive to bring
down the just pattern of the Tabernacle, there may a new star arise, which
was not seen at first, which if we shut up our selves too soon, while the
smoke is in the Temple, cannot appear.

Answer.
1. It is the duty of a State, that is, of them that govern a State, not
only to try spirits, but to rule them; and rather to rule them then to try
them; and for that purpose the sooner they be brought under government, the
better; for the rod and reproof, says Solomon, give wisdoms, Prove. 29.15. And
on the contrary, the longer they live without the yoke of Discipline, the more
enormous will they be: and so the observation of Solomon will be verified, a
child left to himself brings his mother to shame, Ibid. and his father too,
whereof we have an example in his brother Adouijah, 1 King. 1. verse. 5, 6. And
for proving of all things to be imposed, there is a due proportion of time to
be observed, which may as well be too much, as too little; and it has been,
if not the fault, the ill hap of our Church and State, to have the Government
fluttering upon the Lime-twig of deliberation at Westminster, when it should be
upon the wing of actual execution, all over the Kingdom.

2. Whereas he makes it a dangerous matter for the State to involve it self
into the designs of Ecclesiastical power, because it is a means to break
the Civil power, as may be seen in Popish Kingdoms, and our late Prelaticall.

His position and proof are most unseasonably, and impertinently applied to
the Presbyteriall government, which abjureth both Popish, and Prelaticall
dominion by solemn Covenant, and takes a course not only to suppress and
bury, but to keep them down, that there be no fear of a resurrection of them.

3. And when on the contrary he says, 7. p. 5.
There can be no danger in the not sudden incorporating the two powers: since
Moses is not alive to bring down the just pattern of the Tabernacle; there
may a new star arise which was not seen at first; which if we shut up our
selves too soon, while the smoke is in the Temple, cannot appear.

This is a very perplexed and confused expression, darkning the truth which he
should illustrate; wherein if his meaning be that there is no great danger in
the not establishing Ecclesiastical government by the Civil State, or that if
now it were done, it were too sudden and hasty, it is a groundless conceit,
refuted already; and for that he brings in of Moses not being alive to bring
the pattern from the Mount, and of a new sterre to arise, it bewrays his
design not only to delay the government desired for a time, but to debar it
for ever; or to prepare the way for some seducing See Bucol. Ind. Chron p. 156.
ad an. 134. and Schindl. Pentag. col. 826.
Benchocheba, or Barchochebas, (as his name sounds) the son of a star,
who (pretending himself to be the star of Jacob foreprophecied, Numb. 24
17.) took upon him to be a new guide unto the Jews; but misleading them to
their ruin, he was called Bencozba, the son of a lie.

2. For the other prudentiall rule his words are these: There is no Religion
established by State, but there is some proportion in the two powers, and some
10. p. 6.
compliance betwixt the Civil and Ecclesiastical state; so as the
establishing the one, will draw with it some motions in the other; and we all
see (says he) how hazardous it is to dis-ininteresse any in the Civil part,
even in Kingdoms that are more firm, as France, where the Protestants are
partly allowed their Religion, in pay for their civil engagements; and so in
other States; and sure I am, the State is most free where the conscience is
least straightened; where the tures and wheat grow together until the harvest.

Answer.
Here he makes the Civil and Ecclesiastical State so linked, and nearly
allied together, that if there be motions in the one, there will not be
quietness in the other; and that the Ecclesiastical State has such an
interest in the Civil, that it is hazardous to the Civil part, if it be not
allowed: and for that reason the Protestant Religion is tolerated in the Popish
Kingdom of France, which is as a pay or a recompense for their civil
engagement. In which passage (as in diverse others) he aims at the perpetual
prohibition of Government; not at a temporal forbearance only; and he
carries it on so as if we must allow him the authority of a prolitique
Dictator without any proof of Scripture, reason, yea or of any humane
testimony; for what he says, (though in the way of a rational ratification)
has so little strength of reason in it, that it reaches not half way to the
resolution of the Question in the Tenor of his Tenet. For what if the Church
and State be so symbolicall as to reciprocate interests, and conditions,
betwixt themselves? shall the Civil State leave every man, or every
Congregation to their own liberty to be governed, or ungoverned as they list?
every man in matters of Religion to do that which is right in his own eyes,
as when there was no King in Israel? sudg. 17.6. Nay rather, because
disturbances are communicated from the one to the other, the Civil State ought
to settle the government of the Ecclesiastical, according to the word of God,
and the example of the best reformed Churches; that it may the more securely
enjoy its own peace. And for that he says of the toleration of the
Protestants of France, the original of it was not out of any principle of
compliance of all Religions with the Civil State, but because the King
himself Henry the fourth having been a Protestant, and recovering his right
by the Arms of Protestants, (though he wickedly revolted from his Religion,
and wretchedly suffered for his Apostasy) he could do no less in humanity
then allow them the liberty of Religion; which has been continued unto them
not upon Mr. S. his ground before mentioned, but because the Protestants are
the trustiest friends of the Crown of France, and most engaged to defend it
against the interests, and designs of the Spaniard, whose longing after an
universal Monarchy, is carried with the strongest degree of concupiscence
toward the Crown of France, as the fairest mark of his boundless ambition.
Now though his argument fall far short of probable, he concludes with
assurance: Sure I am (says he) that State is most free where the conscience is
least straightened; If he mean most free in indulgence, by letting loose the
reigns to all Religions, it is true, and if he allow of such a freeness, (as
by his ensuing words it seems he does) he complieth with the Author of the
Book of the Bloody Tenet, who holds (as absurdly as impiously) that it is
the will and command of God that (since the coming of his Son the Lord Jesus)
a permission of the most Paganish, Jewish, Turkish, The sixth Proposition of the
twelve prefixed before the Book published Anno 1644.
and Antichristian consciences, and worships be granted to all men, in all
Nations and Countries, and they are only to be fought against with the sword,
which is only (in soul matters) able to conquer, to wit, the sword of the
Spirit, the word of God. If he mean, where there is such licentious allowance
of all Religions, there the State is freest from commotion, and distraction,
manifold experience in several Ages, and Countries proves the contrary. He
concludes this exception against the settling of the Government with the
Parable of the Tares and the Wheat, wherein he closes with the forementioned
Author, cap. 18, etc. of his wicked book. But withal, if there must be such
a mixture of the tares with the wheat, what warrant is there (for his party) to
pluck the wheat from the tares, nay the wheat from the wheat (for they leave as
good Christians as they take) in their new gathering of Churches?

A third Remora against the setting up of Government of prudent or politic
consideration, is this:

11. p. 6.
Our parties, or dissenting Brethren being now together, and clasped by
interest against the common enemy, this foundation of common unity is such, as
may draw in both affections and judgments, if not too suddenly determined into
heretics and schismatics. It is possible while a Controversy is long
suspended, and time given for conclusion of things, opinions may be soon at
peace: A fire let alone may dye out under that wood, which stirred in would
kindle it; The contentions of brethren are like the strong bars of a Castle,
and a brother offended is harder to be won then a strong city, Prove. 18, 19.

Answer.
The danger of a common enemy is many times, and should be always, a cause of
suspension of particular antipathies; the wild beasts in the Arc were
reconciled with the tame, while without it the overwhelming flood was round
about; but this clasping of dissenting brethren in the Camp upon present
undertakings, must not leave us loose to division in the City; for that (as
Mr. Saltmarsh himself acknowledges) M. Saltmarsh practice of policy, l. 4.
pol. 12.
is the mother of confusion; and he Idem l. 2. of his Book of the Practice of
policy. pol. 123. p. 288.
calls private Conventicles the very Parliaments of factious deliberations and
resolutions; and says, they are to be observed and dispersed. And by the Text
he cites, viz. Act. 4.26. he means such factions, as are adverse or opposite
to true Religion; and for expedition in repressing the peril of such
combinations he gives this advice, (which if he had now thought of I suppose
he would not have made such a dilatory discourse as he has done) M. Saltmarsh
his practice of policy l. 2. pol. 124. p. 289.
Kill factions betimes, as Herod did the Infants in their cradles; if you let
them grow, they may prove too strong for you; when sedition is at an age, it is
more able; a little Physic will disperse a gathering disease, which (if it
knot) has more danger and difficulty: it was enough to make the servant bad
when he thought with himself, My Lord delayeth his coming, Matthew. 24.48. And
truly the delay in setting up a Government has been an occasion of the
multiplication both of heresies, and schisms, and of an increase both of
number and courage of such as are engaged in them; and the longer the delay is
drawn on, the more difficult will the reducement be; for men who are disposed
to div^sion, make account that such as forbear the remedy are either
inclinable to them, or unable, or afraid to displease them; and by such
conceits they foment their own sancies, and heighten their spirits to
contumacie, and contempt; whereof there is but too much evidence given in many
that oppose the settlement of Religion by establishing Church Government. And
whereas he says, It is possible while a Controversy is long suspended, and
time given for conclusion of things, opinions may be sooner at peace: We answer.

First, that possibility is but a poor plea against probability, nay, against
particular experience; for it is obvious to any man's view that will observe the
method of proceeding, and manner of prevailing of the dissenting party, that
while their brethren have endeavored by all amicable carriage toward them, and
by courteous compliance with them, to work and win them to a brotherly accord,
they have driven on their own design with a politic activity, and have
gained more by the slownesse of their adversaries pace, then by the goodness
of their own cause, though therein they would be thought to have the
advantage. He adds, A fire let alone may dye out under that wood, which
stirred in would kindie it. But when a fire is kindled, not in green, but in
dry wood, (which will easily burn) will men let it alone till it quench of it
self? or shall we think, that the settling of a Government is as the bellows
to a fire, to blow it up into a flame? No wise man can imagine either the one,
or the other; and the contrary is plain by manifold examples of the
Anabaptists, and other seditious Sectaries in Germany; for whom at first Guy de
Bres against the error of the Anabapt. p. 6.
Luther did mediate with Frederick Duke of Saxony, That within his Dominions
they be favorably dealt with all, because (excepting their error) they seemed
otherwise good men; but afterward, by the connivence and indulgence that was
used toward them, increasing both in bodies and boldness, he was feign to
Sleyd. Comment. l. 5. fol. 76. p. 22.
stir up the Princes and people of Germany against them, as for the
extinguishing of a common combustion, or a fire that threatened the burning of
City and Country. Which I mention not to excite Authority to any needless or
unseasonable severity, but to note the danger of too much delay, in applying
remedies to imminent mischiefs. He concludes this politic consideration, with
a sentence of Scripture, which is, The contentions of Brethren are like the
bars of a Castle, and a Brother offended is harder to be won then a strong
City, Prove. 18.19. And this he brings in as a seal to this politic Aphorism,
for the ceasing of differences of themselves by silent forbearance: But will
the bars of a Castle be broken by letting them alone? And shall one expect to
take a City, a strong City, and do nothing against it? We have not found it
so for the most part of our late wars, either in England or Ireland.

Thus far his Politic Rules. Now for particular Instance: We find it of two
sorts; 1. Negative. 2. Positive.


SECT. 10. The Negative Argument taken from want of experience of the New
Clergy, answered.
FIrst, for the Negative, 8. p. 5.
We have not yet any experience of our new Clergy, (says he) who are many of
them branches of the old stock, and so may weild the Government too much of
the Episcopal faction; as the Samaritanes did with the Jewish Government,
because they were not natural Jews: It is not safe trusting a power too much
into those hands; our Brethren of Scotland have been better used to the way of
Presbytery, and may better trust one another upon mutual experience, then we
can yet.

Answer.
Have we not yet experience of our new Clergy? Then they cannot be charged
with the mis-government of the people; but we have experience of much evil for
want of Government; but how can there be experience of them, if there be no
government to try them withal? He says, Many are branches of the old stock;
and so may weild the Government too much of the Episcopal faction; and yet
presently he compares them to the Samaritans, and Jews, who were most adverse
in affection, and disposition, and dealing one to another; compare Ioh. 8.48.
with Luke 9.53. and Ioh. 4.9. and then says, It is not safe trusting a Power
too far into those hands; I think he needs not much to fear that; The
Government will be so qualified for the thing it self, and so disposed of for
the persons that are to manage it, that it will not be in the power of any to
abuse it, but upon their peril. Here lest the example of our Brethren in
Scotland should be brought in by way of prejudice to his advice, and resolution
against the timely establishment of the Presbyteriall Government in England,
he says, They are more used to the way of Presbytery, and may better trust
one another upon mutual experience, then we can yet. It is well that Scotland
(the Kingdom or Country wherein there is best experience of the Presbyteriall
Government) yields least occasion of exception against it; a great commendation
of it doubtless; which alone were enough to convince all those who stand for a
liberty of conscience, against a certain and general rule; of which liberty
if there were as much trial made, as has been of the discipline of that
Kingdom, it would appear faulty, scandalous, dangerous so many ways, as would
make all good and wise men weary of it; and there are men of note who affirm
(upon late experience in some Counties of the Kingdom) that the best way to
suppress the multiplicity of Sects, is to let them have scope, and they will
run themselves out of breath; whereto I cannot give my Vote, since we may not
give way that God should be dishonored, nor the people be endangered, nor
false teachers tolerated, if we may hinder it, no not for an hour, Galat. 2.5.

2. For the Positive Instance, his next words are, 9. p. 5.
We experience in part some remainders of Prelacie working in many, which
shows a constitution not so clear nor pure, as the Disciples of Christ should
have; then whether it be safe committing the power too suddenly; for though I
question not but some may be like the ten, yet there are others that are like
the two brethren, who strove which should be the greatest, till the Lordended
the difference, It shall not be so among you.

Answer.
This parcel of his Politickes begins scarce with good English, for where
reads this writer this phrase, We experience? and why did he not keep to the
Terms he used in the precedent Paragraph, We have experiment, or experience?
And he goes on with as little good sense, for a little after he says, Then
whether it be safe to commit the power too suddenly, for though I question not,
etc. Where he suspends the sense of his speech, and leaves it to be made up by
a supplement of the Reader; yet we know his meaning thus far, that it is not
safe to commit the power too suddenly; if he mean by this, and by the word
hastily, (in the body of his Quere) rashly, or inconsiderately, we say so too;
but we deny (which he means) that if it had been done sooner, or be not
deferred longer, it will be too suddenly done; but it appears (by what before
has been observed) with him to commit any power, or establish any government,
(especially the Presbyteriall government) it is too soon or suddenly done, if
it be done at all. In the next part of this Paragraph he begins to be
rational, but so that it may make more for that part he opposes, then for
that which he pleads for, in these words: For though I question not (says
he) but some may be like the ten, yet there are others like the two brethren,
which strove who should be the greatest, till the Lord ended the difference; It
shall not be so among you. Where if we keep the proportion he brings in, and
make application accordingly, we may say, for two ambitious Presbyterians, it
is like there may be ten that are more modestly, and humbly minded, then to
affect such a preeminence above their brethren.

Besides, the Presbyterian government is framed directly according to the
resolution of our Savior, (It shall not be so among you) as opposed to the
Prelaticall authority. 9. p. 5.
We find (says he further) the hottest controversy is now moved about Church
government, and there has been most spoken and written this way, and in most
violence. Now when the contention for power is so much, and the controversy
streams most in government, we may soon discern dispositions.

Answer.
But is it not an hotter Controversy that is now moved, and in motion, and in
commotion, touching Civil Government? And for the discovery of dispositions
thereupon, it may be so without any fault in those that are for government in
question, but not without a crime in such as oppose it, or despise it in any
thing wherein it is consonant to Gods word, and found reason subordinate to it;
especially when in a great part it is settled already, and they who are in
authority are intentively employed to bring it to perfection.

But says he, 9. p. 5.
Is it good parting with the stakes yet, while there is such quarrelling for
them, and when one party cannot but take it for an injury, if wholly given to
the other?

This Question prosupposeth and imports an evennesse, and equality as betwixt
parties that lay wagers, or play matches, and lay down stakes upon equal
terms; whereas the difference indeed is betwixt Government and no Government;
and betwixt the high Court of Parliament, and all the most orthodox Churches,
and Divines of the Christian world on the one side, and a small and
inconsiderable party, in respect of them, on the other; who for the most part
(though there be some of them of good note both for learning, and life) might
with good Decorum be brought to the Bar, to receive consure from those, with
whom they cannot take upon them contestation without arrogant presumption so it
cannot be an injury to resolve for government against them, no more, (no nor
so much) then against the Bishops ill government, who had possession of
Prelacie by a prescription Legally authorized, whereas those who are against
the government desired, have no possession or prescription, nor pretense of
Law, for their Anarchie against it. And therefore if the Bishops had struggled
more for their chaires in the Church, and their seats in the Parliament, then
they did, and had been all of them as obstinate as two of them were, B. W. of
L. and C. and B. W. of L.
who said, they would be hanged at the Court gate, before they would yield up
their votes and places in the House of Peers; they had been more excusable in
that contumacie, then most of those who wilfully withstand the Presbytery
resolved on.

The last part of this proof is, that. 9. p. 5, 6.
It is to be feared (says he) there is too much of man, because the by as
runs most in these times toward the truth of Government, and many others are
wholly set by, which might well be looked upon with it: which, if there were
not a principle in man more fitted for a truth of this kind, then any other,
would not be. But every truth has its age, and season: this only for Caution.

Answer.
Most of this may be granted, and nothing gained to Mr. S. his cause; if there
be two much of man in the Controversy, it is like to be in those, who despise
Government, who are presumptuous, and self willed, and are not afraid to
speak evil of Dignities, a Pet. 2, 10. If the by as run most in these times
toward the truth of Government, it is but as it should be, and as it was when
the Prelaticall power was opposed and suppressed by the Parliament; and if the
by as were wryed aside from the truth, it were rather to be noted as matter of
exception, then that it bends toward the truth; especially since he says a
little after, there is a principle in man more fitted for a truth of this kind
then any other; and if, (as he says) every truth has its age and season,
surely then this truth of Presbyterian Government is seasonable now; For the
Bishops Government being put down, it is necessary some other should be set
up, and before all other the Presbyteriall, as most agreeable to the word of
God, and the example of the best reformed Churches and it is yet more
seasonable to establish it with speed, because for want of it in part, are so
many divisions and distractions in Church and State.

And if that be true which he says, that many other truths are wholly set by,
which might be looked upon with it; it may be the fault of those who set
themselves too much against that Government; who, mistaking the truth and
integrity of it, make it their maine work to revile, and reproach it, to make
it odious among the people before they have any true understanding thereof. But
for such as are most for the Presbytery, I am sure they are intentively
studious to discover, deliver, and defend all other truths of faith and
manners, which make for salvation, as well as for the setting up or settling of
the Government in question.

The end of this Paragraph is, This only for Caution. Then neither for proof,
nor reproof; and I wish he had had more caution in his mind, (for if so, he
would not so hastily have set upon the Government, as too hastily either
intended or attempted) and more in his paper, and then I should have spared
some labor, for he would have had fewer faults, and a shorter refutation would
have served the turn.

SECT. XI. Objections against the Reasons for the not establishing Church
Government, proposed, and answered, as Objections against Mr. Saltm. his Tenet
in the Quere, with Replies to his answers.
HAving played the assaylant against the Church Government hitherto, (but
without any impediment or impeachment of moment) he now turns Defendant, and
takes up the Bucklet to ward off objections against his opinion; but whereas
there be many such, he meddles but with two only, and those two such as he
thought himself best able to answer.

Objection 1.
p. 7.
But the Temple was builded with all speed, in Nehemiabs time, and therefore,
etc. And Haggai calls to the building of it, Is it time? Hag. 1.4.

To which be makes this answer: ^ Ibid.
Yea, but the material pattern wa^ m^re clearly left, and known, then the
Gospel pattern; the other were more in the letter, these more in the Spirit;
now there must be a proving of all things, else there may be more haste then
good speed, and the Temple may be built by a false pattern, as well as a true,
and then better no building, then no right Cedar to build with; and there were
Prophets then who knew the periods of times, and could prophecy, as Haggai,
and Zechariah, but none so exactly now; and these knew both the fashion, and
the time for building; yet who ought not to hasten the Temple, if the Timber be
ready, and if the Prophets and Apostles be there for a foundation, and Jesus
Christ for a chief coruer stone? Ephesians. 2.

Reply.
That he may not be thought to side with Sanballat and Tobiah against the
speedy building of the Temple, who scorned and derided the expedition of
Nehemiah and his brethren, in being so forward to the work, as if they meant
to make an end in one day, Neh. 2. v. 19. and Chap. 4. v. 2. he endeavors to
show considerable difference, 1. Betwixt the Material pattern and the Gospel
pattern, (though See Sect. 5. p. 16.
before he married them together to engender an exception against the
Presbyteriall government). 2. Betwixt the builders of the one, and the builders
of the other; whence he would infer, that in the former builders there was
good speed, in the latter there would be too much haste, if it should be set up
sooner then he would have it. And if it be too soon now for the Gospel
government, will he set a time for it when it will be seasonable to establish
it? will he have it stay till it be a material building, as the Temple was? or
till we have inspired Prophets, as Haggai and Zechariah were, to order the
work? If so, the answer is a contradiction to government not for the present,
but perpetually; and tends not to a delay in setting of it up, but to the
keeping of it down for ever. If not, then surely it cannot be an undertaking
of too quick dispatch, if we endeavor to set up the Gospel pattern according
to the rule and direction which we find in the Dictates of the Holy Ghost, in
the New Testament; which to us of this age cannot be called new, nor the
determination sudden, or hasty, since it is made after frequent, and serious
consideration of the Scriptures, and advised consultation with the best Divines
of the reformed Churches, and studious collation of the exactest patterns of
Discipline; after many and long debates in the Assembly of Divines, where the
dissenting Brethren (who by their party were thought most able to manage an
opposition to the government) have had liberty to object what they pleased:
And lastly, after a review, and re-examination of matters debated and voted in
the Assembly by most of our grave and prudent Senators, the two Houses of
Parliament: And in all these passages, by all the Builders especial regard
has been had to the firm foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus
Christ being the chief cornerstone, Ephesians. 2.20. and care taken that the
superstruction thereupon be not of wood, hay, or stubble, or of any material
unsuitable to it, 1 Cor. 3.12. and so by Mr. Saltm. his consent the work may
go on, for in such a case, says he, who ought not to hasten the building of
the Temple?

SECT. XII.
Objection 2.
p. 7.
But vice, heresies, and schisms will grow too fast.

Answer.
To which the Answer he makes may be divided into four particulars.

1. That this Objection makes no more for expedition in erecting of an
Ecclesiastical Government, then in the time of the Gospel from John's first
Sermon to Paul's Epistles, and the sending of the Spirit; presently upon the
setting down of the objection, the words he returns are these: p. 8.
So they might have done from John's first Sermon to Paul's Epistles and the
sending of the Spirit; but ye see there was no government settled till
afterward upon the people of God.

1. Reply.
So they might have done? and did they not do so? did they not grow too fast?
sure it was too fast, if there were any growth at all. Yet to say the truth,
here^ie has not in all ages advanced in the lame pace. But why does be begin
at John Baptists first Serm^n? were not the Pharis^^s, Sadduces, and Esseans,
Heretics, or Schismatics? and were not they long before John Baptist was
(...)? consult with (...) in his 13. Book^ of Antiq. ^.9. and with a
Chronology annexed to it, and you shall find them noted upon the year 144.
before Christ's birth. And were not the Samaritanes heretics? and very ancient
also? See Epiphan. his first Tome and first Book, where he brings in them, and
nineteen more several sorts of Heresies and Heretics, all before the
incarnation of our Savior Christ.

Since Christ, it is a question who was the first Heretic; Epiph. haeres. 21.
Epiphanius gives the Senioritie to Simon Magus before all others; but Aug.
exer^it. in Psalm. 54. hom. ^.
Augustine will have those to be the first Heretics in Christianity, who
took offense at our Savior for saying they must eat his flesh, John 6.52. and
went away with a carnal construction of a spiritual speech. Howsoever there
were variety of Heresies and Schisms but too soon, (and very much vice
withal) as that of Ebion and Cerinthus, who denied the Divinity of Christ,
which occasioned John the Evangelist to begin his Gospel with the Godhead of
our Savior, and the heresy of Hymeneus and Philetus, who said the
resurrection was past already, 2 Timothy 2.18. though the greatest harvest of such
Tares was in after times, when Satan Videns Diabolus Templa daemonum deseri,
and in nomen Mediatoris currere genus humanum, haeretic^s movit, qui sub
vocabulo Christiano doctrinae resisterent Christianae. Aug. de Civit. Dei. l.
8. c. 51.
seeing his Idolatrous Temples deserted, and mankind begin to run after a
redeeming, and delivering Mediat^r, stirred up Heretics, who, under the Name
of Christians, made opposition to the Christian Doctrine.

But as he makes John's first Sermon terminus a quo for heresies, and schisms,
so he makes Paul's Epistles the terminus ad quem; But which of his Epistles does
he mean? from John Baptists first Sermon (which was in the twenty ninth year
of our Saviors life) to Paul's first Epistle, which was the first to the
Thessalonians, in his fiftieth year, were twenty one years; and eight years
after was the last of his Epistles written, viz. that of Paul to Philem^n,
which from John's first Sermon make up twenty nine years: After the Epistles he
brings in the sending of the Holy Ghost at the Foast of Pentecost, which was
much-what about the midway betwixt the two terms before mentioned; and then
he says, But yet you see there was no government, till after, settled upon the
people of God; till after what? If after the Feast of Pentecost or sending of
the Spirit at that time, that was in the thirty fourth year of Christ, and but
five years after the first Sermon of John Baptist; and if after Paul's first
Epistle, it was but twenty one years; if after his last Epistle but twenty
nine years, and before the end of his Epistles that government was written
which we find in Scripture; for the most of that which is produced for Church
Government is taken out of them; and if so, the setting up of Church Government
was not long suspended: but had it been adjourned to a further time, it would
not prejudice any expedition we can make in this matter, because the people of
that age, being many of them dispersed Converts, could not generally so readily
be formed into Christian Congregations, and government settled among them, as
with us they may be. Besides, what has been so long ago established in
Primitive times, cannot be said to be suddenly or hastily taken up in our
days, especially after so many discussions, and so deliberate resolutions, as
has been pleaded in a former answer. I need not give particular instance of
schisms as I have done of heresies, in this place, for heresy is the mother
of schism, and sometimes schism is the mother of heresy, for as ice and
water they many times mutually produce each other, whereof see the proof in the
Advertisement next to the Preface of the New English Annotations on the Bible
in folio.

Answer 2.
The second particular is the needlesnesse of Church Government: 1. In respect
of man. 2. In respect of God. For the first (says he) p. 8.
If Heresies stir up their Patrons against the State, the Magistrate bears
not the sword in vain; and if moral transgressions, let the Magistrates be
set on in every place, to quicken the Statutes; and Preachers every where sent
forth to publish the Gospel.

Reply 2.
What if they do not stir up their Patrons against the State? but Heretics
busily bestirre themselves to poison the souls of the people with damnable
Doctrine; and what if that doctrine be in an high degree derogatory to the
glory of God? as the opinions and positions of Paul Best against the Trinity
of Persons in the Deity, and the Divinity of the son of God, and the
blasphemous Verses be made against them, shall they be suffered so to reproach
the most High, and to seduce the simple to the perdition of their souls, if
they do not perturbe the public peace? that were a sin of near alliance
to old Elyes indulgence to his wicked sons, whose mildness toward them is
interpreted by God, an honoring of his sons above him, 1 Samuel 2.29. If Truth
be not more precious then Peace, why did our Savior with reference to the
offense (taken at Gospel truths) and the defense of them against all
gaine-sayers, say, he came not to send peace, but the sword? Matthew. 10.34. Why
are ancient Fathers in their disputes against the The Arians would have had it
(...).
Arians commended for their constancy, in that (for reconciliation with them)
they would not change a letter of the word (...)? and why do we expose our
selves to the quarrels of so many adversaries, especially those of the Romish
Religion, rather then be at peace with them, with giving up any part of those
truths, wherein God is dishonored by their antitenets, though the peace of the
State be not disturbed by them?

And for moral transgressions, he would have the Magistrate set on in every
place. Set on, by whom? and how? does he mean that the Magistrate is as a
shepherds dog, to be set on the wolf that comes to make spoil of the flock?
we cannot have so mean a thought of the Magistrate, as to make mention of him
in such terms of disparagement; nor dare we take upon us so much, either
interest in all Magistrates, or so much power in any, as to give them the
watchword when to draw the sword, and to expect that they should weild it as we
would have them. And if Ministers preach, and do what they can with their
assistant Elders, by Church Discipline, to regulate men in a way of religious
walking, there will notwithstanding be work enough for the Magistrate to bring
them under a Civil trial, and suffering, who make no conscience to deserve,
and have so much contumacie as to contemn the Ecclesiastical censures: but I
shall meet with this exception again in the 14. Section, and there shall make
a further answer unto it.

Answer 3.
A second needlesnesse is in respect of God: God will make out by extraordinary
what is wanting in ordinary means, as with armor from heaven against
Principalities on earth; and he gives instance in the Prince of Persia, Dan.
10.20. and makes as sure of the conquest, as Christ was in his single combat
with Satan in the wilderness, Matthew. 4. His words next following those
forecited are these. p. 8.
And what if the Prince of Persia withstand for a while? truth is otherwise
armed from heaven: though Satan be in the wilderness with Christ, yet Christ
shall conquer.

3. Reply.
While we know how to distinguish betwixt says and presumption, we cannot
think it meet to divide subservient means from the supreme power; nor the
exercise of Discipline and Government, from his assistance who can make it
effectual; though the Sword of the Lord be able to cut down the enemy as the
Mower does grass, yet the Sword of Gideon must go along with it to the
wars; and in those wars wherein the enemies were miraculously discomfited,
and confounded; the Sword of the Lord and the Sword of Gideon are voiced
together, Judge. 6.20. we must take in all helps, helps in government, 1 Cor.
12.28. to suppress Heresy, Schism and Profaneness; and when we have done
all we can, we must ^ely upon Divine aid for success; and therefore must we
pray, as the Apostle prescribes, that we may live a quiet and peaceable life
in all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2.

Answer 4.
The fourth and last thing which he brings to answer the Objection is the
imputation of jealousy, in such as are desirous to set forward the Government;
and he makes as if it were a property of Papists, and Prelates, to keep up
their supposed truths, by suspecting every thing that appears for an enemy;
which he thus sets down and aggravates by an Antithesis of the boldness of
the Gospel. p. 8.
It is the Papists and Prelates jealousy to keep up their supposed truths by
suspecting every thing that appears for an enemy; the Gospel dares walk
abroad with boldness, and simplicity, when traditions of men, like
melancholy people, fear every thing they meet will kill them: For the Angel
that comes down from heaven has great power; and the earth is lightened with
his glory, Revel. 18.1.

4. Reply.
There is a jealousy which the Apostle calls godly iealous^e, 2 Cor. 11.2. and
such a one is that which would set up as many securities as may be, against
heresy and impiety. Among them Church Government is one; of which, they that
stand for it, are not afraid to let it go abroad, for they have made it
public, and exposed it to the view of all eyes. The jealousy which is a
fault is rather to be found in th^se who have labored to stifle the government
in the birth, and to supprosse it that it might never be brought forth; and who
talk of a more perfect model, but cannot be persuaded to bring it to light,
that it may be viewed and tried whether it be a well grounded truth, or a
groundless fancy. But there is a fear which we profess, and I hope without
offense, it is a fear of Gods anger and of imminent danger, for communion
with, and connivence toward heretical, and wicked men, which makes the godly
abhor their company, as we see in John the Evangelist Iren. advers. haeres.
l. 3. c. 3. and post eum Eusebius.
; when he suddenly got out of the Bath, so soon as the Heretic Cerinthus came
into it, fearing it would fall upon his head, and theirs who accompanied him;
and so it did, so soon as John was departed out of it.

And there is in some an aversion from Heresy, Schism, and Profaneness, out
of hatred of whatsoever is opposite to the glory of God, and to the safety of
man; and this hate is a great evidence not of a causeless jealousy, but of a
true zeal, and love of God and man.

Hence was it that Iren. advers. haeres. l. 3. c. 3.
Polycarp the Disciple of John (a Scholar of a religious temper like his
Master) was so adverse to Marcion the Heretic, that when (scraping
acquaintance of him) he asked him whether he knew him or no? he answered, he
knew him to be the eldest son of Satan; and that Hilary against Auxent. p.
217.
Hilary speaking against Auxentius an Arian Heretic, said, he would never
speak otherwise of him then as of a Devil incarnate; and that Hierome Hieron.
in Psalm. 5. Tom. 8. p. 4.
called Heretics men of blood, who daily shed the blood of souls; and Hieron.
Pr^log. in Dial. advers. Lucif. Tom. 2. p. 263.
averred that as he had never spared Heretics, so he never would, and that he
studiously desired to make those his enemies, who were enemies to the Church.
There be many other causes then, (besides a Popish or Prelaticall jealousy
(arising out of guilt or mistrust of the weakness or crasinesse of the cause)
which make the godly desirous of a prevention o^ suppression of Heresy and
Schism; and sincerely to endeavor the complete establishment of purity and
unity in the Church of God. But I will take up with that one of the Lords and
Commens in Parliament Assembled their Ordinance of the 20. of October, 1645.
concerning rules for receiving of the S^^rament of the Lords Supper, which is
the Obligation of Religious gratitude to God piously acknowledged in this
patheticall expression. The Lords and Commons considering the wonderful
providence of God in calling them to this great and difficult work of
reforming, and purging his Church and people; his guidance and manifest
protection of them in it, do acknowledge that never any of his servants since
the foundation of the world had more high and strong engagements, heartily, and
sincerely to endeavor the complete establishment of purity and unity in the
Church of God, then they have; they do therefore require all Ministers and
Elders, etc. And if Mr. Saltm. had well considered who were engaged for the
establishment of Church Government, and how far, before he published his New
Quere, he would not surely have so far undervalued their Piety and Prudence,
as to compare them to Papists, and Papal Prelates, and melancholy men who
think every thing they meet will kill them. I will conclude my Reply to his
Answer, with a piece of his M. Sal^m. pol. 201. p. 174.
own politic advice, in three particulars.

1. To suspect plausible and fair language in him whose person may render him
suspicious; and such for the most part are seducing Schismatics, and
Heretics, who by good words and fair speeches deceive the heart of the
simple, Romans 16.18.

2. Ibid. pol. 228.
To study to remove the occasions of faction and heresies.

3. Ibid. pol. 246.
In factious stirs, if it be requisite, to muster forces with all expedition
for appalling them; and thus, (says he) you weigh down the weight of one
scale, with the weight of another. And it is no less a part of prudence to
prevent them, then to supplant them. Upon such principles as these, in part, is
Church Government ordained, and there being so many, and stirring factions, it
is with as much speed (as with conveniencie may be) to be settled as a remedy
against them.

There is nothing more in his Answer but a Text out of the Revelation, it is
Chap. 18. v. 1. which with the word For is brought in as a proof of what was
last spoken, and as a seal to close up the total sum of his resolution of
this New Quere thus: For the Angel that comes down from heaven has great
power, and the earth is lightne^ with his glory: But this serves to none other
purpose, but to show, that as he began, so he ends his paper with
misapplication of Scripture.

SECT. XIII. An additionall Answer to some exceptions of Mr. Saltm. ( taken out
of Mr. Prinnes Vindication) against the present establishment of Church
Government, in his late Book entitled The opening of Mr. Prinnes new Book,
called a VINDICATION.
IN this Book which he names The opening of Master Prinnes new Book called a
Vindication; the Author has opened himself plainly to be an Independent at
least, and opposite to the Presbyteriall Government; which he has formerly
disavowed, when in conference with him I desired him to declare to which part
he inclined; as Section the first has been observed.

I shall present the Reader with so much of the matter in this New Book, as I
find symbolicall to the sense and resolution of his New Quere; the sum
whereof is in his last answer of P. to C. of which two letters (representing
two persons in conference Dialogue wise) it is very probable P. may stand for
Presbyterian, but for C. to me it is very doubtful whether it be put for the
name of my reverend Brother Mr. Coleman, whom he cites in the fourth page of
his New Quere; or whether C. stand for Congregationall; or if I did not
conceive him to be of a better spirit then I have observed in many
Antipresbyterian Scriblers, I would think C. stood for Christian, with
intimation that the Presbyterian government is Antichristian; but I cannot
censure so of him, especially since he professes to honor Presbyterians as
believers, and brethren in the Lord; brethren as Christians, not his brethren
as Presbyters; (if it be true which I hear that he preaches not as a
Presbyter, but as a gifted brother) but this but by the way; that which in this
Book we are now to observe is that P. as convinced, and converted by C. is made
to say:

P. Well, I am at this time well persuaded, p. 23. Of the opening.
and having heard all this, for my part I cannot but see, that in settling
things suddenly upon this Kingdom, and things thus questionable, and
unwarrantable in the way of administration, and a Kingdom so full of
impenitent and scandalous sinners as Parochial Congregations generally are,
there is danger of great sin, and great trouble.

Answer.
This may be true if government, whereby the scandalous will be severed from
the religious, be either not established at all, or too long deferred: but that
it may not be set up at all, or not so soon as is necessary, he brings some
proofs from Mr. Prinnes Vindication, ( which he endeavors to disprove, and
confute in other particulars) and I am willing to take notice of them rather
from him, then from Mr. Pr. (though I have read them in his Book) for diverse
reasons.

1. Because Mr. P. is a friend to the Presbyteriall government, having both M.
Prinne his Vindication. p. 56.
pleaded for it, and been persecuted (as he says) by Sectaries, and
Independents, for his good will unto it.

2. Because he So in the Epistle to the Reader before his Vindicat. fol. 2. p.
2.
professes to love and honor with his soul the Assembly of Divines; and has
in a book of purpose vindicated them from Libellous aspersions of the
Antipresbyterians. I confess Mr. Saltm. was once so reverently and religiously
conceited of them, that he honored them in print with the Title of a most
Sacred Assembly, in a M. Salem. his Dedication, of the Examinations, or the
Discovery of some dangerous positions delivered in a Sermon of Reformation in
the Church of the Savoy on the Fast day, July 26. 1643. by Tho. Fuller. B. D.
Dedication of a little book unto them; some of whom (my self for one) desired
him to forbear that Title in the rest of the Copies which were not then
wrought off from the Pres^e; but being so far engaged against the
Presbyteriall way as now he is, I cannot think he has so good either opinion
of, or affection to the Assembly, as formerly he has professed unto them, and
toward them.

3. Because I am confident that whatsoever Mr. P. writes (though I approve not
all that is set out in his name) he writes with a very upright and sincere
heart; without any sinister end or aim at gain to himself, or glory with men.

4. Because I have found him so kind to me in several kinds, that I am loath to
take him for an adversary in any public contestation; and yet I shall take
the boldness (as just occasion shall induce me) to use the freedom of a
friend unto him, and to be true to the truth, without partial respect to
friend or foe.

5. Because Mr. Pr. does not write what Mr. Saltm. alleges out of him,
against expedition in the setting up of Presbyteriall government, much less
finally to suppress it, which seems to be the desire and endeavor of Mr.
Salt^^.

SECT. XIIII. The objections taken from a supposed needlesnesse of the
Presbytery answered.
THat which he produces against the Presbytery in Mr. Prinnes name, consists
chiefly of two particulars.

1. That there is no necessity of it, that it should be established.

2. The want of efficacy in it, where it is established.

For the first, he produces a remarkable passage (as he calls it) out of Mr.
Prinnes Vindication in these words.

And if our Assembly and Ministers will but diligently preach against that
catalogue of scandalous sins, and sinners, they have presented to the
Parliament, and the Parliament prescribe severe Tem porall Laws and punishments
against them, and appoint good Civil Magistrates to see them duly executed,
and inflicted; I am confident, that this would work a greater Reformation in
our Church and State in one half year, then all the Church Discipline and
Consures now so eagerly contested for, will do in an age, and will be the
only true way, and speediest course to reform both Church and State at once;
which I hope the Parliament will consider of, and take care, that our Ministers
(like the Bishops formerly) may not now be taken up with ruling and governing,
but preaching and instructing, which is work enough, wholly to engrosse their
time and thoughts.

Answer.
This saying of Mr. P. I see begins to be had in honor by out Independent
Brethren; for it is the Alpha of Mr. S.E. and Mr. T.T. their defense of
positions, it is as the Omega of Mr. S. his answer to Mr. Prins Vindication,
(and I wish the Author of it may have so much of it from the better sort of
them as may make him some amends for the contumelies, and calumnies he has
suffered from the worse) and if Mr. P. his Testimony be so authentic with
them, (but with most of them I know it is not) it may not be amiss to mind
them, not of a piece of a lease, but of whole Independencie examined, unmasked,
refuted by 12. new parti^ular Interrogatories: detecting both the manifold
absurdities, inconveniences that must necessarily attend it, to the great
disturbance of Church, State, the diminution, subversion of the lawful
undoubted power of all Christian Magistrates, Parliaments, Synods: and thaking
the chief pillars, wherewith its Patrons would support it. And, A fresh
discovery of some prodigious New wandering-blazing stars and firebrands, etc.
Books of his making, against their way.

The words forecited contain three things. 1. A remedy against scandalous
sins, and the sufficiency of that remedy, without Church Discipline, and
Censures, so eagerly contended for.

2. An hope that the Parliament will consider of, and take care that Ministers
may not (like Bishops formerly) be taken up with ruling, and governing.

3. A reason of that hope, because preaching, and instructing is work enough to
engrosse their time and thoughts.

1. For the first, the Remedy prescribed against scandalous sins.

If our Assembly and Ministers will but diligently preach against that
Catalogue of scandalous sins, they have presented to the Parliament, and the
Parliament prescribe severe Temporal Laws, and punishments against them, and
appoint good Civil Magistrates to see them duly executed and inflicted.

Answer.
Here is less required of the Ministers then is performed by many of them;
more promised concerning Laws, Punishments, and Magistrates then without
presumption can be expected by any: For,

1. For the Ministers, they preach against those scandalous sins contained in
the Catalogue, and more too; and undertake to add many more to the Catalogue
then are expressed; and the Honorable House of Commons has sent an Order to
the Assembly of Divines to that purpose; and when a supplement is made in
obedience thereto, there will be yet more found out not mentioned before; so
that there will be still new matter for addition, unless there be a reserve
(...), of remaining particulars, to be added when they are discovered, and some
cautionary Order made that the Minister may not be put upon this hard Dilemma,
either to administer to any against his judgment and conscience, or to suspend
his own act of administration with hazard to himself, either for his person,
or estate; which will be a greater inconvenience then any worthy Communicant
can suffer, if he be upon the Ministers mistake unworthily denied his right to
Gods Ordinance for one turn only; (for before the next celebration of the
Sacrament that which was doubtful before may be fully cleared) and of this
difference there be two Reasons.

1. If the party came worthily prepared, and were refused, he may have his part
in the benefit of the Sacrament, as if he had actually received; for in such a
case God accepts the will for the deed.

2. If he have well prepared his heart for that holy Communion, he has so much
charity, as not to take offense at the scrupled conscience of his Minister, at
least not to desire that he should act any thing against it, because of the
counsel and determination of the Apostle, Whatsoever is not of faith is sin,
Romans 14.23. so much humility, as to take the repulse in a doubtful case with
meekness, and patience; so much faith, as to believe that though his innocence
for the present be under a cloud, the Lord will bring forth his righteousness
as light, and his indgement as the noone day, Psalm. 37.6.

Object. If it be said, the Minister may pretend conscience when it is perhaps
some secret grudge, which tempts him to put upon his Parishioner an open
disgrace.

Answ. 1. I hope we shall have such Ministers, so well known by their
faithfulness in preaching, and conscionablenesse in walking, that there will
be no ground for such a suspicion at such a time.

2. Though the consciousnesse of mine own innocent intentions might dispose
me, for mine own particular, to accept of any penalty that a civil Sanction
can impose, or that the arbitrary revenge of the repulsed party would inflict,
if I were convinced to have kept any from the Sacrament out of spite, or a
perverse spirit, or inconsiderate rashness, without a cause which may be
allowed to be just before a competent Judge; yet I hope, that all who have
authority to determine any thing upon such miscarriage of the Minister, will
think it sufficient, and answerable to exact justice, that he who shall abuse
his power or transgress his duty in such a case, be dealt withal lege
talionis; that is, that the Classis for his undue suspension suspend him from
the Sacrament, which will bring so much more reproach and shame upon him, then
he brought upon the party refused, as the more prudence, piety, and charity
was required in him, and the more notice is taken of him when he prevaricates
in his office and function, and is punished for it in such an open, and eminent
manner.

Object. But to leave it in the power of the Minister, without an express and
particular rule, to receive, or reject whom he pleases, is to put into his
hands an unlimited arbitrary power, which on all hands, in all sorts of men is
disliked, and disclaimed.

Answ. 1. It is not to be left to the Minister alone, but to the Presbytery.

2. Though he act alone in the administration it self, he is not to be thought
to act by an arbitrary power, when according to his duty (following the rule
and his present light) he endeavors to put difference betwixt the holy and
profane, betwixt the unclean and the clean, ^zek. 22.26. and to preserve the
holy Sacrament from contempt, that by a confusion of holy and unholy
communicants, the Brownists and others who act according to their principles,
may not be hardened in their separation from our sacred Assemblies.

And in such a case for any private man to obtrude himself upon the Minister,
is to act an arbitrary power upon him, yea an arbitrary tyranny if he should be
authorized so to do: and should it be so (out we have so much experience of
the piety, prudence, and indulgence of the most Honorable Houses, that we can
never suspect any such pressure to proceed from them) we can readily resolve to
act, or to forbear what according to the Dictate of our consciences we
conceive to be enjoined, or prohibited by our great Master, and to bear and
suffer what shall be imposed on us by our Superiors under him, to whom we
profess our obedience is due, (being but private persons) either actively or
passively, in whatsover they shall determine concerning our persons, liberties,
and estates.

2. For that he says of severe laws and punishments to be constituted, and
good Magistrates chosen to see them actually executed, we confess, if that
could be generally, and perpetually expected, or but for the most part, there
were great hope of much help by such means against both the scandalous sins
contained in the Catalogue, and others of like kind; but so long as Magistrates
are men of no purer mould, or metal, then Ministers are, and they pass not
through so severe an examination before they be admitted to their offices, as
Ministers do, nor have so many obligations laid upon them for sincerity, and
integrity, as are laid upon Ministers; nor so many eyes upon them to observe
their aberrations from a right rule, as Ministers have; nor are like to have so
many mouths open to reprove, or reproach them for, or so many hands to
restrain them from misdoing, or to punish them for it, (as most Ministers in
regard of their poverty, and impotencie, for the most part may expect, which
the Magistrates their superiors in estate and authority need not so much to
fear) there is no reason I conceive, to take all power of censure from the
Presbytery, for the Ministers sake (for the Elders are not denied to be
capable of jurisdiction as they are members of the Civil State) and to put all
upon the power, and vigilant and conscionable execution of the Magistrate.

And I doubt not but we may confidently aver, and the experience of precedent
and subsequent times will make it good, that it is so far from being
superfluous that there be a concurrence of the Civil and Presbyteriall power
for suppression of sin, that when both are employed and improved with all
prudence, diligence, and conscience, to suppress the corruption of nature, and
to prevent the spreading and prevailing of scandalous sins, and when the severe
and strict discipline of private Families, and of common Schools is added unto
them, there will be no cause, for all that, to suspect any pleonasme either of
piety, or civilitie, among the people of the Kingdom.

SECT. XV. Of Mr. Colemans Interimisticall Magistracy.
NOr would that way which Mr. Coleman in his late (and yet perhaps too soon put
forth) Re-examination of the Examination of his Sermon remembers, be so
sufficient of it self, A Brotherly examination, reexamined. p. 1^.
as that if it had prevailed, there would have been no need of a Presbytery to
supply the defect thereof, as he delivers it: it is this,

At the extirpation of the Prelacie, the Honorable Parliament would have
established Commissioners in all Counties as an Interimisticall Magistracy,
etc. And this he seems to conceive a better way of Church Government then
that of the Presbytery; so much better, that if that had been set up, this
would have been superfluous.

But in this historical passage of his, there be many particulars which may
come under correction; for first, he says the Parliament would have
established Commissioners in all Counties, as an Interimisticall Magistracy;
And would the Parliament have done it? why did they not do it? was any power
greater then the Parliaments? any prudence more prevalent then theirs?
Secondly, Some, says he, (and who they were is enough known) fearing that if
once it were there placed, they should never get it into their hands again,
cried it down, and were a stop in the way of the intended work.

Answer.
Who these some were, is not known enough, I think not at all; for it is like
that a party, a smaller party, (for so must that be which is a contra-distinct
to the Honorable Parliament) should oppose and overbeare the greater part,
resolutions being made by plurality of Votes? It is much more probable (to say
no more) that some, and but some, would have set up an Interimisticall
Magistracy, and that the Honorable Parliament cried it down and were a stop
in the way of the intended work; my reason is,

1. Because they never made Ordinance, or Order for that Interimisticall
Magistracy.

2. Because they have done both for the Presbyteriall Government.

3. Because an Interim Germania decestabibis farrago. Bez. respons. ad Baldwin.
p. 49. See Bucolz. Ind. Chron. p. 562. ad an. 1548. Epist. Brentii Calvine. p.
77.
Interimisticall Temperament has been always by the godly, and orthodoxe
party attended with jealousy and fear, and has been by them as much hated,
as feared.

4. Because that Interimisticall Magistracy that was projected, was too like
Prelacie to be liked (by such as desired a through Reformation;) and that in
three things especially.

1. In that it had no warrant in the word of God.

2. That it would shrink up the power into a few hands, which should be
communicated to many, as the Prelacie did.

3. In that it was contrary to the example of all the truly reformed Churches
in the Christian world.

SECT. XVI. The Objection of eager contestation for Church Discipline, and
Censures answered.
HAving done with Mr. Colemans Interim, (which came in as a parenthesis to the
Discourse we were in, though it be pertinent to it) I return to Mr. Saltm. his
exception, taken out of Mr. Prinnes Vindication, where he aggravates the matter
against the Presbytery, in that, though by the sufficiency of other Remedies
it be needless, (so it has been said, and thereto we have replied) it is yet
very eagerly contended for.

The Answer is, if he meant it concerning admission to, or rejection from the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, (which is that which has been most agitated
betwixt him and some of our Tribe) the contestation on the Ministers part is
but for the liberty of their conscience, the purity of Gods Ordinance, the
preventing of Scandal, which causes and confirms Schism; and in such cases
it becomes them not to be remiss, or to manage such a Cause with a Laodicean
luke warmenesse, but with servencie of spirit; and yet I doubt not, but their
zeal therein, for the chiefest of them, is, and will be guided with knowledge,
and both tempered with humility, modesty, and meekness of spirit.

And that it has none affinity with an affectation of power, or liberty to
reject men from the Sacrament at their pleasure, I believe (because I am
confident it is the mind of most of those Ministers who are competently
qualified with knowledge, and grace for their holy function) that it is matter
of great grief of heart unto them to have any occasion of sending any of their
Congregations sad from the Sacrament, or (as it may be likely to prove in most
cases) with wrath, and heart-burning against themselves. For my part I ever
took it for one of the great aggrievances which many godly Ministers (who were
conformists in the gesture of receiving the Lords Supper) suffered under the
domination of the Bishops, that they put it upon them to put such from the
Sacrament as out of scruple of conscience durst not kneel at the receipt of it;
and that such were threatened with suspension (and some actually suspended from
the Ministry) as admitted Communicants either standing, or sitting, though
never so well instructed and well affected in matter of Religion, and never so
religious in life and conversation; and if I might make mine own choice, I had
rather submit my self to the meanest man within my Pastoral charge, in the
most servile offices belonging to his person, for a week together, then for
one time only return him from the Lords Table, as unworthy to be admitted to
partake of the provision thereof; or as Coenam proximo die dominico sinnus
celebraturi. Hinc cogita quibus angustiis nunc constringar; utinon me absente
posset celebrari, bac condition, ut ad vos usque vel manibus reptarem. Calvin.
Epist. Farello, data Calend. September. 1546. Ep. p. 64. in fol. excus. Genev.
anno 1575.
Calvin once said on the like occasion, I had rather absent my self from the
Sacrament for that turn, when there is cause to turn any from the Sacrament,
though I went away somewhither upon mine hands, then to make any distinguishing
disturbance in the celebration of the Supper. And if I know mine own heart in
this point, I think it would be as great a trouble to me to be an agent, as to
any man to be a patient in such a repulse; and as great a joy if any were able
to clear it unto my conscience, that no part of that Government ought to be
committed to my charge, which I ever apprehended as a burden, (and that an
heavy one) rather then a privilege.

Secondly, for the hope that he has that the Parliament will consider of, and
take care that our Ministers, (like the Bishops formerly) may not be taken up
too much with ruling and governing.

Answer.
I hope so too, and I have more then hope also; for I am well assured the
Parliament is so wise, that their Reformation will have so much of the spirit
of sound judgment, so little of pangs of excessive antipathy, that they will
not run so far from one extreme, as to arrive at the other. There is a
golden medium betwixt so much as the Bishops had, and none at all, as some
would now have it.

Thirdly, for the Reason of that hope, it is because preaching and instructing
is work enough wholly to engrosse their time, and thoughts.

Answer.
Yet not so wholly, but that there may be a competent time allowed for
assistance in Discipline; there have been many Disciplinarians who have been
frequent Preachers, and great Writers also; as Calviu, Beza, Moulin, and diverse
others; and there are many Divines at this present, who bestow many hours
daily at the debates, and other business of the Assembly at Westminster, and
yet are not wanting to their Pulpits on the Sabbath, and who preach many times
on the week days besides; and (in modesty to omit the account of mine own
time, studies and taskes for above forty years together, and I believe
diverse of my Brethren have much to say for themselves to the same purpose) I
shall instance only in the great abilities, and diligence of my very learned
and religious friend, and Brother, Dr. Hoyle, who had occasion by way of
Apology, to plead for himself, before his Rejoinder to the lesuite Malone, in
this manner.

The Book indeed is presented to the world far later then my expectation;
which has been ready, as it now comes forth, these many years: But the
Press was still employed, and occupied with other things, by them that had
command. He that herein imputes sloth or negligence to me, knows me not. For if
I should give but an Indiculus of my studies, Et vacet annals nostrorum audire
laborum; I might make the Jesuit, and a thousand more ashamed of their
idleness. Far be it from me to brag and beast, who have ever abhorred all
shadow of vainglory: remembering Solomon's words, Let another man praise thee
and not thine own mouth, Prove. 27. And therefore leaving it to the disposer,
and prosperer of all mine endeavors, I content, and feast my self with the
suffrage of my conscience, as desirous for mine own part to have something
more then the world knows. Though I might appeal (if need were) to the grand
Reader of Europe, as best acquainted from the very first with me, and my
studies. But what the world knows give me leave to speak: that it may appear
that this work could never fall into fuller hands, or to a man more employed;
who could allot no more time to it then what must be gained succisivis horis.
Pro Archia.
Never could Tully speak more truly of his abstracted life, and importunate
lucubrations. I expounded the whole Bible through in the College, in daily
Lectures, and in the chiefest books ordinarily a verse a day; we need not
Origens (...): this work we held almost fifteen years. A few years before
this was ended I began likewise the second Exposition of the whole Bible in
the Church: and within ten years have ended all the New Testament, excepting
one book and a piece, all the Prophets, all Solomon and Job; so that my Answer
to the Jesuit did in part concur with both these labors. What preaching,
what expounding, this is my constant practice, (neither sickness nor any thing
else withdrawing me) thrice every Sabbath for the far greater part of the
year; once every Holy Day, often twice, besides many other extraordinary
sudden occasions. Add to these my weekly Lectures (as Professor) in the
Controversies, and my Answers to all Bellarmine in word and writing. Where in
above eight years I finished his Tome of the seven Sacraments, for there we
began; his last Tome in six years, and now sundry years in the Tome or
Tomes remaining. What breathing time had I in all these employments? or how
could this work be committed to fuller hands?

And though there be but a few who are so eminent in parts, and in performances
so laborious, yet the most of those Ministers who are to bear a part in the
Discipline of the Church, either are, or (if the Refomation proceed) will be so
well qualified, that they may give due attendance upon preaching, and yet have
competent time for other duties, whereto as men, as Christians, or as
Ministers, whether in the Church, or Consistory, they are engaged. And Mr. Pr.
knows by experience in his own profession, that many are able (being
habituated in Book-learning, and Law-cases, and pleading of Causes) upon a
little warning to speak more, and better to the purpose, then many others by
long preparation; and he himself, we see, has time enough, not only to plead
his Clients causes, but to write so many books, as were they bound up together,
would make diverse very competent Volumes: and while a good Minister, (and I
hope we shall have more store of such then in former times) is exercised in
Church Government, he is not quite out of office for preaching, and
instructing, for he may have just occasion and fair opportunity,
ministerially to admonish those that are convened, either as parties to be
censured, or as witnesses to be examined, in the Ecclesiastical Consistory.

SECT. XVII. The Objection of in efficacy for holiness of life in such as
live under the Presbytery answered.
THe second particular he produces, in Mr. Prinnes name, against the
Presbytery is, M. Salim. in his opening of (...) the Vindication. p. 23. 24.
and in the Vindication it self. p. 57.
the want of efficacy in it, where it is established; which he exemplifieth by
instances in several reformed Churches elsewhere, and comparing England with
them, he says, That the practical power of godliness is generally more
eminently visible in the lives of the generality of the people, more strict,
pious, less scandalous, and licentious in our English Congregations, where
there has been powerful preaching without the practice of excommunication,
or suspension from the Sacrament, then in the reformed Churches of France,
Germany, Denmark, or Scotland; for which I appeal (says he) to all
Travellours, and Independent Ministers, who have lived in the Netherlands, who
will, and must acknowledge, that in the sanctification of the Lords Day,
strictness of life, and exemplarinesse of conversation, our English Ministers
and Protestants excel all others.

These be Mr. Pr. his words, upon which Mr. Saltm. makes this inference, viz.
That the Vindication, though it pretend in the general face of it to be for
the Presbytery, yet it is clear, that in aspersing the Government in all
those reformed Kingdoms, where the practice and power of it has been, it
secretly wounds the glory of it in the opinion of the world; and though it pull
not down the Government quite, yet it Weakens the posts, or judgments of men,
on which it stands.

Answer.
1. By what I have read of Mr. Prinnes writings, what I have observed of him my
self, and received by report of such as are best acquainted with his mind, and
ways, I conceive him to be so true an Israelite, without all guile, that he
will not pretend one thing, when he intends another.

2. For the Assertion it self, there be two things to be considered.

1. Whether it be true or no.

2. If so, what may be the reason of it, that alleged, or some other.

For the first: Whether the Assertion be true or no?

The resolution of this Question must be made with difference of times; for
Countries, as well as particular persons, have their variations in Religion,
not only for profession of the faith, but for practice of holiness: as in
King James his days, upon the Declaration and liberty granted upon the
Sunday, (that is the name in the Declaration, and it is the fittest name for a
license of profaneness) for sports and pastimes, renewed by the King that now
is, the people of England were more loose and licentious on that day, then now
they are, upon the burning of that Book, and an Ordinance of Parliament set out
for the more holy observation of the Sabbath. The Application of this
distinction may resolve the observation several ways; and we may say, that
sometimes one people or Nation, sometimes another, (and the same people at one
time more then at another) may be more conformable in practice to the
principles of piety.

And as there is a distinction of times, so of places; some are more, some
less civilized; as in Scotland Abbot Geogr. P. 207, 208.
the Low-land is the most civil part of the Realm, where Religion is most
orderly established; but the other part called the Highland, which lies
further to the North, or bends toward Ireland, is more rude and savage, and
so further from conformity in Religion.

And there may be great difference also in respect of Preachers, and Sermons,
wherewith some Countries are much better furnished then others; and thence are
not only more Civil, but more Religious also; for civilitie and religion
mutually conduce to the help of each other; Civilitie makes men more capable
of Religion, Religion makes them more conformable to Civilitie; this is
observable in many parts of Wales, and Cornwall, which are but poorly stored
with well gifted Preachers, in comparison of London, and many other places of
this Kingdom.

And whereas it is said, that in the reformed Churches, as in the Churches of
France, Germany, Denmark, and Scotland, the people be less strict and pious,
more licentious and scandalous then in England, where there has been
powerful preaching, without the practice of excommunication, and suspension
from the Sacrament. It is to be considered that in England both suspension from
the Sacrament, and excommuication have been in use, before the deposition of
the Prelates and Service Book; and by this Argument we might plead for the
retaining of the English Prelacie and Liturgy, and against the establishment
of the Presbytery and Directory, both which Mr. Priune has in a better opinion
and reputation, then the Government and Book which were their predecessors in
the English Church; and if we suppose there is powerful preaching with the one
Government, and not with the other, we should ascribe the prelation to that
which is principal and present, viz. the preaching of the word, and not cast a
reproach upon that which is accessory (though in a secondary degree necessary
also) because it is absent, since the want thereof can contribute nothing to
spiritual proficiencie, but the presence and exercise of it, very much.

2. Question: If the precedent assertion be true, what may be the reason?

Answer.
If there be less strictness in those forementioned Churches, then in the
Church of England, it cannot be charged upon the Presbyterian Discipline, or
Government; for there is nothing in that which tends to licentiousness, and
scandal, but to the quite contrary; and I can speak it by experience, that
the formal admonition of inordinate walkers by the Minister, and
Churchwardens, without any further proceeding in Discipline, has kept many in
more awe, and better order, then without it they would have been; so that
where the Word is powerfully preached, and that Discipline duly, and piously,
and impartially administered, it is not only very effectual for preservation
of the profession of Christianity from Heresy, and Schism, (as See the
Preface to the new Annotations of the Bible. p. 1.
of the Church of Scotland is observed), but for promotion of the practice of
piety, and prevention of looseness of life, as of the Church of Geneva is
noted, and acknowledged by Bodine, a Papist, in the sixth Chapter of his Book,
de meth, historiae.

And if any where the people living under this Government be more generally
profane, then where it is not, it may, or rather must, be referred, 1. To some
other reason, as in Germany the sin of Drunkenness prevails so much, that
this reproachful Proverb passes upon them, Heylin^ G^^ogr. p. 256.
Germanorum vivere est bibere: The Germans life is drowned in his liquor: whence
it is that they abound in Brewers, Ibid. p. 260.
having 777. of that Trade, 40. Bakers, one Lawyer, one Physician, in the Town
of Hamburge; and where they are habitually addicted to that vice, they are
little disposed to the power of godliness.

2. In some Countries where the Presbytery is established, the Ministers are
in mean estimation, because they are reduced to a despicable poverty, their
revenues being kept from them, by the Nobility and Gentry, and they tucked up
to The large Declaration of the late Tumults in Scotland. p. 7, 8.
some poor pittance, either by way of stipendiary benevolence, or some other
mean allowance, unworthy of the Ministers of the Gospel; and which exposes
them to all manner of contempt, and a base dependence upon their patrons: Now
where the Ministers of the Gospel are despised, the Gospel is less honored,
and the people less affected with any doctrine, or duty of piety, and
conscience.

3. Some reformed Churches, though they admit of the Presbyterian Government,
are the less reformed, because they are in their habitation, and conversation,
mingled with profane Papists, as in France.

4. And lastly, the most reformed Churches in foreign parts are, and long have
been much unreformed in the Doctrine of the Sabbath; which few foraine Divines
teach so soundly, few foraine Christians observe so conscientiously, as do the
Divines and Christians of the Church of England; and it is experimentally
proved, that according to men's care, or neglect of the sanctification of the
Sabbath, they are more or less pious, or profane, strict, or licentious in
their conversations.

It is not then the absence of Discipline, where the Word is powerfully
preached, and the Sabbath religiously observed, that furthereth any thing to
holiness of life, but the want of these (which should be joined with
Discipline) which makes it less effectual for popular reformation; but where
all are joined together, there not only the ordinary behavior of men is more
orderly, but diverse are in their lives so strict, so exact, that, as a The
Essays of the Lord ^erulam. Essay ^2. (...).
witty Author makes the resemblance, they are like a verse wherein every
syllable is measured.

SECT. XVIII. Showing what might be retorted upon the Antipresbyteriall party,
but concluding for Unity and Peace, with allegation of Mr. Buroughs his
propositions of reconciliation and accord: and some other particulars tending
thereto.
HItherto I have for the most part held out the Buckler of Apology against the
exceptions taken at the present setting up of the Presbyteriall Government.

I could now take up the Sword of Assault, and put Mr. Saltm. to be Defendent,
while I bring in Objections against the haste which some of his party make in
setting up their Congregationall way, not only without Authority, but against
it. For the Presbyterian Discipline has been by Authority of Parliament in
^^bate, first in the Assembly, afterward in both Houses of Parliament; and so
far as it is agreeable to the word of God, and the example of the best
reformed Churches, covenanted to be established in this Kingdom, and in the
Kingdom of Ireland, contrary to the Congregationall and Independent platform;
and many parts of it have been set forth already by Ordinance, or Order of the
Honorable Houses; yet the Presbyterians take not upon them to be active in the
choice of Elders, or in any other part of Ecclesiastical power, but humbly
wait for further warrant from the Parliament, to proceed in the work; while
many of our dissenting Brethren, of their own accord, and without the command,
or consent, and against the Vote of the Civil State, gather Churches, or
continue the Government of those they have gathered, according to the model of
their own choosing, notwithstanding the joint admonition of many eminent
Ministers, as well Independent as Presbyteriall, to forbear, until what was,
and yet is, in part, under deliberation, came to accomplishment: and M. S.
Eaton Teacher, and Tim. Tailor, Pastor of the Church of Duckenfield in
Cheshire, in their late defense of sundry positions and Scriptures to justify
the Congregationall way.
some take the boldness publicly, and in print, to avow themselves as
Ministers under the name, and office of Teachers and Pastors of new constituted
Churches, and publicly to assert their repugnant principles, and practices, in
opposition to that which the Honorable Houses of Parliament have partly
authorized already, by their Civil Sanction, and engaged themselves further to
authorize, throughout the Churches of both Kingdoms, as God shall be pleased
to make way for a through reformation, by reducing the several Countries under
the command of the King and Parliament.

But I had rather (then recriminate) friendly and kindly close with my yet
dissenting Brother; and therefore heartily commend it to his Christian
consideration, to study the reconciliation, and union of all the godly party,
(as Mr. Buroughs has lately done) and not to proceed to discourses which tend
to make, or maintain division, or estrangement, and alienation of affection
betwixt them.

To that purpose I shall propose as a pattern of imitation to Mr. Saltm. and
to all others who partake with him in his present Opinion, what he has set
down in the seventh Chapter of his Irenicum in his own words.

First, Mr. Buroughs his Irenieum. c. 7. p. 43, 44, 45.
Those in the Congregationall way acknowledge, that they (...) bound in
conscience to give account of their ways to the Churches about them, or to any
other who shall require it; this not in an arbitrary way, but as a duty that
they owe to God, and man.

Secondly, They acknowledge that Synods of other Ministers, and Elders about
them, are an Ordinance of Jesus Christ, for the helping the Church against
errors, schisms, and scandals.

Thirdly, That these Synods may, by the power they have from Christ, admonish
men or Churches in his Name, when they see evils continuing in, or growing upon
the Church; and their admonitions carry with them the anthoritie of Jesus
Christ.

Fourthly, As there shall be cause, they may declare men or Churches to be
subverters of the faith; or otherwise, according to the nature of the offense,
to shame them before all the Churches about them.

Fifthly, They may by a solemn act, in the Name of Jesus Christ, refuse any
further communion with them, till they repent.

Sixthly, They may declare, and that also in the Name of Christ, that these
erring people, or Churches, are not to be received into fellowship with any of
the Churches of Christ, nor to have communion one with another, in the
Ordinances of Christ: Now all this being done in Christ's Name, is this nothing
to prevail with conscience?

If you say, private brethren may admonish, and declare in the Name of Christ.

This is more then if any private Brethren should do the same thing; for at
Synod is a solemn Ordinance of Christ, and the Elders are to be looked on as
the officers of Jesus Christ.

But our Brethren say, There is one means more in their way, then the
Congregation all way has, that is, if the six former will not work, then
Synods may deliver to Satan.

In this very thing lies the very knot of the Controversy, between these who
are for the Presbyteriall, and those who are for the Congregationall way, in
reference to the matter in hand, namely the means to reducing from, or keeping
out errors and heresies from the Church, in this lies the dividing business:
But I beseech you consider at what a punctum we divide here, and judge whether
the cause of division in this thing be so great, as there can be no help; and
whether, if an evil spirit prevail not amongst us, we may not join; For,

First, consider, what is there in this delivering to Satan? which is a seventh
thing which our Brethren think may hopefully prevail with men's consciences,
when the six former cannot.

Yes, say they, for by this they are put out of the Kingdom of Christ, into
the kingdom of Satan, and this will terrify.

This putting out of Christ's Kingdom, must be understood clave non errante; if
the Synod judges right, not otherwise; yes, this is granted by all.

Then consider whether this be not done before, and that with an authority of
Christ, by those former six things; for bereticall Congregations, or persons,
are judged and declared in a solemn Ordinance, by the officers of Christ,
gathered together in his Name, to be such as have no right to any Church
Ordinance, to have no communion with any of the Churches of Christ. Now if this
judgment be right, are not such persons, or Congregations put out of the
Kingdom of Christ, and put under the power of Satan consequently?

But thirdly. If some brethren rise to a seventh degree, and others stay at
six, which have yet such a power over conscience, that if they prevail not,
the seventh is no way likely to prevail: why should not the Apostles rule
quiet us all, Phil. 3.15, 16. Whereto we have already attained, let us walk by
the same rule; if in any thing you be otherwise minded, God will reveal even
this unto you; if we have attained but to six, and our Brethren have attained
to seven, let us walk together lovingly to the six; if God shall after
reveal the seventh (we will promise to pray and study in the mean time) we
shall walk with them in that also: why must it needs be now urged with
violence, so as to divide else? and although we hold not the seventh, yet there
is an ingredient in the sixth, that has in it the strength of the seventh; for
wherein lies the strength of the seventh above the rest? is it not in this,
that it is the last means Christ has appointed in his Church to work upon the
heart? this consideration has much terror it it; Now those in the
Congregationall way say, that this is fully in the sixth, wherefore that is as
terrible to their consciences, as the seventh can be to the consciences of our
brethren, and that upon the same ground.

If so, what is the difference (for this matter) more then that which has
been betwixt many godly and Orthodoxe Divines about the division of the Lords
Prayer, whether it contain 6. or 7. petitions, when those that are for six,
have as much matter in those six, as those that have seven; and those that
have seven, no more then is contained in the six? for my part, if this be
heartily, and cordially in point of Church Government delivered, and so
received, and professed by those of his side, I hope such as are adversaries
unto both parties, shall not long rejoice, and prosper by the advantage they
make of our mutual divisions.

SECT. XIX. Further grounds and hopes of union in the Churches of the Sister
Kingdoms of England and Scotland, with Answers to the Objections that are made
against it.
I Have the more hope of the Union forementioned, because if they (who in
respect of the paucitie and noveltie of their party, compared with the Churches
of the Presbyterian Government, throughout the Christian World, for number and
Seniority are not so considerable as some conceive) will yield as far as they
ought, for a pacificall accord, their Presbyterian Brethren will as far as
they may (with security to the truth, and reservation of the interest, and
honor of the Reformed Churches) come down to them in such a Christian
accommodation, as is requisite for a conclusion of peace.

My ground for this is that which I have observed in the disposition of the
Reverend, Religious, and prudent Commissioners of the Church of Scotland; for
though that Church be supposed, and censured by some, as the most rigid in
exacting assent to, and observation of her rules, and customs, as if all must
yield to her, as the Standard of Discipline, and she would yield to none, they
have always, in all their debates, and behavior, even toward the dissenting
Brethren, carried themselves with a most Christian and Evangelicall sincerity,
and sweetness of spirit, and some of them have well witnessed to the world
their hopes, desires, and endeavors for peace, especially with all the
religious and faithful Preachers, and Professors of the Church of England.

For instance, one of them in his Mr. Gillespie his Brotherly examination of
some passages of M. C. his printed Sermon. p. 33. This is repeated in his
latter Book called Nihi^ Respondes. p. 19.
Brotherly examination of some passages in Mr. Colem. his Sermon, to this
Question, Where shall the Independents and we meet? returns this answer, In
holding a Church Governmeut jure divino, that is, that the Pastors and Elders
ought to suspend, or excommunicate, according to the degree of the offense of
scandalous sinners; and who can tell but the purging of the Church from
scandals, and the keeping of the Ordinances pure, when it shall be actually
seen to be the great work endeavored on both sides, may wake union betwixt us
and the Independents more easy then many imagine? and in his Ibid.
latter book (says he) we will never despair of an union with such as are
sound in the faith, holy in life, and willing to a Church refining and
sinne-censuring government, in the hands of Church Officers.

And in answer to Mr. C. his relation of news of agreement betwixt
Presbyterians and Independents, Lutherans and Calvinists, Papists and
Protestants, Turks and Christians; in holding that there is a Religion wherein
men ought to walk, he says: No Sir, they must be united upon the like terms,
that is, you must first have Turks to be Christians, Papists to be Protestants,
and then you must have them as willing to purge the Church of scandals, and to
keep the Ordinances pure, etc. And after a few lines before repeated, quitting
Mr. C. his geering report of news, he replieth (but soberly and seriously) Now
will I tell you my news, the Presbyterians and Independents are both equally
interested against the Erastian Principles; and which is more, for degree of
assurance, and for more general concurrence in truth and peace; not this
Commissioner, nor these Commissioners only, but the whole Church of Scotland,
is well prepared, and disposed to a Christian, and Brotherly compliance with
the Church of England, in the way of reformation; for Mr. Coleman having
objected that the Commissioners of Scotland came not to the Assembly at
Westminster as Divines, by dispute and disquisition to find out the truth, but
at Judges to censure all different opinions as errors; for so (says he) come
for nine Divines to Dort, Alexander to the Council of Nice, Cyrill to Ephesus;
the Learned Commissioner answers him thus: Is it not enough to slander us,
though he do not for our sakes slander those worthy Divines that came to the
Synod of Dort, Alexander also and Cyrill, prime witnesses for the truth in
their days? would no less content him then to approve the Objections of the
Arminians against the Synod at Dort, which I had mentioned, p. 33? but he gets
not away so: the strongest instance which I had given he has are once touched:
it was concerning Paul and Barnabas who wore engaged (not in the behalf of one
Nation but of all the Churches of the Gentiles) against the imposition of the
Mosaicall rites, and had so declared themselves at Antioch, before they came to
Jerusalem. Finally, whereas he doubts, though not of our willingness to learn
more, yet of our permission to receive more: That very paper first given in by
we (which I had cited, and unto which he makes this reply) did speak not only
of our learning, but of the Church of Scotlands receiving: And which is more,
there is an actual experiment of it, the last general Assembly having ordered
the laying aside of some particular customs in that Church, and that for the
nearer uniformitie with this Church of England, as was expressed in their own
Letter to the Reverend Assembly of Divines. And though they thought it
necessary to show their different opinion in one point of the Directory, yet
they entered their dissent without any disaffection to us of the Assembly; I
will give you their sense in their own words, which are these:

Only we have thought it necessary to declare, and make known, that the
Clause in the Directory for the administration of the Lords Supper, which
appoints the Table to be so placed, that the Communicants may orderly sit
about it, or at it, is not to be interpreted as if in the judgment of our
Kirks, it were indifferent for any of the Communicants not to come to, and
receive at the Table, or as if we did approve the distributing of the elements
by the Minister to each Communicant, and not by the Communicants among
themselves, in which particulars we still conceive and believe the order and
practice of our own Kirk to be most agreeable to the word of God, the example
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the nature of that heavenly Feast and Table;
nevertheless in other particulars we have resolved, and do agree to do as
you have desired us in your Letter: This was part of the Letter from the
General Assembly at Edenborough, signed thus: Subscribed in the name of the
General Assembly by Mr. Robert Douglas Moderatour. Feb. 13. 1644.

Whereby we see they do not for that difference of opinion take any offense,
or show any dislike of their Brethren at Westminster, nor any distaste at the
rest of the Directory for any particular contained in it.

But yet for all this some are so unwilling to believe there will be peace,
(especially in the point of Government of the Church) that they feign the
Parliament and the Assembly of Divines at irreconciliable difference about it,
the Divines requiring the stamp of Divine right to be set upon it, and the
Parliament resolute to yield no more authority for it, then a mere Civil
Sanction can give unto it.

Answer.
To this we answer: 1. That the Divines do not affirm the whole frame and
fabric of Church Government to be of Divine right, for it is made up of
particulars of different kinds, viz. Substantials of Government, which have
their warrant either by ordinance in his word, or direct inference from it, as
that there must be Church Officers, Pastors, and their Ordination, Elders, and
Deacons, and Church Offices both of preaching, administration of the
Sacraments, and Government; Church censures, admonition, suspension,
excommunication; and accidental, or circumstantiall additions, which are of
prudentiall direction, and consideration, as for Pastors, when and in what
manner they shall be ordained; whether a Preacher should treat on a Text, or on
some Theological Theme or Common place, when and how often, and to how many at
once the Sacraments should be administered, how many assisting Elders should be
in a Parish, and whether they should be chosen and admitted to their office
with imposition of hands, and continue in it for a year or two, or for term
of life; in what form of words admonition, suspension, or excommunication
should be comprised and pronounced, with diverse others of like sort.

This distinction the Divines of the Assembly make of the contents of the
Directory for the public worship of God throughout the three Kingdoms, (and
the same has the like use in the Church Government desired) their words in the
last lease of the Preface of the Directory are these: We have, after earnest
and frequent calling upon the Name of God, and after much consultation, not
with flesh and blood, but with the holy Word, resolved to lay aside the former
Leiturgy, with the many rites and Ceremonies formerly used in the worship of
God: and have agreed upon this following Directory for all the parts of
public worship, at ordinary and extraordinary times.

Wherein our care has been to hold forth such things as are of Divine
Institution in every Ordinance; and other things we have endeavored to set
forth according to the rules of Christian prudence, agreeable to the general
Rules of the Word of God.

2. Though the Honorable Houses have not yet asserted the constitution of the
Church Government as ordained in or derived from, or as agreeable to the Word
of God, because, (as some render the reason) it is not the manner of Lawmakers
to mingle matter of Religion with their Civil Sanction; yet when they present
it complete in all the parts thereof, it may be they will at least give
intimation of the conformity of it to the Canonical Scriptures according to
the distinction of the parts before proposed; and it is not so strange and
unusual (as some pretend) for Legislative authority to borrow a religious
reputation for what they inact or ordain from the Word of God, for we find
instance thereof in the Statutes Concerning the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
the words of Institution are set down, and 15. places of Scripture quoted in
the Marginewith letters of reference in the Text. Poult. Abridgm. p. 826.
of the first year of Edward the sixth, c. 1.

The Statute of the first of Q. Merry, c. 2. repealed as causing a decay of the
honor of God, and the discomsort of the professors of the truth of Christ's
Religion. Ibid. p. 1005.
In the first of Eliza. c. 2.

For as much as profane swearing and cursing is forbidden by the Word of God.
Ibid. p. 1403.
In the 21. of K. James, c. 20.

Nothing more acceptable to God then the true and sincere service and worship
of him according to his holy will, and that the holy keeping of the Lords Day
is 2 principal part of the true service of God. Ibid. p. 1427.
In the first of K. Charles. c. 1. and

For as much as the Lords Day commonly called Sunday is much broken and
profaned by Carryers, etc. to the great dishonor of God, reproach of Religion,
etc. Ibid. p. 1434.
In the third of K. James. c. 1.

Lastly, the present Parliament has done the like already for some parts of
the Reformation authorized, as for the Ordination of Ministers, which is a
chief part of the Presbyteriall authority, of which they say,

So in the Ordinance for Ordination ordered to be printed. October 2. 1644. p.
2.
Whereas it is manifest by the Word of God, that no man ought to take upon him
the office of a Minister until he be lawfully called and ordained thereunto;
and that the work of Ordination, that is to say, an outward solemn setting
apart of persons for the office of the Ministry in the Church by Preaching
Presbyters, is an Ordinance of Christ, and is to be performed with all due
care, wisdom, gravitie, and solemnity: It is ordained by the Lords and
Commons, etc.

And in their Ordinance for the Directory, Jan. 3. 1644. They begin with
these words, The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, taking into serious
consideration the manifold incenveniences that have risen by the Book of
Common Prayer in this Kingdom, and resolving according to their Covenant to
reform Religion according to the Word of God, and the example of the best
Reformed Churches, have consulted with the Reverend, Pious, and Learned
Divines, called together to that purpose; and do judge it necessary that the
said Book of Common Prayer be abolished, and the Directorie for the public
worship of God, herein after mentioned, be established, and observed in all the
Churches within this Kingdom, etc.

If it be said, that Ordination and Worship are usually distinguished from
Power and Government, and that both of them have more express warrant from the
word of God, then can be found in Scripture for the Presbyteriall Government.

I Auswer.
1. That the question is not now whether there be difference betwixt them, but
whether there be such difference betwixt a Civil Sanction, and Divine
ratification, that the one may not well be brought in with the other.

2. That though there were much use made of the distinction of the key of
order, and the key of power, or of Jurisdiction in the time of the Prelates, so
that they confined that wholly to the Clergy, principally to themselves, while
they sold, or trusted out the key of power, or of jurisdiction to Vicars
general, Chancellours, Archdeacons, Commissaries, and rural Deanes: yet is
Ordination one of the principal parts of the Presbyteriall power; and if it be
(as it is commonly taken) matter of power, to let into the Church by the
Sacrament of Baptism, as indeed it is; and whom to admit to, and whom to keep
back from participation of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, it is a degree of
power far above both, whom to ordain to, or whom to debar from the order
of Presbyters: for,

1. Whatsoever power or authority a Presbyter may claim by the word of God,
is virtually included in his Ordination.

2. They that have power to ordain a Presbyter, have power, upon just cause,
to silence and suspend the execution of that power, and to stop his mouth, Tit.
1.11. if it be opened to broach heresy, or blasphemy, or if his conversation
be vicious, and scandalous.

3. The Covenant, for the general heads of it, comprehends a perfect
enumeration of the maine parts of the desired reformation, under the titles of
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government; but Ordination is not to be
referred to Doctrine or Worship, but to Discipline or Government; for the
ordaining of Governors, and the exercise of Government, properly appertain to
the same Topic or Classis.

4. Though Government and Worship be distinguished betwixt themselves, yet both
agree in this, that their general grounds and rules are found in the word of
God, and in that respect, the one may be set forth in the Civil Sanction with
a relish of, and reference to a religious constitution, as well as the other.

But in case they will not be pleased to express any Divine right, in any part
of the Government, in their Civil Sanction, and will in a Parliamentary, and
Legislative way, establish that thing which really, and in it self, is
agreeable to the Word of God; though they do not declare it to be the will of
Jesus Christ, (as is noted before out of the learned Commissioner of Scotland
his Sect. 8. p. 25.
Brotherly examination, and he has the like in his p. 32.
Nihil Respondes) we must be satisfied. p. 22.


SECT. XX. An Appendix to the precedent examination, being an Apologeticall
Narrative of the Petitions of the Common Council of the City, and Ministers
of London, presented to both the Honorable Houses of Parliament the 19th and
20th days of Novem. 1645. with a Vindication of them, and the proceedings in
them, from the scandalous aspersions of the weekly Pamphleters, especially of
him, who miscals himself by the name of the Moderate Intelligencer.
But howsoever the hope of union has gone on hitherto, since the Petitions of
the Common Council, and of the Ministers of the City, were presented to the
Parliament, there is great likelihood of a dangerous breach betwixt the
Parliament and them, which will not easily be cemented up to perfect accord.

So happily may some conceive, who know no more of the matter then they are told
by the Moderate Intelligencer, or by his Plagiatie the writer of the
continuation of especial and remarkable Passages, (who repeats his lying and
scandalous Relation, word for word) in these terms: This day the Common
Council did present a Petition to the Commons House of Parliament, by diverse
Aldermen, and others of that Council, which seemed to complain, or take ill
the proceedings of the Parliament with the Assembly, in the late business past
concerning the election of Elders, etc.

The Commons sat long about the business, and laid it much to heart, that any
such thing should come from the City, and that they should lend an ear to
any, that should in so evil a way represent things unto them; and of what
dangerous consequence it was, and gave them an answer to this effect.

That they did perceive that they had been informed; and that they could not
but lay it much to heart, that they, who had ever been so ready to do all
good offices for the Kingdom, and go with the Parliament, should from any,
but the Parliament, take a representation of their proceedings; and entreated
them, that herealter they would take satisfaction from themselves: Its true
they did believe they meant well, and had a good meaning, and intention in it,
but they were abused. They had no sooner given answer to this, but there came
another from the Clergy, to the same effect, which was more sad then the
former, for they conceived this latter was an appeal from the Houses to the
people, and of as dangerous a consequence as could be imagined; and that it
deserved a high censure: and withal they resolved, if that was the way
intended, they would go on with their Declaration, and quickly undeceive the
people; and in the interim they referred it to the Committee of examinations,
that the first contrivers, and after fomenters of this business, may be dealt
with according to merit.

This is a parcel of their weekly report, but principally his, who miscals
himself the Moderate Intelligencer, for he is neither Intelligent, writing
what he understands not, nor Moderate, being passionately addicted to a party,
to flatter, either out of an erroneous sancie, fondly set upon irregular
novelties in opinion, and practice, or out of a covetous affection to the wages
of iniquity, the reward of flattery or slander, as the bad cause, whereto he
has engaged his Pen, has need to be served with the one or the other, and in
the latter he has showed himself this last week, a very (...), (that is the
word in the Original for a false accuser) 2 Timothy 3.3. a false accuser of the
brethren, Revel. 12.10. not of brethren in evil, as Simeon and Levi, Genesis
49.5. but in good, in most sincere, and zealous desires, and endeavors to be
serviceable to the Parliament, in prosecution of the great Cause that is in
hand, the through reformation of Church and State.

Among whom there are many, who taken single by themselves, might in good
manners have been entertained with terms which savor more of reverence, then
of contempt; but this three-farthing News-monger takes upon him, as if he had
been authorized by the Parliament, to involve all the venerable Magistrates,
and prime men of power, and trust, in this Honorable City, and a very great
number of the most learned, laborious, and conscientious Ministers of the
Province of London, in an unfaithful and undutifull association against the
Parliament, for their joint petitioning to the Parliament. And where lies the
crime, that may make them liable to so loud a clamor? was it for petitioning
in general, or for their petitioning in particular?

If we consult with his scandalous paper, we shall find that he lays an
heavy charge upon both: First for the general, in the precedent page he
ushereth it in with an egregious calumny, in these words: p. 203:
Now let us come home, and look about us, and see if while our Army is
laboring to subdue the enemy, and end strife, there is not new beginning by
those that Fame says have been the causes of all the strife; we did entreat
them the last week they would let the Parliament alone, and wait, and not
doubt they would see a good issue, and good content; they need not fear, they
may be kept a while from their desires, but in the end they will have content,
if their own earnest pressing for it, do not hinder.

Now let us come home? It would be well Sir, if you would come home, and keep
at home, and take measure of your own parts, and sit close to your Trade, and
not ramble abroad, to busy your self in writing Intelligence of matters which
are far above the elevation of your Pole, or the comprehension of your
headpiece. But your zeal perhaps (such a zeal as the Apostle taxes, which
is without knowledge, Romans 10.2. just like a pressing-iron which has heat
without light) stirred you up to complain of some troublesome spirits, who,
while the Army is laboring to end strife, begin it anew; and they are such
(say you) as Fame says have been the causes of all the strife; and who be
they? Fame says, the late Deputy of Ireland, and the little Drelate of
Canterbury were prime causes of the Kingdoms, and the Churches disturbance.
And are they since their heads were cut off (as Herod thought of John Baptist,
Mark 6.16.) raised from the dead, to revive our divisions? Common Fame says,
the Queen and her Faction, that have parted the King and the Parliament,
Digby, Hopton, Goring, Greenvile, and other Military malcontents, have
caused, and do still continue the most dangerous contentions, and convulsions
in England, as Moutrosse and his party in Scotland; Ormond, and his barbarous
and bloody Papists in Ireland. But we must look for these make bates at home,
and find out such as at present do trouble our peace; and if we do so, Fame
says, that they are such among us, as oppose the settling of an uniforme
Government, and break out communities into several Sects; such as so divide
the husband from the wife, the parents from the children, the master from the
servants, that a zealous Joshua cannot say, I and my house will serve the Lord,
Josh. 24.15. since his family is distracted, and sorted into several
Congregations, and it may be also into heretical conventicles.

Fame says, that such factious journeymen as Mr. D. are public Incendiaries,
and Trumpeters of Sedition, by taking all occasions, making use of all
advantages, casting about for all manner of devices, to increase their divided
party, that they may be able to uphold a faction; and because they cannot hope
that their noveltie and paucitie should be able to maintain a public contest
against so many both persons and Churches, as are engaged against their way,
they make it their Masterpiece, to leaven the most considerable Societies,
Cities, Sea-Townes, Armies, but especially the Parliament, with their
Independent Principles, and practices; and either to get Independents into
places of chief power and trust, or to seduce such as are eminent in dignity,
endowments, or authority, to their side; and if they cannot obtain them, they
plot how to displace them; and if they cannot do that, to render them less
serviceable to the Public, their way is to weaken their reputation with
reproaches, or cunningly to intimate some matter of suspicion touching their
acts, or intentions; if they be of such integrity as is of impregnable proof
against their obloquie, then they will, by way of compliance, work out of them
what they can, which may conduce to their design; and if they can prevail no
further, they will at least by an artificial sweetness of behavior, by
appearances of more then ordinary piety, by a pretended extenuation of
difference of opinion, and practice, and by such insinuations, so becalme or
becharme the spirits of some Presbyterians of eminent parts, as to make them,
if not favorable to their cause, yet so that they may not appear against them
when they should, or but in a very remiss and moderate degree of opposition.
Lastly, (to return to our Intelligencer) they set up weekly Pamphleters, who
are wholly of their stamp, or fee them, or by some other artifices work upon
them, to take all occasions to magnify their party, and to vilify and
calumniate those that oppose them; and so they sometimes hyperbolize a Shrub on
that side into a Cedar, and disparage those, who under God are the chief
pillars, and supporters of the public welfare, as if they were of no more
worth, or use, then Reeds shaken with the wind; and this is not the least part
of the Independent policy, to drive on their design all over the Kingdom; for
most of the common people know little of the progress of public affairs,
but by such Informers, and they furnish them with weekly lies, to honor those
of their own sect, or sects rather, (for they are many) and to cast reproaches
on such as are serious, and resolute in all just, and lawful means of
establishing of truth, and restoring of peace.

But it may be he means by Fame, that report which he and his fellows in
loose sheets have dispersed abroad in City, and Country; and if so, I say,
Famaest malum, his fame is infamous; notoriously false, as he applies it, viz.
to those who make addresses to the Parliament by way of Petition. We did
entreat (says he) the last week they would let the Parliament alone, and
wait, and no doubt they would see a good issue, and good content.

We did entreat them to let the Parliament alone? We Sir, who besides your
self? and why you? and what mean you by letting the Parliament alone? do you
forbid the subject of England to petition the Parliament? if that be your
meaning (as a man of Moderate Intelligence may easily perceive it is) do you
not mean they should be deprived of the most undoubted Privilege, and
Liberty, which by the Law of Nature, and of Nations, is allowed all over the
world? if the Parliament had been of that mind, since their first Session,
they would not have tendered so many Petitions to the King, nor have received so
many Petitions from all parts of the Kingdom; nor could they (but by the
informations received in them) have known so much of the distemper of several
Counties, nor had so just grounds and causes as they had, for many of their
Orders, and Ordinances, which were issued out from that Honorable Senate: and
your self say in the next page, that a part of the Parliaments Answer to the
City Petition was, that the Citizens were entreated hereafter that they would
take satisfaction from themselves, that is, satisfaction of their doubts, and
desires by immediate recourse to that Honorable Court; and how can that be
better, or more acceptably done, then by way of petition?

But he says, They need not fear, they may be kept a while from their
desires, but in the end they will have content, if their own earnest pressing
for it, do not hinder. How knows he that better then they, who have put up
their desires for expediting the difficulties of the Government, by way of
petition to the Parliament? The truth is, if he believe what he writes, it is
but as the Devil believes there is a God, with a very ill will, and if he do
not tremble at it, he is afraid of it; and he would have the Orthodox party but
so to believe it too, as to make them neglect the best means to procure it;
for it has been another piece of subtilty of these sons of Zerviah, 2 Samuel
3, 39. to delay resolution against their way, by pretense that there is no need
of speed in it, or no fit season or opportunity for it, that their opposites
may securely sleep, or slacken their endeavors, while they with intentive
vigilance, and double diligence, work on their own web toward the period
they have projected; and give them but time to prosecute their cause, and they
that say now we need not fear, will say at length perhaps, we may not hope
to enjoy our desires; and it may be they will endeavor to See the Epistle
Dedicatory to the High end Honorable Court of Parliament, of Mr. Prinues ^resh
Discovery of some prodigious new wandring-blazingstarres and firebrands, etc.
fol. 3. p. ^. And Dr. Bastwicks Preface to the second part of his Book against
Independency, called the Postscript. fol. 14. p. b. and fol. 15. p. 2.
affright us that they will have theirs by force of arms.

Lastly, he makes as if over earnest pressing for the Government, were the way
to hinder it; and abating the word Over, (which is his word of aggravation, for
he thinks all is too much that is done to such a purpose) we doubt not but an
earnest, and humble pressing by way of petition, will prevail; for it is not
fit to trouble the Parliament with any matter which is not worthy of pressing
importunity; though I confess there is a prudence to be observed, when, and
how, and how far to prosecute a suite in that most high and Honorable Court:
And so from his exception against Petitioning in General, we will come to what
he has said of the Petitions in Particular, which this week were presented to
the two Houses of Parliament, This day (that is, Wednesday the nineteenth of
November, etc.) says he, The Common Council did present a Petition to the
Commons House of Parliament, -- and there came another from the Clergy to the
same effect, etc.

Of these Petitions it will be convenient to consider; 1. How they were framed.
2. How they were presented. 3. How they were accepted.


1. For the first, we shall distinctly observe; 1. The occasion of the
Petitions. 2. The contents of them. 3. The consent and concurrence for
resolution about them.


SECT. XXI. The occasion of the petitions of the Common Council and Ministers
of London, and the presenting of them to the Honorable Houses of Parliament.
THe Occasion is contained in this Declaration following, made by the Ministers
of London, and by them presented to the Honorable Court of Common Council of
the City in this Tenor.

We the Ministers of London, having heretofore received from the Right
Honorable the late Lord Major, A Resolve of the Honorable House of Commons,
of September 23. 1645. for choosing Elders forthwith in the Province of London,
with their Order annexed of October 8. 1645. for communicating the same to our
respective Congregations, did thereupon choose a Committee in our names, both
to acquaint the Lord Major how we had obeyed the said Order, and further to
signify unto him some doubts, and difficulties, for present obstructing our
further progress therein.

Whereupon his Lordship was pleased to impart the same to the Honorable Court
of Common Council, which the Honorable Court so far resented, as to appoint
a Committee of their own members to confer further with the Ministers about
the Premises, October 20. In which conference we declared to the said
Committee that some of the former doubts were removed by the Directions of the
Lords and Commons of August 19. and the Ordinance of October 20. 1645. but that
some were continued, and other new difficulties did rise, by occasion of the
Directions and Ordinance. The result of which Conference was represented to
this Honorable Court, attested by their own Committee.

Upon which an Order of Court was sent unto us, Dat. October. 27. 1645.
entreating the Ministers to present their desires and reasons thereof to this
Court in writing under their hands. In reference unto which Order, we the
Ministers of London ( thankfully acknowledging our selves much obliged both to
the Right Honorable the said Lord Mayor, and this Honorable Court, for all
their loving respects unto us in this matter, so much laid to heart by them)
did humbly present both our desires, and the reasons thereof: Their desires are
the same which are comprised in their Petition, which in its proper place will
offer it self to the Reader. The Reasons I think it fit to forbear, for
diverse reasons, whereof that which I shall mention in the third particular may
be sufficient.

The second thing is the Contents, which consisted chiefly of requests, and
reasons for the establishment of the Presbyteriall Government; wherein, though
the penning of each Petition was diverse in style, and form of words, yet as I
know for the one, which I saw, so I believe of the other, which I saw not, that
there was nothing in it, which they thought would be offensive to either House
of Parliament.

This traducing Intelligencer says, the City Petition seemed to complain,
and take ill the proceedings of the Parliament with the Assembly, in the late
business past concerning the election of Elders. But they did but seem so,
and to such perhaps only, as were not acquainted how careful they were (who
were composers or perusers of the Petition) to shun any expression, that
might be justly liable to the exception of the chief Sages of the Kingdom.

For the third particular, they consented to exhibit the same Schedule of
Reasons, (being in number twelve) that were tendered by the Ministers to the
Honorable Court of Common Council; which, because they were pleased to own,
I will not presume to make public, without their consent; yet their consent I
may note (to their great commendation, and for their just vindication from the
imputation of Schism, which has been reproachfully charged upon the Citizens
of London) which was such, that, as I have heard from such as I dare believe,
the Petition being read in the Common Council, passed with a nemine
contradicente, not one man giving a negative vote against it; which is an
assured argument of the soundness of the Aldermen, and Common Council, (the
most Honorable, and considerable part of the Citizens) and of their clearness
from the taint of heretical, and schismatic Tenets; and this union was well
observed as a confutation of their reports, who had gloried in a pretended
general opposition to the Presbyteriall Government in this City.

The second thing is the presenting of these Petitions, which was done at the
House of Commons, (upon Wednesday the nineteenth of November) to whom the City
Petition was first presented by a competent number of Aldermen, and of the
Common Council, and afterward the Petition of the Ministers by many of them;
and on the twentieth day was each Petition presented to the House of Peers, in
like manner as the day before to the House of Commons.

SECT. XXII. The offensive Acceptance of them by the Parliament, as the weekly
News-makers make report of it: Cautions premised before their confutation.
FOr the third particular, the acceptance the Petitions had; This Malignant
Intelligencer tells his Reader, that the Commons sat long, and laid it much to
heart that any such thing should come from the City, and that they should lend
an ear to any, that should in so evil a way represent things to them, and of
what dangerous consequence it was.

To which before I make any punctual Reply, I desire to premise these
particulars.

1. That in nothing that I have said, or shall say, I intend any contradiction
to the Honorable House of Commons.

2. I believe not this Relater has truly delivered the fence of that House.

3. That if any worthy Member among them, according to any information
received, and believed by him, have used his liberty in speaking of his mind,
(though his wisdom, as well as others innocence, may be abused by mis-report)
I shall not desire to raise any part of my Reply so high as to him, but to
confine my self to the report of this Pamphleter, who I am sure has no
Parliamentary privilege to speak what he pleases; (which yet a Parliament
man, that has it, will not take upon him to use when he is out of Parliament,
as when he is in it.) And if any of that grave and judicious Senate, supposing
us faulty, have thought it fit and just that we should be charged, we doubt not
but there are many among them, who, if we be innocent, will be well content to
see us cleared; since for many of us, their Honor is in part engaged for our
reputation, in the We have consulted with the Reverend, Pi^us, and Learned,
Divines called together to that purpose. The Ordinance of Parliament of the
third of January, 1644. prefixed before the Directory. p. 1.
public Testimony they have given of us to three Kingdoms; and the most of
us are the same men, and have the same consciences engaged in the desire of a
present establishment of Government, so as it may be safely, and profitably
practical, who in confidence of the goodness and godliness of the
Reformation owned, managed, and maintained by the Parliament; and in hearty and
faithful devotion thereto, and ready and cheerful obedience to them, have
suffered the shipwreck of our estates, and hazarded our lives, and we repent
not of any part of our pains, or pressures, or perils, so long as we may be
serviceable to so good a Cause, and to such good and gracious Masters, as under
Christ they have hitherto approved themselves toward us: and I hope we may
without vain-boasting say, by way of Apology, that we have not been altogether
their unprofitable servants, in respect of our Interest in, and endeavors with
the people, (without whom the greatest Kings are rather ciphers then figures,
and destitute both of honor and safety, Prove. 14.28.) to inform their
judgments, and to inflame their zeal, and to oblige their consciences, to
fasten their affections in loyalty, and fidelity to those worthy P^triots,
whom they have in their choice and votes of election entrusted with the
Religion, the lives, and the estates of themselves* and their posterity.

To which purpose we cannot be of so good use, nor our mediation so effectual
for hereafter, as aforetime, if we be such Prevaricators as he has represented
us to the public view; or, not being such, if we suffer our innocence to be
betrayed in mistrust to suspicion, by either inconsiderate or cowardly silence.

Thus much premised in duty to the Honorable House of Commons, and in due
circumspection and caution to my Reverend Brethren, and my self, I shall now
make answer to the charge given out, and the answer (so far as it concerns
us) may be partly made out of the conclusion of the Schedule, (as it was
tendered with the reasons of the Ministers to the Court of Common C^uncell in
confo^^itie to their desires made known unto us) which was as that Honorable
Assembly can witness with us, in these words: These our desires and reasons we
humbly present to this Honorable Court, not that we have the least intention
of investing our selves and the Ministry with any arbitrarie, unlimited, and
exorbitant power: For the power is not to be settled upon the Ministers alone,
but upon the Presbyteries; in all which it is provided already, that there
shall be always two at least of the people for one Minister; And we sincerely
profess our desires and intentions to manage this weighty Government, not
according to our wills, or wisdoms, but as near as is possible, according to
the will and word of God, the most certain Rule in the world; nor that we
would carry on this work by might and power, for we have good hope that God in
due time will patronize his own Cause, though men should be wanting; but that
we may discharge a good conscience, in our utmost endeavors to advance the
Kingdom of Christ, in the purity of Reformation, to be faithful to the
Church of Christ, wherein we are stewards, and watchmen; and to succeeding
posterity, to maintain the truth to which we are bound to bear witness; to
fulfill our solemn League and Covenant with God, from which we cannot go
back; and as your remembran^ers, to put you in mind to neglect no pious
endeavors, in your places, and callings, for expediting both your selves, and
us, out of the former difficulties, and for promoting of such a Reformation of
Religion in Discipline and Government, as may have due purity in it self, may
bring sweet unity amongst us, and most conduce to an happy uniformitie in all
the three Kingdoms, according to the vows of God that are upon you in your
solemn League and Covenant.

He goes on saying, that the House did perceive that they had been
misinformed, and that they could not but lay it much to heart that they who
had ever been so ready to do all good offices for the Kingdom, and go with
the Parliament, should from any but the Parliament take a representation of
their proceedings.

Misinformed, wherein? is there any thing untrue in that they presented in
their Petition, or Schedule annexed? and by whom misinformed? by the Ministers
of London? that is the meaning, but certainly they that originally made this
suggestion are little acquainted with the minds, consciences, intentions, or
proceedings of the Ministers who gave in their writing to the Common Council
of the City, subscribed with no fewer then fourscore and nine hands; and they
had presented more to the Parliament if they had not been strai^ned in time,
for the Petition was drawn up but at night, and was to be delivered the next
morning.

And for the Honorable Court of Common Council of the City, (though their
prudence, integrity, dignity, good affection, and fidelity to the
Parliament, have no need, nor do desire any defense of so mean or feeble an
hand as mine is) I hope it will not be either offensive, or ungrateful to
them, if (having had often conference (as well as other of my Brethren) with
their Committee, and being sent with some of them, in the name of the Ministers
of London, to the Honorable Court of Common Council, on Tuesday, November 18.
where the City Petition was publicly read, and ratified by common consent) I
make report of some passages, wherein they and we are jointly concerned; as
follows.

There being a Committee of Common Council chosen by that Council, to consult
with a Committee of Divines, and to consider of our common engagements in the
Presbyteriall Government, (for some of them, with some of us were already
chosen to be Provincial Tryers of Elders, and the same, and many others of the
Citizens were like to be chosen for Parochial Elders) we saw not how we could
be divided in difficulties, if the Directions were not cleared; nor in hazards,
if we were not sufficiently authorized to carry on the service, who were in
part already, and yet were further to be united in that great (and to this
Kingdom altogether) new undertaking; at our Committees we observed nothing in
those worthy Citizens of the Committee, nor in those who were partly permitted,
and partly requested to be present at our meetings, but what was suitable to
piety, prudence, and to affectionate and dutiful observance of the Parliament;
and it was our joy, as it may be their glory, that we found so many men of
excellent parts, and spirits, so well composed, and balanced, without any
propension to be swayed any way further then the light of truth, and dictate of
conscience did dispose them: and yet so far from overweening wit, or
selfe-conceited wilfulness, that while we debated difficulties with them, we
saw that of Solomon verified in them, Give instruction to a wise man, and he
will be yet wiser, teach a just man, and he will increase in learning, Prove.
9.9.

And though they were pleased to entertain us with much honor, and favor, we
neither took upon us to be their guides, in the carriage of this Cause, nor to
persuade them to any thing, but what would be the result of their own
judgments, and consciences, upon a due consideration of the matters before
them; nor did we know until Tuesday night, the next night before the morning
of their going to Westminster, that they would petition; nor when that was
resolved on, did any of us know, or see that Petitionary draught, or so much as
a line of it, which they presented to the Parliament; only when my self, with
some of my Brethren, were sent from the Divines of London, then Assembled at
Sion College, to know their minds, how farro they would appear in the
proposal of requests and reasons, or what part they would assign or leave to
us (who were resolved to make an humble address by our selves to the
Parliament, if they would not) being called into the Court of Common Council,
we received from the mouth of the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor that now is,
some general words of gracious acceptance of what we had done, and of their
concurrence with us, for the establishment of Church Government; but withal,
not knowing their purpose in particular, we were left to our own resolutions,
to present our desires to the Parliament, as we conceived to be most convenient
for us.

In all this what was there which might imply any digression from duty, or any
diversion from their or our due respect unto the Honorable Houses?

Object. But they took the representation of the Parliaments proceedings not
from the Parliament, as they desired, but from others, viz. the Ministers. The
quite contrary is true; The Ministers received the representation of the
Parliaments proceedings from the Lord Mayor, and both Citizens, and Ministers,
being in a concurrent condition for scruples and dangers, tendered their
Petitions, and Reasons unto them, for satisfaction from them; wherein there was
as fair and ingenuous dealing, as could be desired; for the Ministers tendered
nothing to the Committee, or Common Council, but what they were willing should
be read, heard, and examined, and discussed by any of what mind or affection so
ever; nor could that possibly be carried in a private way, which came under the
consideration of the Committee so many times, and afterward was committed for
probation and trial of the whole Common Council; and as openly and plainly to
the Ministers dealt with the City, so did both the City and, Ministry with
the Parliament, presenting the same Schedule of Reasons, (annexed to each of
their Petitions) to their view and censure; which pattern of plain dealing I
commend to the imitation of some of our Independent Brethren, that their ways
may not be such Ridles (even to those who are no less wise, but more innocent
then they) that they cannot tell where they have been working, no more then of
the Moles of the earth, until they see the heaps they have cast up, and they
glide away so slily in their pace, as if they meant to give occasion for a
fifth particular to be added to Solomon's Proverb, There be three things too
wonderful for me, yea four which I know not; the way of an Eagle in the air,
the way of a Serpent upon a rock, the way of a Ship in the midst of the sea,
and the way of a Man with a maid, Prove. 30. 18, 19. To these as a marginall
note, though not as a part of the Text, we may add, and the way of some
Independents in their plots.

SECT. XXIII. A Copy of the Ministers Petition, and the Intelligencers
slanderous censure of it.
HAving done with the Cities Petition, which he makes the Simeon, he brings in
the Petition of the Ministers as the Levi, or its Brother in ^vill, in this
sort: But there came another Petition from the Clergy to the same effect, which
was more sad then the former; for they conceived this latter was an appeal to
the people, and of as dangerous a consequence as could be imagined; and that it
deserved an high consure; and withal they resolved if that was the way
intended, they would go on with their Declaration, and quickly undeceive the
people; and in the Interim they referred it to the Committee of Examinations,
that the first contrivers, and after f^^^^tors of the business, may be dealt
withal according to merit.

For answer unto this, it might be sufficient (if I had to do with one that
were indeed, and not in name only a Moderate Intelligencer) to set down the
Petition in Terminis as it was presented to both Houses of Parliament; but
laying that as a groundworke, it will be meet to build on to a full confutation.

To the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons Assembled in the High Court of
Parliament in ENGLAND,
The humble Petition of the Ministers of the Gospel, within the Province of
London,
Humbly shows,
THat your Petitioners and daily Orators at the throne of Grace, do
unfainedly bless our God, and the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior, the head over
all things to the Church, that in the midst of those many insufferable miseries
over flowing, and almost over whelming both this Church and Kingdom, he has
graciously opened for us a door of hope, in raising up, continuing together,
and assisting of this Renowned Parliament above our expectations, and against
all oppositions, for the rescuing both of Church and State from their deep
calamities; having to these ends engaged your hearts (and with you the three
Kingdoms) unto himself, in so Religious a Covenant. And we humbly present our
hearty thanks unto the Right Honorable Houses, for all their indefatigable
endeavors these five years together, for the Kingdoms happiness, and the
Churches Reformation; and in particular, for the hopes of a speedy
establishment of Church Government, intimated unto us in your Directions of
Aug. 19. 1645. Order of September 23. and Ordinance of October 20. 1645.

In which Directions and Ordinance notwithstanding diverse difficulties appear
both to us, and to our people, hither to obstructing our putting the
Presbyteriall Government (therein mentioned) into actual execution, according
to our earnest desires; by reason of diverse things (as we humbly conceive)
partly doubtful, partly defective therein.

Wherefore your Petitioners in pursuance of our solemn Covenant, in zeal to
the glory of God, the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the complete establishment
of purity and unity in the Church of God, for the satisfaction of our own
and our peoples consciences in this weighty matter of Church Government, and
for the general benefit, not only of the Province of London, but of all the
Provinces in England, both for present and future Ages.

Do most humbly and earnestly beseech the Right Honorable Houses, That the
Presbyteriall Government in Congregationall, Classical, Provincial, and
National Assemblies, (agreed upon already by the Right Honorable Houses) may
be speedily established, with such fullness and sufficiency of power, upon all
the said Elder ships, that they may fully, faithfully, and cheerfully, with
well satisfied consciences submit unto, and put in execution the said
Government. And that there may be to that end, by your Authority, superadded a
clear explanation of things doubtful, and full supply of things defective, in
the said Directions and Ordinance of the Right Honorable Houses, according to
the Schedule annexed, and herewith humbly presented to your Wisdoms and Piety.

And your Petitioners, etc.
This being the Petition to a word, pardon mine incredulity if I believe not
that you can persuade any Intelligent Reader, that so prudent a Senate as the
Honorable House of Commons is, could so mistake the meaning of it, as to put
such an odious construction upon it, as an Appeal from them to the people, the
people of London; that were to sow sedition, and endeavor dissension betwixt
the Parliament and the City, (whose unanimous consent, and correspondence in
counsels, and executions, have been, under God, the strongest suppport of the
whole Commonweal) a crime worthy of the reward of Metius Suffetius in Vt
paulo ante (inquit Tullus) animum inter Fidenatem Romanemque rem ancipitem
gessisti, it a jam corpus passim distrabendum dabis.

Exinde duabus admotis quadrigis, in currus earum distentum illigat Metium,
deinde in diversum iter equi concitati lacerum in utroque curru corpus, qua
inhaeserant vinculis membra, p^rtantes, etc. Live. Dec. 1. lib. 1. p. 14.


Livy, who for his double dealing betwixt the Fidenates and the Romans, was so
fastened to two Charets, that the Horses that drew them being forced diverse
ways into a furious pace, fore him in pieces.

But Sir, if those on your party do no worse offices to the City, by your
insinuations into the minds of the worthy Members of the Honorable Houses,
then Presbyteriall Ministers do to the Parliament, by their intercourse with
the Citizens, there will be no occasion given for the least show of suspicion,
or jealousy betwixt them; and whosoever shall read your paper and mine Answer,
will see good cause to conceive, that some of your spirit have too busily
bestirred themselves, out of the union betwixt Citizens and Ministers to raise
a Division betwixt the Parliament and City, (which he that desires to see, I
wish rather that the Ravens of the valley pick out his eyes, Prove. 30.17.) But
that union does clearly confute the calumny you cast upon the Ministers
Petition; for so far is it from an appearance of an Appeal from the
Parliament to the people, that it plainly represents both Ministers and
people consulting, and concluding, jointly to make an Appeal to the
Parliament, and humbly waiting to be disposed of by their final Resolutions.

This is it sure for which you say, the latter Petition was more sad then the
former; for when that came in so conformable to the City Petition in matter,
(though differing in phrase and style) and in scope, and Intention, and word
for word the same in a Schedule of Reasons annexed to it, it was an evidence of
so good agreement betwixt the most eminent Citizens, and the forementioned
Ministers, as must needs be a great grief of heart to those, that make great
advantage of the divisions of Reuben, yea and of all the Tribes throughout out
Israel.

He goes on with a proficiencie from bad to worse; and though he has no honey
at all, he has a double sting in the tail of his Intelligence; scruing up a
charge against the Petitioners to the highest aggravation that may be, and
concluding with the commination of a censure, commensurate to their merit. For
the Charge these be his words: They (that is, the House of Commons) conceived
this latter, (that is, the Petition of the Ministers) was an Appeal from the
Houses to the people, and of as dangerous a consequence as could be imagined

Having answered the former words, I will now speak only to the latter: But
first I must pause and wonder a while at this superlative Slander. How Sir, Was
that Petition of as dangerous a consequence as could be imagined? no such
matter Sir. For what danger at all can be imagined in it, when all is in effect
no more but this, that the Citizens and Ministers upon Petition may clearly
understand the mind of the Parliament, and may be thoroughly enabled to put in
execution their commands, to obey them to the full according to their
engagement in the solemn Covenant. Such fearful apprehensions, even of
dangerous consequence, (if they be real, not fained) may proceed from the
self-love of your party, who confine the common felicity to your own
particular Interests; and think the world will be in a very ill condition, if
the Presbytery should be set up, and should set bounds to your ambitious, or
covetous encroachments upon the rights of Ministers and people: and it may be
(because you are no Ionasses, to be willing to be cast into the Sea to save the
Ship and passengers in it) you may have in your thoughts some Military
commotion of your own making; for you know, or may know, that bloody words,
liable to such a sense, and tending to the like effect, have been more then
once laid to the charge of some of your side, as has been noted, page 76.

And if your dangerous consequence be but a fiction and pretense, (which I
rather imagine) it must be supposed to be but a cast of your subtilty, to make
the simple afraid of, and to beget a mistrust of some dangerous design in the
Ministers, that they may desert them, and adhere unto you, as men of prudent
insight into imminent mischieves, and of provident forecast to secure them from
danger who betake themselves to your cause and accomplices for succor and safety.

Which of these conjectures is true, (or whether any other, any worse, for a
plain Presbyterian is too shallow to sound the depth of a projecting
Independent) I will not determine; but I will confidently resolve, that such an
imagination of transcendent danger in the Petition of the Ministers, was no
part of the mind of the major part of the House of Commons; (which must give
denomination to the whole) for they can never be so much mistaken, as to put
such an exuberant expression of offense upon so inoffensive a Petition; who
very well know, and cannot but as well remember, your Brother Lilburnes
business, and what seditious papers he, and his faction sent abroad; which if
you had forgotten (for I doubt not but such a schismatic polypragm^^n, as
those that know you report you to be, if not wise enough to be of his counsel,
may be busy enough to be active in his desperate design) I would help your
memory with a repetition of some such passages out of them, as might be worthy
of your now misapplied aggravation, [ of as dangerous consequence as may be
imagined] but that I think them fitter to be burned by the common Hangman, or
buried in everlasting oblivion, then now to be mentioned, especially in a
Discourse of defense of the Innocent. And truly Sir next unto Lilburnes Libels,
we may say of your malevolent Intelligence of this week, that it is a matter
of as dangerous consequence as may be imagined: For do not you, as far as
your credit will carry a mischievous suggestion, disperse all about a suspicion
of the Cities and Ministers combination against the two Houses of Parliament?
who have hitherto with honor and safety very much confided in their
affection, and fidelity, (as I doubt not they will ever have cause so to do)
though such malignant medlers as you say and do what they can to the contrary.

SECT. XXIV. Britanicus taxed for traducing the Petitioners.
YOur Athenian Colleague, Britanicus, (though they that read you both, will
happily take you to be rather a Boeotion in crasso jurares aere natum. Horat.
Beotian) has a conceit of some disparagement to the Parliament, by a supposed
division, though he lay his action wrong, mistaking an occasion for a cause,
and one person for another: whom, though I first mention him in way of
opposition to you, I must take for an adversary to us, I mean to the City and
Ministry in this business of Petition; and when I have given him an
animadversion by the way, I shall return unto, and proceed with you. It may
prove (says he) a train to blow up the reputation of the renowned Parliament,
and harden the enemy in their courses, if they should see a door of hope
opened through any supposed divisions; the common Adversary will take heart
again, and those which favor them (whether at home or abroad) will dare again
to show themselves, as not doubting to perfect their design, if we disjoynt
our selves, and contribute to our own ruin.

Divisions among us divulged by you, may animate the common Enemy to a greater
height of hopes, and attempts, so much his observation implies, and that is
your fault, Mr. Intelligencer, but he applies it to the Petitioners, and
that is his calumny, as well as yours. It may prove, says he, a train etc.
What is that that may prove so? the Petition? the Petition a train to blow up
the reputation of the Parliament? Read it, Sir, and you will see it is not a
train^, but a Trumpet to blow up their reputation with a loud sound, and
melodious accent, with humble thanks acknowledging, and highly extolling them
by the name of A renowned Parliament, for their indefatigable endeavors for
five years together, for the Kingdoms happiness, and the Churches Reformation.
And can the Petition be charged to open a door of hope to the enemies, through
supposed divisions from the Parliament, when it expressly makes the Parliament
a door of hope of much happiness to the Kingdom? It is an easy matter to
turn the most innocent action, or business, into an occasion of exception;
but they are the causes (for the particular in question) both of disturbance to
the Parliament, and of danger from the common enemy, who proclaim unkindnesse
betwixt the Parliament, and their most faithful, and serviceable Votaries, the
Common Council, and Ministers of the City of London.

This Retortion, as by a kind of partnership, belongs to both these false
Brethren, but taking Britannicus by himself, he begins at the beginning of
the week, by the figure Anticipation, for the Petitions were not presented to
the Honorable Houses until two o^ three days after; and so he comes over
the matter again upon Wednesday and Thursday: In the first place he finds
fault with Petitioning, as out of season, and so indiscreet, and as imputing
neglect to the Parliament, and implying distrust of the Indgment and care of
those whom we acknowledge the wisest and supreme Council, and so undutifull;
but neither so nor so, for the purpose of Petitioning was so fanned and sifted,
by the free and impartial debates of diverse wise and worthy Citizens, and by
learned and well advised Ministers, that if there had been any folly or
indiscretion, it would have vanished into nothing; but, Sir, I can assure you
of my knowledge, the more it was weighed and examined, the more it was approved
by the prudent, as well as the pious of both Societies, not only as necessary,
but as seasonable also. And if the Honorable Houses were intentively imployd
to perfect the Government, and did set themselves in a constant course, and
chose set days for that purpose, and the day of presenting the Petition was
one of them, (all which I believe, and cannot think of it without thanks to
them, nor without praises of them, and prayers for them) yet was it not
unseasonable to petition them, because the concurrent desires of so many, so
considerable Petitioners might be a means to remove some obstructions, Qui
monet u^ facias qu^d jam facis ^de movendo
and to facilitate and expedite the business they had in hand. Nor was it any
distrust, or impeachment of the high praise of their prudence, for you know the
old and ever true Aphorism, when the Acts of goodness do anticipate
admonitions, Laudat, and hortatu comprebat acta suo. Ovid.
(and we may say the like of Petitions) they are so far from repr^ofes, that
they are the praises of the Actors.

Nor is there any more cause to impute undutifulnesse, or ill manners unto the
Petitioners, then there is to accuse them of want of policy, or prudence, for
this particular; nor any ground to strain up the charge so high, as if that
which they did were prejudicial, and derogatorie to the Majesty of Parliament,
in forestalling their counsels with any particular desires. So say you Mr. Br.
in your Wednesdayes account: But I pray you, Sir, by what dialect do you call
those Petitions particular desires, which were concluded in a full Common
Council, (the representative body of this famous, and never more then since
our late and unhappy wars, renowned City) not one man (as I have been
credibly informed) appearing against it at the passing of the Vote; and that
not for any particular person, or purpose, but for the general good of three
Kingdoms, both for the generation present, and for posterity in the ages to
come? And what prohibition I pray you lies against particular Citizens and
Ministers, that they may not Petition the Parliament with particular desires,
as well as you? Did not you when you were confined, for showing your self
rather an over-nimble Mercury, then a sober paced Britannicus, petition them
your self for your enlargement? And when you did so, did you do any thing
prejudicial and derogatory to the Majesty and Dignity of Parliament, and as it
were forestall their counsels with your particular desires? If not, show us
your privilege, which may make it no fault in you, and an indiscretion, or
undutifulnesse, or ill manners in others.

I shall need to proceed no further in answer to your Criticismes, I see you
are ingenious in your apprehensions, and ingenuous in confession of your own
misprisions; and since I perceive you so punctual in rectifying your Reader to
a title, (for you acknowledge a mistake in honoring Sir The Aston (with whom I
have had much, and some perilous opposition in the Cause of the Parliament)
with the Title of a Lord) doubt not but you will be as ready to retract an
undeserved traducement of the Parliaments friends, (especially so many, and of
so great reputation) as to recall an undeserved advancement of the Parliaments
enemy.

I will take leave of you with a word of advice, which is but this, take heed
of engaging your self any further in this cause, see first how the Immoderate
Intelligencer speeds with his precipitated reproaches against the City, and
Ministers of London; to whom now I will return, and take leave of him, though
not in such a manner as I do of you; and having answered his crimination, I
shall now enter a defense against his commination of censure.

SECT. XXV. An answer to the Intelligencers Commination of the Petitioners.
HAving set the suspicion of guilt up to the height, not only of reality but
of imagination, he scrueth up the censure to a proportionable elevation,
saying, in the name of the Honorable House of Commons, (but without any
warrant from them) that it deserved an high censure, and withal that they
resolved, if that were the way intended, they would go on with their
Declaration, and quickly undeceive the people, and in the Interim they referred
it to the Committee of Examinations, that the first contrivers, and after
fomenters of that business, may be dealt with according to merit.

These words may sound some terror to him, -- Hic mur^ abeneus esto, Nil
conseire sibi, etc. Horat.
that has but a brazen face, but he that has a wall of brass, a clear
conscience from the guilt objected, may be bold as a Lion, when such as you may
flee when no man pursues, Prove. 28.1. For more particular Reply, Sr. we cannot
be put into fear of an high censure, while we are assured of our own
innocence, and the Houses of Parliaments both prudence and justice; and
therefore we shall willingly submit our selves to examination, when, and where
they please to call us to our answer; and if our accusers would meet us at the
bar, upon such just and equal terms as lege talionis by the Divine law is
ordained, Deuteronomy. 19.16, etc. we would petition them again for a trial, and
punishment, (upon conviction) as before for the establishment of the
Presbyteriall Discipline.

For the Declaration you speak of, there be two things which will secure us
from all danger of it; the one is, that whatsoever it is, it is but
conditional, viz [if this be the way] that is, the way of seditious appeal
from the Parliament to the people, and we are sure that is no way of ours: how
near the Independent by-path coasts upon, or bends toward that way, may
appear by their making combinations with the people, and setting up a popular
Government in the Church, without any authority from the State.

The other security we have is both from the Parliament, and our selves, as we
have professed before, and in confidence of both, neither Parliamentary
Examinations, Declarations, no nor Visitations shall trouble us; for if we be
guilty, let them visit our transgression with the rod, and our iniquity with
stripes, Psalm. 89.32. and (if we deserve it) let them chastise us not only
with Solomon's whips, but with Reboboams scorpions, 1 King. 12.14.

There is one thing more in his minatory report, which, though he tell it as a
threat, I would take it for a promise, if he could make it good in the right
sense of it, that is, quickly to undeceive the people, for they are shamefully
deceived many ways, especially by such impudent Impostors as this weekly
Newes-maker; with whom I have now done. And in confutation of Britannicus and
him, I have confuted others, who concurr^ with them in the same calumnies
against the Common Council, and Ministers of London.

SECT. XXVI. The misreport of the Diurnall and Weekly Account confuted, and
the Perfect Passages convinced of absurdity and sedition.
YEt I must bestow a few words on the Perfect Diurnall, and Weekly Account,
and a few lines on the Perfect Passages: For the first, omitting what is
virtually or formally answered before, under the Titles forementioned, I shall
note but one particular, which is, that it was ordered as a part of the answer
to the Ministers, that they should return home, and look after and attend the
charges of their several Congregations; so says the Perfect Diurnall; and the
Weekly Account, says, the Ministers were desired to look diligently to their
own flocks, with this addition of the Writer, a neighty charge, and work
enough; by which is implied that they were negligent in their Calling, and too
busy out of it; but as there was no ground for such an implicit reproof, so
there was no such message given in the Name of the House to the Ministers, as
he that presented the Petition confidently averreth, to whom other Ministers
that accompanied him do give attestation.

Now for the Perfect Passages (as the Author calls his Pamphlet) it is in one
particular most seditious and scandalous: viz. this, What may be thought of
those that go about to disparage Lieutenant General Cromwell, and the
Independent Army that have done so much good in reducing the Kingdom, and
brought the Wars so near to an end? What may be thought of this Questionist?
He calls his sheet of News Perfect Passages, by the same figure, belike, that
the Furies are called Eumenides, for never did I read such imperfect passages
in any printed paper. The Title is, Perfect Passages of each days proceedings
in Parliament; and the day he begins withal is the 19. of November; and he
begins that day with a poor piece of Sycophanticall Rhetoric, in praise of
the Parliament, and presently passes from palpable flattery (the shallowest
and silliest that ever was bestowed on so profound and prudent a Senate) to
pernicious calumny, in answer to the Question he has proposed; and that's all
he has for that day; and what is that to the proceedings in Parliament that
day? if he had given in that account for some day about the middle of Midsummer
months, his absurdities had been more seasonable, more suitable to the temper
of that Lu^atick Quarter, and so it might have been some excuse, or
extenuation of his fault in moving such a f^ditious and dangerous Question,
wherein he seems zealous for the honor of Lieutenan^ General Cromwell, and
with him magnifieth the Army under the Title of Independent.

Now for Lieutenant General Cromwell, I (...), no man that goes about to
disparage him, and I doubt many take occasion to commend him otherwise then his
wisdom will approve of; for my part, whether he be an Independent or no, I
know not; but if he be, I can be content to give him, and any other of that
way, all the praise that is due unto them; and though I much mislike projecting
Independents, who idolize their own fancies, and pretending the public
welfare, care for nothing else, or nothing more then to carry on their own
concernments by the Foxes pate, or Lions paw, by fraud, or force, as either of
them may be serviceable to their self seeking design, yet I doubt not but
there be many go under that name, who are rather passive then active in
deceit, who truly fear God, and sincerely desire, according to the song of the
Angel, That glory may be to God on high, good will toward men, and peace upon
earth, Luke 2.14.

And to speak more particularly of him, I believe, (as I have heard of him by
those to whom he is well known, as they are to me) that he is a wise man, a
well advised and valiant Commander, and so good and sincere a Christian, so
true a lover of his Country, that he would not have the peace of it disturbed,
for any difference betwixt Presbyterians and Independents. And upon such
premises I dare presume to infer, that the gallant Lieutenant General will
not be well pleased with such a Question, or Answer, as this Novell Catechiser
has set forth; for whatsoever affinity (or it may be identity) is betwixt him
and an Independent, there is no congruitie betwixt the terms Independent and
Army in our State; for does not the Army depend upon the Parliament, who give
directions, and commands to it for their service? and do not the chief
Commanders in it profess themselves to be disposed of only by the
determinations of Parliament? in this respect a man might say, an Independent
wife, or an Independent servant, as well as an Independent Army. And if we
consider the Army within it self, is it (as they would have the Church)
composed, or made up of Independent Congregations? so that every Captain and
his company are free to attempt, or act, as they can agree among themselves,
without subordination to superior Commanders; if so, the Army would not be an
Army, that is, an entire and well compacted systeme, or body of soldiers
united, and regulated by prudence, and authority in a graduall series of
Martial command and government, but would break in pieces into petty parties,
as it is upon a rout made by the enemy, and so would be of little use, or
force, either for conflict, or conquest, much less would it be terrible as an
army with banners should be, and the Church is compared to such an Army, Cant.
6.4.

This only by the way: But he means it perhaps an Independent Army materially
(not formally) as consisting of Commanders and common soldiers, addicted to
Independencie: If he take Independents as distinguished from the Orthodoxe
party on the one side, and from the heterodoxe party of Anabaptists, Brownists,
Antinomians, and other such erroneous dogmatists on the other side, (with whom
if they be true to the Principles of Religion they cannot finally close in
accord against the Presbyterians) they are much too few to denominate the Army;
and I doubt not but the ingenuous, and conscientious Independents will
confess, that there have been since our woeful war begun, and yet are
many both skillful, faithful, and courageous Commanders, and common soldiers,
who have done very great and successful service toward the finishing of the
war, and yet never came under the name or notion of Independents, unless by
mistake, or imposture, as this fellow would cosen the Kingdom, and afright
the Presbyterians with a conceit of the puissance and prevalence of
Independencie in the Army, and by the Army, as if that were the lifeblood that
maintained the spirits of our Military forces, and made all the soldiers
valorous and victorious, and so the Independent Army as Independent,
reduplicative (for so he would have his Reader deluded) had reduced the
Kingdom, and brought the war so near an end; here an end of his Question.

His Answer is, They, that is, they that go about to disparage Lieutenant
General Cromwell, and the Independent Army, are unchristian, and uncharitable,
and either very envious, or ill affected; either they know not what that Party
have done for us, or else envy that they have done so much: For Lieutenant
General Cromwell his detractors I know none such, therefore I know none who
therein is unchristian, and uncharitable toward him. For your Independent
Army, it is (as Scholars use to term such an unsuitable conjunction) a Bull, a
mere contradiction in adjecto, there is no such thing. It may be if you should
pass uncontrould with such absurd inconsistences, we should shortly hear of
an Independent Parliament (not because it is the supreme and Independent
judicatory in the Kingdom) but because of the members who favor that way,
though they be very few in comparison of those who have voted the Presbytery,
an Independent Synod or Assembly, because there are some Independents mingled
with many Presbyterian Divines; and if the Common Council of the City had not
generally concurred to petition for Presbytery, I doubt not but this
Nicknaming Newes-maker would, in some of his papers, make London (though
already divided into Classical Presbyteries, and united into a Province) an
Independent City.

Last of all he says, they daily adventure their lives, and many of them have
spilt their blood to save our lives, and estates, and i^t not (...) hate them
for the good they have done, and still do for us. As many as have exposed
themselves to such peril, and for such a purpose, ashere is specified, God
forbid, their zeal, and love, and courage should be answered with envy, or
hatred: but here is one fallacy in view, they that are so kind to their
brethren as to shed their own blood, that they might sleep in a whole skin,
did not this as Independents, but as Christians, for many lost their lives
before ever Independents were dreamed of, it was a rule of Religion, that we
ought to lay down our lives for the brethren, 1 Ioh. 3.16.

And there may be another fallacy lurking under those indefinite expressions,
they daily adventure, etc. to save our lives and estates; for it is not true of
all, it may be not of most, that those be the motives or ends of their
engagements. So much for this Question and Answer: Now I could wish this
Questionist were questioned, and that we might know the mind of such as have
Authority to examine him whether they thought him worthy of Bedlam, foe his
witless rashness, or of Newgate, for his seditious wickedness.

Conclusion.
For Conclusion of this Apologetick Reply to these popular Impostors, I shall
fairly admonish them to be better advised hereafter, (then hitherto they have
been) that they do not traduce the Innocence of worthy, and well deserving
Citizens, or Ministers, to gratify a party, and to abuse the credulity of the
Vulgar with untruths, as opprobrious to the one side, as vainglorious to the
other. For since they are discovered to be weekly journey men in the service
of a schismatic design, and to carry it on with intolerable contumely to
venerable Societies, and with insinuations, and incentives to sedition against
the Government intended, and partly established by Authority of Parliament, it
will not be their privilege for time to come, to pass without such
chastisement as is due to their demerits: whereat if any be displeased, it will
be only the faulty, and the offense they take will be like the quarrel of Cum
ab eo quaereretur quid tandem accusaturus esset eum, quem pro dignitate ne
laudare quidem quisquam satis commode posset; aiunt hominem (ut erat furiosus)
respondiss^, qu^d non totum telum corpore recepisset. Cicer. Orat. 2. pro Sex.
Roscio Amerino.
Fimbria against Scevola, for that the noble Senator would not take his dagger
so deep into his body as he would have thrust it. And in such a case, to
forbear a necessary defense of a man's self, or his Associates, in a matter so
just and so general, so ingenuously and uprightly managed, as that of the
Petitioners, lest an enemy should be offended at it without a cause, were in
any indifferent judgment a grand iniquity, a crime composed of a very high
degree of cowardice, and treachery.

A Postscript, or after-reckoning with the Moderate Intelligencer, and
Mercurius Britanicus.
THe pace of a Book at the Press, proceeding flowly, (as Guicciardine says
of the Italian Ordinance drawn with oxen,) has afforded this advantage to
these posting News-men, that they have had a second turn to tell their own
tale unto the people, before the confutation of their calumnies against the
Petitions of the Common Council, and Ministers of London, be once presented to
public acceptance; which Inconvenience has yet brought with it this
recompense; I am by the delay somewhat better acquainted with their spirits,
and thence find cause to conceive more hope of the one, and to observe less
ingenuitie in the other, then I did apprehend, when I put in my defensive plea
for the Petitioners, against their traducements; and in this Postscript or
afterreckoning I shall entertain them accordingly.

1. For the Intelligencer, we have from him some previous dispositions to
repentance for his printed reproaches, somewhat toward attrition, though far
short of such Christian contrition as is a necessary preparative for the
obtainment of a pardon. His words in his Thursdayes account are these; There
past us last week something that was displeasing both to the Common Council,
and likewise to the Clergy; to neither of which we intended the least
displensure; what was inserted, we received, and conceived from a good Author;
and finding the House of Commons to be very much affected with what came from
both, as that which might be of evil consequence; we therefore were the
readyer to believe it might amount to so much as we were told, but
understanding now from others, that the Petitions had no such words, nor
contained any such thing as was expressed; we are heartily sorry, and do freely
acknowledge the same, professing that we hold it an high offense to wrong the
po^rest particular man, ye^, if (...) enemy; nor ever durst we publish that
against the Parliament^^ and Kingdoms present enemy (much more against their
Friends) which we did not receive from any good hands, as truth.

Whereby we may perceive the perplexity of his mind, which makes him recant,
and recant, in both senses of this ambiguous term; for he recants, that is, he
confesses his error thus, Understanding now from others that the Petitions
had no such words, ner contained any such thing as was expressed, we are
heartily sorry, and do freely acknowledge the same: where is one kind of
recantation; and withal he recants in another kind, that is, he sings over
again the same harsh note, wherein he was far out of time from the tenor of
truth, telling the Reader thus much in way of Justification, What was inserted
we received from a good Author, and studing the House of Commons to be (...)
affected with what came from both, as that which might be of evil consequence,
w^^ therefore were the readier to believe it might amount to so much as we were
told; which is to make your s^^der of the petitioners the sense of the House of
Commons, and the hand that brought that sense a good hand; and if so, you have
handled the matter very ill, both in respect of conscience and dis^retion; for
either the House of Comm^^^ thought so ill of the Petitioners, as you have now
the second time asserted, or not; if they did not, (as no wise man will believe
that so many wise men as should denominate the whole House, could so much
mis-judge so humble, and fair dealing an address unto them) then you wrong
them as well as the Petitioners, in calling that a good h^^d, which brought you
such a scandalous mism^erpretation of them both; and so in stead of clearing
your own conscience, you corrupt i^ again with a new guilt.

If the House of Commons did so conceive of the Petitioners, as you have
published before, you have indiscre^tly deserted the true information you had
from them by a good hand, as you call it twice, (but how good soever you take
it to be, there be some false fingers in it, i^ it wrote that to you, which you
have written to others) and have m^^^ your self an offender above the degree of
your (...) for though the tale you were told were mat^rially an untruth, it was
not fo^mally a slander in you, while you did but publish it, not as any thing
made or (...) by you, ^ot as received by report from an (...) with yourselfe of
much (...) for his trusty Intelligence. And yet I conceive it had been a part
of good manners, to have forborne the divulging of such news, of so great
moment, wherein not only the integ^^y of the Common Council, and Ministers of
London, but the prudence of the Honorable House of Commons, was highly
concerned, unless they had given you warrant to proclaim to the world, that
which in such cases is, or should be kept within the compass of their own
walls.

You conclude, as you began, with commendation of your self, for the innocence
of your intentions, and charitablenesse of your affection; saying in your first
lines, There past us the last week something that was displeasing both to the
Common Council, and likewise to the Clergy, to neither of which we intended
the least displeasure; and you end with the same self conceit wherein you
began, for you tell us in the close of your speech that you hold it (...) high
offense to wrong the poorest particular man, yea, if an enemy; nor durst we
(say you) ever publish that against the Parliaments and Kingdoms present
enemy, much more ( much less you should say) against their friends, which we
did not receive from very good hands as truth.

If you say this in sincerity, we shall see some clearer evidence of your
conscientious acknowledgement (then that contradictory confession can be
accounted, which is like an Iliaca passie in the belly, and bowels of your
retractation, though the head and loot of it be sutably qualified) of your
wronging, not of a single, or a private enemy, but of a numerous society of the
most public, Honorable, and venerable Friends and Votaries of the Parliament
in the Kingdom; which if you seriously consider, you cannot satisfy your
self, much less can you expect that they should rest satisfied with such a
recanting recantation, as you have now made; if other wise, this Paper will
assure the Intelligent Reader, that as Belshazzars government, so your
repentance, is weighted in the ballan^e, and found wanting, Dan. 5.27. But
until I know the worst, my charity disposes me to hope the best, and my hope
is that you are on the mending hand, and so fare you well.

Now for the bold Britain^, who brags of his daring spirit, and would have
every man to turn coward in a good Cause, for (...) of his courage in a (...);
yet it seems some body (...) the (...) to tell him of his miscarriage toward
the Magistrates, and Ministers of the City, in such sort, that (as Salust said
to Cicero) Si quam voluptatem male dicendo cepisti, eam male audiend^ amittas.
Orat. Salust. in Ciceron. Cicer. Orat. p. 671.
If he took any delight in speaking what he ought not, he may lose it again
by hearing what he would not; and I must now do it the second time, by giving
him another check for his vanity in magnifying himself, and his injury in
vilifying such as he cannot sufficiently honor.

For himself, he makes as if he were a man of such high elevation, that it is
a stooping below his genius. to have any thing to do (though by way of
reproof) with such a despicable company, as the Court of Common Council, and
the Ministers of the City; whom he would not meddle with, were it not to serve
the Parliament; and serve them I dare, says he, in as high a nature as any
man, and shall in all things comply with their proceedings, and endeavor to
make this compliance universal.

Were it not to serve the Parliament? For your service to the Parliament, Mr.
Brit. I would not have you to be confident either in your own performances, or
of their acceptance, or of the good effects it has brought forth among the
people of the Kingdom; there are some, who (though they do not brag of wit
as you do) have a great deal more wisdom then you have, and they say, you
have begotten much malignitie in many against the Parliament, and confirmed it
in others, and have much weakened the hands of their most conscionable friends,
by the licentious extravangancie of your Pen beyond all bounds of grace, or
modesty; and they further add, (which honest men will lay hold on as a
promise, but you perhaps will take as a threatening) that they will trace your
irregular steps from the first page of your first Pamphlet, to this present of
the number 945. and represent you so in one entire delineation, and discovery,
as (if you be not a man of impenetrable impudence) will make you ashamed of
your own resemblance.

And for your particular service you pretend to do unto the Parliament, in
abusing the Petitioners. I believe they will have little cause to give you
thanks, much less any real reward for your painer; since it will scarce lie
in your power to do them a greater dishonor, then to make good men believe,
and Malignants insult, that their most potent, and beneficent, I may say
munificent Assistants, the Citizens, and their most faithful (and not
altogether impotent or unusefull servants) the Ministers of the City of
London, either give, or take such offense at each other, as may tend to a
rupture; but the hope is there will be present help, and an effectual
Antidote against this scandal, in the Apologeticall Narrative of the
Petitions, as now it is presented to public view; which will be the more
expedite and prevalent in its operation, by the little credit you have with all
such as read your papers as the dictates of a Poet, not of an Historian; and
you are like Sir to have less credit hereafter, and to do the Parliament
less service then you have done (if ever you did any worthy acceptance)
because you profess you will in all things comply with their proceedings: For,

1. No body will believe you will be so regular in you writing, as they are in
their Parliamentary passages.

2. When you say, you will in all things comply with their proceedings, you
must either suppose that they cannot err (which is far from their thoughts,
for they know it is a pitiful, and perilous ignorance, or perverseness, not
to acknowledge their humanity, Psalm. 9.20. and that it is the presumption of
the Papal Conclave, not a Privilege of Parliament, to assume an infallible
guidance in their determinations) or that they may err, and then we must
think, that though they do so, you resolve to be on their side, be it right or
wrong; if so, do you not tell the world that your compliance with them, has
more of policy in it, then of conscience? and will it not readily follow, that
such a Mercurius at Westminster, would easily turn to an Aulicus at Oxford, if
(which God forbid) the Royal Prerogative should so far advance, as to
plunder the Parliament of their ancient and Honorable Privileges.

The other Animadversion upon Britanicus this week concerns the vilifying of
the Petitioners, whom Lucian like he falls upon in this scornful and jeering
manner: It is a fine humor in any to cry, We will have this, we will have that
done, Come let us petition, he should have said, we would have this or that
done; for we will have this or that done are terms rather of the Imperative,
then the Optative Mood, fitter for Commanders, then Petitioners. Besides Sir,
you know there be a sort of men, who have taken upon them, without petitioning
to the Parliament, or Authority from the Parliament, to set up a Government of
themselves; which the Petitioners dare not attempt without warrant from the
Parliament; this is a humor indeed, a fine humor of a new impression; but
when did you bestow a jeere or a taunt upon them? in this surely you bewray
your partiality, and somewhat worse which you may hear of hereafter; but say
on.

Yes I warrant you we are wise Statesmen, know the due times and seasons well
enough, and though we lie under the deck, are able to discern as well as they
that sit at the stern. Did the Petitioners take upon them to be Statesmen? did
they not professedly disclaim so vain a conceit, when in a modest and humble
way they came to the Parliament, as to Statesmen, the Fathers and Physicians of
the State, to receive from their prudent resolutions present remedies against
the maladies wherewith the City is dangerously infected, and infested? and was
it not time to complain, when they perceived the subtle insinuations of Schism
creep into their families, and found it had stolen their wives from their
bosoms, their children and servants from Oeconomicall communion in their
families, and from hearing Orthodoxe Divines in the public Churches of the
City, to sort themselves under erroneous, and heretical Teachers in private
Conventicles?

And whereas you would degrade the Petitioners sitting at the st^rne to lying
under the d^cke, though you (for fear or shame) may have occasion to play
least in sight, and to lurk under the hatches to secure your self, the
Petitioners are (for the chief p^^t of them) eminently conspicuous; diverse of
the one sort sit upon the Tribunal of Authority, and all of the other weekly
appear visible to common view in their Pulpits; and have so much advantage
ground for discovery of the evils of the times, and places they live in, that
it can be no disparagement to the Parliaments prudence, in many particulars to
receive informations from them.

But they go beyond their bounds, as Britanicus charge them, for their duty
leads them (...) further (says he) then to present matter of grievance in
things already established, not to demand the establisment of any thing (...);
this must be left in the Parliament, who (it is presumed, and we must hold to
this ma^ime) will neglect nothing necessary or convenient.

Now he takes upon him to play the Casuist, and to resolve both positively, and
negatively, how far men may proceed to petition, how far not; they may
(says he) present matter of grievance in things already established, not
demand the establishment of any new thing: This Aphorism is framed of purpose
for the pulling down of the Prelacy, and against the setting up of the
Presbytery, that Independencie (and under that Title all Sects of what sort
soever) may be set up, and spread abroad without restraint; but a man would
think it more reasonable, that when things are established, they should command
either assent or silence, but in the want of necessary things, the presenting
of requests for supply to those that are able to grant them, has no affinity
with a fault, but rather has the nature of a duty, and therefore they who
petitioned the Parliament for Ordination of Ministers in a new way, without
Bishops, (new to this State, though most ancient in the Church of Christ) were
never blamed, but approved by the Parliament, and accordingly an Ordinance
passed both the Honorable Houses, for enabling a certain number of Divines to
put it in practice; much more cause is there to approve the Petitioners, who
received a command for the choice of Church Governors, whereto without further
direction, and warrant, they could not perform complete obedience as they
desired.

And for that he says of leaving all to the Parliament, in confidence of their
universal care, neglecting nothing which may be necessary and convenient, it
has a pretense of respect to the Parliament, but the drift of it is to make
all those (who desire a deliverance out of dangerous confusion, by a setting
up, and settling a regular Government) remiss in their mediation for it, while
Independents intentively bestirre themselves in several Counties to make
choice of such for Knights and Burgesses, as favor their faction, and quicken
their Patrons with uncessant importunity to expedite their design in
Parliament, in Committees, in the Army; and some of them are such ubiquitaries,
within the Kingdom, and without, (to work themselves up to a capitulating
party) that none but that great Peripatetick, 1 Pet. 5.8. goes beyond them
for sedulitie in prosecution of a plot. And yet whatsoever he aims at in this
diversion or prohibition of Petitions, the Parliament may have need of them and
may make good use of them, (yea and as some Antipresbyterians brag, The most
and best things that ever this Parliament did, were first m^tioned by private
men, and then authorized and established by them. The Postscript of the
Libellous Pamphlet called Lilburnes Englands birthright.
have done so) and may be very well pleased therewith.

For instance, having a purpose to ordain the Presbyteriall Government which
(as the The Copy of the Remonstrance lately delivered to the Assembly by
T.G.I.B. etc.
Independents confess) they have voted already, it may be matter of much
encouragement to them to perfect their purpose in that behalf, since they see
such a general accord of the Common Council, and Ministry of the City
petitioning together for the establishment thereof.

This may suffice for the second Edition of this scandalous contumely against
the Petitions, and Petitioners of London; for whose sakes (they being so many
in number, and so eminent in rank, and order,) and for the good Cause wherein
they, and many more are so much engaged, I have taken the opportunity that was
cast in my way to make this Apology, otherwise I should not think it meet to
bestow my most idle minutes upon so mean an employment, as a conflict, or
contestation with such Antagonists as now I have answered. Who if they appear
again with any degree of folly, or offense in this Cause, above that which
discretion may disdain, or Religion must pardon, though I be silent (which yet
I do not promise) there will be a course taken to make some more sensible of
their unsufferable excesses, and others more circumspect, and cautelous, then
to run the hazard of their deserved reward.

FINIS.

