Lieu. Col. John Lilburn's Plea in Law, Against an Act of Parliament of the 30
of January, 1651. Entitled, An Act for the execution of a Judgment given in
Parliament against Lieu. Col. John Lilburn. Contrived and penned, on purpose
for him, by a true and faithful lover of the Fundamental Laws and Liberties of
the free people of England, a great deal more then of the person of Lieu. col.
John Lilburn, though now he be a prisoner for the said Laws, and Liberties,
and his own innocence, in Newgate: All which compels and forces the Penman to
be very studious of his own good and preservation, very much concerned, and
very much incroached upon, in that harsh, unjust, and illegal dealing, that at
present is exercised upon him: And therefore, for his own good and benefit, the
honest Readers information, and for Mr Lilburns the prisoners advantage, he
presents these ensuing lines to thy view, and his, as the form of a Plea; that
the Penman hereof, as a true well-wisher of his, and the people of England,
would have him to ingross into Parchment, and to have ready by him to make use
of (in case his own brains cannot contrive a better) when he is called up to
answer for his life before the Judges of the Upper-Bench, or any other Bar of
Justice whatsoever; and the said form of a Plea for him thus follows verbatim.
The second Edition much enlarged, corrected, and amended, July 2. 1653.
JOhn Lilburn now prisoner at the Bar says, that he having heard the Charge
contained in the Scire facias, Indictment, or Information, now read unto him at
the Bar: For plea thereunto he says, That it appears by the Act of Parl of
the 30 of Jan. 1651. That upon the 15. of Jan. 1651. a Judgment was given in
Parl. against one Lieu. Col. Jo. Lilburn, in the Act named, for high crimes and
misdemeanors by him committed, as by the same appears, for which the fines and
other punishments were promulgated against him, mentioned in the said Act. But
the said John Lilburn now prisoner at the Bar says, that the said J. Lilburn
in the said Act named, and he the now prisoner at the Bar, be not one and the
self-same person; for that he the now prisoner at the Bar is a freeborn
English Gentleman; and never was legally charged, indicted, and convicted,
either by the Parl. or any other Court of Judicature, being a Court of Record,
in the English Nation, or Commonwealth: Neither ever was there any Judgment
given in Parl. against him the now prisoner at the Bar, for high crimes and
misdemeanors mentioned in the said Act, upon the said 15 of Jan. 1651 (Votes or
Resolves being not in the least any judgments in law) It being impossible that
a Judgment in any legal Court of England should be past against a freeborn
English man; and that man daily forthcoming, and never to hear read, nor see
any of the proceedings ante-ceding the said Judgment, and never summoned by any
legal process to any legal proceedings, nor called to any legal Bar whatsoever,
and demanded (according to Law) what he could say, why Judgment should not be
past against him. Neither ever did the pris^ner J. Lilburn, now at the Bar,
ever in all his lifetime, by kneeling at the Bar of the P. of the Commonwelth
of England, lately sitting at Westminster. ever acknowledge that the said Parl. in
law, ever had in all their life times, any the least jurisdiction in the world,
to sentence him, or any other freeborn English man of England, (that are none
of their Members of immedi^te Officers) for any crimes whatsoever, as I.
Lilburn the prisoner at the Bar has fully and undeniably proved by Law in his
P^ea (upon the Writ of Habeas Corpus) before the late Judges of the Kings
Bench, viz. Judge Bacon, and Judge Rolls, upon the 8th of May, 1648. as in that
printed Law-Argument, entitled, The laws funeral, is fully to be read in page
8 9, 10, 11. All crimes whatsoever being for him, only and solely to be h^ard,
determined, and judged at the Common Law, and no where else. For, Magna Charta
the P^tition of Right, and the Act that abolished the Star Chamber, expressly
says, That no freeman of England shall be taken, or imprisoned, or be
disseized of his free hold, or liberties, or free customs, or be outlawed or
be ex^led, but by a lawful Judgment (of a Jury of 12 sworn men) of his equals
(of the same neighborhood) according to the Law of the Land. And that none
shall be taken (for any crime whatsoever, by any person or Court whatsoever)
unless it be by indictment, or presentment of good and lawful people of the
same neighborhood where such deeds be done, in due manner, or by process made
by Writ original at the Common law, and that none be put out of his franchise
or freehold, unless he be duly brought in to answer and adjudged of the same
according to the course of the Law, and if any thing be done (by any persons,
or Courts wha^soever) against the tenor of the same it shall be void in Law,
and holden for error.

And the Petition of Right expressly says, No man whatsoever shall be any ways
punished (especially in criminal cases) but according to the Laws and Statutes
already established in the Land. And those also by the said Petition of Right,
and the Statute that abolished the Star Chamber, are precisely declared to be
according to our good, old, native, fundamental Rights and Liberties. This very
thing (or the securing thereof) alone, being the principal and chief declared
cause of all the late Parl. and present Armies wars with the late King and his
son; and without the inviolable preservation of these our fundamental laws and
liberties, it is impossible that any in the Army, from the highest to the
lowest, in the least can acquit themselves of being justly esteemed, both
before God and all just men, real and wilful murderers, of all those persons
that they have slain in the late civil wars; and if so? woe unto them when God
makes inquisition for innocent blood. Neither indeed, is he the now prisoner at
the Bar, guilty of any such high crimes and misdemeanors, as is expressed in
the said Act: Neither ever was he the now prisoner at the Bar, in the least
duly and legally banished, and fined by the said Act; nor yet is a fellon, nor
guilty of felony in no manner of respect, as by the said Scire facias,
Indictment, or Information, now read unto him is supposed: Neither can he
rationally imagine, that by the Parl. that is mentioned in the said Act of the
30 of Jan. 1651. for banishing one Lieu. Col. John Lilburn, is not in the least
meant the late Parl. of the Commonwealth of England sitting at Westminster,
(especially, because it is not so expressed) who had taken many Oaths, and past
abundance of Declarations, and particularly that of the 9 of Feb. 1648.
inviolably to maintain the funda^ental Laws of the Land, in reference to the
peoples lives, liberties, and properties, with all things incident,
appertainining, and belonging thereunto; But that rather it was some ignorant
sottish French Parl. sitting at Paris, or elsewhere in France, that understand
nothing of the laws, liberties, and freedoms of England, or that it was the
Malignant Cavalier Parl. lately sitting at Oxford, in the Kings Quarters there,
post-dating their Act, and thereby endeavoring by the said Act, to create such
a a president as in the consequence of it would destroy all the laws,
liberties, and properties, of the freeborn people of England, and thereby
absolutely set up the Kings Will and Prerogative above Law, the bare
endeavoring of which in the Earl of Strafford, has bin long since adjudgd
high Treason. Or in the next place, if the Authors of the said monstrous and
illegal Act of banishment, be neither the ignorant Parliament of Paris, nor the
Cavalier Parliament of Oxford, then of necessity in the third place, it cannot
in Charity and Reason but be judged that the said Act of banishment was drawn
up by Mr Scobel, the Parliaments Clerk, Mr Hill their Chairman, and Mr Prideaux
their Attorney General, when they were all riding Post, and so jumbled or
shaken with fast riding, that it was impossible for them to hold their pens to
write right and true; and when they had framed it, then by some cunning
artifice, or enchantment of theirs, they preferred it to the said Parl. who in
charity and common Reason must needs be judged to pass it when they were three
quarters asleep, against some silly natural fool called Lieu. col. John
Lilburn, that could not be imagined ever in his life to have read any thing of
Law or Reason. It being impossible (in the least) in Reason to be conceived,
that the late supreme Authority the Parl. of the Commonwealth of England
sitting at Westminster, being only by their own Declarations, but trusted to
provide for the Peoples weal, but not in the least for their woe, would ever in
their right wits, or not being three quarters asleep, pass such an Act of
Parliament against John Lilburn now prisoner at the Bar ( who has much read
the law, and very well understands the fundamental liberties of England, and
has hazardously adventured his life a thousand times for the inviolable
preserving of them) because such an Act of Parl. as the foresaid Act of Parl.
is, is in the first place, An Act of Parliament against common right, common
equity, and common reason; and therefore is void and null in law, and ought not
to be executed; as appears by these following Law Authorities, viz. 1 part of
Dr Bonhams Case, fol. 118. and the 8th of Edw. 3. fol. 3. 30. 33 E. cassavit
32. and 27 H. G. annuity 41. and 1 Eliz. Dier. 113. and 1 part Cooks
Institutes, lib. 2. chap. 11. sect. 209. fol. 140. a. 4 Edw. 4. 12. 12 Ed. 4.
18. 1 H. 7. 12. 13. Plow. com. fol. 369. and Judge Jenkins learned Works in the
Law, printed for I. Gyles, 1648. but particularly by his Discourse of long
Parliaments, page 139, 140, etc. See also Mr W. Prins notable book of the 16 of
June, 1649. called, A legal Vindication of the liberties of England against
illegal taxes, p. 11, 12, 13. etc. But especially see a book, entitled, The
legal and fundamental liberties of England revived, asserted, and vindicated;
printed and reprinted in the year, 1649. page 54, 55, 56, 57. yea an Act of
Parl. That a man shall be Judges in his own Case, is avoid Act in law; as
appears in Hubberts Case, fol. 120. and by the 8th Part of Cooks Reports in
Dr Bonhams Case, and by the present Armies own Book of Declarations, page 35,
52, 54, 59, 60, 61, 63, 132, 141, 142, 143, 144. Yea, says that learned Oracle
of the Law of England Sr Edw. Cook, in the 4th part of his Institutes, fol.
330. Where Reason cease, there the Law cease; for, seeing Reason is the
very life and spirit of the law it self, the lawgiver is not to be esteemed,
to respect that which has no Reason; although the generality of the words, at
the first sight, or after the letter, seem otherwise. And says the said
learned Author in his first part Institutes, fol. 140. a. All Customs and
prescriptions (Acts of Parliament, Laws and Judgments) that be against Reason,
are void and null in themselves.

And says the Armies Atturny General John Cook, in the late Kings Case stated,
page 23. that by the law of England, any Act or agreement against the laws of
God and nature, is a mere nullity: for as a man has no hand in making the laws
of God and nature, no more has he power to mar or alter them; and he cites
the E. of Leicesters adjudged Case for a proof: And in page the 20th he also
says, That all the Judges in England cannot make one case to be law that is
not reason, no more then they can prove a hair to be white that is black; which
if they should so declare or adjudge it is a mere nullity; For law (says he)
must be reason adjudged. And excellent to this very purpose, is that ancient
Law Book, called the Doctor and Student, who in his second Chap. page 4.
expressly says, Against the law of Nature (which he calls the law of reason)
prescription, statute, nor custom, may not prevail; and if any be brought in
against it, they be no prescriptions, statutes, nor customs, but things void
and against justice; And what this law of nature or reason is, he excellently
shows in the latter end of the 4th page and the beginning of the fifth; and
therefore in his 7th page he expressly says, That to every good law, is
required these properties, viz. that it be honest, rightwise, possible in it
self, and after the custom of the country, convenient for the place and time;
necessary, profitable, and also manifest; that it be not captious by any dark
sentence, nor mixed with any private wealth, but all made for the common good;
for, says he, every man's law must be consonant to the law of God, otherwise
they are not righteous, nor obligatory.

Secondly, such an Act of Parliament as the foresaid Act of Banishment, is not
only against common-right, common-equity, and common-reason; but it is
absolutely destructive to the very ends of the peoples trust conferred upon the
Parliament; and so the highest of Treasons that can be committed, and that it
is destructive to the ends of the peoples Trusts, clearly appears by the
Statutes of the 4th of Ed. the 3d, chap. 14. and 36 Edw. 3. 10. which expressly
says, That a Parliament at least shall be holden once every year; and that for
the maintenance of the Peoples laws and liberties, and the redress of diverse
mischiefs and grievances that daily happen; and suitable to these things, are
the ends contained in the Writs that summon them, and the intentions of those
that choose the Members and send them. And suitable to this is the ends of Parl.
sitting, as the present General and his Army in many of their remarkable
Declarations have fully declared against the late 11 members, and their
Accomplices: Yea, and forced the late Parl. to raze out of their Books and
Records, many wicked and unrighteous things, as they judged them to be, after
the Parl. had solemnly past them; as Votes, Orders, Judgments, and Acts; yea,
and endeavored very earnestly to hang diverse of those as Traitors that had
executed them; as particularly, Alderman Adams, Langham, and Bunch; with the
Lord Major Sr John Gayer, etc. But the greatest grievances and mischiefs in the
world are by the foresaid mischievous and unjust banishing Act, established,
ratified, and confirmed; for by it a man is condemned to lose his liberty and
estate, and all the comforts of this life; and that without any the least crime
committed, or accusation exhibited, or legal process issued out to summon the
party to make any defense in the world, or ever calling or permitting him to
speak one word for himself; Which is an act or proceeding against the light and
law of Nature, Reason, the Law of God, against the Law of Honor, Conscience,
and common-honesty; yea, a dealing worse with the party, then ever the cruel
Jews did with Christ; or, then the bloody Butchers, Bishop Gardener and Bonner
did with the ^oasted Martyrs in Queen Mary's days; who always suffered them
to have due process of law, and to know and see their Accusers, and to have
free liberty to speak for themselves; and never condemned them, but for
transgressing a known and declared Law in being.

Yea also dealing worse with the party then ever the bloody Gunpowder Traitors
were dealt with by King James, who always allowed them fair trials in law, from
the beginning to the end, at the Bar of Justice, for their lives: Yea it is a
worse dealing with the party, then ever the Parliament themselves dealt with
the bloudiest and most massacring traitors that ever was in arms against them
to cut their throats. Yea, the forementioned practice, of the foresaid most
illegal and unrighteous Act of banishment, is an Act, and proceedings in the
highest subversion of the fundamental law and liberty of England, that can be
invented or imagined; and by consequence, if it may without the highest
offense, or solicismes in Law be supposed, that his Excellency the Lord Genesis
Cromwell, Major Genesis Harrison, and the rest of the Members of the late supreme
Authority of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England sitting at
Westminster, had any real finger in it, or were Actors of it, they may and
ought all of them, with all the rest under them, that have executed any part of
the foresaid unjust, injurious, illegal Act of Parliament, be apprehended,
indicted, and processed against at the common law, as Traitors, and subverters
of the fundamental laws, liberties, and freedoms, of the freeborn people of
England: As that learned man in the Laws of England, Sr Edward Cook, in the
second, third, and fourth parts of his Institutes (all three of which are
published by two special Orders of the late House of Commons, in Anno, 1641.
for good Law) does declare, and proof was dealt with by Empson and Dudley in
less Cases, then the before recited unjust Act of banishment. Which Case of
Empson and Dudley was thus:

At the Parliament holden by King, Lords, and Commons, in Henry the sevenths
time, who was a most undoubted lawful King of England, and by his Marriage of
his Wife the Lady Elizabeth, Heir apparent to the House of York, as Himself was
to the House of Lancaster, had united the two claims of Lancaster and York in
Himself; and in pitcht-battel had slain King Richard the third, the Usurper;
and by reason of the extraordinary many troubles of His Reign, and the ignorant
Regal time in which he lived considered, He had a thousand times more grounds
to be arbytrary and discretionary in his proceedings with the people of
England, then the late decapitated Parliament had. Yet he summoned a free
Parliament, who sat peaceably and quietly, without the force or purgings of
soldiers, and after that several Juries, at Assizes and Sessions by corruption
and favor, had refused to fi^de persons that were judicially proved guilty
before them of br^ach of penal laws, as in full and free Parliament by King,
Lords and Commons, is avowedly declared; An Act of Parliament ( recorded in the
4th part of Cooks Institutes, fol. 40, 41.) in the 11th of Hen. 7. chap. 3 was
past by King, Lords and Commons, in full and free parliament, to enable the
Justices of Assize in open Sessions to be holden before them, and the Justices
of peace in each country in England, upon information for the King before them
to be made, to have full power and authority by their discretion (with ^ut
trials by Juries) to hear and determine all offenses and contempts committed
against penal laws: In all which arbitrary or discretion I proceedings,
murder, treason and felony, was excepted out of their cognizance or
jurisdiction, as also all other offenses whereby any person should lose life,
or member, or lands, tenements, goods, or chattels to the party complaining.

By pretext of which statute says the Lord Cook in his last recited foli^,
Empson and Dudley (privy Counselors and Justices of peace to Henry the
seventh) did commit upon the subject insufferable pressures and oppressions
(which yet at the highest was but the taking away some small part of the
persons estates from them that they condemned) and therefore this statute was
justly soon after the decease of Henry the seventh repealed at the next
Parliament after his decease, by the statute of the 1 Hen 8. chap 6. A good
caveat says he to parliaments, to leave all causes to be measured by the
golden and straight wet-wand of the law, and not to the uncertain and crooked
cord of discretion. For it is not almost credible to foresee (says he) when
any maxim, or fundamental law of this Realm is altered (as elsewhere has been
observed) what dangerous inconveniences do follow, which most expressly
appears by this most unjust and strange Act of 11 H. 7. For hereby not only
Empson and Dudley themselves, but such Justices of peace (corrupt men) as they
caused to be authorized, committed most grievous and heavy oppressions and
exactions, grinding the face of the poor subjects by penal laws (be they never
so obsolete or unfit for the time) by information only, without any
presentment or trial by Jury, being the ancient birthright of the subject, but
to hear and determine the same by their discretion, inflicting such penalty, as
the statutes not repealed imposed. These and other like actions and oppressions
by, or by the means of Empson and Dudley and their instruments, brought
infinite treasures to the Kings Coffers, whereof the King himself in the end,
with great grief and compunction repented, as in another place we have
observed. This statute of 11 H. 7. we have recited, and showed the just
inconveniences thereof, to the end, that the like should never hereafter be
attempted in any Court of Parliament, and that others might avoid the fearful
end of those two Time-servers Empson and Dudley. Qui eorum vestigia insistant,
eorum exitus perhorrescant. That is to say, Those that follow their footsteps,
may fear the same destruction that they had; whose end in the third part of the
Institutes fol. 208. and the fourth part fol. 198, 199. may be seen; was
severally to be indicted at Common law (whose indictments is there to be read)
and convicted and executed as Traitors, for subverting the fundamental Law and
Liberties of England, viz. Trials by Juries: which the Conquests of the Romans,
Saxons, Danes, or Normans, could never blot out of the Calendar of Englishmens
fundamental Liberties, but has from time to time, with the infinite hazards of
their lives and bloods been preserved, as the choicest of their jewels, and as
one of their chiefest fundamental right.

Of whom the said Lord Cook in his exposition of the 29 Chapter of Magna
Charta, in his second part, Institutes fol. 51, upon the words of lex terra, or
the law of the Land (where he plentifully shows, that no Englishman whatsoever,
ought not for any crime whatsoever, in any Court whatsoever, by any power or
authority whatsoever, to be tried but by Juries, and due process of Law as is
before showed) expressly says; Yet

Against this ancient and fundamental Law, and in the face thereof, I find an
Act of Parliament made (says he) that as well Justices of Assize, as Justices of
Peace (without any finding or presentment by the verdict of twelve men) upon a
bare information for the King before them made, should have full power and
authority by their discretions to hear and determine all offenses and contempts
committed or done by any person or persons, against the form, ordinance, and
effect of any Statute, made and not repealed, etc. By color of which Act,
shaking this fundamental Law, it is not credible what horrible oppressions and
exactions, to the undoing infinite numbers of people, were committed by Sir
Richard Empson Knight, and Edmond ^^dley, being Justices of the Peace
throughout England, and upon this unjust and injurious Act (as commonly in six
cases it falls out) a new Office was erected, and they made Masters of the
Kings forfeitures.

But at the Parliament hold^n in the first year of Henry the 8, this Act of the
11th of Henry the 7th is recited, and made void, and repealed, and the reason
thereof is yielded, for that by force of the said Act it was manifestly known,
that many sinister and crafty feigned forged informations, had been persued
against diverse of the Kings subjects, to their great damage and wrongful
vexations, and the ill success hereof, and the fearful ends of the two
Oppressors, should deterr others from committing the like, and should admonish
Parliaments, That instead of the ordinary and precious trial (per legem terra)
by the law of the Land, they bring not in Absolute, and partial trials by
discretion.

And in the fourth part of his Institutes fol. 37. he expressly says, That he
finds an Attainder by Parliament of a subject (viz. Thomas Cromwell then Earl
of Essex) of High Treason, who was committed to the Tower, and thereby forth
coming to be heard, and yet was never called to answer in any of the Houses of
Parliament. Of the manner of which proceeding he thus says; Auferat oblivio,
si potest, si non, utcunque silentiam tegat; That is, Let the Parliaments crime
be buried in oblivion, if it be possible; and if not, nevertheless, yet let it
give place to silence for the present. For says he, the more high and absolute
the jurisdiction of the Court is, the more just and honorable it ought to be
in the proceeding, and to give example of Justice to inferior Courts. And fol.
38. he is confidently persuaded, that the rehearsal of this unjust Attainder,
will hereafter cause the Honorable Members of both Houses of Parliament, to be
so tender of their duty, in preserving the fundamental Laws and liberties of
the people of England, as that never hereafter such an unjust Attainder shall
be brought, where the party is forth coming, to condemn him, without hearing
of him. And consonant unto this, is the Scripture and the Law of God therein
contained, as appears by the third of Genesis verse. 9. where God after Adam had
transgressed his Law, summons him before him to answer for himself, before he
would pass judgment against him. And when Sodom had abhominably defiled its
ways, with the height of wickedness, yet the just God of heaven and earth,
would not judge, condemn or pass sentence against them, Till he went down to
see, whether they have done altogether according to the cry that is come up
against them, or not; And says God, I will know, Genesis 18. And Deuteronomy. 17.6.11.
and Chap. 20.15. God says expressly, One Witness shall not rise against a man
for any iniquity, or for any sin, in any sin that he sins; at the mouth of
two witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses, shall the matter be
established. And by the hand of Moses he required the people of Israel, to do
according to the sentence of the Law, and the judgment which shall be given
thereupon, and not to decline from the law, to the right hand, or to the left.
And suitable to this is the judicial and legal proceedings of the great
Congregation of the children of Israel (consisting to the number of four
hundred thousand able men) in the case of the Levite, and his ravished and
slain Concubine, who in their judicial proceedings in that Case, first demanded
of him, how so great a wickedness came to be committed in Israel? And the
conclusion, after their hearing, and examining the cause, was to consider,
consult, and then to give sentence. And says Nicodemus, that learned man in
the Law of God, against the Scribes and Pharisees, in behalf of Christ, Does
our Law judge any man before it hear him? John 7.51. And says Festus, the
Heathen Roman Governor in Judea (that had no other guide to walk by, but the
Light and Law of Nature) in the behalf of Paul, against his bloody enemies; It
is not the manner of the Romans to deliver any one to die, before that he which
is accused have the accusers face to face, and have license to answer for
himself, Act. 25.16. And says righteous Paul, who writ the Oracles of God,
infallibly by the Spirit of God; where there is no law, there is, nor can be no
transgression, Romans 4.15. And as evil says the Lord Cook in the last
forecited fol. was the proceeding in Parliament, in the second of Henry the 6.
against Sir John Mortimer, the third son of Edmund the second E. of March,
(descended from Lionel Duke of Clarence) who was indicted of High Treason, for
certain words; which Indictment (without any Arraignment or pleading) being
merely feigned to blemish the Title of the Mortimers; and withal, being
insufficient in Law, as by the same appears, was confirmed by Authority of
Parliament. And the said Sir John being brought into the Parliament, without
Arraignment, and Answer, Judgment in Parliament was given against him, upon the
said Indictment, that he should be carried to the Tower of London, and drawn
through the city to Tyburn, and there hanged, drawn, and quartered; his head to
be set on London Bridge; his four quarters on the four gates of London; as by
the Record of Parliament appears. And therefore, in the next folio, being
fol. 39. he says, That whereas by Order of Law, a man cannot be attainted of
high Treason, unless the Offense be in Law high Treason: he ought not to be
attainted by general words of high Treason, by Authority of Parliament (as
sometime has been used) but the high treason ought to be specially expressed,
seeing that the Court of Parliament is the highest and most honorable Court of
Justice, and ought (as has been said) to give example to inferior Courts. And
further to show that Parliaments (which in their right constitution are the
best conservators of our Laws, and Liberties) are erroneous things (when they
walk by their own Wills, and forsake their true and only guide the fandamental
Laws of England) what need there any more instances then many of the Armies
own Declarations; in several of which, and their frequent Discourses, they
have declared the late parliament a traiterous Parliament, Breakers of their
Trust, and embroylers of the Nation in bloody wars, and subverters of the
peoples liberties and freedoms; yea, and in the conclusion, the Lord Genesis
Cromwell himself, and Maj. Genesis Harrison, with their own hands have pulled them
out by the ears, and plucked them up by the very Roots, as final breakers of
their trust, and as a pack of the vildest knaves and villains that ever
breathed in England; Although they were fenced in, and about by an Act of
parliament made before the wars, by King, Lords, and Commons, that they should
not be dissolved, but by their own free and voluntary consents; And, also,
since they changed the Kingdom into a Commonwealth, by two several Acts of
parl. of the 14 of May, 1649. and the 17 of July, 1649. in which it is expressly
made high Treason, for any Englishman, or men, by writing, printing, or words
declaring; or by endeavoring to raise or stir up Force to dissolve the late
parliamment, or their council of state, without their own consents or to say,
that the said late parl. or their council of state is tyrannical, usurped, or
unlawful, as by the said Acts of Parl. with reference thereunto being had, more
at large does appear; (which Acts are printed in the first part of the Trial or
Arraignment of the prisoner at the Bar at Guild Hall, October. 1649. page 86, 87,
88, 89) And the said J. Lilburn, now prisoner at the Bar, for further plea
says, That for supposed violating those two last forementioned Acts of Parl.
and that but for supposed words, and for the supposed, compiling, writing, and
causing to be printed, Arguments, founded at grounded upon the known and
declared fundamental Laws of England, the received principals of Reason, and
the Armies own printed and published Declarations; he the said Joh. Lilburn,
now prisoner at the Bar, was arraigned, and indicted, as a Traitor for his life
at Guildhall, London, in Octo. 1649. And that principally by the instigation
and means of his Excellency the present L. G. Cromwell; which Trial was with
that violence and fury, that the said prisoner at the Bar was absolutely denied
the declared benefit of the known Laws of England, viz. the help of Council
learned in the Law (and a copy of his Charge and Indictment) which were not
denied, but granted to the Lord Macquire, that grand Irish Rebel, and those
arch Traitors, as they are commonly called, Strafford, Canterbury, Hambleton,
Capel etc. and which also was granted to the prisoner at the Bar, as his Right
by Law, when he was prisoner at Oxford, and arraigned by Judge Heath, etc. for
his life as a traitor; so that the said J. Lilburn now prisoner, at the Bar,
considering the several penalties declared to be due, to any person, or persons
whatsoever, that by force or otherwise should but endeavor to dissolve the late
Pa^. or the^ Council of State, he cannot either in Reason or Law, see or
apprehend which way his Excellency the said L.G. Cromwell, and M. Genesis Harison,
etc. if they continue and persevere as they have begun, to execute the said
unjust and injurious Act of parl. upon the said J. Lilburn, prisoner at the
Bar, (which is one of the most wicked'st, and unjust, that ever the Parl. in
their lives made, and one of the highest and most notorious Acts of their
breach of trust that ever they committed; as is before fully proved) can in the
least either before God or Man, acquit themselves of being guilty of the
high^st of Treason, both by the letter and equity of the two last forementioned
Laws (lately made in part by themselves; but principally by their instigation)
in forcibly dissolving the late parl. against their own voluntary wills and
consents; or how they can acquit themselves in the least in the eyes of all the
understanding people in England, to be justly esteemed guilty of plucking up
the parl. by the roots, not in the least for any evil oppression, injustice, or
breach of trust they had committed against the Nation, or honest people thereof
(that never yet in the least, upon their own principles, forfeited their
liberties and freedoms) but only because they would destroy the parl. to have
the power in their own hands; thereby to dispose of all the lives, liberties,
and proprieties, of all the people of England, by their absolute wills and
pleasures; and to deal worse and more arbytrary with the honest Inhabitants
thereof, then any Conqueror that ever went before them did, although themselves
against the late King, have in the Kings Case stated, p. 22. by John Cook their
own Attorney Genesis publicly declared, That Conquest is a Title or Government
fit to be exercised amongst Bears and Wolves; but not in the least amongst
men. And for any to aver Us in England to be a conquered Nation, is not only
expressly against all the tenor of the Armies many and remarkable Declarations;
but it is such an averment, then which, there can be none more pregnant and
fruitful in Treason then it; as Mr Jo. Pym in his learned and rational printed
Argument, by the special Order of the House of Commons the 29 April, 1641.
against the E. of Strafford avers. And further in page 6. says. There are few
Nations in the world that have not been conquered; and NO doubt but the
Conqueror may give what Laws he please to those that are conquered; but if the
succeeding pacts and Agreements do not limit and restrain that Right, what
people can be secure? England has been conquered and Wales has been
conquered; and by this Reason will be in little better case then Ireland, if
the King by the right of a Conqueror give laws to his people; shall not the
people by the same Reason be restored to the right of the Conquered, to recover
their liberty if they can? What can be more hurtful, more pernicious to both,
then such Propositions as these? Which must needs be most truly averred, have
no end of bloodshed and murder, and all the miseries besides that Tongue can
express, or Heart can imagine.

And it is impossible that ever the honest people of England should entrust,
(as in some measure they have done) the General and His Officers with the
Custody, and preservation of their lives, liberties, freedoms, and proprieties,
with any the least intentions, that when they had subdued their common enemies,
they should subdue their fundamental laws and Rights (for the preservation of
which, the only Contest with the common enemy was begun) and then give them a
Law, flowing from their uncertain discretionary Wills and pleasures. Sure I am,
that righteous and just David calls those sons of Belial, and wicked men, that
would go about to deprive those that staid with the stuff, of an equal share
in the Conquest, even with those that went out to fight, 1 Samuel 30.21, 22, 23,
24, 25, etc. and sure I am, that worthy man in his Age, Mr John Pym, in his
foresaid excellent Speech, page 22. says, That such Treasons as the subversion
of fundamental laws, violating of liberties, can never be good or justifiable
by any circumstance or occasion; and therefore by how much the more, a trust is
upon a man, or generation of men, by so much the more it makes their Crime in
this kind to be the more capital and heinous. Therefore, to conclude, though J.
Lilburn, the prisoner at the Bar, could, and might in Law, urge many things
more against the Parl. legallest power, in all manner of Acts of Attainder, the
Argumenes against which are excellently set down in that rational and highly to
be commended Plea in Law, entitled, The Laws subversion (p. 32.) or, Sr John
Maynards Case truly stated in 1648. by I. Houldin, Gent. and their
non-jurisdiction in the least, as to punish any man whatsoever that is not of
them, for any crime whatsoever; and also the absolute irrationallity and
illegality, of their making a particular law, or their setting up of a
particular Court, for a particular man; which are notably and rationally
discussed upon, in the 2d edition of the book, entitled, The Picture of the
Council of state, p. 4, 5, 6. and the 2d edition of The legal fundamental
liberties of England revived, asserted, and vindicated, p 71, 72, 73. yea, he
might urge many Arguments, lawfully to prove, that the parl. was no parl. when
they past the said Act of banishment, but were long before dissolved, and that
by their own consents, when the late parl. took upon them the exercise of
Regality, and the dissolution of Kingship, and the House of Lords; as is
notably endeavored to be proved in the late Discourses of several of the Armies
Champions; as particularly, one licensed to be printed for G. Calvert, and
another by R. Moon, at the seven Stars in Paul's Churchyard. Yet he shall close
all at present with this last Plea, viz. That although by the said unjust Act
of banishment, the Act it self does authorize all Judges, Mayors, Sheriffs,
Bailiffs, and all other other Officers, as well Military as Civil, in their
respective places, to be aiding and assisting in apprehending etc. the said
banished Lieu. Col. John Lilburn; yet it authorizeth none of them in the least
to arraign, try, condemn, and execute the said John Lilburn mentioned in the
said Act; and therefore by reason of the insufficiency of the said Act, in that
very particular, although John Lilburn, Gentleman, now prisoner at the Bar,
were that Lieu. Col. John Lilburn mentioned in the said Act of banishment (as
with confidence, for the just and legal Reasons, at the beginning of this his
Plea it mentioned, he does avow he is not) yet in regard the Parliament is
dissolved, that made the said Act, which in reason (by reason of the said
insufficiency of the said Act) cannot otherwise be supposed; but as they past
the Act of banishment themselves, against the John Lilburn therein mentioned
and meant; so they resolved to reserve only to themselves, the final judging
and condemning of him; which cannot be done now without their sitting again.
And further he avers, that its impossible, as things at present in England now
stands, to find a legal number of men, or one single legal men, to give a legal
Commission to any man or men in England, to hold a legal Court of Justice to
try John Lilburn, now prisoner at the Bar, either upon pretense for
transgressing the said unjust and illegal Act of banishment, or for any other
real, or pretended Crime whatsoever: And, therefore, the premises duly and
legally weighed and considered, he prays, and demands, as his absolute Right,
the judgment of the Court upon the insufficiency and invalidity of proceedings
now had against him, on the Keepers of the Liberties of England's behalf, in
point of Law, before he put himself upon the Country for any further Trial.

June 28. 1653. John Lilburn, Gent.

The illegal Mittimus of the Lord Major.
Whereas it was enacted by a late Act of Parl. ( entitled an Act for the
execution of a judgment given in Parliament, against Lieu. Col. John Lilburne)
that the said John Lilburne, should within twenty days to be accounted from the
15 day of January, 1651. depart out of England, Scotland, Ireland, and the
Islands, Territories and Dominions thereof; and that in case the said John
Lilburne, at any time, after the expiration of the said 20 days, to be
accounted as aforesaid, should be found or should be remaining within England,
Scotland, Ireland, or within any of the Islands, Territories or Dominions
thereof, the said J. Lilburne is thereby adjudged a Felon, and to be executed
as a Felon, ^s in the said Act was mentioned; And whereas the said J. Lilburne,
has been remaining and found since the expiration of the said 20 days within
the Liberties of the City of London, in the Commonwealth of England, contrary
to the said Act; These are therefore in the Name of the Keepers of the
Liberties of England by Authority of Parl. to will and require you forthwith
upon receipt hereof, to receive into your custody the body of the said J.
Lilburne, whom I send unto you herewith, for the Felony aforesaid, and him
safely to keep, until he shall be delivered by due course of Law, and this
shall be your Warrant.

Given under my Hand and Seal, Dated this 16 day of June, in the year of our
Lord, 1653. JOHN FOWK, Major.

To the Keepers of the Goal of Newgate.
Postscript. Reader, if thou perusest the Charges or Proceedings against King
Edward the second, or King Richard the second, or the late King Charles; or
against the Judges, Trisillian, Fulthorp, Berknap, Carry, Holt, Burge, and
Lockton, with the rest of their Accomplices; as also against the late
Ship Money Judges: Thou shall clearly find, they were all principally
proceeded against, For subverting of the Peoples fundamental Laws and
Liberties, and the setting up Arbitrarines, Will, and Pleasure.

July the 2d. 1653.
REader, I am desired to entreat thee take notice, that besides all the
Petitions that Mr Lilburn, and his friends, in and about the City of London
(the last of which of the Citizens, the Soldiers about London freely signed)
have delivered to the Council of State for him, which are all extant in Print;
There is besides this P^ea, two notable Pieces in print about him; The one is
entitled, A Jury-mans judgment upon the Case of Lieutenant Colonel John
Lilburn: The other is called, A Defensive Declaration of Lieut. Col. John
Lilburne, printed and reprinted in a second Edition, corrected and amended the
first of July, 1653. And also there i^ this day come out in print Mr Lilburn's
Letter to the Lord Major of London, entitled, The Prisoners most mournful Cry,
against the present Oppression and Tyranny that is exercised upon him.

Finis.

