THE PICTURE OF THE Council of State, Held forth to the Free people of England
BY Lievt. Col. John Lilburn, Mr Thomas Prince, and Mr Richard Overton, now
Prisoners in the Tower of LONDON.

OR, A full Narrative of the late Extrajudicial and Military Proceedings
against them.

Together with the Substance of their several Examinations, Answers and
Deportments before them at Darby house, upon the 28. of March last.

Printed in the Year, 1649.

THE PICTURE OF The COUNCIL of STATE, Held forth to the Free People of England,
By Lieutenant Coll. John Lilburn, M. Thomas Prince, and M. Richard Overton.
The Narrative of the proceedings against Lieut. Coll. John Lilburn, thus
follows.
ON Wednesday the 28. of March 1649. about four or five a clock in the
morning, my Lodging at Winchster-house was beset with about a hundred or two
hundred armed men, Horse and Foot, one of which knocking at my chamber door, I
rise and opened him the door, and asked him who he would speak with, and what
he would have? He replied, he was come to take me Prisoner, where upon I
demanded of him to see his Warrant, he told me he had one, but had it not here,
but as soon as I came to Paul's I should see it; I told him if he walked by the
rules of Justice, he ought to have brought his Warrant with him, and to have
showed it me, and given me leave to have coppied it out, if I had desired it;
but diverse of the foot Soldiers rushing into my room at his heels, I desired
him to demean himself like a Gentleman, and not with any incivilities affright
my children and family, for if it were nothing but my person he would have, I
would but make me ready and go along with him without any more a do, whither
he would carry me, for his power of armed men was beyond my present resisting,
or power to dispute; so I desired him and another Gentleman with him to sit
down, which they did, and when I was almost ready to go, I demanded of him
whether it would not fully satisfy his end, in my going along with him and one
or two more of his company in a boat, and I would engage unto him as I was an
Englishman, there should be no disturbance to him by me, or any in my behalf,
but I would quietly and peaceably go with him, wherever he would have me; but
he told me no, I must march through the streets with the same Guard that came
for me; I told him I could not now dispute, but it would be no great conquest
to lead a single captive through the streets in the head of so many armed men,
who neither had made resistance, nor was in any capacity to do it; and coming
down stairs into the great yard, I was commanded to stand till the men were
marshalled in Rank and File and two other Prisoners were brought unto me, viz.
my Landlord, Mr. Devennish's two sons, but for what they knew not, nor could
imagine; So away through the streets the armed Victors carry us, like three
conquered Slaves, making us often halt by the way, that so their men might draw
up in good order, to encounter with an Army of Butter-flies, in case they
should meet them in the way to rescue us their Captives from them; so coming to
Paul's Church, I th^re meet with my Comrade Mr. Prince, and after embraces each
of other, and a little discourse, we see our acquaintance M. William Walwin
marching at the head of another Party as a captive, and having understood that
our being seized as Prisoners was about a new address by way of Petition to
the Parliament, entitled the second part of Englands new chains discovered; We
could not but wonder at the apprehending of M. Walwin about that, he having for
some months by past (that ever I could see, or hear of) never bin at any of
our meetings, where any such things were managed; But Adjutant General Stubber
that was the Commander of the Party coming then to view, I repaired to him, and
desired to see his Warrant by virtue of which his men forced me out of my bed
and habitation, from my wife and children, and his Warrant he produced, which I
read, he denying me a copy of it, though both there and at White Hall I
earnestly demanded it as my right, the substance of which so near as I can
remember, is from the Committee, commonly styled the Council of State, to
Authorize Sir Hardresse Waller, and Colonel Edward Whalely, or whom they shall
appoint, to repair to any place whatsoever, where they shall hear Lieut. Coll.
John Lilburn, and M. Prince, M. Walwin, and M. Overton are, them to apprehend
and bring before the Council of State, for suspicion of high Treason, for
compiling etc. a seditious and scandalous Pamphlet etc. And for so doing, that
shall be their warrant.

Signed John Bradshaw President.

And in the same paper is contained Sir Hardress Wallers, and Col. Whaley's
Commission or Deputation to Adjutant General Stubber, to apprehend M. Walwin,
and my self; who with his Officers, dealt abundantly more fairly with us, then
I understand Lieut. Col. Axestell dealt with M. Prince and M. Overton; From
which Lieut. Col. if there had bin any harmony in his spirit to his profession,
abundance more in point of civility, might have bin expected, than from the
other, though he fell much short.

But when we were in Paul's Churchyard, I was very earnest with the Adjutant
General, and his Ensign that apprehended me (as I understood by the Adjutant
he was) that we might go to some place to drink our mornings draughts, and
accordingly we went to the next door to the School-house, where we had a large
discourse with the Officers, especially about M. Divinish sons; we
understanding they had no warrant at all to meddle with them in the least, nor
nothing to lay to their charge, but a private information of one Bull their
fathers tenant, between which parties there is a private difference; we told
them, we could not but stand amazed, that any Officer of an Army durst in such
a case apprehend the persons of any Freeman of England, and of his own head
and authority, drag him or them out of his house and habitation, like a
Traitor, a Thief, or a Rogue; and they being ashamed of what they had done to
them, at our importunity, let both the young men go free. So away by water we
three went to White Hall, with the Adjutant General, where we met with our
friend M. Overton. And after we had staid at White Hall till about 4. or 5. of
the clock in the afternoon, we were by the foresaid Adjutant carried to Darby
house, where after about an hours stay, there were called in Lieu. Col.
Goldegne, a Coalyard keeper in Southwark, and as some of good quality of his
neighbors do report him to have bin no small Personal Treaty man; and also
Capt. Williams, and M. Saul Shoemaker, both of Southwark, who are said to be
the Devils 3. deputies, or informers against us; and after they were turned
out, I was called in next, and the door being opened, I marched into the Room
with my hat on, and looking about me, I saw diverse Members of the House of
Commons present, and so I put it off; and by Sergeant Dendy I was directed to
go near M. Bradshaw, that sat as if he had bin Chairman to the Gentlemen that
were there present; between whom, and my self, past to this following effect.

Lieut. Col. Lilburn (said he) here are some Votes of Parliament that I am
commanded by this Council to acquaint you with; which were accordingly read,
and which did contain the late published and printed Proclamation or
Declaration, against the second Part of Englands New Chains discovered, with
diverse instructions, and an unlimitted power given unto the Council of State,
to find out the Authors and Promoters thereof. After the reading of which, M.
Bradshaw said unto me, Sir, You have heard what has bin read unto you, and
this Council having information that you have a principal hand in compiling and
promoting this Book, (showing me the Book it self,) therefore they have sent
for you, and are willing to hear you speak for your self.

Well then M. Bradshaw, said I, If it please you and these Gentlemen to afford
me the same liberty and privilege that the Cavaliers did at Oxford, when I was
arraigned before them for my li^^ for levying War in the quarrel of the
Commonwealth, against the late King and his Party (which was liberty of
speech, to speak my mind freely without interruption) I shall speak, and go on;
but without the Grant of liberty of speech, I shall not say a word more to you.

To which he replied, That is already granted you, and therefore you may go on
to speak what you can or will say for your self, if you please; or if you will
not, you may hold your peace, and with draw.

Well then (said I) M. Bradshaw, with your favor, thus. I am an Englishman
born, bred, and brought up, and England is a Nation Governed, Bounded, and
Limited by Laws and Liberties: and for the Liberties of England, I have both
fought and suffered much: but truly Sir, I judge it now infinitely below me,
and the glory and excellency of my late actions, now to plead merit or desert
unto you, as though I were forced to fly to the merit of my former actions, to
lay in a counter-scale, to weigh down your indignation against me, for my
pretended late offenses: No, Sir, I scorn it, I abhor it: And therefore Sir, I
now stand before you, upon the bare, naked, and single account of an
Englishman, as though I had never said, done, or acted any thing, that tended
to the preservation of the Liberties thereof; but yet, have never done any act
that did put me out of a Legal capacity to claim the utmost punctilio, benefit,
and privilege that the Laws and Liberties of England will afford to any of you
here present, or any other man in the whole Nation: And the Laws and Liberties
of England are my inheritance and birthright. And in your late Declaration,
published about four or five days ago, wherein you lay down the grounds and
reasons (as I remember) of your doing Justice upon the late King, and why you
have abolished Kingly Government, and the House of Lords, you declare in effect
the same; and promise to maintain the Laws of England, in reference to the
Peoples Liberties and Freedoms: And amongst other things therein contained, you
highly commend and extol the Petition of Right, made in the third year of the
late King, as one of the most excellent and gloriest Laws in reference to the
Peoples Liberties that ever was made in this Nation; and you there very much
blame, and cry out upon the King, for robing and denying the people of England
the benefit of that Law; and sure I am (for I have read and studied it) there
is one clause in it that says expressly, That no Freeman of England ought to
be adjudged for life, limb, liberty, or estate, but by the Laws already in
being established and declared: And truly Sir, if this be good and found Legal
Doctrine (as undoubtedly it is, or else your own Declarations are false, and
lies) I wonder what you Gentlemen are; For the declared and known Laws of
England knows you not, neither by names, nor qualifications, as persons endowed
with any power either to imprison or try me, or the meanest Freeman of
England; And truly, were it not that I know the faces of diverse of you, and
honor the persons of some of you, as Members of the House of Commons that have
stood pretty firm in shaking times to the Interest of the Nation; I should
wonder what you are, or before whom I am and should not in the least honor or
reverence you so much as with Civil Respect, especially considering the manner
of my being brought before you, with armed men, and the manner of your close
sitting, contrary to all Courts of Justice. M. Bradshaw, it may be the House of
Commons has past some Votes or Orders, to authorize you to sit here for such
and such ends as in their Orders may be declared: But that they have made any
such Votes or Orders, is legally unknown to me, I never saw them. Its true, by
common Fame you are bruted abroad and styled a Council of State, but its
possible common Fame in this particular may as well tell me a ly as a truth;
But admit common Fame do in this tell me a truth, and no ly, but that the House
of Commons in good earnest have made you a Council of State, yet I know not
what that is, because the Law of England tells me nothing of such a thing; and
surely if a Council of State were a Court of Justice, the Law would speak
something of it: But I have read both old and new Laws, yea all of late that it
was possible to buy or hear of, and they tell me not one word of you, and
therefore I scarce know what to make of you or what to think of you, but as
Gentlemen that I know, I give you civil respect, and out of no other
consideration: But if you judge your selves to be a Council of State, and by
virtue thereof think you have any power over me, I pray you show me your
Commission, that I may know the better how to behave my self before you. M.
Bradshaw, I will not now question or dispute the Votes or Orders of the present
single House of Commons, in reference to their power, as binding Laws to the
people; yet admit them to be valid, legal, and good; their due circumstances
accompanying them: yet Sir, by the Law of England let me tell you, what the
House Votes, Orders, and Enacts within their walls, is nothing to me, I am not
at all bound by them, nor in Law can take any cognizance of them as Laws,
although 20. Members come out of the House, and tell me such things are done,
till they be published and declared by sound of Trumpet, Proclamation, or the
like, by a public Officer or Magistrate, in the, public and open places of
the Nation; But truly Sir, I never saw any Law in Print or writing, that
declares your power so proclaimed or published; and therefore Sir, I know not
what more to make of you, then a company of private men, being neither able to
own you as a Court of Justice, because the Law speaks nothing of you; nor as a
Council of State, till I see, and read, or hear your Commission, which I desire
(if you please) to be acquainted with.

But Sir, give me leave further to aver unto you, and upon this Principle or
Averment I will venture my life and being, and all I have in the world; That if
the House had by a Proclaimed and Declared Law, Vote, or Order, made this
Council (as you call your selves) a Court of Justice, yet that proclaimed or
declared Law, Vote, or Order, had bin unjust, and null, and void in it self;
And my reason is, because the House it self was never (neither now, nor in any
age before) betrusted with a Law executing power, but only with a Law making
power.

And truly Sir, I should have looked upon the people of this Nation as very
fools, if ever they had betrusted the Parliament with a law executing power,
and my reason is, because, if they had so done, they had then chosen and
empowered a Parliament to have destroyed them, but not to have preserved them,
(which is against the very nature and end of the very being of Parliaments,
they being by your own declared doctrine) chosen to provide for the peoples
weal, but not for their woe) And Sir, the reason of that reason is, because its
possible if a Parliament should execute the Law they might do palpable
injustice, and male administer it, and so the people would be robbed of their
intended extraordinary benefit of appeals, for in such cases they must appeal
to the Parliament, either against it self, or part of it self, and can it ever
be imagined they will ever condemn themselves, or punish themselves; nay, will
they not rather judge themselves bound in honor and safety to themselves, to
vote that man a Traitor and destroy him that shall so much as question their
actions, although formerly they have dealt never so unjustly with him; For this
Sir I am sure is very commonly practiced now a days, and therefore the honesty
of former Parliaments in the discharge of their trust and duty in this
particular was such, that they have declared, the power is not in them to judge
or punish me, or the meanest freeman in England, being no Member of their
House, although I should beat or wound one of their Members nigh unto their
door, going to the House to discharge his duty, but I am to be sent in all such
cases to the Judge of the upper See 5. H. 4. 6. 11. H. 6. Chapter 11. see also my
plea against the Lords jurisdiction, before the Judges of the Kings Bench
called the Laws Funeral. Page 8, 9. and my grand Plea against the Lords
jurisdiction, made before M. Maynard of the house of Commons; and the four
imprisoned Aldermen of Londons plea against the Lords jurisdiction, published
by M. Lionel Hurbin 1648.
Bench, unto whom by Law they have given declared rules, and direction in that
particular how to behave himself, which are as evident for me to know as
himself, now Sir, if reason and justice do not judge it convenient that the
Parliament shall not be Judges in such particular cases, that is of so near
concernment to themselves, but yet has others that are not of their House that
are as well concerned as themselves, much less will reason or justice admit
them to be judges in particular cases, that are farther remote from their
particular selves, and does merely concern the common wealth, and sure I am
Sir, this is the declared Statute Law of England, and does stand in full force
at this hour, there being I am sure of it no law to repeal it, no not since
the House of Commons set up their new Commonwealth. Now Sir from all this I
argue thus, that which is not inherent in the whole, cannot by the whole be
derived, or assigned to a part.

But it is not inherent neither in the power nor authority of the whole House
of Commons, primarily and originally to execute the Law, and therefore they
cannot derive it to a part of them selves.

But yet Sir with your favor, for all this I would not be mistaken as though I
maintained the Parliament had no power to make a Court of justice, for I do
grant they may errect a Court of justice to administer the Law, provided that
the Judges consist of persons that are not Members of their House, and provided
that the power they give them be universal, that is to say, to administer the
law to all the people of England indefinitely, and not to two or three
particular persons solely, the last of which for them to do is unjust, and
altogether, out of their power: And therefore Sir, to conclude this point, It
being not in the power of the whole Parliament to execute the Law, they can
give no power to you their Members to meddle with me in the case before you;
For an ordinary Court of Justice (the proper Administrator of the Law) is the
only and sole Judge in this particular; and not you Gentlemen, no nor your
whole House it self.

For with your favor M. Bradshaw, the fact that you suppose I have committed
(for till it be judicially proved (and that must be before a legal Judge that
has cognizance of the fact) or confessed by my self before the Judge; it is
but a bare supposition) is either a crime, or no crime; A crime it cannot be,
unless it be a Transgression of a Law in being, before it was committed, acted,
or done; For where there is no Law, Romans 4.15. See the 4. part of the L. Cooks
Instituts, Chapter 1. high Court of Parl. fol. 14. 35. 37. See also my printed
Epistle to the Speaker, of the 4. of April, 1648. called The Prisoners plea for
a Habeas Corpus, p. 5, 6. and Englands Birthright, p. 1, 2, 3, 4. and the
second edition of my Epistle to Judge Reeves, p. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. and M.
John Wildmans Truths Triumph, p. 11, 12, 13, 14. and Sir John Maynards Case
truly stated, called The Laws Subversion, p. 9.13, 14, 15, 16. 38.
there is no Transgression. And if it be a Transgression of a Law, that Law
provides a punishment for it, and by the Rules and method of that Law am I to
be tried, and by no other whatsoever, made ex post facto.

And therefore Sir, If this be true, as undoubtedly it is; then I am sure you
Gentlemen have no power in Law to convene me before you, for the pretended
crime laid unto my charge; much less to fetch me by force out of my habitation
by the power of armed men: For Sir, let me tell you, The Law of England never
made Colonels, Lieu. Colonels, Captains, or Soldiers, either Bailiffs,
Constables, * See the Petition of Right, in the C. R. and my Book, called the
Peoples Prerogative, p. 67, 68, 69, 70.
or Justices of the Peace: And I cannot but wonder that you should attach me in
such a manner as you have done, considering that I have all along adhered to
the Interest of the Nation against the common enemy (as you call them) and
never disputed, nor contemned any Order of Summons from Parliament, or the most
irregularest of their Committees, but always came to them when they sent for
me, although their warrant of summons was never so illegal in the form of it;
and I have of late in a manner de die in diem, waited at the House door, and
was there that day the Votes you have read, past, till almost twelve a clock;
and I am sure there are some here present (whose conscience I believe tells
them, they are very much concerned in the Book now before you) that saw me at
the door, and stared wishfully upon me as they went into the House; and I
cannot but wonder there could be no Civil Officer found to summon me to appear;
but that now, when there is no visible hostile enemy in the Nation, and all the
Courts of Justice open, that you (that have no power at all over me) must send
for me by an hundred or two hundred armed Horse and Foot, as though I were some
monstrous man, that with the breath of my mouth were able to destroy all the
Civil Officers that should come to apprehend me; Surely I had not endeavored
to fortify my house against you, neither had I betaken my self to a Castle, or
a defenced Garrison in hostility against you, that you need to send an hundred
or two hundred armed men to force me out of my house, from my wife and
children, by four or five a clock in the morning, to the distracting and
frighting of my wife and children: Surely, I cannot but look upon this
irregular, unjust, and illegal hostile action of yours, at one of the fruits
and issues of your new created Tyranny, to amuse and debase my spirit, and the
spirits of the People of this Free Nation, to fit me and them for bondage and
slavery. And Sir, give me leave further to tell you, that for diverse hundreds
of men that have often bin in the field with their swords in their hands, to
encounter with hostile enemies, and in their engagements have acquitted
themselves like men of valor, and come out of the field conquerors; for these
very men to put themselves in Martial Array against four Mise or Butterflyes,
and take them captives, and as captives lead them through the streets,
methinks is no great victory and conquest for them, but rather a diminution to
their former Martial Achievements and Trophies: And therefore to conclude
this, I do here before you all, prorest against your Power and Jurisdiction
over me, in the case in controversy; And do also protest against your Warrant
you issued (...) to apprehend me; And against all your martial and hostile acts
committed toward me, as illegal, unjust, and tyrannical, and no way in Law to
be justified: Further telling you, that I saw most of the Lord of Straffords
arraignment, and (if my memory fail me not) as little things as you have
already done to me, were by your selves laid to his charge, as acts of Treason;
For which I saw him lose his head upon Tower Hill as a Traitor: And I doubt not
for all this that is done unto me, but I shall live to see the Laws and
Liberties of England firmly settled, in despite of the present great opposers
thereof, and to their shame and confusion: and so M. Bradshaw I have done with
what I have now to say.

Upon which M. Bradshaw replied, Lieut. Col. Lilburn, you need not to have bin
so earnest, and have spent so much time in making an Apologetical defense; for
this Council does not go about to try you, or challenge any jurisdiction to try
you, neither do we so much as ask you a question in order to your trial, and
therefore you may correct your mistake in that particular.

Unto which I said, Sir, by your favor, if you challenge no Jurisdiction over
me, no not so much as in order to a trial, what do I here before you? or what
do you in speaking to me? But Sir, seeing I am now here, give me leave to say
one word more, and that is this; I am not only in time of peace (the Courts of
Justice being all open) fetched and forced out of my house by multitudes of
armed men, in an hostile manner, and carried as a captive up and down the
streets, contrary to all Law and Justice, but I am by force of Arms still kept
in their custody, and it may be, may be intended to be sent to them again, who
are no Guardians of the Laws of England, no nor so much as the meanest
Administrators or Executors of it, but ought to be subject to it themselves,
and to the Administrators of it: And truly Sir, I had rather die, than basely
betray my liberties into their Martial fingers, (who after their fighting for
our Freedoms, would now destroy them, and tread them under their feet) that
have nothing at all to do with me, nor any pretended or real civil offender in
England: I know not what you intend to do with me, neither do I much care;
having learned long since to die, and rather for my Liberties, than in my bed:
Its true, I am at present in no capacity effectually to dispute your power,
because I am under Guards of armed musketeers, but I entreat you, If you will
continue me a prisoner, that you will free me from the military Sword, and send
me to some Civil Goal; and I will at present in peace and quietness obey your
command, and go. And so I concluded, and was commanded to withdraw; which I
did, and then M. William Wallin was called in, and while he was within, I gave
unto my comrades M. Prince, and M. Overton, and the rest of the people, a
summary account of what had past between me and them: and within a little time
after, M. Walwin came ^ut again, and M. Overton was called in next: and at M.
Walwins coming out, he acquainted us what they said to him, which was in a
manner the same they said to me; and all that he said to them was but this,
That he did not know why he was suspected. To which M. Bradshaw replied, Is
that all you have to say? And M. Walwin answered, yes. So he was commanded to
withdraw.

And after M. Overton was come out, M. Prince was called in, and after he had
withdrawn, they spent some time of debate among themselves, and then I was
called in again; So I marched in suitable to my first posture, and went close to
M. Bradshaw, who said unto me to this effect: Lieut. Colonel Lilburn, This
Council has considered what you have said, and what they have bin informed of
concerning you, and also of that duty that lies upon them by the command of the
House, which enjoins them to improve their utmost ability to find out the
Author of this Book; and therefore to effect that end, they judge themselves
bound to demand of you this question: Whether you made not this Book, or were
privy to the making of it or no?

And after some pause, and vvondering at the strangeness of the question, I
answered and said, M. Bradshaw, I cannot but stand amazed that you should ask
me such a question as this, at this time of the day, considering what you said
unto me at my first being before you; and considering it is now about eight
years ago since this very Parliament annihilated the Court of Star Chamber,
Council board, and High Commission, and that for such proceedings as these. See
the Acts that abolished them, made in the 16. C. R. printed in my Book called
The peoples Prerogative, p.
And truly Sir, I have bin a contestor and sufferer for the Liberties of
England these twelve years together, and I should now look upon my self as the
basest fellovv in the world, if now in one moment I should undo all that I
have bin doing all this while, which I must of necessity do, if I should
answer you to questions against my self; For in the first place, by answering
this question against my self, I should betray the Liberties of England, in
acknovvledging you to have a Legal Jurisdiction over me, to try and adjudge me;
which I have already proved to your faces you have not in the least: and if you
have forgot what you said to me thereupon, yet I have not forgot what I said to
you. And secondly Sir, if I should answer to questions against my self, and so
betray my self, I should do that which not only Law, but Nature abhors: And
therefore I cannot but wonder that you your selves are not ashamed to demand so
illegal and unworthy a thing And well might I, for M. John Cook, and M.
Bradshaw himself were my Counsel at the Lords Bar, against the Star Chamber,
the 13. of Feb. 1645. where M. Bradshaw did most excellently open the
Star Chamber injustice toward me; and at the reading of their first sentence,
he observed to the Lords, that that sentence was felo de se, guilty of its own
death; the ground whereof, being because M. Lilburn refused to take an oath to
answer to all such questions as should be demanded of him, it being contrary to
the Laws of God, Nature, and the Kingdom, for any man to be his own Accuser:
Whose words you may more at large read in the Printed relation thereof, drawn
up by M. John Cook, and my self, p. 3.
of me as this is. And therefore in short, were it that I owned your power
(which I do not in the least) I would be hanged, before I would do so base, and
un-Englishman-like an Action, to betray my Liberty; which I must of necessity
do, in answering questions to accuse my self: But Sir, This I will say to you,
my late Actions have not bin done in a hole, or a corner, but on the house top,
in the face of the Sun, before hundreds and some thousands of people; and
therefore why ask you me any questions? Go to those that have heard me, and
seen me, and it is possible you may find some hundreds of witnesses to tell you
what I have said and done; for I hate holes and corners: My late Actions need
no covers nor hidings, they have bin more honest than so, and I am not sorry
for what I have done, for I did look well about me before I did what I did, and
I am ready to lay down my life to justify what I have done; and so much in
answer to your question.

But now Sir, with your favor one word more, to mind you again of what I said
before, in reference to my Martial imprisonment; and truly Sir, I must tell
you, Circumstantials of my Liberty, at this time I shall not much dispute, but
for the Essentials of them I shall die: I am now in the Soldiers custody, where
to continue in silence and patience, is absolutely to betray my Liberty; for
they have nothing to do with me, nor the meanest Freeman of England in this
case; and besides Sir, they have no rules to walk by, but their wills and their
swords, which are two dangerous things; it may be I may be of an hasty
choleric temper, and not able nor willing to bear their affronts; and
peradventure they may be as willing to put them upon me, as I am unwilling to
bear them; and for you in this case to put fire and tinder together, to burn up
one an other, will not be much commendable, nor tend much to the accomplishment
of your ends; But if for all this, you shall send me back to the Military sword
again, either to White Hall, or any other such like garrisoned place in England,
I do solemnly protest before the Eternal God of Heaven and Earth, I will fire
it, and burn it down to the ground, if possibly I can, although I be burnt to
ashes with the flames thereof; for Sir, I say again, the soldiers have nothing
to do to be my Goalers; and besides, it is a maxim among the soldiers, That
they must obey (without dispute) all the Commands of their Officers, be they
right or wrong; and it is also the maxim amongst the Officers, That if they do
not do it, they must hang for it: therefore if the Officers command them to cut
my throat, they must either do it, or hang for it. And truly Sir, (looking
vvishfully upon Cromwell, that sat just against me) I must be plain with you,
I have not found so much Honor, Honesty, Justice, or Conscience, in any of the
principal Officers of the Army, as to trust my life under their protection, or
to think it can be And truly I am more than afraid honest Capt. Bray has too
much experience of this at Windsor Castle, who though he be but barely
committed thither into safe custody, yet (as I from very good hands am
informed) the Tyrannical Governor Whichcock, Cromwels creature, does keep him
close prisoner, denying him the benefit of the Castle Air, keeping not only
pen and ink from him, but also his friends and necessaries with which cruelty
etc. he has already almost murdered and destroyed the honest man; in whose
place were I, and so illegally and unjustly used, a flame (if possibly I could
should be the portion of my chamber, although I perished in it.
safe under their immediate fingers; and therefore not knowing, nor very much
caring what you will do with me, I earnestly entreat you, if you will again
imprison me; send me to a Civil Goal that the Law knows, as Newgate, the Fleet,
or the Gate House, and although you send me to a Dungeon, thither I will go in
Peace and quietness, without any further dispute of your authority. For when
I come there, I know those Goalers have their bound and limits set them by the
Law, and I know how to carry my self toward them, and what to expect from
them; and if they do abuse me, I know how in law to help my self. And so Sir, I
have said what at present I have to say. Whereupon M. Bradshaw commanded the
Sergeant to put me out at an other door, that so I should no more go amongst
the people; and immediately M. Walwin was put out to me, and asking him what
they said to him, I found it to be the same in effect they said to me,
demanding the same foregoing question of him, that they did of me: to which
question, (after some kind of pause) he answered to this effect, That he could
not but very much wonder to be asked such a question, however that it was very
much against his Judgment and Conscience to answer to questions of that
nature, which concerned himself; that if he should answer to it, he should not
only betray his own Liberty, but the Liberties of all Englishmen, which he
could not do with a good Conscience; And he could not but exceedingly grieve at
the dealing he had found that day; That being one who had always bin so
faithful to the Parliament, and so well known to most of the Gentlemen there
present, that nevertheless he should be sent for with a party of Horse and
Foot, to the affrighting of his Family, and ruin of his credit; And that he
could not be satisfied, but that if was very hard measure, to be used thus upon
suspicion only; And that if they did hold him under restraint from following
his business and occasions, it might be his undoing, which he conceived they
ought seriously to consider of.

Then M. Bradshaw said, he was to answer the question, and that they did not
ask it as in way of Trial, so as to proceed in Judgment thereupon, but to
report it to the House. To which M. Walwin said, That he had answered it so as
he could with a good Conscience, and could make no other Answer, and so
withdrew.

And after he came out to me, M. Overton was next called in again, and then M.
Prince, so after we were all come out, and all four in a room close by them,
all alone, I laid my ear to their door, and heard Lieutenant General Cromwell
(I am sure of it) very loud, thumping his fist upon the Council Table, til it
rang again, and heard him speak in these very words, or to this effect; I tell
you Sir, you have no other way to deal with these men, but to break them in
pieces; and thumping upon the Council Table again, he said Sir, let me tell you
that which is true, if you do not break them, they will break you; yea, and
bring all the guilt of the blood and treasure shed and spent in this Kingdom
upon your heads and shoulders; and frustrate and make void all that work,
that with so many years industry, toil and pains you have done, and so
render you to all rational men in the world, as the most contemptible
generation, of silly, low spirited men in the earth, to be broken and routed by
such a despicable contemptible generation of men as they are; and therefore Sir
I tell you again, you are necessitated to break them, but being a little
disturbed by the supposition of one of their Messengers coming into the room,
I could not so well hear the answer to him, which I think was Col. Ludlows
voice, who pressed to bail us, for I could very well hear him say, what would
you have more than security for them? Upon which discourse of Cromwels, the
blood run up and down my veins, and I heartily wished my self in again amongst
them being scarce able to contain my self) that so I might have gone five, or
six stories higher than I did before, yea, as high as I intended when I came to
their door, and to have particularly paid Cromwell and Hasleridge to the
purpose, for their late venom not only against me in the House, but my whole
family, Hasleridge saying (as I am informed) in the open House, there was never
an one of the Lilburns family fit or worthy to be a Constable in England,
though I am confident there is not the worst of us alive that have served the
Parliament, but he is a hundred times more just honest and unspoted than he
himself, as in due time I shall make it appear by Gods assistance (I hope) to
his shame: But the fair carriage of the Gentlemen of the supposed Council to
me at the first, took off the height of the edge of my spirit, and intended
resolution; which it may be they shall have the next time to this effect. You
your selves have already voted the People under God, the Fountain and Original
of all just power, And if so, then none can make them Laws, but those that are
chosen, empowered, and be trusted by them for that end; and if that be true, as
undoubtedly it is, I desire to know how the present Gentlemen at Westminster
can make it appear they are the peoples Representatives, being rather chosen
by the will of him, whose head as a Tyrant and Traitor, they have by their wills
chopped off (I mean the King) then by the people: whose Will made the Borough
Towns to choose Parliament men, and there by robbed above nineteen people of
this Nation, of their undubitable and inherent right, to give to a single man
in twenty for number (in reference to the whole Nation) a Monopoly to choose
Parliament men; disfranchising therereby the other nineteen, and if so in any
measure, than this; upon their own declared principles they are no
Representative of the people, no nor was not at the first; Again, the King
summoned them by his Writ, the issue of his will and pleasure, and by virtue of
that they sit to this hour; Again, the King by his Will and pleasure combines
with them by an Act to make them a perpetual Parliament (one of the worst and
tyranicallest actions that ever he did in his life) to sit as long as they
pleased, which he nor they had no power to do in the least, the very
constitution of Parliaments in England, being to be once every year, or oftener
if need require; Quere, Whether this act of perpetuating this Parliament by the
Parliament men themselves beyond their Commission, was not an act in them of
the highest Treason in the world against the People and their liberties, by
setting up themselves an arbitrary power over them for ever? Yea, and thereby
razing the foundation and constitution of Parliament it self: And if so, then
this is null, if at the first it had bin any thing.

Again, if it should be granted this Parliament at the beginning had a legal
constitution from the people (the original and fountain of all just power) yet
the Faction of a traiterous party of Officers of the Army, has twice rebelled
against the Parliament, and broke them to pieces, and by force of Arms culled
out whom they please, and imprisoned diverse of them and laid nothing to their
charge, and have left only in a manner a few men, besides eleven of themselves
viz. the General, Cromwell, Ireton, Harrison, Fleetwood, Rich, Ingolsby,
Hasleridge, Constable, Fennick, Walton and Allen, Treasurer; of their own
Faction behind them that will like Span el-doggs serve their lusts and wills;
yea some of the chiefest of them, viz. Ireton, Harrison, etc. yea, M. Holland
himself, stiling them a mock Parliament a mock power at Windsor, yea, it is
yet their expressions at London; And if this be true that they are a mock
power and a mock Parliament; then,

Quere, Whether in Law or Justice, especially considering they have fallen from
al their many glorious promises, and have not done any one action that tends to
the universal good of the Peolpe? Can those Gentlemen siting at Westminster in
the House, called the House of Commons, be any other than a Factious company of
men traitorously combined together with Crom. Ireton, and Harrison, to subdue
the Laws, Liberties, and Freedoms of England; (for no one of them protest
against the rest) and to set up an absolute and perfect Tyranny of the Sword,
Will and pleasure, and absolutely intend the destroying the Trade of the
Nation, and the absolute impoverishing, the people thereof, to sit them to be
their Vassals and Slaves; And if so, then,

Quere, Whether the Free People of England, as well Soldiers as others, ought
not to contemn all these men's commands, as invalid and illegal in themselves,
and as one man to rise up against them as so many professed traitors, theives,
robbers and high way men, and apprehend and bring them to justice in a new
Representative, chosen by virtue of a just Agreement among the People, there
being no other way in the world to preserve the Nation but that alone; the
three forementioned men, viz. Cromwell, Ireton, and Harrison, (the General
being but their Stalking horse, and a Cifer) and there traiterous For the
greatest Traitors they are that ever were in this nation, as upon the loss of
my head I John Lilburn will by law undertake to prove and make good, before the
next free Parliament, to whom Ihereby appeal.
faction, having by their wills and Swords, got all the Swords of England under
their command; and the disposing of all the great places in England by Sea and
Land, and also the pretended Law making power, and the pretended law executing
power, by making among themselves (contrary to the Laws and and Liberties of
England) all Judges, Justices of peace, Sherifes, Balifes, Committee men etc.
to execute their wills and Tyranny, walking by no limits or bounds but their
own wills and pleasures; And traytorously assume unto themselves a power to
levy upon the people what money they please; and dispose of it as they please,
yea even to buy knifes to cut the peoples throats that pay the money to them,
and to give no account for it til Doomes Day in the afternoon; they having
already in their wills and power to dispose of the Kings, Queens, Princes,
Dukes, and the rest of the childrens Revenue; Deans and Chapters lands, Bishops
lands, sequestered Delinquents lands, sequestered Papists lands, Compositions of
all sorts, amounting to millions of money; besides Excise, and Customs; yet
this is not enough, although if rightly husbanded it would constantly pay above
one hundred thousand men, and furnish an answerable Navy there unto: But the
people must now after their trades are lost, and their estates spent to procure
their liberties and freedoms, be cessed about 100000. pound a month, that so
they may be able like so many cheaters and State thieves, to give 6. 8. 10. 12.
14. 16, thousand pounds a piece over again to one another, as they have done
already to diverse of themselves to buy the Common wealths lands one of another,
(contrary to the duty of Trustees, who by law nor equity can neither give nor
sell to one another) at two or three years purchase the true and valuable rate
considered, as they have already done, and to give 4 or 5000 l per annum over
again to King Cromwell, as they have done already out of the Earl of Wrocesters
estate, etc. Besides about four or five pounds a day he has by his places of
Lieut. General, and Colonel of Horse in the Army, although he were at the
beginning of this Parliament but a poor man, yea, little better than a beggar
(to what he is now) as well as other of his neighbors.

But to return, those gentlemen that would have had us bailed lost the day, by
one vote as we understood; and then about 12. at night they broke up, and we
went into their pretended Secretary, and found our commitments made in these
words, our names changed, viz.

These are to will and require you, to receive herewith into your custody, the
person of Lieut. Col. John Lilburn, and him safely to keep in your Prison of
the Tower of London, until you receive farther order, he being committed to you
upon suspicion of high Treason, of which you are not to fail, and for which
this shall be your sufficient Warrant;

Given at the Council of State at Darby-house this 28. day of March, 1649
Signed in the name, and by the Order of the Council of State, (...) appointed
by authority of Parliament. Jo. Bradshaw. President.

To the Lieut. of the (...) of London.
Note that we were committed upon Wednesday their fast day, being the best
fruits that ever any of their fasts brought out amongst them, viz. To smite
with the fist of wickedness. For the illegality of this Warrant, I shall not
say much, because it is like all the rest of the Warrants of the present House
of Commons, and their unjust Committees; whose Warrants are so sufficiently
anatomised by my quondam Comrade, M. John Wildman, in his books, called Truths
Triumph, and the Laws subversion, being Sir John Maynards case truly stated;
and by my self, in my late Plea before the Judges of the Kings Bench, now in
print, and entitled The Laws Funeral, that it is needless to say any more of
that particular, and therefore to them I refer the Reader. But to go on, when
we had read our Warrants we told M. Frost we would not dispute the legality of
them, because we were under the force of Guards of Armed musquettiers: So some
time was spent to find a man that would go with us to prison, Capt. Ienkins (as
I remember his name) being Capt. of the Guard, and my old and familiar
acquaintance, was prevailed with by us, to take the charge upon him, who used
us very Civilly, and gave us leave that night (it being so late) to go home to
our wives, and took our words with some other of our friends then present, to
meet him in the morning at the Angel Tavern near the Tower; which we did
accordingly, and so marched with him into the Tower; where coming up to the
Lieut. house, and after salutes each of other with very much civility, the
Lieut. read his Warrants: and M. Walwin as our appointed mouth, acquainted him
that we were Englishmen, who had hazarded all we had for our Liberties and
Freedoms for many years together, and were resolved (though Prisoners) not to
part with an inch of our Freedoms, that with struggling for we could keep, and
therefore we should neither pay fees nor chamber rent, but what the Law did
exactly require us; neither should we eat or drink of our own cost and charges
so long as we could fast; telling him it was our unquestionable right by Law,
and the custom of this place, to be provided for out of the public Treasure,
although we had never so much money in our pockets of our own, which he granted
to be true; and after some more debate I told him, we were not so irrational as
to expect that he out of his own money should provide for us: but the principal
end of our discourse with him was, to put words in his mouth from our selves,
(he being now our Guardian) to move the Parliament or Council of State about
us, which he has acquainted us he did to the Council of State, who he says
granted, the King or former times used to provide for the Prisoners, but I say,
they will not be so just as he was in that particular, although they have taken
off his head for tyranny, yet they must and will be greater Tyrants than he,
yea, and they have resolved upon the Question, that he shall be a Traitor that
shall but tell them of their tyranny, although it be never so visible.

So now I have brought the Reader to my old and contented Lodging in the Tower,
where within two, or three days of our arrival there, came one M. Richardson a
Preacher amongst those unnatural, un-English-like men, that would now help to
destroy the innocent, and the first promoters in England (as Cromwels beagles
to do his pleasure) of the first Petition for a Personal Treaty almost 2, years
ago, and commonly style themselves the Preachers to the 7 Churches of
Anabaptists, which Richardson pretending a great deal of affection to the
Common wealth to Cromwell, and to us, pressed very hard for union and peace, (and
yet by his petition since this, endeavors to hang us) teling us, men cried
mightily out upon us abroad for grand disturbers, that sought Crom. blood for all his good service to the Nation, and that would center no where, but merely
labored to pull down those in power, to set up our selves: And after a little
discourse with him, being all 4. present, and retorting all he said back upon
those he seemed to plead for, before several witnesses, we appealed to his own
conscience, whether those could intend any hurt or tyranny to the people, that
desires, and earnestly endeavors for many years together, that all Magistrates
hands might be bound and limited by a just law and rule, with a penalty annexed
unto it, that in case they outstrip their rule, they might forset life and
estate, and that al Magistrates might be chosen by the free people of this
Nation by common consent, according to their undubitable right, and often
removed, that so they might not be like standing waters, subject to corruption;
and that the people might have a plain, easy, short, and known Rule amongst
themselves to walk by; but such men were all we; and therefore justly could not
be styled disturbers of any, but only such as sought to rule over the people
by their absolute Wills and pleasures, and would have no bounds or limits but
their lusts, and so sought to set up a perfect tyranny, which we absolutely
did, and still do charge upon the great men in the Army, and are ready before
indifferent Judges to make it good. And as for seeking ourselves, we need no
other witnesses but some of our present adversaries in the House, whose great
preffered places, and courtship by themselves and their Agents some of us have
from time to time slighted, scorned, and contemned, till they would conclude to
come to a declared and resolved center, by a just Agreement of the People;
there being no other way now in the World to make this Nation free, happy, or
safe, but that alone. And as for Cromwels blood, although he had dealt basely
enough with some of us in times bypast, by thirsting after ours, without
cause; of whom (if revenge had bin our desire) we could have had it the last
year to the purpose, especially when his quondam Darling, Maj. Huntington,
(Maj. to his own Regiment) impeached him of Treason to both Houses: yet so deer
was the good of our native Country to us, to whom we judged him then a
serviceable Instrument to balance the Scots, that we laid all revenge aside,
hoping his often dissembled Repentances was real indeed; and M. Holland himself
(now his favorite) if his 1000. or 1500. l. per annum of the Kings Lands, that
now he enjoys, did not make him forget himself, can sufficiently testify and
witness our unwearied and hazardous Activity for Cromwels particular
preservation the last year, when his great friends in the House durst not
publicly speak for him.

And whereas it is said we will Center no where, we have too just cause to
charge that upon them; the whole stream of all our Actions (as we told
Richardson) being a continued Declaration of our earnest Desires to come to a
determinate and fixed center: one of us making sufficient propositions to that
purpose to the Council of State at our last being there and all our many and
late proffers as to that particular, they have hitherto rejected, as no ways
consistent with their tyranical and selfish ends and designs: and have given us
no other answer in effect, but the sending our bodies prisoners to the Tower:
and therefore we judged it infinitely below us (as we told him) and that
glorious cause (the Peoples Liberties and Freedoms, that we are now in bonds
for) and for which we suffer, to send any message but a defiance by him or any
other to them. Yet to let him know (as one we judged honest, and our friend) we
were men of reason, moderation, and justice, and sought nothing particularly
for our selves, more than our common share in the common freedom, tranquillity,
and peace of the land of our Nativity: We would let him know, we had a two fold
Center, and if he pleased of and from himself to let our Adversaries know, we
were willing our adversaries should have their choice to which of the two they
would hold us to.

And therefore said we in the first place, The Officers of the Army have
already compiled, and published to the view of the Nation, an Agreement of the
people, which they have presented to the present Parliament; against which we
make some exceptions, which exceptions are contained in our Addresses: Now let
them but mend their Agreement according to our exceptions, and so far as all
our interest extends in the whole Nation, we will acquiesce and rest there, and
be at peace with them, and live and die with them in the pursuance of those
ends; and be content for Cromwell and Iretons security, etc. for the blood of
war shed in time of peace at Ware, or any thing else; and to free our selves
that we thirst after none of their blood, but only our just Liberties (without
which we can never fit down in peace) That there shall be a clause, to bury all
things in oblivion, as to life and liberty, excepting only estate; that so the
Commonwealth may have an account of their moneys in Treasurers hands, etc.

Or secondly, if they judge our exceptions against their Agreement (or any one
of them) irrational, let them choose any 4. men in England, and let Cromwell and
Ireton be 2. of them, and take the other 2. where they please, in the whole
nation, and we 4. now in prison, will argue the case in reason with them, and
if we can agree, there is an end, as to us, and all our interest, but in case
we cannot, let them (said we all) choose any 2. members of the House of Commons,
and we will choose 2. more, viz. Col. Alex. Rigby, and Col. Henry Martin, to be
final umpires betwixt us, and what they, or the major part of them determine,
as to us (in relation to an Agreement) and all our interest in the whole land,
we will acquiesce in, be content with, and stand to without wavering: and this
we conceive to be as rational, just, and fair, as can be offered by any men
upon earth: and I for my part, say and protest before the Almighty, I will yet
stand to this, and if this will content them, I have done; if not, fall back,
fall edge, let them do their worst, I for my part bid defiance to them,
assuredly knowing, they can do no more to me, than the devil did to Job: for
resolved by Gods assistance I am, to spend my heart blood against them, if they
will not condescend to a just Agreement that may be good for the whole Nation;
that so we may have a new and as equal a Representative as may be, chosen by
those that have not fought against their freedoms, although I am as desirous
the Cavaliers should enjoy the benefit of the Law, for the protection of their
persons and estates, as well as my self. I know they have an Army at command,
but if every hair on the head of that Officer or Soldier they have at their
command, were a legion of men, I would fear them no more than so many straws,
for the Lord Jehovah is my rock and defense, under the assured shelter of whose
wings, I am safe and secure, and therefore will sing and be merry; and do
hereby sound an eternal trumpet of defiance to all the men and devils in earth
and hell, but only those men that have the image of God in them, and
demonstrate it among men, by their just, honest, merciful, and righteous
actions. And as for all those vild Actions their saint-like Agents have fixed
upon me of late, I know before God none is righteous no not one, but only he
that is clothed with the glorious righteousness of Jesus Christ, which I
assuredly know my soul has bin, and now is clothed with, in the strength of
which I have walked for above 12 years together, and through the strength of
which, I have bin able at any time in all that time, to lay down my life in a
quarter of an hours warning. But as to man, I bid defiance to all my
Adversaries upon earth, to search my ways and goings with a candle, and to lay
any one base Action to my charge in any kind whatsoever, since the first day
that I visible made profession of the fear of God, which is now above twelve
years; yea, I bid defiance to him or them, to proclaim it upon the house to^e,
provided he will set his hand to it, and proclaim a public place, where
before indifferent men, in the face of the Sun, his accusation may be scand;
yea, I here declare, that if any man or woman in England, either in reference
to my public actions, to the States money, or in reference to my private
dealings in the world shall come in and prove against me, that ever I defrauded
him, or her of twelve pence, and for every twelve pence that I have so done, I
will make him or her twenty shillings worth of amends, so far as all the estate
I have in the world will extend.

Courteous Reader, and deer Countryman, excuse I beseech thee my boasting and
glorying, for I am necessitated to it, my adversaries base and lying
calumniations putting me upon it, and Paul and Samuel did it before me: and so I
am thine, if thou art for the just Freedoms and Liberties of the land of thy
Nativity.

JOHN LILBVRN, that never yet changed his principles from better to worse, nor
could never be threatened out of them, nor courted from them, that never feared
the rich nor mighty, nor never despised the poor nor needy, but always has,
and hopes by Gods goodness to continue, semper idem.

From the Tower of London April 3. 1649.
Postscript.
CVrteous Reader, I have much wondered with my self, what should make most of
the Preachers in the Anabaptist Congregations so mad at us four, as this day
to deliver so base a Petition, in the intention of it against us all four; (who
have bin as hazardous Sticklers for their particular liberties, as any be in
England) and never put a provocation upon them that I know of, especially,
considering the most, if not all their Congregations (as from diverse of their
own members I am informed) protested against their intentions openly in their
Congregations, upon the Lords day last, and I am further certainly informed
that the aforsaid Petition the Preachers delivered, is not that which was read
by themselves amongst the people; but another of their own framing since, which
I cannot hear was ever read in any one of their Congregations: So that for the
Preachers viz. M. Kiffin, M. Spilsbury, M. Patience, M. Draps, M. Richardson,
M. Constant, M. Wayd, the Schoolmaster, etc. to deliver it to the Parliament
in the name of their Congregations; they have delivered it a lie and a
falsehood, and are a pack of fauning daubing knaves for so doing, but as I
understand from one of M. Kiffins members, Kiffin himself did ingenuously
confess upon Lords day last, in his open Congregation, that he was put upon
the doing of what he did by some Parliament men, who he perceived were willing
and desirous to be rid of us four, so they might come off handsomely without
too much loss of credit to themselves: and therefore intendded to take a rise
from their Petition to free us, and for that end it was, that in their Petition
read in the Congregations, after they had sufficiently bespattered us, yet in
the conclusion they beg mecy for us; because we had bin formerly active for the
Public. Secondly, I have bin lately told, some of the Congregationall
Preachers are very mad, at a late published and licensed book sold in Popes
head Alley and Cornhill, entitled, The vanity of the present Churches;
supposing it to be the Pen of some of our friends, and therefore out of revenge
might Petition against us; I confess I have within a few hours seen and read
the book, and not before, and must ingenuously confess, it is one of the
shrewdest books that ever I read in my life, and do believe it may be possible
they may be netled to the purpose at it; but I wish every honest unbyased man
in England would seriously read it over,

John Lilburn.
April 4. 1649.
The Proceedings of the Council of State against Richard Overton, now prisoner
in the Tower of London.
UPon the twenty eigth of March 1649, a party of Horse and Foot commanded by
Lieut. Colonel Axtel (a man highly pretending to religion,) came betwixt five
and six of the morning to the house where I then lodged, in that hostile manner
to apprehend me, as by the sequel appeared.

But now, to give an account of the particular circumstances attending that
action, may seem frivolous, as to the Public; but in regard the Lieutenant
Colonel was pleased so far to outstrip the the capacity of a Saint, as to
betake himself to the venomed Arrows of lying calumnies and reproaches, to
wound (through my sides) the too much forsaken cause of the poor oppressed
people of this long wasted Commonwealth: like as it has been the practice of
all perfidious Tyrants in all ages. I shall therefore trouble the Reader with
the rehearsal of all the the occurrant circumstances which attended his
apprehension of me, that the world may clearly judge betwixt us. And what I
here deliver from my pen as touching this matter, I do deliver it to be set
upon the Record of my account, as I will answer it at the dreadful day of
judgment, when the secrets of all hearts shall be opened, and every one receive
according to his deeds done in the flesh: and God so dead with me at that day,
as in this thing I speak the truth: And if the rankorous spirits of men will
not be satisfied therewith, I have no more to say but this, to commit my self
to God in the joyful rest of a good conscience, and not value what insatiable
envy can suggest against me. Thus then to the business it self.

In the House where I then lodged that night there lived three families, one of
the Gentlemen being my very good friend, with whom all that night he and I
only lay in bed together, and his Wife and child lay in another bed by
themselves: and when they knocked at the door, the Gentleman was up and ready,
and his Wife also, for she rose before him, and was suckling her child: and I
was also up, but was not completely dressed; And of this the Gentleman himself
(her Husband) has taken his oath before one of the Masters of the Chancery.
And we three were together in a Chamber discoursing, he and I intending about
our business immediately to go abroad, and hearing them knock, I said, Yonder
they are come for me. Whereupon, some books that lay upon the table in the
room, were thrown into the beds betwixt the sheets (and the books were all the
persons he found there in the beds, except he took us for printed papers, and
then there were many;) and the Gentleman went down to go to the door; and as
soon as the books were cast a to-side, I went to put on my boots; and before
the Gentleman could get down the stairs, a girl of the house had opened the
door, and let them in, and so meeting the Gentleman upon the stairs, Axtel
commanded some of the soldiers to seize upon him, and take him into custody,
and not suffer him to come up: And I hearing a voice from below, that one would
speak with me, I went to the chamber door (it being open) and immediately
appeared a Musketier (Corporal Neaves, as I take it) and he asked me if my name
were not Mr. Overton: I answered, it was Overton; and so I sat me down upon the
bed side to pull on my other boot, as if I had but new risen, the better to
shelter the books; and that Corporal was the first man that entered into the
chamber, and after him one or two more, and then followed the Lieutenant
Colonel; and the Corporal told me, I was the man they were come for, and bade
me make me ready: and the Lieutenant Colonel when he came in, asked me how I
did, and told me, they would use me civilly, and bid me put on my boots, and I
should have time enough to make me ready: And immediately upon this the
Lieutenant Colonel began to abuse me with scandalous language, and asked me, if
the Gentlewoman who then sat suckling her child, were not one of my wives,
and averred that she and I lay together that night. Then the Gentleman hearing
his Wife called Whore, and abused so shamefully, got from the soldiers, and
ran up stairs; and coming into the room where we were, he taxed the Lieutenant
Colonel for abusing of his Wife and me, and told him, that he and I lay
together that night: But the Lieutenant Colonel, out of that little discretion
he had about him, took the Gentleman by the hand, saying, How do thou,
brether Cuckcold? using other shameful ignorant and abusive language, not
worthy repeating. Well, upon this his attempt thus to make me his prisoner, I
demanded his Warrant; and he showed me a Warrant from the Council of State,
with Mr. Bradshaw's hand to it, and with the Broad Seal of England to it, (as
he called it) to apprehend Lieutenant Colonel Lilburn, Mr. Walwine, Mr. Prince,
and my self, wherever they could find us. And as soon as I was dressed, he
commanded the Musketeers to take me away; and as soon as I was down stairs, he
remanded me back again into the chamber where he took me, and then told me, he
must search the house, and commanded the trunks to be opened, or they should be
broken open: and commanded one of the soldiers to search my pockets. I
demanded his Warrant for that: He told me, he had a Warrant, I had seen it. I
answered, That was for the apprehension of my person; and bid him show his
Warrant for searching my pockets, and the house: and according to my best
remembrance, he replied, He should have a Warrant. So little respect had he to
Law, Justice, and Reason; and vi and armis, right or wrong, they fell to work,
(inconsiderately devolving all law, right, and freedom betwixt man and man into
their Sword, for the consequence of it extend, from one to all) and his party
farmed Horse and Foot (joined to his over-hairy exorbitant will) was his
irresistible Warrant: And so they searched my pockets, and took all they found
in them, my money excepted, and searched the trunks, chests, beds, etc. And the
Lieutenant Colonel went into the next chamber, where lived an honest Soldier
(one of the Lieutenant Generals Regiment) and his wife, and took away his
sword, and vilified the Gentleman and his wife, as if she had be a his whore,
and took him prisoner for lying with a woman, as he said. He also went up to
the Gentleman who lets out the rooms, and cast the like impurations upon his
wife, as also upon a Maid that lives in the house, and gave it out in the Court
and Street, amongst the soldiers and neighbors that it was a Bawdy House, and
that all the women that lived in it were whores, and that he had taken me in
bed with another man's Wife. Well, he having ransacked the house, found many
books in the beds, and taken away all such writings, papers, and books, of what
sort or kind soever, that he could find, and given them to the soldiers,
(amongst which he took away certain papers which were my former Meditations
upon the works of the Creation, entitled, God Word confirmed by his Works;
wherein I endeavored the probation of a God, a Creation, a State of
Innocence, a Fall, a Resurrection, a Restorer, a Day of Judgment, etc. barely
from the consideration of things visible and created: and these papers I
reserved to perfect and publish as soon as I could have any rest from the
turmoils of this troubled Commonwealth: and for the loss of those papers I am
only troubled: all that I desire of my enemies hands, is but the restitution of
those papers, that whatever becomes of me, they may not be buried in oblivion,
for they may prove useful to many.) Well, when the Lieutenant Colonel had thus
far mistaken himself, his Religion and Reason thus unworthily to abuse me and
the household in that scandalous nature, unbeseeming the part of a Gentleman, a
Soldier, or a Christian (all which titles he claims) and had transgressed
the limits of his Authority, by searching, ransacking, plundering, and taking
away what he pleased, he marched me in the head of his party to Paul's
Churchyard, and by the way commanded the soldiers to lead me by the arm; and
from thence, with a guard of three Companies of Foot, and a party of Horse,
they forced me to Whitehall; and the soldiers carried the books some upon
their Muskets, some under their arms: but by the way (upon our march) the
Corporal that first entered the room (whose word in that respect is more
valuable then Axtels) confessed unto me (in the audience of the Soldier they
took also with them from the place of my lodging) that the Lieutenant Colonel
had dealt uncivilly and unworthily with me, and that there was no such matter
of taking me in bed with an other woman, etc. And this the said soldier will
depose upon his oath.

When I came to White Hall, I was delivered into the hands of Adjutant General
Stubber, where I found my worthy friends Lieutenant Colonel, John Lilburn, Mr.
Wallwin, and Mr. Prince in the same captivity under the Martial usurpation:
and after I had been there a while, upon the motion of Leivtenant Colonel
Lilburne, that Leivtenant Collonell Axstell, and I might be brought face to
face about the matter of scandal that was raised, he coming there unto us, and
questioned about the report he had given out, there averd, that he took me a
bed with an other man's wife; and being asked if he saw us actually in bed
together, he answered, we were both in the Chamber together, and the woman had
scarce got on her coats, (which was a notorious untruth) and she sa^e suckling
of her child, and from these circumstances he did believe we did lie together,
and that he spoke according to his conscience what he believed. These were his
words, or to the like effect, to which I replied, as a forementioned. But how
short this was of a man pretending so much conscience and sanctity as he does I
leave to all unprejudiced people to judge: it is no point of Christian faith
(to which is so great a pretender) to foment a lie for a wicked end, and then
to plead it his belief and conscience, for the easier credence of his malicious
aspertion: but though the words belief and Conscience be too specious
Evangelicall terms, no truly conscientious person will say they are to be
used, or rather abused to such evil ends. Well in that company I having taxed
him for searching my pockets, and without warrant, he answered; that because I
was so base a fellow, he did what he could to destroy me. And then the better
to make up the measure of the reproach he had raised, he told us, it was now an
opinion amongst us to have community of women; I desired him to name one of
that opinion, he answered me, It may be I was of that opinion, and I told him,
it may be he was of that opinion, and that my may be was a good as his May be:
whereupon he replied, that I was a sawsy fellow. Surely the Lieutenant Colonel
at that instant had forgot the Bugget from whence he dropped, I presume when he
was a peddler in Harsord-shire he had not so lofty an esteem of himself, but now
the case is altered, the Gentleman is become one of the Grandees of the Royal
palace: one of the (mo^k^) Saints in season, now judgeing the Earth, inspired
with providence and oppertunities at pleasure of their own invention as quick
and as nimble as an Hocas Spocas, or a Piend in a Juglers Box, they are not
flesh and blood, as are the wicked, they are all spiritual, all heavenly, the
pure Camelions of the time, they are this or that or what you please, in a
trice, in a twinkling of an eye; there is no form, no shape that you can fancy
among men, into which their Spirituallities are not changeable at pleasure; but
for the most part, these holy men present themselves in the perfect figure of
Angels of light, of so artificial resemblance, enough to deceive the very
Elect if possible, that when they are entered their Sanctum Sanctorum, their
holy convocation at White Hall, they then seem no other then a quire of
Archangels, of Cherubins and Seraphims, chanting their fals-holy Halelujaes of
victory over the people, having put all principalities and powers under their
feet, and the Kingdom and dominion and the greatness of the Kingdom is theirs,
and all Dominions, even all the people shall serve and obey them, [excuse me,
it is but their own Counterfeit Dialect, under which their pernicious hipocrisy
is veiled that I retort into their bosoms, that you may know them within and
without, not that I have any intention of reflection upon holy writ] and now
these men of Jerusalem (as I may term them) those painted Sepulchers of Sion
after their long conjuring together of providence, opportunities and seasons
one after another, dressed out to the people in the sacred shape of Gods Time,
(as after the language of their new fangled Saint-ships I may speak it) they
have brought their seasons to perfection, even to the Season of Seasons, now to
rest themselves in the large and full enjoyment of the creature for a time, two
times and half a time, resolving now to ware out the true asserters of the
peoples freedom, and to change the time and laws to their exorbitant ambition
and will; while all their promises, declarations and engagements to the people
must be nulled and made Ciphers, and cast aside as wast paper, as unworthy the
fulfillment, or once the remembrance of those Gentlemen, those magnificent stems
of our new upstart Nobillity, for now it is not with them as in the days of
their engagement at New Market and Tripl^e heath, but as it was in the days of
old with corrupt persons, so is it in ours, Tempora mutantur --.

But to proceed to the story: the Lieutenant Colonel did not only show his
weakness, (or rather his iniquity) in his dealing with me, but he converts the
aforesaid Soldier of Leivtenant Generals Regiment before diverse of the
Officers at White Hall, and there he renders the reason wherefore he made him a
prisoner, because said he, he takes Overtons part, for he came and asked him
how he did, and bid him be of good comfort, and he lay last night with a woman:
To which he answered It is true, but the woman was my wife, then they proceeded
to ask, when they were married, and how they should know she was his wife, and
he told them where and when, but that was not enough, they told him, he must
get a Certificate from his Captain that he was married to her and then he
should have his liberty.

Friends and Countrymen, where are you now? what shall you do that have no
Captains to give you Certificates? sure you must have the banes of Matrimony
re-asked at the Conventicle of Gallants at White Hall, or at least you must
thence have a Congregationall License, (without offense be it spoken to true
Churches) to lie with your wives, else how shall your wives be chaste or the
children Legitimate? they have now taken Cognizance over your wives and beds,
whether will they next? Judgment is now come into the hand of the armed-fury
Saints. My Masters have a care what you do, or how you look upon your wives,
for the new-Saints Millitant are paramount all Laws, King, Parliament,
husbands, wives, beds, etc. But to let that pass.

Toward the evening we were sent for, to go before the Counsel of State at
Darby-house, and after Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne, and Mr. Wallwine had
been before them, then I was called in, and Mr. Bradshaw spoke to me, to this
effect.

Master Overton, the Parliament has seen a Book, Entitled, The Second Part of
Englands New-Chains Discovered, and has past several Votes thereupon, and has
given Order to the Council to make inquiry after the Authors and Publishers
thereof, and proceed upon them as they see Cause, and to make a return thereof
unto the House: And thereupon he Commanded Mr. Frost their Secretary to read
over the said Votes unto me, which were to this purpose, as has since been
publicly proclaimed:

Die Martis, 27 Martis, 1649.
THe House being informed of a Scandalous and Seditius Book Printed, entitled,
The Second Part of Englands New-Chains Discovered.
The said Book was this day read.
REsolved upon the Question by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this
printed Paper, entitled, The Second Part of Englands New-Chains Discovered
etc. does cont^in most false, scandalous, and reproachful matter, and is highly
Seditious and Destructive to the present Government, as it is now Declared and
settled by Parliament, tends to Division and Mutiny in the Army, and the raising
of a New War in the Commonwealth, and to hinder the present Relief of Ireland,
and to the continuing of Free Quarter: And this House does further Declare,
That the Authors, Contrivers, and Framers of the said Papers, are guilty of
High Treason, and shall be proceeded against as Traitors; And that all Persons
whatsover, that shall join with, or adhere unto, and hereafter voluntarily Aid
or Assist the Authors, Framers, and Contrivers of the aforesaid Paper, in the
prosecution thereof, shall be esteemed as Traitors to the Commonwealth, and be
proceeded against accordingly.

Then Mr. Bradshaw spoke to me much after this effect,

Master Overton, this Council having received Information, That you had a hand
in the Contriving and Publishing of this Book, sent for you by their Warrant to
come before them; Besides, they are informed of other Circumstances at your
Apprehension against you, That there were diverse of the Books found about you.
Now Mr. Overton, if you will make any Answer thereunto, you have your Liberty.

To which I answered in these words, or to the like effect:

Sir, what Title to give you, or distinguish you by, I know not; Indeed, I
confess I have heard by common report, that you go under the name of a Council
of State; but for my part, what you are I cannot well tell; but this I know,
that had you (as you pretend) a just authority from the Parliament, yet were
not your Authority valuable or binding, till solemnly proclaimed to the people:
so that for my part, in regard you were pleased thus violently to bring me
before you, I shall humbly crave at your hands, the production of your
Authority, that I may know what it is, for my better information how to demean
my self.

Presid.] Mr. Overton, We are satisfied in our Authority.


Ric. Overt.] Sir, if I may not know it, however I humbly desire, that I may be
delivered from under the force of the Military power; for having a natural and
legal title to the Rights of an Englishman, I shall desire that I may have the
benefit of the Law of England, (which Law takes no cognizance of the Sword).
And in case you or any man pretend matter of crime against me, in order to a
trial, I desire I may be resigned up to the Civil Magistrate, and recceive a
free and legal trial in some ordinary Court of Justice, according to the
known Law of the Land; that if I be found a transgressor of any established
declared Law of England, on Gods name let me suffer the penalty of that Law.

Further, Sir, In case I must still be detained a prisoner, it is my earnest
desire, that I may be disposed to some prison under the jurisdiction and
custody of the Civil Authority: For, as for my own part, I cannot in
conscience (to the common right of the people) submit my self in any wise to
the trial or custody of the Sword; for I am no Soldier, neither has the Army
any Authority over me, I owe them neither duty nor obedience they are no
Sheriffs, Justices, Bailiff, Constables, or other Civil Magistrates: So that I
cannot, neither will I submit unto their power, but must take the boldness to
protest against it.


Presid. Mr. Overton, If this be your Answer, you may withdraw.


R. Overt. Sir, I humbly desire a word or two more.


Lieut. Genesis Let him have liberty.


Presid. Mr. Overton, You may speak on.


R. Over. Gentlemen, for future peace and security sake, I shall humbly desire
to offer this unto your consideration; namely, that if you think it meet; That
you would choose any four men in England, pick and choose where you please; and
we (for my part, I speak it freely in my own behalf, and I think I may say as
much in theirs) shall endeavor to the utmost of our power by a fair and
moderate Discourse, to give the best account and satisfaction concerning the
matter of difference betwixt us, that we can, that if possible, peace and
agreement may be made: And this, after the weakness of my small understanding,
I judge to be a fair and reasonable way: if you shall be pleased to accept of
it, you may; if not, you may use your pleasure; I am in your hand, do with me
as you think good, I am not able to hinder you.


Presid. Mr. Overton, If this be all you have to say, withdraw.


R. Overt. Sir, I have said.

So I was commanded into a little withdrawing room close by the Council; and I
supposed they would have taken my motion into consideration: But after I had
been there a while, I was ordered to the Room again, where Lieut. Col. Lilburn,
Mr. Walwins, etc. were.

And now that it may be clear unto the whole world, that we heartily desire the
prevention and cessation of all differences and divisions that may be bred and
break forth in the Land, to the hazard, if not actual imbroilment thereof in a
new exundation of blood in the prosecution of this controversy, we do freely
from the heart (that heaven and earth may bear witness betwixt our integrity
to the peace of the Commonwealth, and their dealings with us) make this
proffer as to be known to the whole world; that we (in the first place I may
best speak for my self; and I so far know the minds of Lieutenant Col. John
Lilburn, Mr. Walwine, and Mr. Prince, that I may as freely speak it in their
behalfs) will, by the Assistance of God, give any four men in England that they
shall choose (although the Lieutenant General, and the Commissarie General be
two of them) a free and moderate debate (if they shall think it no scorn)
touching all matters of difference betwixt us, as to the business of the
Commonwealth (for therein does consist the controversy betwixt us) that if
possibly, new flames and combustions may be quenched, and a through and an
hearty composure be made betwixt us, upon the grounds of an equal and just
Government. And that the business may be brought to a certain issue betwixt
us, let them, if they please, choose two Umpires out of the House, or
elsewhere, and we will choose two; and for our parts, we shall stand to the
free determination or sentence, that these four, or any three of them shall
pass betwixt us. Or else, if they please but to center upon The Agreement of
the People, with amendments according to our late sad Apprehensions, presented
to the House upon the 26 of February 1648, for our parts, we shall seal a
Contract of: Oblivion for all bypast matters, relating either to good name,
life, liberty or estate; saving of making Account for the public Moneys of
the Commonwealth: And in such an Agreement we will center, to live and die
with them in the prosecution thereof. And if this be not a fair and peaceable
motion, let all well-minded people judge.

But if nothing will satisfy them but our blood, we shall not (through the
might of God) be sparing of that, to give witness to the Right and Freedom of
this Commonwealth against their Usurpation and Tyranny; but let them know
this, That Building has a bad Foundation that is laid in the blood of honest
men, such as their own knowledge and consciences bear them record, are
faithful to the common interest and safety of the People: out of our ashes may
possibly arise their destruction. This I know, God is just, and he will repay
the blood of the innocent upon the head of the Tyrant. But to return to the
Narrative.

After some small space that we had all been before them, we were called in
again; first, Lieut. Col. John Lilburn, then Mr. Walwine, and then my self: And
coming before them the second time, Mr. Bradshaw, spoke to this effect:


Presid. Mr. Overton, The Council has taken your Answer into consideration,
and they are to discharge their duty to the Parliament, who has ordered them
to make enquity after the Book, entitled, The second part of England's new
Chains, etc. and thereof they are to give an account to the House: And the
Council has ordered me to put this question unto you, Whether you had an hand
in the contriving or publishing this Book, or no?


R. Overt. Sir, I well remember, that since you cut off the King's head, you
declared (or at least the Parliament, from whence you pretend the derivation of
your Authority) that you would maintain the known fundamental Laws of the
Land, and preserve them inviolable, that the meanest member of this Common
wealth, with the greatest, might freely and fully enjoy the absolute benefit
thereof. Now Gentlemen, it is well known, and that unto your selves, that in
cases criminal, as now you pretend against me, it is against the fundamental
Laws of this Commonwealth to proceed against any man by way of Interrogatories
against himself, as you do against me* and I believe (Gentlemen) were you in
our cases, you would not be willing to be so served you selves; (what you would
have other men do unto you, that do you unto them.) So that for my part,
Gentlemen, I do utterly refuse to make answer unto any thing in in relation to
my own person, or any man or men under heaven; but do humbly desire, that if
you intend by way of Charge to proceed to any Trial of me, that it may be (as
before I desired at your hands) by the known established Law of England, in
some ordinary Court of Justice appointed for such cases (extraordinary ways
being never to be used, but abominated, where ordinary ways may be had) and I
shall freely submit to what can be legally made good against me.

But I desire that in the mean time you would be pleased to take notice, that
though in your eye I seem so highly criminal, as by those Votes you pretend;
yet am I guilty of nothing, not of this paper, entitled, The second part of
England's new Chains, in case I had never so much an hand in it, till it be
legally proved: for the Law looks upon no man to be guilty of any crime,
till by law he be convicted; so that, I cannot esteem my self guilty of any
thing, till by the Law you have made the same good against me.

And further Sir, I desire you to take notice, that I cannot be guilty of the
transgression of any Law, before that Law be in being a it is impossible to
offend that which is not; Where there is no Law there is no Transgression: Now,
those Votes on which you proceed against me are but of yesterdaies being; so
that, had I an hand in that Book whereof you accuse me, provided it were before
those Votes, you cannot render me guilty by those Votes: If I had done any
thing in it, since the Votes (provided you had solemnly proclaimed the same)
then you might have had some color to have proceeded against me: but I have
but newly heard the Votes, and since that you know I could do nothing.


Presid. Mr. Overton, I would correct your judgment in one thing* We are not
upon any Trial of you; we are only upon the discharge of our duty, and that
trust committed unto us by the Parliament, to make enquiry after the authors,
contrivers and framers of the Books and having information against your self
and your Comrades, we sent for you, and are to return your Answer to the House,
howsoever you dispute their Authority.


R. Overt. Dispute their Authority, Sir I That Is but your supposition, and
supposition is no proof. And Sir, as you say, you are to discharge your duty,
so must I discharge mine. And as for matter of trial, I am sure you tax me in
a criminal way, and proceed to question me thereupon. But Sir, I conceive it
my duty to answer to none of your Questions in that nature, and therefore
shall utterly refuse.

Now Gentlemen, I desire you to take notice, that I do not oppose you as you
are members of the Commonwealth; for it is well known, and I think to some
here, that I have ever been an opposer of oppression and tyranny, even from
the days of the Bishops to this present time; and the viz. Arraignment of
Persecution. Ordinance of Tithes Dismounted. The Game at Scotch and English,
etc.
Books that I have writ and published do in some measure bear witness thereof,
and it is well known, that my practice has ever been answerable thereunto. I
suppose no man can accuse me, but that I have opposed Tyranny wherever I
found it: It is all one to me under what name or title soever oppression be
exercised, whether under the name of King, Parliament, Council of State, under
the name of this, or that, or any thing else; For tyranny and oppression is
tyranny and oppression to me wherever I find it, and wherever I find it I
shall oppose it, without respect of persons.

I know I am mortal and finite, and by the course of nature my days must have
a period, how soon I know not; and the most you can do, it is but to proceed to
life; and for my part, I had rather die in the just vindication of the cause of
the poor oppressed people of this Commonwealth, then to die in my bed; and the
sooner it is, the welcomer, I care not if it were at this instant, for I value
not what you can do unto me.

But Gentlemen, I humbly desire yet a word or two. I confess, I did not expect
so much civilitie at your hands as I have found, and for the same I return you
hearty thanks.

Now whereas you commonly say, That we will have no Bottom, center no where,
and do tax us by the Votes you read unto me, of destruction to the present
Government, division and mutiny in the Army, etc. But here I do profess unto
you, as in the presence of the all-seeing God before whom one day I must give
an account of all my actions, That in case you will but conclude upon an equal
and just Government by way of an Agreement of the People, as was honorably
begun by the General Officers of the Army; and but free that Article in it
which concerns the liberty of Gods Worship from the vexatious entanglements and
contradictions that are in it, that so conscientious people might freely
(without any fear of an insulting Clergy) live quietly and peaceably in the
enjoyment of their consciences; As also to add unto it a Bar against
Regalitie, and the House of Lords; As also to make provision in it against the
most weighty oppressions of the Land; that thereby they may be utterly removed,
and for the future prevented, and the people settled in freedom and safety: And
then, for my part, neither hand, foot, pen, tongue, mouth or breath of mine
shall move against you; but I shall with my utmost power, with hand, heart,
life and blood, assist you in the prosecution thereof, and therein center. Try
me, and if I fail of my word, then let me suffer.


Presid. Mr. Overton, If you have no more to say, you may withdraw.


R. Overt. Sir, I humbly crave the further addition of a word or two.

Gentlemen, I desire (as I did before) that I may (according to the common
right of the people of England) be forthwith freed from under the power of the
Sword, and be delivered into the hands of the Civil Magistrate, in case I shall
be still detained a prisoner; for I am so much against the intrusion of the
Military power into the feat of the Magistrate, that I had rather you would
fetter me legs and hands, and tie me neck and heels together, and throw me into
a Dungeon, and not allow me so much as the benefit of bread and water till I be
starved to death, then I would accept of the best Down-bed in England, with
suitable accommodation, under the custody of the Sword.


President. Mr. Overton, I would correct your Judgment a little, you are not
under the Military power, but under the Civil authority; for by the Authority
of Parliament this Counsel by their Warrant has sent for you.


R. Overton. Sir, it is confessed, that pro forma tantum, for matter of Form,
ink or paper, I am under the Civil Authority, but essentiallie and reallie, I
am under the Martial power; for that Warrant by which I was taken, was executed
upon me by the Military power, by a Party of Horse, and diverse Companies of
Foot in Arms, and in that Hostile manner (like a prisoner of War) I was led
Captive to White-hal, and there ever since, till commanded hither, I was kept
amongst the Soldiers, and I am still under the same force: Besides, Sir, these
men are mere Soldiers, no Officers of the Magistracy of England, they brought
no Warrant to me from any Justice of Peace, neither did carry me before any
Justice of Peace, but seized on me, and kept me by their own force: Therefore
it is evident and clear to me, That I am not under the Civil, but the Martial
power.


President. Master Overton, If this be your Answer, you may withdraw.


R. Overton. Sir, I have said.


And so I was conducted to the Room where they had disposed Lieutenant Col.
Lilburne and Mr. Walwine: And the next news we heard from them, was, of our
Commitment to the Tower, and Master Prince and I were joined as yoak-fellows in
one Warrant; a Copy whereof is as follows;

THese are to will and require you, to receive herewith into your Custody the
Persons of Master Richard Overton, and Master Thomas Prince, and them safely to
keep in your prison of the Tower of London, until you receive further Order:
They being Committed to you upon suspicion of High Treason; of which you are
not to fail; and for which this shall be your Warrant:

Given at the Council of State at Darby-House this Twenty eighth day of March,
1649. Signed in the Name, and by the Order of the Council of State, appointed
by Authority of Parliament. Jo. Bradshaw President.

To the Lieutenant of the Tower.
Thus all un-interested, unprejudiced persons, (who measure things as they are
in themselves, having nothing in admiration with respect of persons, who simply
and sincerely mind the freedom and prosperity of the Commonwealth) may clearly
see, as in a Glass, by this taste of Aristocraticall Tyranny toward us, a
perfect and lively resemblance of the Council of State; Ex pede Leonem, you
may know a Lion by his foot, or a Bear by his paw: by this you may see their
nature and kind, what and from whence they are, and whether they tend, by this
line you may measure the height depth and breath of their new Architecture of
State, and by making our case but yours, you will find your selves new fettered
in chains, such as never England knew or tasted before; that you may (truly if
you will but measure it in the consequence thereof,) break forth and cry out,
Their little finger is thicker then our Fathers loins; our Fathers made our
yoke heavy, but these add unto our yoke; our Fathers chastised us with
whips, but these chastise us with Scorpions. Who would have thought in the
days of their glorious pretenses for Freedom, in the days of their
Engagements, Declarations and Remonstrances, while they were the hope of the
oppressed, the joy of the righteous, and had the mighty confluence of all the
afflicted and well-minded people of the Land about them, (I principally reflect
upon the Victors of the times) I say, who would have thought to have heard,
seen, or felt such things from their hands as we have done? Who would have
thought such glorious and hopeful beginnings should have vanished into
Tyranny? Who would have thought to have seen those men end in the persecution
and imprisonment of persons whom their own Consciences tell them, to be men of
known integrity to the Commonwealth; and which is so evident and
demonstrative, that thousands in this Nation can bear Record thereof; and that
those men should be so devilish, so tyrannical and arbitrary, as after their
imprisonment, to rake hell, and skim the Devil, to conjure out matter of
Charge or accusation against them, that they might have their blood, as in our
case they have done, sending abroad their bloodhounds to search and pry out in
every corner, what could be made out against us, going up and down like roaring
Lions seeking how they might devour us; one offering Mistress Prince her
Husbands liberty, and the 1000 l. they owe him, if he will but discover what
he knows (as they are pleased to imagine) against us; and not only so, but
some Members of the House (as Mr. Kiffin confessed in respect of himself)
negotiate with the principal Leaders of several Congregations of religious
people about the Town, to promote a petition, which was no other but in order
to their bloody design against us; that those conscientious people (surprised
by their fraudulent suggestions and craft) might (not truly understanding the
business) appear in the dis-ownment and discountenance of us; and in the
approbation and furtherance of the prosecuters of their bloody Votes of
High Treason, intentionally breathed out against us: for could they by their
delusions over-whelm us once in the odium of religious people; with the
venomous contagion of their malicious clamours, bug-bears, reproaches and lies,
beget us under the Anathema of the Churches, then they think they may with ease
and applause cut us off; for that is the venom lies under the leaf, how
finely soever they zeal it over; that so our friends and brethren (thus
surprised and overtaken) may become our Butchers, and think they do God and
their Country good service while they slay us; but let them beware how they
contract the guilt of our blood upon their heads; for assuredly the blood of
the Innocent will be upon them, and God will repay it; I speak not this to beg
their mercy, I abhor it, I bid defiance to what all the men and devils in
earth or hell can do against me in the discharge of my understanding and
Conscience for the good of this Commonwealth; for I know my Redeemer lives,
and that after this life I shall be restored to life and Immortality, and
receive according to the innocence and uprightness of my heart: Otherwise, I
tell you plainly. I would not thus put my life and wel-being in jeopardie, and
expose my self to those extremities and necessities that I do; I would
creaturize, be this or that or any thing else, as were the times, eat, drink,
and take my pleasure; turn Judas or any thing to flatter great men for
promotion: but blessed be the God of Heaven and Earth, he has given me a
better heart, and better understanding. But to proceed;

That which is most to our astonishment, we understand of a truth, That Master
Kiffin (to whose Congregation my back-friend A^tel is a retainer) Master
Spilsbury, Master Patience (who vilified the Book entitled, The Second Part of
Englands New Chains, and yet confessed be never saw it or heard it read, as by
evidence can be made good) Mr. Fountain, Mr. Drapes, Mr. RICHARDSON, Mr.
Couset, Mr. Tomlins, and Mr Wade the Schol-master became their Pursuevants or
bloud-hounds, to hunt us to the Bar of the House of Commons with a Petition
(most evidently and clearly in pursuance of our blood) Entitled, The humble
Petition and Representation of the several Churches of God in London, commonly
(though falsely) called Anabaptists, April 2. 1649. tacitly and curiously in a
most Religious vail pointing at, and reflecting upon us, as Interrupters of the
Setlement of the Liberty and Freedom of this Commonwealth; headie,
high-minded, unruly disobedient, presumptuous, self willed, contemners of
Rulers, Dignities and Civil Government, whoremasters, drunkares, cheaters, etc.
as if it were not with those men, as with the Publican and Sinner, dis-owning
the Book entitled, The Second Part, etc. which at that juncture of time, all
circumstances duly weighed, was an absolute justification of those Votes of
High Treason, and of prosecution against us as Traitors, for the tendency of
those Votes were vented at us, and that their own knowledge and Consciences
tells them to be true, so that they could have done no more in Order to our
blood, then what they did in that matter, so as to ^and it of fairly and
covertly preserving to themselves the reputation of the Churches of God: and to
add unto their impiety against us, they juggle with the Churches, present it
in the name of the Churches of God in London called Anabaptists, and in their
names Remonstrate that they (meaning the Churches, as by the title they speak)
neither had nor have heart nor hand in the framing, contriving, abetting, or
promoting of the said Paper, which though read in several of our public
Meetings, we do solemnly profess, it was without our consent, being there
openly opposed by us. Notwithstanding it is notoriously evident, That the
generality of the People Dissented from their Petition against us; and as upon
good intelligence I am informed, They had scarce ten in some Congregations to
sign it, in some not above 2 or 3, in some none; and in the main they had not
the Tithe of the people; and yet those men like a Consistory of Bishops, a
Synod of Presbyters, or a New England Classis, presume upon the Assumption of
the name of Several Churches of God, as if to themselves they had purchased the
Monopoly or Pattent thereof, or as if the persons of Mr. Kiffin, Mr. Patience,
etc. were so many several Churches, (hence sprang the papal, Prelatical, and
Presbyterial Supremacy over the Consciences of people) and therefore it
behooves the people to have a care of their Leaders.

We have had the name of King, the name of Parliament, the name of the Army,
etc. surprised, abused, and usurped against us by the hand of our exorbitant
enemies; but never before, the name of Several Churches of God, and those
styled Anabaptists; Hear O Heavens, and judge O Earth! Was there ever the like
Fact attempted or perpetrated amongst the Churches of God? such wickedness is
not once to be named amongst them: And I do not doubt but the wel-minded
Christian people of those several Churches presented by that Petition, will
vindicate themselves from the Aspersion thereby laid upon them; For I cannot
believe till I see it, That those people would do any thing, or own any thing
that might but so much as seemingly tend to our blood, or our imprisonment; I
am confident they abhor it^ And they cannot in Conscience do less then to
disavow that Bloody Petition (as to its tendency against us) and till they do
it, they will be sharers in the public guilt of our imprisonment, yea, and of
our Blood, for (ho^ever God may divert the wicked purposes of men) that
Petition is guilty of our Blood.

I confess, for my part, I am a man full of Sin, and personal Infirmities, and
in that Relation I will not take upon me to clear or justify my self; but as
for my Integrity and uprightness to the Common wealth, to whatsoever my
understanding tells me is for the good of mankind, for the safety, freedom, and
tranquillity of my Country, happiness and prosperity of my Neighbors, to do
to my neighbor as I would be done by, and for the freedom and protection of
Religious people. I say as to those things, (according to the weak measure of
my understanding and judgment) I know my integrity to be such, that I shall
freely (in the might of God) sacrifice my life to give witness thereunto; and
upon that Account I am now in Bonds, a protestor against the Aristocratical
Tyranny of the Counsel of State, scorning their Mercy, and bidding defiance to
their Cruelty, had they ten millions more of Armies, and Cromwels to
perpetrate their inhumanities upon me; for I know they can pass but to this
life, when they have done that, they can do no more; and in this case of mine,
he that will save his life shall loose it; I know my life is hid in Christ, and
if upon this account I must yield it, Welcome, welcome, welcome by the grace of
God.

And as for those reproaches and scandals like the smoke of the bottomless pit
that are fomented against me; whereby too many zealous tender spirited people
are prejudiced against my person, ready to abhor the thing I do, though
never so good, for my person sake; I desire such to remove their eyes from
persons to things: if the thing I do be good, it is of God; and so look upon
it, and not upon me, and so they shall be sure not to mistake themselves, nor
to wrong me: And I further desire such to consider, That tales, rumors,
slanderings, backbitings, lies, scandals etc. tossed up and down like clouds with
the wind, are not the fruits of the Spirit, neither are they weapons of Gods
warfare, they are of the devil and corruption, and betray in the users of them
an evil mind: It is a certain badge of a Deceiver to take up whispering^ and
tales of men's personal failings to (...) them to the cause those persons (...),
by such means to gain advantage) upon them.

Consider whether the things I hold forth and profess as in relation to the
Commonwealth, be not for the good of mankind, and the preservation of Gods
people and if they be, my personal failings are not to be reckoned as a
counter-balance against them. As I am in my self in respect to my own personal
sins and transgressions; so I am to my self and to God, and so I must give an
account; the just must stand by his own faith: But as I am in relation to the
Commonwealth, that all men have cognizance of, because it concern^ their own
particular lives, livelihoods and beings, as well as my own; and my failings
and evils in that respect I yield up to the cognizance of all men, to be
righteously used against me. So that the business is, not how great a sinner I
am, but how faithful and real to the Commonwealth; that is the matter
concerns my neighbor, and whereof my neighbor is only in this public
Controversy to take notice; and for my personal sins that are not of Civil
cognizance or wrong unto him, to leave them to God, whose judgment is righteous
and just. And till persons professing Religion be brought to this sound temper,
they fall for short of Christianity; the spirit of love, brotherly charity,
doing to all men as they would be done by, is not in them; without which they
are but as a sounding brass, and a tinkling cymball, a whited wall, rottenness
and corruption, let their ceremonial formal practice of Religion be never so
Angel-like or specious.

There is a great noise of my sins and iniquities: but which of my Aspersers
Ox or Ass have I stolen? which of them have I wronged the value of a
farthing? They tax me with filthiness, and strange impieties; but which
amongst them is innocent? he that is innocent, let him throw the first stone;
otherwise let him lay his hand on his mouth: I have heard of as odious
failings, even of the same nature whereof they tax me (and it may be, upon
better evidence) amongst them, laid open to me, even of the highest in present
power, as well as amongst eminent persons in Churches; which I ever have
counted unworthy to be used as an engine against them in the Controversy of
the Commonwealth: But if they will not be quiet, I shall be forced, in honor
to my own reputation, to open the Cabinet of my Aspersers infirmities, that the
world may see what sort of men they are that say unto others thou shall not
steal and steal themselves: I shall be (...) to informed to it; (...) (...),
necessity (...) law, I shall (as Mr. (...) to Mr. Edwards, if he would not be
quiet) make all their reputations as a stinking carcass.

And although they think they have such firm matters against me, let them not
be too hasty to pursue me with reproach any further, lest it recoil with a
vengeance upon themselves: for it is an old and a true saying, One tale is good
till another be told. Therefore let no man judge before the time, lest he be
judged; for I am able to vindicate my self to all rational men, as clear as
the Sun at noon day, in what I have done.

Much I might have said as in relation to the illegality of our Apprehension,
Commitment, etc. But for the present I shall omit it to further opportunity, or
the engagement of some more abler pen: And so I shall commit my self and my
ways to God alone, with cheerfulness and alacrity of spirit, rejoicing that
he has counted me worthy to bear witness once more against the Oppressors of
the People, and to suffer for the sake of the poor, against the insulting
tyrants of the times.

Richard Overton.
From my Aristocraticall Captivity in the Tower of London; April 4, 1649.

Dulce est pro Patria mori.
Postscript.
COurteous Reader, for thy better satisfaction concerning the infamous scandal
raised by Lieutenant Colonel Axtel upon me, I thought meet to subjoin hereunto
a Copy of an Affidavit concerning the Matter: But I have forborne the
publishing of the Deponents name in print, upon his own desire; Yet those of my
friends who are desirous, I shall be ready to show unto them the Original
Copy: A transcript whereof is as follows.

A. B. of the Parish of St. Anne Aldersgate, Citizen and Pewterer of London,
aged thirty six years or thereabouts, makes Oath, That whereas Lieutenant
Colonel Axtel, upon his Apprehending of Mr. Richard Overton, upon Wednesday,
between five and six of the clock in the morning, being the twenty ninth of
March last past, 1649, by an Order from the Council of State, did raise and
make a Report, that he took the said Mr. Overton in bed with this Deponents
Wife, that That Report was and is altogether false and scandalous; for that
this Deponent and the said Mr. Overton, the Tuesday night next preceding the
said Wednesday, did lie both together all that night in one and the self same
bed; and this Deponents Wife and his little Child in another bed of this
Deponents house or lodgings. And that the next morning, before the said
Lieutenant Colonel Axtel knocked at the door, this Deponent, with his Wife,
with the said Mr. Overton, were all up and ready (saving that Mr. Overton had
not put on his boots, band and cuffs) and were altogether in a chamber of this
Deponents house, where this Deponents Wife was then suckling of her child: and
this Deponent hearing some body knock at the door, went down to open it; which
was readily done by a girl of the same house. Whereupon the said Lieutenant
Colonel Axtel (meeting this Deponent upon the stairs, and asking him if he were
Mr. Overton; to which this Deponent replying, No;) commanded the Musketeers
(who attended him) to take this Deponent into their custody, and he himself
went directly up into the chamber with some Musketeers attending him. All which
this Deponent affirms upon his oath to be true.

A. B.
Jurat. 4 Aprilis, 1649. ROB. AYLET.

FINIS.
THE NARRATIVE of the Proceedings against Mr Thomas Prince, Thus follows.
UPon Wednesday the 28. of March 1649, about four a Clock in the morning, my
house was beset with about 200 Horse and Foot Soldiers with their Arms; one or
more of them knocked at my door, my Wife being up with one of my Children (who
was very sick) she hearing the knocking, speedily went and asked who was there?
Some of them said, Is Mr Prince within? my wife said, yes: one of them said I
would speak with him about some Butter and Cheese for Ireland: my wife told
them, my husband is not stirring: they said, We must speak with him, it is not
for his hurt: my wife presently comes running to my chamber and said to me,
Husband, what have you done, here is a Troop of horse and many soldiers at the
door for you? I gave my wife this Answer I fear them not, if there were ten
thousand Troops: presently my wife went and let them into my house, and being
entered, they searched my Cestern and Oven, and three beds, and asked who lay in
this bed? and who in that bed? etc. and turned and tossed the bed clothes:
presently after they came to the chamber where I was, with a pistol and
muskets presented against me: I asked them what the matter was? Lieutenant
Colonel Axtel told me, I was his Prisoner, and that he did apprehend me for
High Treason; I desired to see his Warrant: He said, here is a Warrant from the
Council of State, signed by the Lord President, and sealed with the great Seal:
I took it of him, and read it over, and I found it was no Legal Warrant; and so
I told the Lieutenant Colonel. Forthwith came my Wife unto me, and said unto
the Soldiers, that she knew her Husband had done no harm, and that he cared
not for the worst his Enemies could do unto him.

I was joyful to hear the cheerful words of my Wife; And my Wife further said,
Is these the men my Husband has stood for, and adventured his life, as he has
done, and trusted the Parliament in their necssities, above six years past,
with above 1000 l. and is yet unpayd? I am sure my Husband is above 2000 l. the
worse in his Estate, for assisting them. I said, Good sweet Heart be content,
it is not for men I have stood, it is that the Commonwealth might be freed from
Tyranny and Slavery, and I am not sorry for what I have done, for I have
discharged a good Conscience therein.

I made me ready presently, took my leave of my dear and loving Wife, and went
with the Lieutenant Colonel into my shop, where I found one of my servants and
diverse Soldiers with him; The Lieutenant Colonel asked me if I missed any
thing, wished me to search the Soldiers.

I looked upon the Soldiers, and I told them, By their faces they seemed to me
to be no such men: I told them, I had better thoughts of them; I, for my part,
have done the Soldiers no wrong:

And I doubt not but these men and their Fellow Soldiers will stand for their
own and the Peoples just Liberties against all Tyranny in whom soever.

And as I was going from my shop in the Lane which does join to my house, there
was another party of Soldiers which stood nigh unto my door; and perceiving
them in the street and lane, I laughed heartily to see so many armed men come
for me: I told the Lieutenant Col. one man with a Legal Warrant had been
sufficient: The Lieutenant said, they had special Order upon their peril to
come: I told him, to come in that manner was suitable to his unjust Warrant:
And I also told him, my name is Prince, and that it was usual for Princes to
have great attendance.

The Lieutenant Colonel gave a Captain charge of me, to bring me to Paul's
yard, which was performed with a strong Guard following close unto us; after a
very little time, came my Friend Lieut. Col. John Lilburn, and Mr. William
Walwyn, after salutations betwixt us, we went from thence with Adjutant General
Stubbard to White Hall, and there with a very strong Guard of Soldiers was
brought unto us our Friend Mr Richard Overton, and there we were kept prisoners
until about five a Clock in the afternoon, at that time with a Guard of
Soldiers we were brought to Darby-house; within two hours after we had been
there, I was called for; I presently went, as was desired, into a room, where I
see about ten or twelve men sitting about a large Table; after I had given them
a full view. I put off my Hat: I was spoke unto to go nigh Mr Bradshaw, which I
did; Mr Bradshaw said unto me, Here is the Votes of Parliament against that
printed paper, entitled, The second part of Englands new Chains discovered,
which Mr Bradshaw gave unto Mr Frost to read it to me, which he did. Mr
Bradshaw likewise told me, Here is an Order of Parliament, giving power to this
Council of State to find out and examine the Authors, Framers and Contrivers
of the aforesaid paper, and to deal with them as they shall see cause; This
Council is informed that you are one of the Authors, Framers, or Contrivers of
the aforesaid Paper, and you are required to give your Answer.

After a little silence, I said these words, or to this effect.

Sir, I am an Englishman, and therefore lay claim to all the Rights and
Liberties which belongs unto an English man; and God gave me such knowledge,
that in the very first beginning of the late Wars I gave my cheerful assistance
against those that would rule over the people by their own wills, and upon that
account, I adventured my life, and lost much blood in defense of the
Commonwealth, and all along to this day have assisted in person and purse, to
my utmost abilities, and I am the same man still to withstand Tyranny in any
whomsoever.

Sir, I hate no man in the world, only the evil in any man I hate.

Sir, all those good things which my conscience and my actions will witness, I
have done in behalf of the Commonwealth; I desire they may be all laid aside,
and not come in the balance, as to hinder any punishment that can be afflicted
upon me for breaking any known Law.

Sir, that which makes a man an offender, is for breach of a Law, and that Law
ought to be made before the offense is committed. Sir, Although I have fought
and assisted against the wills and tyranny of men, yet I have not fought to
overthrow the known Laws of the Land; for if there be no Law to protect my
Estate, Liberty and Life, but to be left to the will of men, to the power of
the Sword, to be abused at pleasure, as I have been this day, contrary to Law,
being fetched from my wife and family. Sir, by the same rule you may send for my
wife, and children, and for all my estate, and the next time, if you please, to
destroy all my neighbors; nay all in the City, and so from County to County,
until you destroy as many as you please.

Sir, I have heard talk of Levellers, but I am sure this is levelling indeed,
and I do here before you abhor such doings, and I do protest against them.

Sir, There is a known Law in this Land; if I have wronged any man, let him
take his course in Law against me, I fear not what any man in England can do to
me by Law; and, Sir, the Law I lay claim unto, as my right, to protect me from
violence.

Sir, the Parliament has lately declared, they would maintain the Law; but I
am sure their and your dealing by me declares to the contrary.

Mr Bradshaw said, Is this your Answer? I said, Yes; then I was commanded to
withdraw.

After some space I was called in again, Mr Bradshaw asked me, if I did own or
deny that Paper, entitled, The second part of Englands new Chains discovered;
and to this I was required by that Council to give my Answer. To which I
replied:

Sir, At the beginning of the Parliament it was declared, how destructive it
was for any man to be examined upon Interrogatories; and Sir, if they had not
Declared it, it is my right not to be examined against my self; Sir, God has
given me this understanding, not to wrong my Neighbor nor my Self; if my right
hand should take away and betray the liberty of my left, I would cut it off:
Sir, the people who is the Original of all Just Power, has not given any such
power to the Parliament, as to examine men against themselves in criminal
Causes; the Parliament cannot give that to others they have not.

Sir, as I said before, if any man in England has any thing against me, let
them take their course by Law; Sir, the Law does prescribe Rules for the
Offender to be brought before a Justice of Peace, and after the Justice has
examined witnesses upon Oath, before the party apprehended, if the offense
(although proved upon oath) be Bayleable, the Justice is to take Bail, if the
Justice refuse, the party may arrest the Justice, and have his cost by Law
against him; if not Bayleable the party is to be sent to prison, and there to
be kept until the next Session or Assizes, and not during pleasure.

Sir, I never heard of any Law that gives you, or any of these Gentlemen that
sit here, any just Authority to call me here in this manner before you.

Master Bradshaw said, Is this your Answer? I answered yes; then I was bid
withdraw.

About an hour after, news was brought unto us, That we were to be sent
Prisoners to the Tower, upon suspicion of High Treason; we disputed with the
Officer, and showed he had no Legal Warrant to carry us thither as prisoners,
notwithstanding (by the power of the sword) we were brought Prisoners to the
Tower of London, where we are Rejoicing that we are counted worthy to suffer in
bearing Testimony for the Freedom of the People, against their Usurpation and
Tyranny.

Tho: Prince.
From the Tower of London this 1. day of April 1649.
FINIS.

