A LETTER Sent from Captain LILBVRNE, To diverse of his Friends, Citizens, and
others of good account in LONDON, Wherein he fully expresses the misery of his
imprisonment, and the barbarous usage of the Cavaliers toward him.

Desiring them (if it were possible) to use some means for his releasement.

London, Printed for James Rogers. 1643.

A Letter sent from Captain Lilburne to diverse of his friends in LONDON.
My dear friends,
IT will seem strange to you, considering the miserable condition of my
present fortune, and the strictness of my imprisonment, to receive any notice
from me of my affairs; but God having blessed me with the opportunity of this
treaty, and convenient messenger, I thought it fit to give you the true
intelligence how things stand with me at this instant time of my writing. I am
thanks be to God in very good health, though in as strict imprisonment as can
be possible unless I should be in a dungeon; and since Judge Heath, whom God
forgive, pronounced sentence of death against me, I have been laden with Irons;
but those either by direct command from His Majesty, or out of his own
clemency or by the mediation of some about him, are now taken o^ from me. The
report was here immediately after my condemnation, that I should suffer an
ignominious death but since the Honorable the High Court of Parliament, in my
favor put out their Declaration that rumor has been quite dashed, so that I
must confess I owe my life more to their bounty, then to the gentleness of my
enemies, who went about as much as possible in them lay to deprive me of it and
truly I should very cheerfully have received my f^eath, being secured by the
innocence of my own conscience, that I should have dyed Gods true religious,
and my Countries Martyr, for whose sake I put on Arms. And not my
imprisonment, nor death, would have so much afflicted me, as do the thoughts,
that by my restraint I am deprived of doing my best endeavor, according to my
poor abilities, in serving the affairs of that strength of this kingdom, and
champion of true Religion, the Honorable the High Court of Parliament: In
whose service, if I had dyed valiantly in the field in the face of those
enemies to all goodness and humanity, the Cavaliers, it would have been a more
welcome benefit to me then this imprisonment, wherein I lie and languish under
a daily death; the grief whereof would certainly take away my life, did not
the goodness of the cause for which I suffer, like an Angel of light, come
and comfort me in this darkness, and make me not only scorn my afflictions,
but even rejoice that I am held worthy for Gods cause, and my Countries, to
undergo these bonds; and should they never so long imprison my body, it should
not a jot inthrall the liberty of my mind, which is above the unhappiness of
my fortune; and I do still serve the State and Parliament as much in the
integrity of my heart, and wishes, as I did when I had my freedom, and
converse as familiarly with you in my understanding, as when I was at London
with you; marry the greatest cross that has befallen in this my durance, is,
that the barbarousnesse of my Gaolers and visitants, the Cavaliers, who never
cease reviling me, calling me Roundhead, Parliament-dog, and terms of the
like villainy and disgrace, never suffering me to enjoy the quiet of being
alone, but when they are weary of tormenting me; so that sometimes, as I am a
man, I am not enough fortified against their reproaches; which to a courageous
mind, breed more torments then to have ones body cut into a thousand pieces;
and certainly, I should unarmed as I am diverse times fly in the faces of these
adversaries to God and all good men, did not my reason tell me it were an act
of desperate cowardice, rather then truly valor in any man to seek his own
death; For no more mercy would they show to me in such a case, then Turks
would, nay perhaps, not so much; the Turks themselves being surely better
civilized, then these monsters of Christianity, who neither respected the
Divine or Humane Laws, but make whatsoever their wicked desires guide them to,
that only is a Law to them, nor is it in the power of the King or his Officers
to restrain them from any outrage they have a will to commit: they keeping his
Mayestie and those Noblemen that are with them, scarcely in any condition
better then that of imprisonment, or as hostages for their own safety; so
that in my duty to his Majesty, to whom I told the Cavaliers to their teeth, I
was as loyal a Subject as the best of them. I do much pity the misery of his
present misfortune, being enforced to do nothing contrary to their desires,
not having liberty to dispose of his own intentions or Person: but these
Cavaliers have their powerful agents in his Counsels, and, as it were, their
spies upon his Person, lest He should (as I do verily believe His Highness
would, if it were possible) make an escape from them, (of whose behavior His
goodness must needs be weary) to London, to His high Court of Parliament, as I
was informed from an old friend of mine at Court, a Yeoman of the Guard, one
very well affected to the King and Parliament, who has given me diverse visits
since my imprisonment: he further more avowing, that the Cavaliers insult so
much over His Majesty's meniall servants, that they with their domineering, and
the want of their salaries, are so much oppressed, that they would, if it were
possible withdraw themselves from Court to London to their houses; but if any
one of them should but attempt his escape, the Cavaliers would cut his throat.
And surely, this man whom you all know, has been next to my own innocence,
the greatest comfort I have had in my imprisonment: and he that has given me
to understand (for I am never suffered to go abroad, or to speak with any
body else that will inform me any thing truly) that his Majesty intends
certainly to make His abode at Oxford during this Winter, and has for that
cause bought up, or taken upon trust, all the corn and other provision could
be possible procured in the Country thereabouts; that they are in great want
of powder and ammunition in the Kings Army, and that there soldiers steal away
daily for want of pay; and that all the hopes his Majesty has of supplies, is
from the Earl of Newcastle, who should receive them from beyond sea: that the
town of Oxford is not so well fortified as is reported; and that the Kings
Army there is nothing so strong as they report it, and this was all the news
which he would relate to me for truth. And this I thought good to certify unto
you; and as concerning mine own affairs, you may imagine, my dear friends,
how heavy a burden it is for me to groan under the weight of this
imprisonment, which surely is as grievous to me as that was of the Prophets
committed by Ahab, to be fed with the bread and water of affliction; for
Gentlemen, do but consider with your selves, if it were any of your own cases
to be as I am at this instant, bereaved of your liberty, and by that means
deprived of the society of your friends and kindred, robbed of all that is
either pleasant or delightful to mankind; I do believe (though the cause of
your sufferings were as noble as mine is, which is as noble and honest as ever
cause was, or can be, your humane frailties wearied with the afflictions of
your present misfortune, and consideration of your past happiness (would as I
do now) desire liberty, to be freed from the griefs you are oppressed with,
and be restored to the happiness you have been so long deprived of. I wish, I
profess to you not my liberty so much for these ends though, as that by it I
ought have occasion to bestow my self in the quarrel of the Commonwealth
against these divellish Cavaliers, who have vilified me as much as it is
possible for such traducers of God and all good men to do; nor should I ever
receive so much comfort from any worldly blessing, as to see my self once more
in the field in complete harness against those Malignants to the
Commonwealth, they should then quickly perceive I should with Gods Grace, be
able to right my self of part of the abuses they have with so much despite
cast upon me*

I would therefore desire you, dear and truly friends, to use all the means
in your possibilities that may procure my liberty. I know the honorable the
high Court of Parliament will not be wanting to the effecting of my freedom;
and I do believe his Excellency the Earl of Essex, might by the commutation
or exchange of another Captain of their side for me, work my restitution to
liberty: his Excellencies own noble disposition and the affection he bears
naturally to his Soldiers and Commanders, will be as forward in any treaty of
that nature as you will desire he should be; let me therefore injoyne you, as
you have ever respected the good of your unfortunate friend, or ever will give
a testimony of the reallitie of your u^faigned affections to me, to omit no
occasion, either by this means or any other, which to you may appear better
for the sudden restitution of my liberty, which is not more precious to me
then my ardent desires of expressing in the most ample manner my affections to
the commonwealth, my zeal to Gods true Religion; and last of all, my love to
you Gentlemen, whom I esteem as dear as my self, and wish none of you may
ever have so much misfortunes as to fall into the hands of these inhumane
Butchers, the Cavaliers. I shall not need with any further inducements or
circumstances to engage you to a forwardness in my behalf, I should then in
that, abuse the integrity of your honest friendship, I know I cannot be more
ready to desire your pains in this kind then you will be to imply them; and so
the God of mercy and peace bless, sanctify and preserve you all, and send the
light of his countenance, his best of blessing down on the honorable the High
Court of Parliament, that they may proceed cheerfully as they have begun for
the glory of God and all our goods in the great business of the Commonwealth,
And if I be never ransomed, but die in my imprisonment, I shall joyfully take
my lot, and think I fell happy in suffering for my Religion and Country, the
Commonwealths true servant, and your entire friend,

I. L.

FINIS.

