AN OUTCRY Of the Youngmen and Apprentices of London: OR, An Inquisition after
the lost Fundamental Laws and Liberties of ENGLAND. Directed (August 29.
1649.) in an Epistle to the private Soldiery of the Army, especially all those
that signed the solemn Engagement at Newmarket-Heath, the fifth of June, 1647.
But more especially to the private soldiers of the Generals Regiment of
Horse, that helped to plunder and destroy the honest and true-hearted
Englishmen, traitorously defeated at Burford the 15. of May, 1649.
Signed by Charles Collins, Anthony Bristlebolt, William Trabret, Stephen
Smith, Edward Waldgrave, Thomas Frisby, Edward Stanley, William White,
Nicolas Blowd, John Floyd, in the name and behalf of themselves, and the
Young Men and Apprentices of the City of London. Who are cordial approvers of
the Paper, called, The Agreement of the free people, dated May 1. 1649. and the
defeated Burford-mens late Vindication, dated the 20. of August, 1649.
LAMENT. 2.11,12. Mine eyes do fail with tears: my bowels are troubled: my
liver is powered upon the earth, for the destruction of the daughter of my
people, because the children and the sucklings swoon in the streets of the City.

They say to their mothers, Where is corn and wine? when they swooned as the
wounded in the streets of the City, when their soul was powered out into their
mothers bosom.


Gentlemen,
WE are all of one Nation, and People, it is the sword only that differs;
but how just a title that is over us, your own private thoughts surely are our
determiners, however your actions import: For, it is not imaginable, (except
amongst Bears, Wolves, and Lions,) that brethren of one cause, one Nation, and
family, can without remorse and secret check of conscience, impose such iron
yokes of cruelty and oppression upon their fellows, as by the awe and force of
your Sword rampant, is imposed upon the people of this Nation: you see it; we
are at best but your hewers of wood, and drawers of water; our very persons,
our lives and properties, are all overawed to the supportation only of the
raging lawless Sword, drench't in the precious blood of the people, the
ancient and famous Magistracy of this Nation, the Petition of Right, the great
Charter of England, above thirty times confirmed in open and free Parliament,
with all other the fundamental laws, safeties, and securities of the people,
which our Ancestors at an extraordinary dear rate (as with abundance of their
blood and treasure) purchased for the inheritance of us, and of the Generations
after us, and for which you pretendedly took up arms against the late King and
his party, are now all subverted, broken down and laid wast, the Military Power
being thrust into the very office and seat of the Civil Authority, The King not
only most illegally put to death, by a strange, monstrous, illegal, arbitrary
Court, such as England never ^ew; Monarchy extirpated (not rectified) without,
and besides the consent of the people, (though the actors of that bloody Scene
have owned and declared them to be the original of all just humane Authority)
but even our Parliaments (the very interest, marrow, and soul of all the
native rights of the people) put down, and the name and power thereof
transmitted to a picked party of your forcible selecting, and such as your
Officers (our Lords, and Riders) have often and frequently styled no better
then a mock-Parliament, a shadow of a Parliament, a seeming Authority, or the
like, pretending the continuance thereof, but till a new and equal
Representative, by a mutual Agreement of the free People of England could be
elected, although now for subserviency to their exaltation and Kingship; they
prorogue, and perpetrate the same in the name, and under color thereof,
introducing a Privy Counsel, or as they call it, a Counsel of State, of
superintendency, and suppression to all future successive Parliaments for ever,
erecting a martial Government (by blood and violence impulsed upon us) making
soldiers to be executioners of Orders and Warrants, pretending to the Civil
Authority, and in every particular (notwithstanding, all your famous and
glorious Declarations of Freedom and Liberty) dealing with us, as an absolute,
conquered and insl^ed People: The Law being nothing but a mock protection to
our lives, liberties and properties; the Judges set apart, for the executors of
it, a mere delusion, our Sheriffs, Mayors, Justices of Peace, Constables, etc.
being laid by, or made no better then ciphers, (the choice of them, by will
without right) appropriated to a few factious men, while the right owners (the
people) are robbed of their free and popular elections of them) as not daring to
execute Justice upon the rudest or meanest soldier in England, although the
Law sufficiently warrants them thereunto, but contrariwise, Commoners are
forceably convented and tried before a Council of War, and some sentenced
even unto death, others by a private verbal order made to run the gantlop, and
whipped most barbarously, for refusing to take false and illegal oaths; and the
blood of war (expressly against the Petition of right, and for which amongst
other crimes, the Earl of Strafford lost his head as a Traitor, shed in times
of Peace, as the blood of Mr. Richard Arnell upon the 15. November, 1647. near
Ware, of Mr. Robert Lockier the 27. of April, 1649. (so much bewailed and
lamented at London) of Col. Poyer, of Cornet Thompson, Mr. Perkins, and Mr.
Church, upon the 16. of May 1649 at Burford, contrary to promises, and solemn
engagements at the taking of them, (as their friends lately defeated with them,
in their vindication of the 20. of August, 1649. fully declare, page 6. 7.) and
others yet fresh in our memory does witness: parties of horse and foot,
(contrary and in direct defiance, of the due course and process of Law) sent
at unseasonable hours, to hale and pull people out of their beds and houses,
from their wives and children, without so much as ever summoning of them, and
without any crime or accusation shown, or accuser appearing, or the least
pretense or shadow of Law produced, some sent into remote Garrisons, where they
have been most barbarously used, and endeavored to be starved, and tossed from
Garrison to Garrison, others locked up close prisoners, with sentinels night
and day upon their doors, and all due trials and help at Law, stopped and
denied, and no remedy to be obtained, yea, free men most barbarously put out of
their legal possessions, by force of arms; without any manner of trial at
Law, yea the Law damned, and stopped up against them, for recovering of their
legal rights; and they threatened severely to be punished, if they desist not
their suits at Law; yea, and free-mens estates never pretended to be within the
compass of the Ordinances of sequestrations, seized on to a great value (by
some great men's wills, protected by their swords, to do even what they list,
without control) without any manner of trial or conviction, or any shadow of
legal pretense, or ever so much as laying any pretended crime to the parties
charge; all which are the very (if not higher) crimes, then the Earl of
Strafford principally lost his head for, as a Traitor, as clearly appears by
his Act of Attainder, and by his large printed additionall Impeachment, 1640.
both in English and Irish cases, as clearly appears in the preamble thereof;
and in Article 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. But that which is worst of all, the best
and most faithful maintainers of the English Freedoms, are most maligned,
abused, and vilified, that it is now become a crime of the greatest peril and
penalty, to be faithful to the declared interest of Parliaments, or rights of
the people therein; a thing so dreadfully complained of by the Parliament, in
the beginning of their first Remonstrance of December 1641. New Acts of high
Treason to that end devised to ensnare and entrap the most conscientious, so
that we cannot talk or discourse of our lost Freedoms, or open our mouths of
our oppressions, but we are in as bad a condition, as our Forefathers were, in
the days of William the Conqueror, (that thought any fact crime enough to
entitle him to their estates,) if not worse, by being Treason struck; and
besides all this, multitudes of pick pocket, murdering taxes are heaped, and
continued upon the old, and in default of payment, soldiers are put upon
straining, seizng and plundering of our Masters goods, and houses, for which
violence and villainy, they must be largely paid, or else they will plunder over
again for that; yea and the late large Act about Excize, so transcendent and
insnaring in its p^nalties, that no man well knows how to behave himself in his
trading, for fear of being undone; yea, so numberless are our most
insufferable cruelties, overspreading and wounding the whole Land and people,
that our borders are even filled with the lamentations, mournings, tears, sighs
and doleful groans, of the oppressed and inslaved ruinated people. Trade
decayed and fled, misery, poverty, calamity, confusion, yea and beggary grown
so sore, and so extreme upon the people, as the like never was in England,
under the most tyrannical of all our Kings, that were before these in present
power, since the days of the Conqueror himself; no captivity, no bondage, no
oppression like unto this, no sorrow or misery like unto ours, (of being
inslaved, undone and destroyed by our large pretended friends, for whose
preservation, we could have even pulled out our very eyes) the people become
desolate and forsaken, wandering, pining, and mourning (like those in Jeremies
Lamentations, unto whose sorrows, they said none was like) after their lost
fundamental Laws, their native, and just freedoms, and rights, and there is
none to comfort, none to pity, none to relieve, none to help or save. Alas,
alas for pity. For,

Your hearts seem to us as obdurate as the flinty rock, as savage and inhumane,
as if the flesh and blood, the bones and marrow of the people, were become your
meat, as already it is in effect, and instoad of encouragement and support to
our true friends, and real relievers (at least in faithful desire and
endeavor) as shall stand in the gap betwixt our destroyers and us, all ways
and means are used to impoverish, destroy, and suppress them, and in them to
break and vassallage the spirits of all the English, which in all ages have had
the preheminency of other Nations, that there may not be so much of gallantry
or courage left amongst the people, that one amongst them shall dare to assert
or maintain their freedoms; (which Act is not a little aggravated by M. John
Pym, in his remarkable Speech against the Earl of Strafford, as the highest of
Treasons against any Nation or Commonwealth,) for if any do but murmr and
complain, or seek for remedy, though by way of Petition or Address to the
House, presently their houses, as with Furies, are beset, with armed mercenary
Janisaries, Guards, and Sentinels set upon their doors and passages, no
consideration had of the terror or affrightment of our Masters, their wives,
children, or servants, or of reason, or law, and their persons as Traitors
therefore imprisoned, for weeks, and months; yea, and close imprisoned from
the society of all their friends, without so much as ever seeing either
informer, accuser, prosecutor, or witness, yea, or ever seeing Indictment,
impeachment, or Charge, yea, or face to face, or in their Mittimus's, or any
other formal or legal way, ever so much as having any crime, or pretense of a
crime laid unto their charge, by those very men before whom they are brought,
and who by the rules of their mere will commit them therefore, although the
Parliament in several Declarations have declared, That they have received
Petitions for the removal of things established by Law, and we must say, and
all that know what belongs to the course or practice of Parliament will say,
that we ought so to do, and that both our Predecessors, and His Majesty's
Ancestors have constantly done it, there being no other place, wherein Laws
that by experience may be found grievous and burdensome, can be altered or
repealed, and there being no other due and legal way, wherein they which are
agrieved by them, can seek redress, and that it is no tumult to deliver
Petitions by popular multitudes, 1 part book of Parliaments Declarations, page
123. 201. 202. 209. 533. 548. 691. 720.

Yea, and your very selves, and your Juggling Officers quarreled with, and took
up arms against the Parliament, your creators and original Lords and Masters,
for prohibiting you to petition, and make known your grievances to them, and
sufficiently envy and exclaim against them for so doing, and impeach some of
them as Traitors therefore, as clearly appears in your own book of Declar. p.
10. 11. 17. 23. 33. 35 44. 60. 61. 62. 83. 85. 118.

And yet nothing but the boundless wills and humors of those forementioned
men of blood, rages and rules over us: and is this all the return and fruit,
that people are to expect at your hands? does your solemn engagement at
New Market, and Triplo heath, with your Declarations, Remonstrances, Vows and
Protestations unto us all, center in this bed-roll of cruelties? we pray you
give us leave to make inquiry amongst you after those things, and give losers
leave to complain. Remember you not with what cheerfullnesse and alacrity our
fellow-Apprentices, the glory and flower of the youth of this Nation, and
multitudes of our selves yet surviving, ran in to your assistance out of a
conscientious intent, to uphold and maintain the fundamental Constitution of
this Commonwealth? viz. the interest and right of the people in their
Parliaments (it being most rational, and unquestionably just, that the people
should not be bound but by their own consent given to their Deputies in
Parliament, which by the Laws and customs of England, ought [wholly new] to
be annual) to deliver and clear the Land from its heavy pressures and bonds,
not engaging in the least, against the person of the King, as King, or with any
thoughts or pretense of destroying, but regulating Kingship, but merely for the
removal of all those cruelties and oppressions, he had laid upon the people by
his will, contrary to Law: this you know to be true, your own papers extant
to the world are our record and witnesses, as might plentifully be recited, but
they are known to all men, that know your affairs, you cannot deny it; but
where is the fulfillment of all your glorious words, registered in your book of
Declarations? in which page 14. you say, you shall through the grace of God,
discharge your duties to the Parliament, etc. and also demonstrate, that the
good and quiet of the Kingdom is much dearer to you, then any particular
concernment of your own: and in page 23. the General to both Houses in his
Letter of the 6. of June 1647. assures the Parliament, it is his study and care
to avoid a new war, and (further thus says) so I find it to be the unanimous
desire, and study of the Army, that a firm peace in this Kingdom may be
settled, and the liberties of the people cleared, and secured according to the
many Declarations by which we were invited, and induced to engage in the late
war, most seriously there promising them, they will not meddle to the
advancement of any particular party, or interest whatsoever.

And in your solemn engagement of the 5. June 1647. page 26. you promise and
engage to God, the Kingdom, and to each other, that you will not disband,
divide, nor suffer your selves to be disbanded, nor divided (either for
Ireland, or any other place else) until we have first such satisfaction [as
you say] to the Army, in relation to our grievances, and desires heretofore
presented, and such security, That we of our selves (when disbanded, and in the
condition of private men) or other the freeborn people of England (to whom the
consequence of our case (about petitioning) does equally extend) shall not
remain subject to the like oppression, injury or abuse, as in the premises has
been attempted and put upon us while an Army.

O that there had been an heart in you, to have made this good before your
gross apostasy from all your engagements and promises, that has already
occasioned so much misery, war and bloodshed. Or, oh that yet there were
hearts within you vigorously and effectually to go about the accomplishment and
fulfillment thereof (and thereby prevent all the misery, bloodshed and
d^solations that for want thereof undoubtedly must and will ensue) which you
are bound and tied unto both before God and man, as is (in our judgments)
unanswerably proved in the foresaid treacherously defeated Burford men's
Vindication, page 8 9 10.

But to return, in your said engagement, in the fore-recited 26. page, you
positively there disown and disclaim all purposes or designs in our late or
present proceedings, to advance or insist upon a particular interest, to the
overthrow of Magistracy, etc. neither (say you) would we (if we might or could)
advance or set up any particular pa^ty or interest in the Kingdom [though
imagined never so much our own] but shall much rather [as far as may be within
our sphere or power] study to promote such an establishment of common equal
right and freedom to the whole, as all might equally partake of.

And in that most choice and best of Declarations made by the whole Army of
Soldiers, as well as Officers June 14. 1647, tendered to the Parliament,
concerning their just and fundamental rights and liberties o^ themselves and
the Kingdom, Book Decl page 36. 37. you say, That we may no longer be the
dissatisfaction of our friends, the subject of our enemies malice [to work
jealousies and misrepresentations upon] and the suspicion [if not astonishment]
of many in the Kingdom, in our late or present transactions and conduct of
business; we shall in all faithfulness and cleernesse profess and declare unto
you, these things which have of late protracted and hindered our disbanding,
the present grievances which possess our Army, and are yet unremedied; with
our desires, as to the complete settlement of the Liberties and peace of the
Kingdom, which is that blessing of God, then which (of all worldly blessings)
nothing is more dear unto us, or more precious in our thoughts, we having
hitherto thought all our prese^ enjoyments [whether of life or livelihood, or
nearest relation] a price but sufficient to the purchase of fo rich a blessing,
that we, and all the freeborn people of this Nation may sit down in quiet under
our vines, and under the glorious administration of Justice and Righteousness,
and in full possession of those fundamental Rights and Liberties, without
which we can have little hopes (as to humane consideration) to enjoy either any
comforts of life, or so much as life it self, but a^ the pleasures of some men,
ruling merely according to will and power.

And in the same D^claration page 38. 39. you f^rther say thus; Nor will it now
(we hope) seem strange or unreasonable to rational and honest men, who
consider the consequence of our present case, to their own and the Kingdoms [as
well as our] future concernments, in point of right, freedom, peace and safety
(if from a deep sense of the high consequence of our present case, both to our
selves [in future] and all other people) we shall, before disbanding, proceed
in our own and the Kingdoms behalf, to propound and plead for some provision
for our and the Kingdoms satisfaction and futu^e security, in relation to those
things especially, considering that we were not a mere me^enary Army, hired to
serve any arbitrary power of a State, but called f^rth and conjured by the
several Declarations of Parliament, to the de^ence of our own and the peoples
just Rights and Liberties: and so we took up arms in judgment and conscience to
those ends, and have so continued them, and are resolved, according to your
first just desires in your Declarations, and such principles as we have
received from your frequent informations, and our own common sense, concerning
those our fundamental Rights and Liberties, to assert and vindicate the just
power and rights of this Kingdom in Parliament for those common ends premised
against all arbitrary power, violence and oppression, and ^st all particular
parties and interest, whatsoever. (...) said Declarati^ns still directing us to
the equitable sense of all Laws and Constitutions, as dispe^sing with the very
lette^ of the same, and being supreme to (...), when the safety and
preservation of all is concerned: and assuring us that all Authority is
fundamentally fe^ed in the Office, and (...) ministerially in the Persons.

And in page ^. speaking (...) general of purging some evil members out of
the Parliament, you declare, your carriage toward them sall be such, as that
the world shall see we aim at nothing of priv^te rev^nge and animosities, but
that Justice may have a free course, and the Kingdom be ease^ and secured, by
disenabling such men [at least] from place of Judicature, who d^si^ing ^o
advantage and set up themselves and their party in a general confusion, have
endeavoure^ to put the Kingdom into a new flame of War, then which nothing is
more abhorrent to us. And in the same Declaration, spending the 42 and 43 pages
in most excellent ^xpressions, of the excellency and benefit of frequent and
successive Parliaments [totally new] and the mischief, bondage and vassallage
of the long continuance of any Parliament, in pa. 44. you say. And thus a firm
foundation being laid in the authority and constitution of Parliaments, for the
hoo^s at least of common and equitable Right and Freedom to our selves, and all
the free born people of this Land; we shall for our parts freely and cheerfully
commit our stock or share of interest in the Kingdom into this common bottom of
Parliaments, and though it may [for our particulars] go ill with us in one
voyage, yet we shall thus hope [if right be with us] to fare better IN another.

And in the last end of that transcendent Declaration, page 46. you conclude
thus: We have thus freely and clearly declared the depth and bottom of our
heart and desires in order to the Rights, Liberties and peace of the Kingdom;
wherein we app^al to all men, whether we seek any thing of advantage to our
selves, or any particular party whatever, or to the prejudice of the whole;
and whether the things we wish and seek for, do not equally concern and conduce
to the good of oth^r^ in common with our selves, according to the sincerity of
our desires and intentions (wherein as we have already found the concurrent
sense of the people in diverse Count^ies, by their petitions to the General,
expressing their deep resentment of these things, and pressing us to stand for
the interest of the Kingdom therein; so we shall w^sh and expect the unanimous
concurrence of all others, who are equally concerned with us in these things,
and wish well to the Public.

And in p 52. being writing to the Lord Mayor Aldermen, and Commons of the City
of London in Common Council assembled, it is thus said (...) We say from our
hearts that as our especial ends are the glory of God, and the good of this
whole Land, so our endea^ shall be to prose^te (...) without prejudice to the
^ing or well being of P^rliaments in general, the maintenance whereof we value
above our own lives or (as we have formerly said) of this Parli^nt (...), but
altogether in order to the good and Peace of this Nation, and with a most
tender regard to your City.

And in page 57, 58. its said that, In our last Representation it may appear
what our desires are, as Members of the Commonwealth in behalf of our selves,
and all others for the clee^ing, settling and securing of the rights liberties
and Peace of the Kingdom; for the justness, reasonableness necessity and
common concernment whereof unto all, we dare appeal to the whole Kingdom, and
to the world.

And in page 76 to the Lord Mayor of London, etc. it is said, 'That it is a
sudden and substantial settlement of the whole we desire in a general, safe,
and well grounded peace, and the establishment of such good Laws, as may duly
and readily render to every man their just rights and liberties; and for the
obtaining of these, not only our intentions had led us too, but we think that
all the blood, treasure and labor spent in this War, was for the accomplishing
those very things, which are of that concernment both to our selves and
posterity, that neither we nor they can live comfortably without them, and
therefore their help is much pressed for to bring things to a happy conclusion,
to the satisfaction of all honest men's expectation, and that in all our
undertakings we shall be found men of truth, fully and singly answering the
things we have held forth to the Kingdom in our several Declarations and
Papers, without by or base respects to any private end or interest whatsoever.

And in page 97. is recorded a notable Proposal to the Parliament from
Redding, July 18. 1647: which does sufficiently condem your late tyrannical
dealing with some of the very parties therein mentioned; The Proposal thus
follows; 'Wee do earnestly desire, That all persons imprisoned in England or
Dominion of Wales, (not for Delinquency in relation to the late War, but for
other pretended misdeameanours,) and whose (...) is not by the regulated course
of Law, but by Order from either Houses of Parliament, (or of Committees
flowing from them) may be put into a speedy regular and equitable way of
Trial, (or if the necessity of se^ing the general affairs of the Kingdom
admit not the^ present ^al*) then they may have present liberty (upon
reasonable security) to their appearance at a certain day, to answer what
shall be charged against them in a Legal way, and that when they should be
tried, if they appear wrongfully or unduly imprisoned, they may have reparation
according to their sufferings.

In particular we desire this may be done in behalf of L. Colonel John
Lilburn, Master John Musgrave, Master Overton and others (in their condition)
imprisoned in and about London. Read also more fully to this purpose p. 101.
105. 110. 112 11^. 128. 132 137. as also the large Remonstrance from Saint
Albones of the 16. of November 1648. page 6. 8 9 12. 14, 15. 22. 23. 29. 43.
45. 47. 48. 57. 62. but especially 65. 66. 67. 68. ^9.

But after this large (but yet profitable and necessary) digression, let us
seriously expostulate with you and put you in mind of your most wicked and
gross apostasy ( such as the world never see nor read of before, from men that
profess God and godliness in a strict manner, and would be reputed the
CHOICEST SAINT, in England) and cry out unto you with astonishment and
admiration; and thus interrogate your very consciences (where God alone ought
to (...) King) Oh hear you not the blood of our dear fellow Apprent^ces, and
of the rest of the good People of England, spilt for the redemption of this
inthraled Nation (especially since your first contest with the Parliament) cry
aloud in your ears and hearts (where ev^r you go) for vengeance upon you, the
peoples perfidious abusers, be^ers and destroyers? Oh (...) you bear them cry
out unto your very cons ences; O give our Fathers, our Mothers, our Brothers,
our Sisters, and others of our near and dear relations, the full and f^dy
accomplishment of all your forementioned inravishing promises and engagements,
by virtue of the power and ^ffi^ of which you stole away their heart and
spirits from all their relations, (...) and cheerfullnesse become sacrifices
for your assistance; for that (...) p^ncipal (...) that they that survived
might enjoy the full and (...) and engagements, for common Freedom. (...)
Justice and righteousensse upon the earth; Oh do you not hear their blood (...)
you? O ^ock not (nor dally with) God any longer, but without delay, give (...)
^mised p^e of all our blood, by the full and speedy payi^g of all y^r (...),
and engagements made unto God for that end, lest for all your perjury,
apostasy, and perfidiousnesse ^e create a mighty and unresistable spirit of
revenge amongst the people, and (...) together (their otherwise divided hearts,
in one, is one man to rise up in one ^y to destroy you, with a more fatal
scouring destruction then you have already destroyed others (yea the highest in
the Nation), pretendedly for oppressions, breach of Oaths, Faith and Covenants)
yea to sweep you away from the land of the living, with an overflow ^luge of
destruct^ the enslaved women about six or seven hundred years ago, did the
Danes in one night throughout England.

Oh do not your hearts at all rel^? (...) you consider this your forecited
unparalleld and horrible defection and apostasy, and not ^emble and be amazed,
and even confounded? is there less remorse of conscience in you then was in
Belshazzar, who at his seeing the hand writing upon the wall, changed his
countenance, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his loins
were loosed, and his knees smote one against another, (though otherwise in as
gre^ Jolity and prosperity as any of your selves or Officers) or ^ve you less
apprehension of the Majesty of God then was in the heathen Roman Governor F^,
who when he heard Paul reason or Preach of righteousness, temperance and
Judgment to come trembled and feared, and durst not proceed in fury against
him, although much ther^unto provoked by his adversaries, Acts 24. Sure all
sense and compunction of conscience is not totally departed from you; hear us
therefore in the earning bowels of love and kindness, we ^ent and bese^ch you
with patience, and do not abuse us for complaining and crying out, for the
knife has been very long at the very throats of our Liberties and Freedoms,
and our burdens are too great and to many for us, we are not able to ^ar them
and contain our selves, our oppressions are even ready to make us despair, ( or
forthwith to fly to the prime Laws of nature, viz. the next violent remedy at
hand, light it where it will, or upon whom it will) they are become as
devouring fire in our bones, ready to burn us up, rendering us desperate and
careless of our lives, prising those that are already dead, above those that
are yet living, who are rid of that pain and torment, that we do and must
endure, by sensibly seeing and beholding not only the dying, but the daily
burial of our native Liberties and Freedoms, that we care not what becomes of
us, seeing that we are put into that original state or chaos of confusion;
wherein lust is become a law, envy and malice are become laws, and the
strongest sword rules and governes all by will and pleasure; all our ancient
boundaries and landmarks, are pulled up by the roots, and all the ties and bonds
of humane society in our English horizon totally destroyed and exterpated Alas
for pity.

We had rather die then live this life of languishing death, in which our
Masters possess nothing (to buy themselves or us bread to keep us alive) that
they can call their own; therefore its no boot for us to serve out our times,
and continue at our drudging and toyling trades, while these oppressions,
cruelties and inhumanities are upon us, and the rest of the people; exposing
thereby the Nation not only to domestic broils, wars and blood-sheds (wherein
we are sure our bodies must be the principal b^ts) but to foreign Invasions
by France, Spain, Denmark, Sweathland, etc. as was well observed by our
endeared and faithful friends of the forementioned late treacherously defeated
party at Burford in their Book of the 20 of August, 1649. Entitled the
Levellers vindicated, or the Case of their 12 Troops truly stated, page 11. 12.
which we cannot but seriously recommend (with them) to your serious perusal
and judgment; and desire to know of you (but especially the private Soubliery
of the Generals Regiment of horse, who we understand had a hand in seasing upon
and plundering our true friends at Burford) whether you do own the abominable
and palpable treacherous dealings of your General and Lieutenant General
Cromwell and their perfidious Officers with them or no? (that so we may not
condemn the innocent with the guilty, and may know our friends from our foes)
as also to tell us, whether you do approve of the total defection of your Army
under which it now lies, from their Faith and solemn engagement made at
Newmarket-heath, June ^ 5. 1647. not one of those righteous ends in behalf of
the Parliament and people, on which your vow was made, being yet fulfilled or
obtained; but on the contrary (as we have before rehearsed); whole flood-gate
of tyrannies are let in upon us, and even over-whelme us; and whether you
justify all those actions done in the name of the Army upon your account, and
under pretext of that Engagement since the Engagement it self was broken, and
your Council of Agitators dissolved? And whether you will hold up your Swords
to maintain the total abolition of the peoples choicest interest of freedom,
viz. frequent and successive Parliaments, by an Agreement of the People, or
obstruct the annual succession? Whether you do allow of the late shedding of
the blood of war in time of peace, to the subversion of all our Laws and
Liberties? And whether you do countenance the extirpation of the fundamental
Freedoms of this Commonwealth? as their revocation or nullity of the Great
Charter of England, The Petition of Right, etc And whether you do assent to the
erection of Arbitrary prerogative Courts that have or shall overruled, or make
void, our ancient way of trials in criminal Cases, by a Jury of 12 men of the
neighborhood? and whether you will assist or join in the forcible obtrusion of
this Martial and Tyrannical Rule over us? Also whether you will fight against
and destroy those of our friends that shall endeavor the composure of our
differences, together with the procurement of our Freedoms and settlement of
our peace (your plenty and prosperity) accordingly as it was offered by the 4
Gentlemen prisoners in the Tower of London, upon the first of May 1649 (as a
peace offering to this Nation) by the Agreement of the People?

Lastly, We earnestly beseech you to acquaint us, whether from your hands (to
your power) we may expect any help or assistance in this our miserable
distressed condition, to the removal of those Iron bands and yoaks of
oppression, that have thus enforced us to complain, and address our selves
thus to your serious consideration.

For we cannot choose but acquaint you, that we are seriously resolved, through
the strength and assistance of God, (with all the interest we have in the
world) to adhere to the righteous things contained in our treacherously
defeated friends forementioned late vindication; very much approving of that
unparaleld expedient (of an agreement of the free people,) they propose in the
latter end thereof, for the firm settling of the peace, Liberties and Freedoms
of this distracted nation, which has so much justice, righteousness and
safety in it, that we hope it will in a very short time level all self
interests before it, and make it clearly appear to him that claims the greatest
personal share in the government of this Nation, that there is no way to
obtain the true love of the understanding English people (without which he will
never obtain his desired Crown) but by a cheerful, hearty and real promotion
of such principles therein contained, as do sufficiently tie his hands from
cutting the peoples throats, at his will and pleasure, the endeavoring of
which, exposed his father to that fatal end that befell him; which may be a
seasonable caveat to all Princes etc. to take heed of that d^sperate rock, viz.
the attempting to govern the people by will, and not by Law; by force, and not
by love; the only and alone durable and permanent tie or bond amongst the sons
of men; We say that expedient of an Agreement of the free people appears to us
to have so much ^uity righteousness and common safety in it, that we are
resolved to bury all bypast DISTASTS at the greatest of Englishmen that shall
heartily and cordially, sign and put forth their power and interest, to
promote the establishment of the principalls therein contained; and in the
ADHERING TO, AND STANDING BY, all such as shall be in any danger for walking in
such paths, we shall through the strength of the Lord God Omnipotent (to the
uttermost of our power and abilities) resolvedly hazard our lives and all that
is dear to us.

For the effectual promotion of which said Agreement we are necessitously
compeld, to resolve in close union to join our selves, or our Commissioners
(chosen for that end) in Counsel with our foresaid Burford friends, or their
Commissioners, and to resolve to run all hazards, to methodize all our honest
fellow Prentises, in all the Wards of London, and the out-Parishes, to choose
out their Agents to join with us or ours: to write Exhortative Epistles, to all
the honest hearted freemen of England, in all the particular Countries thereof,
to erect several Councels amongst themselves, out of which we shall desire (and
exhort them) to choose Agents or Commissioners (empowered and entrusted by them)
speedily to meet us and the Agents of all our (and the Agreement of the People)
adherents at London, resolvedly to consider of a speedy and effectual method;
and way how to promote the Election of a new and equal Representative or
Parliament by the Agreement of the free People, seeing those men that now sit
at Westminster, and pretendedly style themselves the Parliament of England, and
who are (as they say (although most falsely) in the Declaration for a Free
State, dated March 17. 1648. p. 27. entrusted, and authorizedly the consent of
all the People of England whose Representatives ^ey are) make it their chiefest
and principallest work, continually to part and share amongst themselves, all
the great, rich, and profitablest places of the Nation, as also the Nations
public treasure and Lands, and will not ease our intolerable oppressions, no
nor so much as of late receive our Popular Petitions having upon Thursday last,
August 23. 1649. rejected that most excellent of Petitions re^dy at their door
to be presented to them by diverse honest men (our true hearted neighbors of
Surrey) the true Copy of which for the worth of it although it be at large
already printed in Friday Occurences and the Tuesday Moderate,) we desire here
to insert.

To the supreme Authority of this Nation, the Commons of England assembled in
Parliament: The humble Petition of the oppressed of the County of Surrey, which
have cast in their Mite into the Treasury of this Commonwealth.
SHOWS,
THat as the Oppressions of this Nation in time foregoing this Parliament were
so numerous and burdensome, as will never be forgotten; so were the hopes of
our deliverance by this Parliament, exceeding great, and full of confidence,
which as they were strengthened by many Acts of yours in the beginning,
especially toward conscientious people, without respect unto their judgments
or opinions; so did the gratitude of the wel-minded people, exceed all
presidents or example, sparing neither estate, limb, liberty, or life, to make
good the authority of this honorable house, as the foundation and root of all
just Freedom, although we many times observed (to our grief) some proceedings
holding resemblance rather with our former bondage: yet did we impute the same
to the troublesomness of the times of War, patiently and silently passing them
over, as undoubtedly hoping a perfect remedy, so soon as the Wars were ended:
But perceiving our expectations in some particulars frustrated: and considering
some late dealings with some of our friends, etc. the consideration of which
lies so heavy on our spirits, that for prevention thereof, we conceive our
selves bound in conscience and duty to God, to set before you once more, the
general grievances of the Commonwealth, and the earnest desires of the
ingenuous and well-minded people.

First, That the Petition of the Eleventh of September last, and the Agreement
of the People may be reassumed, and the particulars thereof speedily established.

Secondly, we most earnestly beg, with many other of your faithful friends in
all the Counties of England that that most irksome and intolerlable oppression
of Tithes, which is retained in no Reformed Church, nevertheless more firmly
established then ever by your Ordinance for treble damages, made in the
Parliaments corruption, and yet no Act against it, which causes our hearts to
be discouraged, and brought into much fear and doubt of the removal of these
and other bondages, by this Representative: Wherefore we cannot pass it by,
but again entreat, that the Ordinances for Tithes may be speed ly revoked, and
that a more equal way of maintenance be provided for the public Ministry.

Thirdly, That all proceedings in law may be in English, that a short time may
be inserted for the trial of all causes, and that by Twelve men of the
Neighborhood, and that none may be debarred of Freedom to plead his own or his
Neighbors Cause, [as by Law any man may and ought t^ do, as clearly appears by
the Statute of 28 Ed 1 chapter 11.] before any court of Justice, although no
Lawyer. And that no member of your House be suffered to plead as a Lawyer,
whilst a member thereof.

Fourthly, That some course may be taken for the future, to pa^ the Army; not
l^ing such intolerable Burdens and Taxes on the people which we are not able
to ^ar, And so we shall for ever stand by you, and ^ll Representatives for the
freedom of this Nation, as formerly. Desiring that we may obtain speedily a new
and equal Representative.

We say, considering what is before premised* we are necessitated and compeld
to do the utmost we can for our own preservations; and for the preservation
of the Land of our Nativity; and never (by popular petitions) address our
selves to the men sitting at Westminster any mo^e, or to take any notice of
them, then ^s of so many Tyrants and Usurpers, and for time to come to hinder
(as much and as far as our poor despised interest will extend to) all others
whatsoever (...) subscribing or presenting any more popular petitions to them:
And only now, as our last Paper-r^fuge, mightily cry out to each other, of our
intolerabl^ oppressions in Letters and Remonstrances signed in the behalf, and
by the appointment o^ ^l the rest, by some of the stoutest and st^est amongst
us that we hope will never apostatize, but be able through the strength of God,
to lay down their very lives for the maintaining of that which they set their
hands to.

You our fellow-Countrymen (the private Soldiers of the Army) alone, being the
isntrumental authors of your own slavery and ours; therefore as there is any
bowels of men in you, any love to your Native Country, Kindred, friends or
relations, any spark of conscience in you, any hopes of glory or immortality
in you, or any pity, mercy, or compassion, to an inslaved, undone, perishing,
dying people, O help, help! save and redeem us from total vassalage and
slavery, and be no more like brute beasts, to fight against us or our friends,
your loving and dear brethren after the flesh: to your o^n vassalage as well as
ours.

And as an assured pledge of your future cordialnesse to us (and the true and
real liberties of the Land of your Nativitie) we beseech and beg of you, ( but
especially those amongst you that subscribed the solemn engagement at New
market heath the fifth of June 16^^) speedily to chuse-out from amongst your
selves, Two of the ablest and constantest faithful men amongst you in each
Troop and Company, now at last, (by corresponding (...) with other, and with
your honest friends in the Nation) to consider of some effectual course
(bey^nd all (...) and cheat^) to accomplish the real end of all your
engagements and fightings, ^iz. the settling of the Liberties and Freedoms of
the people, which can never permanently be done, but upon the sure foundation
of a POPULAR AGREEMENT: who (viz. the people) in J^stice, gratitude, and common
equity, cannot choose but voluntarily and largely make better provision for
your future subsistence, ( by the payment of your ARREARS) then ever your
Officer^, or this pret^nded Parliament intends, or you can rationally expect
from them; witness, their cutting off three parts of your Arreares in four
(...) for Free Quarter, and then necessi^ating abundance of your
Fellow Soldiers (now cashiered, etc.) to s^ll their Debenters at two shillings
six pence, three shillings and at most four shillings per l. by means of
which, you that keep your Debenters being necessitated to vie with the greatest
bidder, in the purchase of the late Kings Lands; they are able ^o give above ^
years purchase, for that you cannot give 8 years purchase (...); and if you
will not give with the most* you must have no Land, so that the most of your
Debenters are likely to prove waste papers, and those that purchase will have
but a slippery security of their possessions, by reason of general discontents
amongst all sorts of people, and particularly by so extraordinarily disengaging
and cheating so many Soldiers as they have done, of their just expected
recompense of reward.

And also, as a further demonstration of the cordialnesse of your hearts to us,
OUR BURFORD FRIENDS, and your own and our Liberties; we desire you to take some
speedy course for the faithful restoring to the right Owners, all such Horses,
Money, Clothes, etc. as you, or any of you, plundered or stole from our true
friends, (cheated and defeated) at Burford; and publish some kind of
Demonstration of your or any of your remorse of Conscience for your being
isntrumental in destroying of them there, that stood for your good, freedoms,
and ARREARS, as much, (and as well) as their own, especially considering they
have by their foresaid Vindication made it evident and apparent (and we
understand they are ready face to face to prove) That both your General, and
Lieutenant General Cromwell broke their solemn faith with them, and
treacherously surprised them; and so dealt worse and more vildly with them,
then ever they did with the worst of Cavaliers, with whom in that kind they
never broke faith with, in their lives; but more especially we desire the last
forementioned thing at your hands; because upon that Traiterous and wicked
defeat of those our true Friends, (and wilfully murdering of three of them)
that really stood for the Nations interest, Liberties, and Freedoms, your
General and Cromwell, with the rest of their faction* made a most transcendent
Feast, to insult over the Liberties and freedoms of the servants of the most
h^gh God, as though by that most vile act, they had subdued and buried all the
Liberties of the Nation in eternal oblivion, and FOILED the Lord of life and
glory himself, from distilling any m^re Spirit of Courage and Resolution into
any, to stand for them; and in that wickedest of Feasts, not only in a great
measure imitated Belshazzar, Dan. 5. That made a great Feast to a thousand of
his Lords, and fetched out the vessels, that by the spoil of the people of
God, his father Nebuchadnezzar had got out of the Temple of the Lord, and drank
wine in them, and praised the gods of gold and of silver, of brass, of iron,
of wood, and of stone; but also imitated the greatest of the enemies of Christ,
who at the slaying of the two witnesses, Rev. 11. rejoiced over them, and made
merry, and sent gifts one to another (as in Gold and Silver plate, etc. was
most largely done to your General Fairfax and Lieutenant Genesis Cromwell) the
reason of which is there rendered, which is, because the two Prophets (of Truth
and Justice) tormented them that dwelt on the earth; but with comfort and joy
we cannot but observe the next words to them, which is, That within a little
season after, the Spirit of life from God entered into them, (as we hope and
doubt not, but it will abundantly now do upon the true standers for justice
and righteousness amongst men) and they stood upon their feet, and great fear
fell upon them that saw them, and great Earthquakes followed, in the nick of
which is proclamation made, that the Kingdoms of this world are become the
Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ^; and he shall reign for ever and ever;
unto which we heartily say, Amen, Amen. So with our hearty and true love
remembered to you all, expecting your, or some of your speedy answer, we commit
you to God, and rest

Your faithful, though abused Countrymen. Signed in the behalf of our selves,
and the unanimous consent of the Agents of the Youngmen and Apprentices of the
City of London, that love and approve of the Agreement of the People, dated May
1. 1649. and the Vindication of the late defeated men at Burford, entitled,
The Leveller, vindicated. Charles Collins William Trabret Ed. Waldegrove Ed.
Stanley Nicholas Blowd Anthony Bristlebolt Steven Smith Thomas Frisby. William
White John Floyd.

London this 29. August, 1649.
FINIS.

