A JUST REPROOF TO Haberdashers-Hall: OR, An Epistle writ by Lieut. Colonel
John Lilburn, July 30. 1651. to four of the Commissioners at Haberdashers Hall,
viz. Mr. James Russel, M. Edward Winsloe, M William Mollins, and M. Arthur
Squib, wherein is set forth their unjust and unrighteous dealing in several
Cases; with the relations of the said John Lilburn, and their Captiving their
understandings to the Tyrannical will of Sir Arthur Haslerigge, who has most
unjustly endeavored a long time together, the exterpation of the Family of the
said John Lilburn.
Isai 29.20, 21. For the terrible one is brought to naught, and the Scorner is
consumed, and all that watch for iniquity are cut off.

That make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproves
in the gate, and turn aside the just for a thing of naught.


GENTLEMEN,
MY serious eyeing and beholding for diverse months together, your most unjust,
partial, and visible combining way of proceedings against some of my nighest
relations, has filled me with so much detestation and indignation against your
injustice, that my heart has even b^^end within me, and I have with my self
had much ado to forbear thus long to speak more plainly to you by my pen, then
was safe for me to do at your bar (although I have there, as you all very
well know, been very free.) But yet to avoid if it were possible, by all
rational and ingenuous men, to be judged turbulent, and irrational. I have
rather bridled my passion, and indignation, and in a quiet, sober and moderate
way, endeavored by Petitions to the Parliament to ease and redress the
grievances of my self and my relations: but some of you with violence,
reproaches, and much falsehoods interposing to hinder our just expected remedy
(the particulars of which, by and by I shall more fully ^int unto you) which
has had too great an influence to retard our just proceedings: so that
although my self, and others have done what in us lies, for diverse days
bypast, to get two petitions full of justice and truth read against you, yet
cannot: and although you your selves directed, and bid me petition against you,
yet finding that you are to the purpose netled at my putting in execution your
own desires, and withal behind my back to the purpose reproach me, and do
what in you lies to bereave me of all ordinary and legal means to help my self,
and my relations, and thereby force me to betake my self to extraordinary,
which is my pen, my last and unwilling refuge. In the name, strength, and power
of the Lord God Almighty, have at you, and if, I perish, I perish: and
therefore before I come to the main combat, give me leave to send out these
Forlornes.

First, That I plead against Sir Arthur Haslerigge (a man unto whom, as to me
by your actions you seem to have sold your selves to be his slaves, and vassals
in all cases whatever) who I do over, has endeavored for these several years
together, the extirpation and total destruction of my whole Family, and al
those in the County where they live that have wished them well, and that for no
other cause but for their honesty and integrity, and because they will not be
his professed slaves as other people are, all which I shall to you and the
world endeavor to demonstrate thus;

First my Father Richard Lilburn, and my Uncle, George Lilburn, Esquires, with
all their sons, have been well affected to the Parliament, and all of them that
have been fit for soldiers, freely and faithfully adventured their lives for
the Parliament, without spot on blemish, save my unfortunate youngest brother,
Henry Lilburn, who yet visibly was honest enough in the eyes of his chief
Commanders, till he came under the command of Sir Arthur Haselrig; and my
Father and Uncle in the Kings time before the Parliament, were the only two
Gentlemen in all the County of Durham that ever I could hear of, that durst
oppose the Kings Will and Pleasure in the point of shipmoney; and the Bishop of
Durham and his under Priests called Deans and Chapters will and pleasure, in
point of innovations; and when the Parliament came with all their strength
adhered to them, and were not willing to be rid upon, nor implicitly led
against their understandings by the power of any great ones whatsoever, that
under the Parliament had the chief Government of the County of Durham, it being
a Bastard as it were to all the Counties of the Nation: having yet never
enjoyed that right and privilege to send either Knights or Burgesses to
Parliament, to represent it or speak for it, and therefore was subject always
to have some great one or other to domineer over it: And upon the late contest
betwixt the Parliament and Army, my eldest brother Col. Robert Lilburn, was
thought the fittest by the chief Officers of the Army, to be sent down into his
own Country to secure New Castle for the interest of the Army, which he did
effectually and honorably like a Soldier; and whilst he staid there, governed
it in Justice, honesty and peace; but was in short time privately undermined and
worm-eaten out of his governmentship by Sir Arthur Haselrig, who as may be
easily demonstrated, had itching fingers after some poor Ahabs Vineyard or
other, and it may be in his own thoughts could neither by Law nor equity come
by it, unless he could attain to be governor of that Town, and in pomp and
glory with his Soldiers round about him, sit as Judge and party in his own
case, to over awe thereby if it were possible, both Jury and Judge; that so by
interest and power he might get that, which before neither by Law nor equity he
could obtain; all or the most part of which, was to the purpose shortly
manifested in poor Mr. Collinwoods case diverse hundred pounds per-annum thick,
and then to disinable him and his posterity for ever, to lift up their heads
against Sir Arthur. when times as to him shall mend, to recover their
Inheritance again, he got him put into the Act for sale of Delinquents estates,
for all the rest behind; but as to me it seems, being by my self and Mr. John
Musgrave's pens pursued for his injustice, he thought it policy to be the
means of getting him out again, least it might be made use of by either of us
to his suine, but yet in the words of the Order there is such a clause as may
be a sufficient rod over the Collinwoods back to keep him in awe, for so much
as talking of Sir Arthurs unjust proceedings with him; I say in order to this
and the like my brother unawares, was by Sir Arthur undermined, and thrust out
of his government without (as he has often told me) as ever having so much as
a complement from Sir Arthur for it; and my brother like a soft and quiet
spirited man gives way unto it, without so much as one Ruffle.

And my Father and Uncle having had former acquaintance with Sir Arthur, and
judged him so Godly, just and honest, as the like could scarce be found in
England, and my Uncle having high obligations upon him to Sir Arthur for being
so zealous for him in 1641. in delivering his Petition to the then House of
Commons for reparations for his foresaid sufferings, they did not regard the
aforesaid affront done to my eldest brother, but bless themselves in the
happiness they were like to enjoy, by having so good a man as they then reputed
Sir Arthur to be, to be their Governor; and so made it their work to be
serviceable (with all respect) to him and the public interest, which they
conceived to be concerned in him, and having an extraordinary fair visible
Correspondency with him, they took the opportunity some years ago, to write a
Letter to him for a zealous Parliamentiet (which is something rate in that
county) and to entreat him to fix his eye upon him for such a place, but upon
the reading the Letter, it seems Sir Arthur sweld, and told him to this effect,
that if he expected good from him, he must not be so fixed to the two Lilburns,
for says he, they are stiff obstinate men, and opposed old Sir Henry Vane, and
Sir William Armin, and in time will oppose me: But the man being understanding,
kept this many months in his own breast, from my Father and Uncle, till now of
late by accident it was told to the one of them; but they not knowing the
ranker of Sir Arthurs heart against them, went on in their old honest blunt way
(for so I shall call it till I see something fairly proved against them) in
doing their duty without favor or affection, and being something rigid, and
not ensie to be byased in their employment, Sir Arthur had a mind to have my
Uncle George as he was a Surveyer of Bishops lands, to make him some reprisals
for his great Lordship of Bishop Auckland, which in conscience he could not say
Amen unto; upon which grew he first clear demonstration of a visible grudge
betwixt them: and the second was occasioned by Sir Arthurs Steward one Mr.
Colson, who was also a Surveyer of the same lands, who counterfeting my Uncles
hand, upon which my Uncle complained against him as a forgerer; whereupon the
said Colson arrested him in an action of some thousands of pounds, and cast him
into the Counter prison at London, supposing he could not have got bail for
such a sum; in which he was mistaken but never durst to this day declare
against my Uncle, lest in the conclusion it should have cost the said Colson
his ears for his said Forgery. The third visible occasion was about the coming
in of Hamilton, Sir. Arthur endeavored to get my Uncle to join with him in
laying on 4 s. per Chaldron Excise upon coals, and for that purpose sent for
him from Sunderland, a coal town, where my Uncle had a little power, as well as
Sir Arthur had at New Castle a great one, and pressed him to do the one at one
place, as he did intend to do the other at the other place; but my Uncle being
a wary understanding old man, he could not nor would not do it, unless Sir
Arthur could show him the Parliaments commands for so doing, saying that if he
did it without Authority, it might be the ruin of him and all his; but Sir
Arthur replied to this effect, The Parliament was a base wicked Parliament, and
he would do it though he died for it; and when he went about to lay it on, the
seamen demanding the sight of his Commission, he clapped his hand upon the hilt
of his sword, and told them that was his Commission, and with that he would
justify it. Thus much for my forlorns: Now to the main and close joining of
the battle of Sir Arthurs clear and visible discovery of himself against my
Uncle.

The fourth visible heart-burning within my cognizance arises from this
occasion, that Mr. John Blackston late a Parliament man, being a Prebends son,
and being allied to diverse of the great Malignants in our Country, as Dr.
Cosens his brother in Law, and several others like him: he very much endeavors
to protect them from Sequestration; and he finding my Father and Uncle (who
were both Committee men made by Ordinance of Parliament dated April 1643. as
well as himself) to be somewhat stiff, and that they would not sell their souls
and consciences for greatness sake and relations sake; therefore did Mr. Thomas
Shadforth, the said Mr. Blackstons brother in Law, pick a hole in my Uncles
coat, for signing two Warrant at New Castle in 1642. when he was under force
and power, on purpose to save himself from Sequestration, he being then
charged, and it proved against him for a Cavalier in the first War, all which
my Uncle in his printed Remonstrance to the Parliament, dated March 18. 1649,
has set forth; and Mr. John Blackston all that while sufficiently and
groundlesly reproaching my Uncle in the then House of Commons for a notorious
Delinquent Cavalier; and thereby gradually got him turned out of those places
of trust the Parliament had reposed in him, that thereby he might the easilyer
trample upon him: and was not only content to pay my Uncle, but also fell upon
me, as I have punctually declared in my Epistle o^ the seave^^^ of April 1651.
Writ to Master John Price, Sir Arthurs P^n-Agent; which he durst never answer
to this day; to which Epistle for this particular, I refer you and the
inquisitive Reader, where you and he shall find sufficient foul play offered
by Sir Arthur. But this business at the last coming to a Committee of
Parliament, Sir Arthur it may be finding it was advantageous to him to join
with the said Mr Blakiston to crush my Uncle, that so he might be rid of him
and his opposition, and thereby to the boot ove aw (if it were possible) my
Eather, to a slavish and beastly compliance with him, he did more then ordinary
(being Chairman to the said Committee) appear against my said Uncle; but I did
to his face sufficiently tell him of his unworthy doings in the Country in the
said case: but being my self committed to the Tower about that time, viz. upon
the 28. of March, 1649. although then Sir Arthur could not fully have his will
of my said Uncle at that time, for the Committee voted him a clear and honest
man, and ordered to Report him so to the House; yet I being so in prison, Sir
Arthur then thought to the purpose to crush to pieces, and root up by the roots
our whole Family, and in order to that fell upon my bones to the purpose, to
seek my total destruction, which is particularly touched in that Book proved at
my Trial to be mine, saving the Printers Errata's which were many, called A
preparative to an Hue and Cry after Sir Arthur Haselrig. page, 4, 5 7, 8. and
particularly in the case of my money, which was mine by diverse Votes, Orders,
and Ordinances of Parliament; yet although the Council of State imprisoned me
for Treason, and the Parliament approved thereof, yet they were so just and
righteous, as not to order my estate to be seized upon, till I was convicted of
some crime; yet Sir Arthur Haselrig did assume that power to himself, as
without authority, either from Parliament or Council of State, to sease upon,
or stop and destroy the current of my Ordinance of Parliament, so that I could
not get a penny of almost 2500 l. in the day of my adversity, to buy me, my
wife and three little babes a bit of bread; of which doings of his being
certified by my Father, I confess it did not drive me into a little rage and
passion, and put those provocations upon me, that had like to have been my ruin
and destruction, and I think Sir Arthur exposed me to as sad a condition as any
man in the world could be exposed to, by his being isntrumental to get me into
prison for Treason, and then close imprisoned, and my Friends and relations
kept from me, and no allowance then from any: And besides all this, to keep all
my own Estate from me, and call me Traitor and Villain to my Father, when he
demanded some of my Money for the supportation of me, my wife and children, then
in the greatest distress that it was possible for any people in the world to be
in: O the height of cruelty and bloodiness in this Sir Arthur! Nay, to add to
this, that thus to provoke and necessitate me, and then at Durham to threaten
and tell my Father, He would come up to London to get me hanged for crying out
of that which really and truly arose from his unsufferable oppressing of me;
yea, and I have from good hands been told, such an influence Sir Arthur had
upon my trial for my Life, That after the Scaffolds were begun to be built in
Guildhall, my Trial was delayed a week for his coming to Town, and ^o lay his
model for my ruin. And after that by the special providence of God I was
freed from his bloodthirstinesse, he kept my Money in his, and his Treasurers
hands so long, without letting me have a penny of it to support me, being then
at liberty, and thereby exposed to the utmost extremity in a manner that could
be, that I was in my own spirit compelled to tell his Clerk, Mr Pearson, at
the George in Chanell-Row, That his Master (Sir Arthur) had exposed me, by
keeping my Money from me, to the utmost extremity, and have it from him I must
and would, although it cost me my heart blood; and so I desired him before
witness to tell him; And that if he thought to keep it while I sued him at Law,
or complained to the House of him, it was a vain thing for him to think so, for
he was too great for me that way to encounter with, and I too much under a
cloud in such a way to expect any remedy from him; and besides, I neither had
Money nor time to spend upon him; and therefore as he loved his Masters life
and welfare, I entreated him to tell him, I wore a good Dagger by my right
side, and a good Rapier by my left side, and if within 8 days he did not send
me all my Money, or give me some rational satisfaction, let him look to
himself, for after that day, wherever I met him, I would pay him for all
together, though I were cut in a thousand pieces on the very place: For if
against a thief that sets upon me upon the Highway to rob me of a little Money,
it was lawful for me to draw my sword, and in the defense of my propriety to
kill him; much more was it lawful for me to do the like to him that would
(most arbitrarily and tyrannically without all shadow or color of Law) take all that ever I had, and thereby expose me, my wife and children to famish and
perish: And in case by my fair dealing with him, by telling him before hand of
my intention, he got me committed to prison, and thereby thought to disenable
me to deal with him, he would be very much mistaken, for thereby the hand
would only be changed: Whereupon, within the time limited, (to the best of my
remembrance) I had, and received a Paper or Warrant, signed by Sir Arthur and
Colonel George Fenwick to the Treasurer at Newcastle, to pay me or my Assigns
about 800 l. which I accordingly received: And at the Lord General Cromwels
coming out of Ireland, he was Nobly pleased to get me a grant of selling Lands
upon Me for the residue of my Money; for which most noble favor I must and do
heartily declare and acknowledge my self highly obliged to him.

But I must acquaint you that when Sir Arthur had got me to prison, and robbed
me of my estate, for no better I can call it, although he should tell me my
father was one of the Committee, where it was disposed of; yet I must tell him,
his will was, and is a Law to all the Committees in the North, and so absolute
he is amongst them, that some of them have told me, he will neither suffer them
to vote, nor stare a question, but resolve all himself, and bid the Clark enter
it, for so it must be; I say, when he had got me fast, (as is before declared)
he then thought all was his own, and finding my Uncle the heaviest man left, he
falls point blank upon him, about the Colliery at Harraton, and thinks to do
two works at once. viz. 1. Sufficiently to disgrace and impoverish my Uncle
thereby. And then 2. To invest Wray a Popish Delinquent in the title of it,
that so from him he might either purchase it for a song; or if that could not
be, get him put into the Act for sale, as he has done some others, and so get
his own surveyers put in to survey it, and by his agents either drown the
Colliery, that it might be esteemed but little worth at the surveying it, or
else over awe them to make what reprizals he pleased, (as in the like he has
partly done already) that so it might be his for a toy; for I believe scarce
all the Lands and Collieries in the County of Durham will satisfy his greedy
appetite; and therefore in order to the accomplishment of both his foresaid
ends, he does with force and violence, in the most tyranicallest way, that ever
was done in England, sequester the said Colliery, in or about Sept. 1649.

And in process of time, Mr. Primate Landlord to my uncle, etc. Appeals to the
Commissioners at Haberdashers-hall, in these words.

To the Honorable Commissioners, for compounding, etc.
The humble Petition of Josiah Primate Citizen, and Letherseller of London.
Shows,
THAT Your Petitioner being possessed lawfully of three parts in four to be
divided of all the Cole Mines in Harraton in the County of Durham, for diverse
years yet to come, by virtue of a Lease thereof made by Sir John Hedworth
Knight, in December. 4. Caroli, upon good consideration for 41. years, and by
mean assignments now come unto your Petitioner: And notwithstanding that your
Petitioner, and those under whom he claims, has still sithence quietly
wrought in the said Cole Mines, and enjoyed three parts thereof, till Aug.
1649. And though the same three parts are notoriously known to be your
Petitioners, yet has the Committee of Durham sequestered all the said Cole
Mines, as supposing the same to belong unto one Thomas Wray Esquire a
Delinquent, who in truth was never possessed nor enjoyed more then the fourth
part, which your Petitioner claims not.

And therefore your Petitioner humbly prays, That he may be admitted to make
good his title to the said three parts; which being so done that he may be
restored to the Possession, and benefit thereof: And that in the mean while
upon security given to answer the profits to the state, in case your Petitioner
has no right in regard by the oath annexed, it appears, he, and those under
whom he claims have been in Possession these 11. years and above, he may be
admitted to work in the said Cole Mines.

And he shall pray, etc. Josiah Primate.
Copia vera exam. John Leech.

Upon the Reading of which Petition, the Commissioners made an Order, the copy
of which thus follows:

By the Commissioners for compounding, etc.
12. Junii, 1650.
Upon the Petition of Josiah Primat, Citizen and Leatherseller of London,
(hereunto annexed) it is Ordered, That it be referred to Mr Reading to peruse
the said Petition, and to report the state of the case to us.

Copia vera, Exam. Jo. Leech.

A copy of which Order, being (it seems) sent to Durham, an answer is returned
unto it, the copy of which thus follows:

Gentlemen,
IN answer to your Order dated 12. Iunii, 1650. granted upon the Petition of Mr
Josiah Primat, we have here enclosed sent you the true state of that Case,
concerning Harraton Colliery, and the States interest in it; which we conceive
is very clear: We are (...) Gent'

Your affectionate friends and servants, Arthur Haselrige. Francis Wren. Tho.
Delavall.
Copia Vera exam. John Leech.


Which enclosed certificare, or state of Harraton Colliery, being one of the
notorious false ones, that I think can be made, and contains in it the sum of
the ranker of Sir Arthur's heart, and the ultimate of what can be said by him
against my Uncle; I shall here insert the copy of it, which thus follows;

Dunelm.
UPon the sixth day of August 1649. Thomas Wray of Beanish in this County of
Durham Esquire, made complaint to the Committee of Sequestrations for this
County, that Mr. George Lilburn and Mr. George Gray, two of the said Committee,
had entered into and possessed themselves of his Colieries, and several houses
thereunto belonging in Harraton, and that his estate and coliery in Harraton
was sequestered for his being a Recusant, and for his being in Newcastle when it
was the enemies Garrison; and that the said Mr. Lilburn and Mr. Gray had raised
great sums of money out of the same, and converted it to their own proper
uses, which ought to have been paid unto the State; and that they still hold
possession thereof, to the great loss and prejudice of the Commonwealth. And
upon examination of Witnesses upon But I am sure their Depositions are no where
to be found; Sir Arthur it seems not daring to trust Mr. Gilpm the Clerk to
take them, but only his own Secretary, who was no Record-keeper of that
Committee And what they were, or where they are, is not to be found.
Oath before the Committee i^ appeared, that in the year 1644. Sir William
Armyn and the rest of the Commissioners of Parliament, sequestered the coliary
of Harraton then in the sole possession of the said Mr. Wrey, and sold one
thousand pounds worth of coals that was upon the Staythes And further, that the
Committee of Sequestrations for this county granted an Order in the year 1645.
upon the petition of Mrs Wray wife to the said Tho. Wray, (Mr. Geo. Lilburn and
Mr. Geo. Greys hands being at the said Order) for letting the said coliery at
Harraton to one Pearson for the payment of the creditors of Mr. Wray. And the
said Pearsen was to give an account thereof to the Committee. Which Pearson did
enter into the Colery This is the grossest untruth that can be told: For
Pearson never took the said Colery.
accordingly. But it does not appear to us that the said Pearson was ever
called to give any account to the Committee. And it further appeared to us,
that the said coliery continued to be wrought by Mr. Wray's Agents for his
use, till June in the year 1647, And that about April in the year 1647. Mr.
George Lilburne and Mr. George Gray sent to the aforesaid Thomas Wray to desire
a meeting with him to treat about buying out his estare in the said coliery.
Accordingly they met at Ferryboat about Easter in the year 1647. Upon their
meeting Thomas Wray told the said Mr. Lilburne and Mr. Gray, that they very
well knew that coliery to be of very great value, and that it was worth above
3000. l. per annum, and that he was out in moneys for that colery at least
16000. l. yet in respect of the condition he was now in, he was contented to
sell his whole estate in it for 5000. l. That he would have one thousand pound
paid down for his own use, and one thousand more to stop the clamors of his
creditors; and that he would take further time to consider what days to
require the payments of the other three thousand pounds upon. It was affirmed
that Mr. George Lilburne did then say, That for the payment of the first 2000
l. they should not differ; and that Mr. Wray having there his Evidences for
that colery, they being viewed by Mr. George Lilburne and Mr. George Gray, Mr.
Lilburne told the said Mr. wray that he did not think that Mr. Wray could have
produced so clear a Title for 7 parts of 8 in that colery; but for the 8 part
he was not so fully satisfied. Mr. Wray then told him, that there was one
Comadale that pretended a Title to that 8 part; but he conceived that he had
sufficient to make it good, that that part was in him also. But told Mr.
Lilburne that howsoever he knew Comadale would part with his interest upon very
easy terms. There was then a new day appointed for another meeting for Mr.
Wray's appointing the other days for the payment of the 3000. l. And Mr.
Lilburn in his going from that place, he met with one Mr. Swain, and the said
Mr. Lilburne told him that he was agreed with Mr. Wray for the said colery. A
little before the appointed day of meeting, great rains fell, and the Rivers
rose so high, that it hindered the meeting. Immediately after the said Mr.
Lilburne and Mr. Gray went to London, and made some agreement with the said Mr.
Commondale about the 8 part as they pretend but nothing shown to make it good.
And coming down in June following, they entered into and possessed themselves
of the whole colery aforesaid, and it has been wrought by them ever since to
their own uses and benefits.

And for that it plainly appeared unto the Committee that the Colery This is as
false as can be: For the nine and five quarter Seams of Coals were not in work
at all in 1644, 1645, nor 1646, nor never was sequestered by any in the world
till 1649. that Sir Arthur by his Will and Sword sequestered it.
was sequestered by Sr. William Armine in the year 1644. and that it had been
solely in the possession of Mr. Wray and his Agents three years before that,
and that it was let by the Committee of Sequestrations in the year 1645. And
that no other had claimed any interest in it until Mr. George Lilburn and Mr.
George Gray, two of the Committee possessed themselves of it. And that there
had been no Order made either by the Lords and Commons for Sequestrations, or
the Committee of Sequestrations in the County, nor that there had been any
Authority for the divesting and dispossessing of the State of their interest,
and that Mr. Wray as being a Recusant and Delinquent, was incapable of
composition, the Committee made this Order.

Decimo tertio die Augusti. 1649.

Upon hearing of Thomas Wray, George Lilburne, and George Gray Esquires, It
appeared to this Committee, that in the year 1644. Sir William Armine did
sequester the Colliery at Harraton, belonging to Mr. Wray for the use of the
State, and that the faid Colliery was then wrought for the use of the said Mr.
Wray and his assigns, and for no other, and that the same was since let by
this Committee in the year 1645. for one whole year to one Pearson: And that it
does not appear that the sequestration was not at any time taken off: It is
therefore thought fit, and so ordered by the said Committee, that the
sequestration shall be continued upon the said Colliery for the use of the
State, and that all those, who have had any use or profit of the said Colliery,
since the same was sequestered, shall forthwith make their accounts, that it may
appear what profits have been made thereof in that time, and immediately after
the making this order, Mr. George Lilburne then sitting at the Committee, and
being one of the Committee, desired that he might have time given him to make
his title good, to the estate he claimed in that Colliery, the Committee bad
him to appoint his time, he then desired a full month, and it was granted:
Thereupon he went to London, and by the aforeappointed day he brought down with
him one Mr. Levit, and Mr. Josiah Primatt; who with their Council went to the
Committee: The Council being then put upon it, to show what title either Mr.
Levitt, Mr. Primatt, or Mr. Lilburne had, affirmed that Mr. Wray had gotten
their Evidences, and would have had the Committee to have compelled him to have
produced his title: The Committee then replied, that the matter was of very
great concernment to the State, the Colliery being worth 3000. l. per Annum.
and that Mr. Lilburne had made of it, after he had put the State out of
possession at least 15. l. per diem, for about a year together, as they were
informed by those that knew it very well, and that they durst not be sofalse to
their trust, as when the State had been in possession above three years, to
produce Evidences to divest the State: and what they desired was such a thing,
as was never heard in any Court, That a Plaintiff that sued for the possession
of Land, should desire the Defendant to make him a Title to out himself: And
that if Wray had gotten their Evidences into his hand, their way was plain, to
exhibit a Bill in Chancery, and there they might compel him to produce his
Evidences in a legal way: And it not appearing to the Committee, that either
Mr. Lilburne, Mr. Levitt, or Mr. Josiah Primatt, would, or then could produce
the least Evidence to overthrow Mr. Wrays title, Mr. Wray being then present
and confidently affirming and holding his Evidence in his hand ready to make it
good; that the right of the whole Colliery was in him, they confirmed their
former order, and have since let the said Colliery for the benefit of the
State: And we do now desire that you would be pleased to call Mr. George
Lilburne and Mr. George Gray to account for the profits of the said Colliery;
we being assured that great sums of money are in their hands due to the
Public, they having as yet paid never a penny, And we hope this is a full
answer to your Order procured by Mr. Josiah Primatt, dated July the 12. 1650.
concerning his interest in the Cole Mines at Harraton, and sent down to us for
our Certificate.

Arthur Hasilrige. Francis Wren. Tho. Delaval.

August 8 1650. Copia vera Exam. Jo. Leech.

Now I shall desire you to take notice, that the chief title here set up, is
Wray's own bare averments, who is a Delinquent Papist, and one of the basest of
that sect, being a common procurer of affidavit men; and a fellow that will
swear any thing in the world, it being his common habit, in his common
discourse, as you your selves very well know, for which you lately reproved him
in open Court, though he was too much your friend to be punished therefore by
you: but in counter-ballance to his lying averments before mentioned, I could
produce you he oaths of my Uncle and Mr. Gray, two men of honor, conscience,
and repute; but they being much both at one, and my Uncle a party, and Mr. Gray
none, although you lately made him one, against all reason and justice. I shall
only insert Mr. Greys; The Copy of whose oath thus follows.

GEorge Gray of Harraton in the County of Durham Gentleman, makes Oath that in
the year 1644. Sir William Armin and other Commissioners of Parliament, did
Sequester certain Colemynes, or seams of coals in Harraton in the said County
of Durham, then belonging to one John Jackson Gentl. a Delinquent, and certain
other Colemynes or seams of coals in Harraton aforesaid, then belonging to
Thomas Wray Esquire a Papist and Delinquent; which seams of coals belonging to
the said Mr. Wray, were only the half yard and 3 quarter seam of coals, the
greater seams of coal, viz. the five quarter seam and nine quarter seam being
then drowned and not won or wrought. And he further deposes that on or about
the 6 of February 1645. upon the said Mr. Wrays Petition on the behalf of his
creditors, the Committee for Sequestrations for the said County, Ordered that
Mr. Rich. Pearson of New Costle, or any other of Mr. Wrays creditors well
affected, that would undertake the working of the said colemines, called the
half yard and three quarter coal, should have a lease thereof granted for one
year, there being then no coals of the said Mr. VVrays visible but only the
coals that did come from the two seams commonly called the half yard and three
quarter seams, the five quarter seams and nine quarter seams being then
ungained, the profits whereof should be all wed to the said creditors, but
neither the said Pearson nor any other of the said Mr. Wrays creditors did
accept of any lease to work the said mines: And this Deponent knows that
neither the said Mr. Wray, nor any of his Agents, did from thenceforth to this
day, work any part of the said coalmynes, except the workmen of the grounds got
some for their own fire; And he also knows that Capt. Thomas Lilburn took an
estate of the eight part of the said five quarter coal and nine quarter coal,
from William Commondale Gentleman for certain years not yet expired; and the
said Mr Wray pretending to have some estate in another share of the said seams,
called the five quarter and nine quarter coal; He, this Deponent, and Mr George
Lilburn at the desire of the said Mr. Wray by his Servant William Madison, did
give Mr. Wray a meeting at Ferryboat in the said county about April or May (as
he remembers the time, to see what estate the said Mr. Wray could make to the
said seams of five quarter and nine quarter coal, where the said Mr. Wray did
show deeds that entitled him to a fourth part, and no more of the said seams of
nine and five quarter coal, for the term of certain years, then and yet
unexpired; but neither this Deponent nor the said George Lilburn (to this
Deponents knowledge) ever offered the said Mr. Wray 5000 l or any other sum at
all for his interest in the said coalmine, but told him if he could enable
himself to work his share, they would be content to join with him in the
winning and recovering the said Mines, and so referred the business to another
meeting, but they never after gave him any further meeting about it, well
knowing him to be a Delinquent, and all his his estate to be liable to
Sequestration. And he further deposes that he never heard, nor does he in the
least believe, that Mr. George Lilburn did acknowledge to the said Mr. Wray,
that he the said Mr. Wray had a title to 7 parts of 8 of the said Colliery, and
the rather believes it, forasmuch as the said Mr. Lilburn at the said meeting
audibly read over the Deeds of the said Mr. Wray, by the which there did no
more in the least to the best of this Deponents understanding, appear due to
him but barely a fourth part. And the said M George Lilburn said then unto the
said Mr. Wray, that he could not have believed, that the said Mr. Wray had had
so clear a Title to his fourth part, had he not so plainly read it in the said
Deeds. And he further believes, that the said Mr. George Lilburne did not then
nor any time since, acknowledge that the said Mr. Wray had a good right to 7
parts of 8 of the said colery, forasmuch as he has often heard the said Mr
George Lilburne affirm, that in or about the year 1641. he was chosen a
Commissioner by Mr Morley in a Suit in Chancery depending, for examining
witnesses betwixt the said M. Morley and one Mr. Lewis and Mr. Levet; which
commission was set upon at Northalerton in the county of York, where the said
Thomas Wray was examined as a principal witness for the clearing of the
estate of the colery, the thing in controversy, and he the said Wray, did then
and there positively swear, that his right was no more but a fourth part of the
said colliery in question, as by the said depositions upon Record in the Court
of Chancery, reference being thereunto had, more fully appears, unto which
this Deponent refers himself; neither does he believe that the said George
Lilburn did ever tell one Mr. Swayne mentioned in Sir Arthur Haslerigs
Certificate, that he the said Lilburn had made an agreement with the said Wray
for any part of the said colliery, neither can he believe or can imagine it
possible, that ever the said Wray has disbursed 16000 l. about or in the
managing of the said colliery, for as much as he could never hear him in the
least at any time to be judged a man in lands, stock or credit, able to lay out
such an estate as 16000 l. is, although this deponent have known the said Mr.
Wray above 30. years. And this deponent further makes Oath, That he has
known the said colliery very nigh 40. years, and has known many that have
disbursed great sums for the winnining thereof, who have all complained they
have had great loss, but never heard of any that gained any thing by i^. And he
further deposes, That after the meeting with the said Mr. Wray, and perusal
of his deeds, and that it was informed that Jesi^h Primat of London,
Leather-seller, had the greatest interest and share of the said colliery of the
five quarter and nine quarter coal, Mr. Lilburn and this deponent dealt with
the said Mr. Primat for a lease of the said 5 quarter and 9 quarters seams,
which was granted to the said George Lilburn, and this deponents son George
Gray the younger, for five years of the moity of the said Mines, and after
those five years ended, then for a further Lease for seven years, of three
quarters of the said Mines, under certain rents agreed on, by virtue of which
lease, they entered and won and wrought the said colliery: and in or about the
Month of May 1648. by ill accident, the said colliery was fired, and about 50
workmen thereby perished, and about August next after, the said Mines by a
great stood were drowned, whereby he believes the said George Lilburn and his
son suffered great loss, besides one thousand pounds and upwards clear out of
purse; and afterward the said George Lilburn and his said son, at their great
charge, recovered the said Mines, and had and enjoyed them til 1649 when the
said Thomas Wray informed Sir Arthur Haselrig and the Committee at Durham, that
he had the interest of 7 parts of 8 to be divided of the said colemynes; which
the said George Lilburn, being then one of the Committee, denied, and alleged
that Mr. Wray had but only a fourth part thereof, and that the other three
parts belonged to the said Josich Primat and others; whereupon the Committee 13
August 1649 ordered that all parties should upon the 11 of September next
following produce their writings and evidences touching their several titles
and claims to the said colemynes, at which day the said Mr. Primat and Thomas
Levet Esquire, under whom the said Mr. Primat claims his interest, were come
down from London to Durham, and was ready before the Committee to prove his
said title, and brought with him his Council, one Mr. Turner to plead his
cause, who if he had been suffered, would have made as he believes, the title
clear; but was so taken up and affronted by Sir Arthur Haselrig, who took upon
him the whole matter, that Mr. Turner could not open the business, insomuch
that the standers by did admire at such injustice; yet Mr. Turner desired that
Mr Wray might produce certain deeds or leases of the said Mines which he had in
his keeping; which concerned Mr Primat as well as Mr Wray; But Sir Arthur said
he should not, then Mr. Turner desired that Mr. Wray might declare the truth,
which the said Mr Wray said he would; but Sir Arthur rising up in an angry
manner, shaked his hand toward the said Mr. Wray, uttering these words, I
charge you speak not a word, for if you do, it shall be no better for them, and
it shall be the worse for you, for I know how to handle you; or words to that
effect. And this Deponent further says, that afterward Sir A thur with Col.
Fenwick and Col. Wren, drew up an Order privately, and brought it to the Clark
of the Committee of Durham to enter it, contrary to the opinion and knowledge
of some of the Committee, as by their Certificate under their hands, which this
deponent has lately seen, may appear.

And this Deponent further makes oath that Mr. George Lilburne, and this
Deponent was served with a warrant to appear before the Lords and Commons, to
answer a Petition preferred by Captain Francis Swayne one of Mr. Wray's
creditors, about January or February 1647. To the right honorable the
Committee of Lords and Commons for sequestrations; in which Petition he
complained, that the said Thomas Wray had a right to the said Colliery of
Harraton, which he valued at 16000. l. and was kept out of it by Mr. George
Lilburne, and this Deponent, so that neither he nor the State for his
Delinquency could enjoy any benefit by it; Upon which Petition the now L. chief
Baron Wild having then the Chair there, passed an order to refer the
consideration of the Petition to Mr. John Bradshaw now Lord President; After
which a set day of hearing was appointed, where diverse members of Parliament
appeared, and sat upon the hearing of the business: And the now Lord President
as Council for the State, was fully heard, and the said Mr. Lilburne, and this
Deponent having no Council then present appeared, and the said Mr. Lilburne
gave the said Lords and Commons, such full satisfaction by demonstrating his,
and this Deponents sons legal right to those parts they now claim, and that the
said Mr. Wray had no right at all to any more then a fourth part, for which the
said Mr. Lilburne then offered the said Lords and Commons; That if either their
honors, or any other for the use of the State, or any other in the right of the
said Mr. Wray, would put in their Stock, he the said George Lilburne, and his
Partners would be true Accomptants, and be very glad to yield up to the said
Mr. Wray, or the State, or any other in his right a clear fourth part of
profit, or any other larger proportion that could legally be proved to belong
to the said Mr. Wray: upon which hearing, and prosers of the said Mr. Lilburne,
the said Lords and Commons threw out the Petition and Complaint of the said
Captain Swayne, and openly at the board much commended the said Mr. Lilburne,
for his honest, fair, and just dealing, and profers. And this Deponent further
makes oath, that he heard the said Mr. Primatt say to Sir Arthur Haselrige at
Newcastle, it was in vain for us to come here, for he, the said Mr. Primatt was
told, that Mr. Wray told his friends, that sir Arthur was to have the Colliery,
and that he the said sir Arthur had undertaken to pay Mr. Wray's debts, or
words to that effect.

George Gray.
Jur. coram Comiss. Janurary 3. 1650. Will. Molins.
Copia vera Exam. Jo. Leech.

UPon which foresaid Order of yours, or some of you, and others of the
Commissioners, Mr. Reading perfected his report, the first of February 1650.
and the later end of that month, viz. the 27. day, we came to a hearing upon
it, where Sir A thu^ appeared as the Prosecuter, and so behaved himself with
sweating, foaming, and dominiering, as, if he had had a privilege to ingrosse
all the discourse where ever he comes, and none else had a power to contradict
what he says: But you (as I will say) unjustly overruling our chiefest
Depositions, (although our case in my judgment both as to possession and
Title, was made as clear as the Sun by Mr. Readings Report) for which I have
been several times told he was sufficiently chid, for that he durst be so
honest:) upon which your overruling our said Depositions, we let that petition
fall, having liberty of right as also by your Order, we preferred a new one;
and upon your Order thereupon, I rode almost fourscore miles a day toward the
county of Durham to fetch up new witnesses, in such weather that the wind and
haile-stones had like to have beat out both my eyes (one of which to this very
day I could never since perfectly recover) and there I found our claim to be so
clearly able to be made forth, both to title and an uninterrupted possession
and that the 5 and 9 quarter Seams of coals were never in this world in Wrayes
sole possession, nor never sequestered in 1644 for his delinquency, both of
which is most falsely suggested in the foresaid certificate of Sir Arthur, and
the pretended Committee of Durham, that I judged it a case so just and honest,
as that I might have comfort in it to venture both my life and estate in the
defense of it, which I have since done, and to the death shall by Gods
assistance still do; and what injustice you have since offered us in that
case, cannot better in my judgment briefly be set forth, then by the inserting
Mr. Primats Petition to the Parliament upon Tuesday being the 22 of this
present July 1691. the copy of which as it was in print delivered at the
Parliament door, thus follows,

To the Supreme Authority of this Nation, the Parliament of the Commonwealth
of England.
The humble Petition of Josiah Primat Citizen and Leatherseller of LONDON.
Shows,
THat Sir John Hedwarth Knight, was seized in Fee of the Manor and Cole-mines
of Harraton upon Sunderland river in the county of Durham, under whose Title
your Petitioner and one Thomas Wray Esquire, Anthony Metcalf, and William
Commondell Gent. and their Assigns, were and are interessed for a long term of
years yet in being in the two greater Seams of coal there, called the 9 and 5
quarter Seams viz. your Petitioner in one moity of those Seams, the said Thomas
Wray in one quarter thereof, the said Metcalf in one half quarter thereof, and
the said Commondell in the other half quarter thereof.

That in 1642. the said Seams were lost and drowned, and lay so lost till 1647.
when your Petitioner demised his said moity to George Lilburne and George Gray
Junio^, Esquires, for 12 years at certain Rents, who by the expense of at least
1500 l. regained the same, and quietly enjoyed and wrought them till 1648. the
said Wray and Metcalf neglecting and refusing to join with them in that charge
and work.

That in 1648. by a sad mischance with the loss of almost 60 men's lives, the
said Seams were fired and lost again; but before the end of that year at the
vast charge of your Petitioners said tenants, they were regained, and quietly
enjoyed and wrought by them till September 1649 to the great advantage of the
State in abating the price of coals, and increasing Trade in that River.

That in September 1649 Sir Arthur Haselrig acting as one of the Committee for
Sequestrations, with two others, viz. Col. Fenwick, and Col. Francis Wren in
the said county, unjustly caused your Petitioners said tenants to be
dispossessed of the said Seams of coals and their utensils to be seized and
taken from them, under pretense that the said Seams wholly belonged to the said
Wray being a Papist Delinquent, and had been sequestered as his estate in 1644.
whereas in truth they were not then in being, being absolutely drowned.

That your Petitioner being then in that county, by his Council humbly moved
that Committee before they sequestered his estate, that either the said Wray
(who was then also in Court) might show forth his Title and Evidence, (your
Petitioner and his Tenants being in quiet possession) or that the said Order
for the sequestration of the said 9 and 5 quarter Seams in 1644. might be
produced. But Mr. Wray could neither produce any Evidence, nor Sir Arthur any
such Order, And yet your Petitioners said estate was presently sequestered, and
his Tenants ejected and dispossessed, although he does confidently believe that
neither Sir Arthur nor colonel Fenwick had any legal right to act there as
Sequestrators, having not taken the Oath appointed by Ordinance of Parliament
of 27 May 1644. for all members whatsoever of Committees of Sequestration to
take before they intermeddle at all with Sequestration; and two of the legal
Committee of Sequestration there, viz. col. Milford, and Rich. Lilburne
Esquire, did enter their Protest in the Committee Book against the unjust
actings of the said Sir Arthur Haselrig; to which illegal practices of Sir
Arthur, the major part of the Commissioners at Haberdashers Hall refused to
suffer your Petitioner to examine his witnesses to.

That your Petitioner appealed (which was upon the 28 June, 1650.) to the
Commissioners for compounding, and before them was ready to make his title
appear by good evidence, and particularly by the said Wrays own depositions in
Chancery, taken about 9 years ago in a cause then there depending about the
said colliery, where he positively swears he has but a fourth part; but in
February last, when this business came to hearing, the Major part of the
Commissioners rejected Wrays said depositions in Chancery, and would not suffer
them to be read. The first time that ever depositions in Chancery were refused
for good evidence (especially against the party swearing them) in any Court of
Equity in England, that ever your Petitioner could hear of.

That thereupon by the Order of the said Commissioners, your Petitioner
preferred a new Petition, (which was upon the of February, 1650.) before them,
setting forth his title to, and possession of the said moiety of the said
Seams, and sent above 200 miles for 7 or 8 substantial witnesses, several of
which have lived a long time upon the place, and were workers about the said
Colliery, and examined them, and staid them here many days after at his own
charge, that they might be cross examined for the State. And after obtained As
appears by their order dated
publication in the cause, by consent of the States Solicitor, and a report of
the state of the case, and got a day of hearing appointed, and an Order that
Mr. Wray should be present, and produce his deeds and evidences at the hearing:
but the said Wray (though duly summoned) appeared not the first day, nor the
second, nor third appointed days Which several days of hearing by the
Commssioners orders, were to be on Thursday next come 14 days after the 21 May
1651. and in three weeks next after the 22 May 1651. and upon 5 June 1651. they
order that Wray shall forthwith appear to the hearing, upon notice of that
Order.
of hearting, till your Petitioner got him commanded up by the Council of
State. whose Order or Warrant is dated the 10. June 1651.


That when the said Wray was come up and should have brought his deeds into
Court, and gone to a speedy hearing, according to your Petitioners expectation,
and several Orders of the Commissioners for that end, the Major part of them
ordered the said Wray six weeks longer day to bring in his deeds, and to attend
the hearing, and that in the mean time he might examine new witnesses; which is
held, (as your Petitioner is informed) a most dangerous course in all other
Courts of Justice, and the mother of much perjury, and which three worthy
members there, viz. Mr. Moyer, Mr. Barners, and Mr. Moor, in open Court cried
shame on, but were overruled, by the influence of Sir Arthur (being the
principal instrument of placing the said Commissioners in their power) as your
Petitioner by their dealings with him, having just cause to judge, has more
prevalency with them, then the rules of Justice and right, as in part may
appear by the Copy of his Petition delivered unto them, hereunto annexed.

The Premises considered, and for that your Petitioner has now for almost two
full years, been most injuriously, and arbitrarily thrust out, and as unjustly
kept out of his rightful estate and possession, (without ever having any
pretense of title set up against him) the clear profit whereof by Sir Arthur
Haselrig 's own Certificate, amounts to 15 l. a day, and all that while no
piece of a proof of the States Title offered or produced, and in regard Sir
Arthur Haselrig has put certain of his Officers and Soldiers into the
possession of the said Colemynes, which are but unskilful Collyers, and (as
your Petitioner is lately informed) do work the Mines very foully and
injuriously, and are like to destroy them, and so will endanger your
Petitioners utter undoing, in point of breach of Covenant with his Landlord,
John Hedworth Esquire, son and heir of the aforesaid Sir John Hedworth, the
Inheritor of the said Mines.

Your Petitioner therefore most humbly prays the Justice of the Parliament,
that he may either be restored to his possession upon good security given to
the Parliament, to be answerable for the profits, in case hereafter the said
Mines shall appear to be duly sequestrable. Or otherwise that the
Commissioners for compounding, may be commanded by your Order forth with to
hear and determine the whole matter, and admit Wrays Depositions in Chancery
for evidence against himself; or else in case of further delay, that the said
Sir Arthur Haselrig, and the other two that arbitrarily took away your
Petitioners possession with all those Officers and Commanders of Sir Arthurs,
that now possess and enjoy the profits of the said Collyery, may forthwith be
ordered and compelled by your Honors, to give your Petitioner good security to
answer him the profits of the said Collyery, his damages and expenses, in case
the said Collyery be judged your Petitioners, or that you will declare that
without the check or control of this honorable House, or the Committee of
Indemnity, he may have his remedy at Law against the said Sir Arthur, and all
whatsoever under him, or that have joined with him to act illegally, and
arbitrarily against your Petitioner and his said Tenants, and that you will
take care to maintain the honor and dignity of Parliament (which does consist
in doing Justice and right without respect of persons) by dealing with Sir
Arthur according to his demerit, in case your Petitioner shall fully make it
appear to your Honors or some of your Committees, that Sir Arthur has merely
acted arbitrarily, and without all shadow of Law or Justice, in taking your
Petitioners right and propriety from him; himself, and his own private gain and
interest, being principally at the bottom of these his proceedings.

And he shall pray, etc. Josiah Primat.

To the honorable the Commissioner for Compounding
The humble Petition of Josiah Primatt, Citizen and Leatherseller of London.
Shows,
THAT the Colliery of Harraton in the County of Durham, consisting of four
Seams of Coal, distinguished by the names of the half yard, three quarter, five
quarter, and nine quarter seam of Coal, and that one moity of the five and nine
quarter seams of Coal in the said Colliery were wrought under your Petitioners
title, one of them until 1640. and the other until 1642. and from that time,
both the said seams of Coals lay drowned and unwrought until 1647. at which
time your Pettioners tenants (viz) Mr. George Lilburn and Mr. George Gray the
younger, as to one moiety, and the tenants of one Commondale, and one Metcalf
as to another fourth part of the seams of coal, undertook to regain and work
the said 5. or 9. quarter seams of coals, and by the expense of near 2000 l.
they did regain and work the same until May 1648. at which time the mines were
fired, and above 50. persons lives lost thereby, and within two months after
by a flood, the said mines were drowned again, and by the end of that year were
regained again by the vast expense of your Petioners said tennants, George
Lilburne and George Gray, who enjoyed the same until September 1649. And within
two months after were sequestered by sir Arthur Haselrige, etc. and by
Soldiers violently taken from your Petitioners said tenants, merely ont of
pretense that they were sequestered in 1644. as belonging to one Thomas Wray of
Beamish in in the said County, a Papist Delinquent.

That before the day of sequestration, your Petitioner went down into the
County of Durham, and by his Council desired the Committee there, that the said
Mr. Wray might show hi^ title, and evidence to the said mines, or that any
order in 1644. for sequestring the same, as belonging to the said Mr. Wray,
might be produced; but upon the day of hearing before the Committee of Durham,
no such order could be produced, and it would not be permitted by sir Arthur
Haselrige that the said Wray should show any title thereunto, as is already
deposed before your Honors, by diverse witnesses then present.

That your Petitioner thereupon appealed to your Honors, and after long
attendance, coming to a hearing about the seven and twentieth of February
last, the deposition of the said Wray in Chancery, not being allowed to be
used, although in October 1641. he positively swore that he had no interest at
all in the 5. and 9. quarter coal, but a fourth part; which oath in any Court
in England, ought not to be denied for good evidence against himself, and the
depositions of other witnesses being laid aside as parties, although they
offered their oaths, that they had no interest therein in Law or equity, and
there was no writing purporting the same; Your Petitioner thereupon was
necessitated to withdraw his Petition, and to present a new Petition according
to your order, stating his title unto the 5. and 9. quarter seams of coal and
his possession thereof, and to send above two hundred miles for several
witnesses to prove the same; and your committee of Durham, and Mr. Eowle, were
ordered to take a special care of the Commonwealths Interest therein, and Mr.
Wray was ordered to be at the hearing, and to have moneys allowed him for his
charges, and to bring with him all his deeds and evidences concerning the same.

That your Petitioners witnesses being examined, and according to your Order,
publication had, and a report of the state of the case being drawn by Mr.
Reading, you were pleased to appoint a day for hearing the case, and to order
that Mr. Wray should be present at the same to produce his deeds, and
evidences, and he not coming, a second day of hearing was appointed, and the
said Wray ordered again to be there; and he not coming, it was pretended, that
the reason was because he had not a license from the Council of State to come
to London, although your own Officers had for about two months been ordered to
procure such a license, whereupon your Petitioner undertook to procure such a
license, and in one afternoon did procure the same, and sent it down by the
Post.

That now the said Wray having been come to London above a week, your
Petitioner expected his hearing,, according to your several Orders, and that
Mr. Wray should have brought his evidences into Court; but in steed hereof on
Friday last, he finds Mr. Wray Petitioning for three months longer time, but
states no title at all, nor produces any deed according to your several Orders
in the said case, nor names any deed of any date, that he would have time to
prove; and at last makes Whose oath is dated the 27. of June 1651.
Oath that he has material witness to examine, but names not unto what, and
being asked who they were, he said in open Court, he knew not; yet contrary to
the rules of all Courts of Justice in England, that Affi-davit of the said Wray
was admitted by your honors, as sufficient to give him a longer time.

That your Petitioner humbly offers it to you, that by confession of all
parties, you took the said 5. and 9. quarter seams of coals out of your
Petitioners possession in 1649. and that in near two years since, no proof is
offered on the behalf of the State, that the State was ever in possession of
the said seams of coal by sequestration, which ought to have been upon record,
if it had been so, and that your Petitioner has proved by many sufficient
witnesses, that the 5. and 9. quarter seams of coal was never wrought, from
1642. till 1647. When they were won and wrought by your Petitioner and his
tennants and others: claiming from Metcalf and Commondale; and that in such
cases, by your own rules, you do take away no man's possession, until the States
title thereunto appears: And if it be doubtful, you suffer the Possessor to
enjoy it upon security.

He further offers, That in case the said 9. and 5. quarter seams of coal
should by ill management be drowned, fired, or the Pits wrought out, a vast sum
of money would not recover the same, and he knows not how he shall be repaired.

He therefore humbly prays, That he may either be restored to his possession,
upon proof hereof, now before you, at least upon security, which you do in
ordinary Cases, upon an Affidavit only: Or otherwise that his Case may be
heard forth with, no Title ever yet being set up against him.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc. Josiah Primatt.

And to make it further appear, that it was not the nine and five quarter seams
of cole that was under the pretense of sequestrations in 1644. but only the
half yard and three quarter seams of coals; take a copy of an Order, made at
Durham, the 13 of August, 1649. the Original I have by me, all writ with Master
Gilpin the Clerks own hand.

Dunelm. Die Lunae 13 Augusti, 1649. By the Committee of Sequestrations for
this County.
Upon the hearing of the cause depending betwixt Thomas Wrey, George Lilburn,
and George Gray Esquires, touching the Colyeries at Harraton, it appeared to
the said Committee, that the half yard and three quarter Cole was wrought for
the use of the said Master And yet I have seen two depositions taken by Master
Carry, that contradicts this Order, and says positively, that then one M.
William Fenwick of Harraton, farmed the said half yard and three quarter seams
of cole of Master VVrey, and wrought them upon his own account, and that Sir
William Armine, etc. only sequestered Wrays rent of the said small seams, and by
bargain and sale bought diverse 100 Chaldron of the said coals of the said
Fenwick, for part of which he paid him ready money, and the rest remains unpaid
for at this day.
Wrey or his assigns, and for no other person in the year 1644. and that in
the same year the said Colyery was sequestered by Sir William Armyn for the use
of the State, and the said Sequestration was not at any time since taken off.
It is therefore thought fit, and so ordered by the said Committee, that all the
said parties shall produce their writings and evidences, touching their several
titles and claims, either from Master Primate of London, or any other person,
and their several witnesses to be examined by the said Committee upon Tuesday
the eleventh day of September next coming. And that the present tenants or
occupiers of the said Colyeries, shall continue the working of the said
Colyeries in the mean time as tenants to the State: And that Lieutenant Edward
Shepherdson shall forthwith enter unto the said Colyery, and take possession
thereof, for the use of the State, till the title shall be determined and
tried, and shall take true and perfect account of all the Coals that are or
shall be wrought in the said Colyeries, and of all the charges and disbursments
to be laid out and disoursed in the working thereof, during that time. And the
said Lieutenant Edward Shepherdson to have such reasonable allowance for his
pains, as this Committee shall think fit.

Vera Copia Ex. Per me Isaa. Gilpin Cl. Com.

And because by a Member of Parliament, that was by in the Speakers Chamber the
other day, I am credibly informed that Master Winslow was with the Speaker
there, and endeavored very much to render my Uncle and M. George Gray to be
two base fellows, according to the contents of the said false and unjust
Certificate of the foresaid pretended Committee of Durham; and said what else
of him he pleased, and indeavored very much to reprorch me by accasing me of
endeavoring to divide the Army amongst themselves, and the Parliament amongst
themselves; and now the Commissioners amongst themselves, by setting three
against four, and that it was a false averment of us, to say there was
publication in the case. I shall therefore disprove that fully, only I desire
this may be observed, that Master Carry your Examinor upon our last Petition,
examined all our witnesses upon interrogatories, and it was your Order that
commanded our depositions out of his hands; which Order compared with your
other Orders for three several days of hearing, is sufficient with another that
either is, or ought in your Books to be entered to prove there was publication
in the case: but before I come to that, let me tell you it is but a poor guilty
shift to put off the reading of Master Primates Petition, because either George
Lilburn, George Gray, or John Lilburn, is so and so; therefore it is not ^t to
read Master Primats Petition, and to do him justice and right: for Master
Primats Petition is either true or false, and you have either do^e him
injustice, or you have not; however let us come to a fair and equal hearing.
And I do here aver, I dare engage my life to prove the whole Petition against
you, but seeing you have by your daily reproaches put me to it, by calling my
Uncle cheat, etc. at your open Table upon Thursday last in the case of the
Lady Tongue; I do aver that you are four of the most unjustest, and unworthiest
men, that ever the Parliament made in one place Judges in England; and that you
are fit for nothing but to be spewed out of all humane society, by all
ingenious rational men; and that for the injustice you have acted, and the
dishonor you have done the Parliament in your places, you deserve a sharper
and severer punishment from them then King Alfred gave to those forty four
Judges he hanged in one year for their injustice, whose petty crimes in
comparison of yours, are recorded at the latter end of the Law Book, called the
Mirror of Justice; you deserving for example sake, (all circumstances
considered) rather to have your skins flead over your ears, and stopped full of
straw, and hung up in some public place, to deter others from doing that
multiplied gross wickedness that you have committed in a short time; and so
now I come to your forementioned Order, the copy of which thus follows.

By the Commissioners for compounding, etc. 28 Martis, 1651.
Upon motion made by M. John Lilburn, alleging that M Josiah Primat has
several witnesses in Town, which can give testimony concerning the Colyery of
Harraton, and desires that the said witnesses may be speedily examined here in
Town. It is ordered that M. Foul do examine the said witnesses by this day
seven-night. And upon the expiration of this Order, Major John Wildman in open
Court made a motion for publication of the depositions, unto which Master
Fowls Solicitor for the State in open court consented unto, upon which by
special order, there was publication, which if not entered in your Books, the
fault is none of ours.
And in case that the said witnesses shall be detained longer in Town on behalf
of the State, that then their charges expended in such stay, be allowed unto
them. And it is referred to M. Reading after such examinations taken, to peruse
the same, and also the Petition of the said M. Primate, and Report the case.

Vera copia Ex. T. Baly,

The forementioned Orders for hearing the cause thus follows.

By the Commissioners for compounding, etc. 22. May 1651.
WHereas we ordered 21 may current, That the Case touching the Coliery at
Harraton should be heard on Thursday then next come fortnight unless Mr Foul
showed cause to the contrary by Wednesday then next. Now upon the desire of Mr.
Foul on behalf of the Commonwealth, that there may be longer time given for
the hearing of the said cause; and that Mr. Wray might according to former
order, be sent for up to be present at that time, with what Evidence he has in
his hands, touching the same: It is ordered that the said Case be heard on this
day three weeks, unless just cause be showed to the contrary. And Mr. Wray is
required at the time to attend here and bring with him all the Evidences and
Writings in his hands concerning the said Coliery, and that he have timely
notice thereof. And the Commissioners for Sequestrations in the County of
Durham, are to certify to Us such notice the week after the receipt hereof,
and pay to the said Mr. Wray 5. l. for and toward his charges. And that Mr.
Foul do attend the right Honorable the Lord President of the Council of
State, for a license for the said Mr. Wray to come up to London accordingly, he
being a Papist and Delinquent.

Copia vera exam. T. Bailey.

By the Commissioners for compounding. 5. Junii 1651.
WHereas we ordered 22 May last, That the Case touching the Coliery at Harraton
in the County of Durham, should be heard on that day three weeks, unless
cause were showed to the contrary. And Mr. Wray required to attend here at that
time, and to bring with him all the Evidences and Writings in his hands
concerning the said Coliery, and to have timely notice thereof. And the
Commissioners for Sequestrations in the County of Durham, were to certify such
notice to Us the week after the receipt of the said Order, and to pay the said
Mr. Wray 5. l. for and toward his charges. And that Mr Foul should attend the
right Honorable the Lord President of the Council of State for a license for
the said Wray to come up to London accordingly, he being a Papist and
Delinquent. Now for that upon information given to Us by Mr. Foul, that he
has not as yet procured a license from the Council of State for the said M.
Wrays coming hither at the day of hearing aforesaid; and upon consideration had
thereof, and the short space of time now remaining for the said Mr. Wray to
come up hither, the three weeks for hearing the said Case being far spent, so
that we have not time to address our selves to the Council of State for a
license for the said Mr. Wray: It is therefore resolved, and so ordered, That
the said Mr. Wray do forthwith upon notice hereof, repair hither, and bring
with him all the Writings and Evidences in his hands touching the said Coliery,
to be present at the hearing of the said Case: and for which this shall be his
sufficient Warrant. And it is further ordered, That the Commissioners for
Sequestrations in the said County of Durham, do forthwith pay unto the said
Mr. Wray the sum of five pounds for and toward his charges, etc.

Copia vera exam. T. Bailey.

But to return back, the said Sir Arthur Hasterig fell upon my Uncle, about the
Land he farms at Ford, as if he had cozened and cheated the State there, and
has put him to a great deal of trouble and charge thereby, although he justly
farmd it of those that had a right to Le^ it. the main drift of sir Arthur, to
my understanding, being to get all that land of Ford, with all other lands of
the late Baron Hiltons that he gave to the poor of London, etc. invested in the
present Col. Hilton a delinquent, that so he might by himself, ragents, get him
put into the Bil of Sale, being a gallant and fit parcel of Land (lying close
by Esquire Hedworths) for Sir Arthur to purchase at the hands of the State, after
the Rate of his own surveying, and add M. Hallimans Ballast key and Land at
Munckwarmouth near Sunderland, if Sir Arthur could get that made to be (as he
strongly endeavors it) Pudseys, the Delinquents, it would be fit for the Bil
of sale also: And so Sir Arthur in time might have a fo^^ing even from the
spring of the River Wear, to its going into the (...), for I am sure lately Sir
Arthur came to plead his cause against poor Halliman which he did with that
violence that I never heard man in life do, and he declared himself in my
hearing, that the land claimd by Halliman was just and fit to be put into the
Bill of sale.

Another of Sir Arthurs unjust dealings with my Uncle, is his going about to
make him a deceiver, and the cheater of the State about the Colliery of Lamton,
in which I am confident he dealt as justly and as honestly as any Tenant in
England could do that took such a thing of any man for a valuable
consideration, that had a right to let it.

Another piece of sir Arthurs dealing with my Uncle, was in his sequestring
that Land he had in mortgage from the Lady Tongue for 600 l. in ready money to
pay her sons Composition, as if he had by so doing committed the horriblest
cheat against the State that possibly could be but M. B^eretons Report, and
your own Order made upon Thursday last, being the 24 July, 1651. has
sufficiently cleared my Uncle for an honest man in that particular, although M.
Mollins at the beginning of the cause could with open mouth in the Court call it
a notorious cheat, which was reproved by Major Wildman, by demanding of him if
he were not ashamed to condemn a thing before he heard it, or understood it;
but it seems Sir Arthur had said it, and left his commands with him so to call
it: and therefore right or wrong he must believe it and obey it: and M Winsloe,
and M. Squib both did their parts to that purpose, but truth and the reason of
M. Moyer was too strong for you all three.

Another piece of Sir Arthur Haselrig most false and wicked dealing with my
Uncle, was at Haberdashers hall, not long since, when he and I had the tug for
5 or 6 hours together hand to hand, where he would have had you to have past
sentence upon my Uncle upon 3, or 4 verbal charges of his, prosecuted with
that heat by him, as if it had laid upon his life, which were all falsehoods and
lies in themselves, and for a taste of one for all give me leave to whet up
your memories, that when Sir Arthur came to tax my Uncle for cheating of the
State of the profits of the land of Harraton, as well as of the coliery, which
was sequestered only for the Delinquency of the foresaid Thomas Wray, as he
aver'd, being all of it his and he or you the Commissioners demanded my Uncles
answer unto it, which I gave to this purpose, that we denied every thing that
Sir Arthur said there, being nothing but falsehoods and untruths in all his
averments; and put it upon him to prove what he said: at which he being very
mad, that such a man of his rank and quality as he was, and one who had from
the Parliament so great a trust upon him, should be so affronted as he was, by
such a man as I was; unto which I replied to this purpose, That setting aside
his authority, with which I would make no comparisons, I judge my self as honest
and as good a man as himself, and come of as good parentage as he; and if he or
the greatest man in England durst go about in my hearing to make my Father and
his generation a company of knaves and cheaters (as he that day had done) in
things or for things, for which my conscience told me they had don nothing but
justly and honestly, I should not judge my self worthy to be accounted to com
from the loins of so honest and just a man as my Father was, if I should hear
him so basely abused to his face, as he had abused him, and suffer it in
silence; for he hinted as if my Father and Uncle had defrauded or lost unto the
State 12000. a year of sequestered lands; and that my Father had made himself
rich by meddling with sequestered lands, and therefore if he durst abuse my Father
in things I knew to be false, I durst tell him he spoke falsely in any place in
England; and therefore if he would not by me be told of his falsehoods, let him
speak truth But Sir Arthur at that time began to lift up his eyes and hands,
and call for vengeance from Heaven, averring upon his soul, his conscience and
honor, and calling the grear Lord God of heaven and earth to bear witness, that
he spoke nothing but Truth; and that as ever he expected to appear with comfort
before the Lord, the land of Harraton, which Esquire Hedworth lays claim to, was M,
Wrays, and was sequestered for his delinquency, and his only and alone; and this
I know, says he; you have a Certificate of from your own sworn commissioners,
who are men of honor and conscience, and therefore desired it might be read; Of
which Certificate, and all others about that land, I was totally ignorant of,
and had never seen not heard read before, to my knowledge; and M. Baily the
Clerk being commanded to read it, he read a Certificate, the copy of which thus
follows

Gentlemen, we formerly returned that we had sequestered the Lands at Harraton
for the Recusancy of the Lady Dorothy Hedworth, the relict of Sir John Hedworth
deceased. And we perceiving by several Orders sent unto us, that John Hedworth
Esquire son of the said Sir John Hedworth and the said Lady, is endevoring a
pretended right thereunto, to get off the Sequestration; we have therefore sent
the depositions enclosed with a copy of a deed which holds forth the Ladies
interest, and the original deed being in the custody of Mr. Levet, or Mr.
George Gray, who now live and recide at London, we have sent what testimony was
produced unto us by the said Lady Derothy Hedworth, and desire that Mr. Levet
and Mr. Gray aforesaid may be called before you, and enjoined to produce the
said Original deed, whereof this enclosed is a Copy, in case the State be
prejudiced by taking off the sequestration of the said estate, by destroying
the Ladies title, which determins not until her death: We remain.

Durham April 18. 1651. Gentlemen, your assured friends; Francaes Wren, Thomas
Delavel.
Copia vera. Exam. John Leech.

At the reading of which you may remember Sir Arthur was full of rage at the
Cleark, but I helped to stop his mouth a little, by appealing to you to be
Judges whether there was either conscience, honor, faith or truth in Sir Arthur
Haselrig, or that there was any credit to be given to any thing he had said or
sworn, seeing he had so solemnly averred, protested, and imprecated, and called
God to witness, that the land was sequestered only and alone for Mr. Wrays
Delinquency; and his own Record that he first produced to prove his assertion,
says the quite contrary; but although I then plyd him with hot clothes, and
made him in the face as read as a Turkeycock, yet he was not totally dashed out
of Countenance; but to mend the matter, called for another Certificate, saying
he was sure there was such a Certificate as he spoke of; which being before the
Gleark, it was read: The Copy of which thus follows.

Gentlemen, According to your Order granted upon the motion of Mr. Higgins, in
the behalf of John Hedworth Esquire of Harraton and William Hollyman of
Monkewarmonth, dated July 12. 1650. We do hereby certify that concerning the
Lands in Harraton, pretended by John Hedworth to have been in his possession
for several years last past: It appears to us, that about May Day 1647. the
said lands were sequestered by the Committee of Sequestrations for the County,
as belonging unto Thomas Wray of Beamish Esquire, he being then in the sole
possession thereof, and so having had the possession for many years, and that
they were letten by the Committee to several Farmours for 200 l per annum, and
that Mr. George Gray, one of the said Committee, dealt with the said Farmours,
and got into the possession of the said lands, and so continued for several
years together, not paying, any rent to the State. And that when the Committee
about a year since called for their rent, and the arrears, Mr. Gray then stood
up and claimed the said lands, as belonging to one John Hedworth, that married
his daughter by color of an intail, pretended to have been made by some of
Hedworths Ancestors.

The Committee then finding the state had been so long disposed without any
Order, and that by a member of their own Committee, and that it did belong to
the State from the year 1644. that being the time that Mr. Wray was sequestered
as a Papist in Arms, they ordered the said lands to be sequestered and disposed
for the use of the State: And whereas Mr. Hedworth informs you that he was in
possession for diverse years past, and that we put him out, the truth is, the
State was long since in possession, the land belonging to Mr. Wray, and he
being sequestered in the year 1644. and Mr. Wray has now a good estate in it.
But Mr. Gray by virtue of that power as aforesaid, gets into the possession as
under-tenant to the State, pays no rent, and after marries his daughter to Mr
Hedworths and then also taking the profits to his own use; and when the
Committee demanded rent and arrears of him, then held forth a Title in Mr.
Hedworths name: And had not the land been long since in the possession of the
State, we should not have turned Hedworth out of possession, but only staid
the profits, and acquainted you with it, and so we shall do in all cases of the
like nature; but we hold it very fit and necessary, that where the State has
been possessed, they ought not to be put out of possession by any private or
clandestine way; but either publicly by Authority from you the Commissioners,
or the Barons of the Exchequer, or by leave given from one of you to the
plaintiff, to sue at common Law, care being taken that the States Title be
defended; and we offer it to you, if it be not requisite that Mr. Gray be
called to account for the profits of these lands, which of due and right he
ought to pay to the State. And as for Monk-Warmouth Hal, it was sequestered in
the year 1644. from one Ralph Pudsey a Papist in Arms, he being then in the
possession of it, the aforesaid Mr. Gray being a Committee-man, took it of the
Committee, and being then possessed of it, never paid rent to the State, and
when he saw his time, he let Hollyman have the possession of the land, and took
to himself the Ballace Shore, and so the State was deceived of both, and
Hollyman by pretending a Title by marrying one of Robert Widdringtons
daughters; Pudsey being then, and so continues still in Arms against us, the
said Hollyman commencing a suit against Pudsey, pretending his wives Title to
be better then Pudseys, and there being none to defend the Title, he has
gotten some legal color, and so thinks utterly to dispossess the State of
their Interest; and this is the truth of Hollymans Case: And we offer it
likewise, whether Mr. Gray shall not give an account to the State for the
profits of this, as for the other.

Arthur Haselrig. Francs Wren. Thomas Delavall.

August. 8. 1651. Copid vera Exam. Dunelm. Jo. Leech.

After the reading which, you may remember I told you to this purpose, that Sir
Arthur had mended the matter well; for he had now made his Commissioners as bad
as himself: nay, he had made them knaves and forsworn men upon Record;
Forasmuch as they are upon their Oaths, and yet return certificates point
blank cross to one another. I then desired you to consider whether there were
any truth in those Commissioners, or any faith or credit to be given to any
thing they say or swear. And yet notwithstanding all this, I will show you the
copy of a third certificate or Order in the same thing, various from both the
former, which thus follows.

By the Commissioners for Sequestration. March the 21. 1649.
Dunelm
IT is ordered, That William Brewing Gent. Solicitor for Sequestration, shall
forthwith repair to Harraton, and take possession for the use of the State of
all those lands and Coliery in Harraton, now under Sequestration, for the
recusancy of the Lady Hedworth. and for the Recusancy and Delinquency of Thomas
Wray and Ralph Rooksby, together with all the Gins and other Engines standing
upon the grounds, for the working of the said Coliery late in the possession of
Mr. George Lilburne and Mr. George Gray, until they shall plead their Title
before the Barons of the Exchequer, and give account to the State for the
profits of the said coliery.

Copia vera exam. Cuthbert Hawdon. Clerk to the said Commissioners.

And if any observations upon their contradictions be not authentic enough to
declare them contradictions to you, take the copy of your own Order made that
very day in the case, which thus follows.

By the Commissioners for compounding, etc. 30 April 1651.
Upon reading of two certificares returned from the Commissioners for
Sequestration for the county of Durham, the one dated 8 August 1650. The other
dated 8 April current, touching the lands of Harraton in the said county,
betwixt which there seems to us to be some contradiction touching the persons
for who^ the same was sequestered: it is resolved that copies of both the said
certificates be sent down to the said Commissioners, who are to certify unto
us how the said contradiction happens, and they are to search the Books and
Records of the former Committee, whether Mr. Wray was not in possession of the
said lands at the time of the first sequestration thereof; and they are to
examine witnesses touching the same, and what profits has been received out of
the said lands since the sequestration, and by whom. And they are to examine
witnesses upon Oath (if desired) on behalf of Mr. George Lilburne and Mr.
Geo^ge Gray, or either of them, and to cross examine the witnesses on both
sides (if desired) and to return the proofs and examinations to us sealed up
within six weeks next easuing: Mr. Fowls is to draw up a charge against Mr.
Gray out of the certificate sent up hither from the said Commissioners in the
county of Durham.

Copia vera exam. T. Bailey.

Which Order having been served upon the Commissioners of the county of Durham
with several others about the lands of the said Harraton, yet they will obey
none of them, but keep the said lands from the right owner of them Esquire John
Hedworth, although he has proved that he was in possession when they
sequestered it, sometimes for ones delinquency, sometimes for another And that
he was in possession, take these proofs.

Witnesses examined in the case of John Hedworth, Esquire. 13. Feb. 1650.
John Clifton of Gateshhead in the County of Durham gentleman, sworn and
examined, being demanded who was in possession of the lands at Harraton, now
sequestered at the time of the seizure made; says that Mr. John Hedworth was at
the time of Sequestration actually possessed of the lands at Harraton, and that
since he knew the said Mr. Hedworth, he has frequented the Church, and was
never in any service against the Parliament.

John Clifton.

Thomas Petty of the City of Durham Apothecary, sworn and examined, says,
That Mr. John Hedworth was in actual possession of the lands at Harraton, now
sequestered at the time of the last seizure, for that to this examinants
knowledge, he tilled the ground and stockt it; and that the said John Hedworth
was neither recusant nor Delinquent to his knowledge.

Capt. Coram Thomas Delavell Frances Wren. Thomes Petty. T. Bailey.

Copia vera Exam.
Some of the Copies of the forementioned Orders for his land thus follows.

Westminster, By the Commissioners for compounding, etc. July 12. 1650. Upon
motion of Mr. Higgins in the behalf of John Hedworth of Harraton in the County
of Durham Esquire, and William Hollyman of Munckwar mouth in the said County,
complaining, that whereas the before named Hedworth, has had the possession of
diverse lands there for several years last past, by virtue of a deed made by
his Ancesters in the 41 year of the Queen, and that the said William Hollyman
does hold the moiety of the Manor of Munck Warmouth in the right of his wife,
which they have held for these several years; yet the Commissioners for
Sequestration have turned them out of possession, notwithstanding they offered
secrity to be responsible for the profits of the said estate, upon pretense
that the estate belongs to delinquents and papists. It is ordered and the
Commissioners for sequestration in the said County, are hereby desired to
examine who was in possession at the time of their Sequestring the said estate;
And if the said Hedworth and Hollyman were in the actual possession thereof,
and be not Delinquents nor recusants, That then they be restored to the
possession taken from them, giving security to be responsible for the profits
of the estate to which they shall be restored; And in the mean time, the said
Commissioners are to certify the whole matter to this Committee: And that the
said Hedwo^th and Hollyman prosecute the same to a Judgment here within the
space of three months.

To the Commissioners for Sequestrations in the County of Durham.
Exam Jo. Leech. Jo. Berners. William Mollins. Edward Winsloe. Richard Moore.


But before I insert any more copies of your Orders, I shall here give you two
of Mr. Hedworths Affidavits in the case, the copies of which thus follows.

John Hedworth of Harraton in the County of Durham Esquire makes Oath, That he
has had the possession of diverse lands in Harraton aforesaid, which he held to
him and his heirs males of his body, by virtue of a deed made from his great
Grandfather bearing date the 41 year of Queen Elizabeth, and that he kept and
had the said lands in his possession for these 3 years last past; until in
March last the Commissioners for sequestrations, put him out of possession,
upon pretense that part of the said lands did belong to the Lady Hedworth his
mother a recusant, and the other lands did belong to Thomas Wray, and Ralph
Rookesby delinquents; and this deponent demanding a Certificate of the cause of
sequestration, the Commissioners refused to let him have any; but took the
possession of his estate from him, notwithstanding that he proffered good
security to be responsible for the profits of the said lands, in case any
pretended title should be made good against his title; which is great dan mage
to him, by reason that his cattle are unprovided for, and that his corn upon
the ground may ^u^er much by the ill loooking thereunto.

Juram little Commissarium 5. June. 1650. John Hedworth
Examined according to order the same day by Pet. Brereton.

The Copy of his said second Affidavit thus folleweth:

John Hedworth of Harraton in the county of Durham Esquire, makes oath, that
upon the sixth day of August last, this deponent did deliver an Order from the
Honorable the Commissioners for compounding with Delinquents to the
Commissioners for sequestration of the said county, which Order was, that this
deponent should have the possession of his lands, sequestered from him by the
said Commissioners, this deponent giving security to be responsal to the State
for the mean profits, in case that the lands should be adjudged against this
deponent. As also by the said Order the said Commissioners were to certify the
cause of sequestring the said lands. And who was in possession of the said
lands at the time of their sequestration. This deponent makes oath, that
according to the said Order, he did render good security, but the said
Commissioners refused to take any security, or to deliver him the possession of
the said lands, according to the said Order; but then said that they would
certify the Commissioners for Compositions accordingly, but as yet this
deponent cannot learn of any return made by them, although he has waited above
a month, and daily made inquiry for the same.

Jur. Coram Commiss. 11 October. 1650. John Hedworth.
W. Molins. Copia vera exam. Jo. Leech.

Upon this last Affidavit, another Order was procured, the copy of which
follows.

By the Commissioners for Compounding, etc. die veneris 18 Oct. 1650.
Upon reading of an order of the 12 of July last 1650. and also the deposition
of John Hedworth of Harraton, in the county of Durham, Esquire, thereunto
annexed, taken 11 October. instant. It is ordered, that a copy of the said
deposition be sent to the Commissioners for sequestrations in the county of
Durham, who are hereby required to certify according to the said Order of the
12 of July 1650. and that the said John Hedworth do prosecute his claim within
a month.

Copia vera Exam. per Ia. Hind. Ia. Russel. Io. Berners. Sam. Moyer. Edw.
Winslo.


But nothing being done upon this order, I upon the 5 Feb. last, moved for our
possession, upon which they made another Order; the copy of which thus
follows.

By the Commissioners for Compounding, etc. 5 Feb. 1650.
Upon reading of our Order made the 12 of July 1650. in the case of John
Hedworth of Harraton in the county of Durham Esquire. It is ordered that our
said Order be performed, and that the said M. Hedworth shall be repayed such
rents as appear to have been received our of his estate by the Commissioners in
the country, since the date of the said Order in case the cause shall be
adjudged for him. And that the said Commissioners do certify unto us all their
proceedings touching the said M. Hedworths goods or lands within three weeks
after notice hereof, that he may not be delayed any longer.

Copia vera Int. 387. exam. Io. Leech. Rich. Moore. Will. Molins. Sam. Moyer.
Edw. Winslo.


Now unto your dealings with us about the colyery of Harraton, and to the land
there, add to them your dealings with us about the Esquires Cattle, and it will
I think clearly appear to any rational man that you have sold or given up your
selves to be Sir Arthurs vassals and slaves, and that we shall have no
effectual justice at your hands in any cases, wherein he is concerned as he is
in all these, because it is against his will and pleasure, and because by his
crushing, and do as much as in him lies, grinding to pieces poor Esquire
Hedworth, he will sufficiently (as he may imagine) terrify and affright any
man in the county of Durham, to be familiar with a Lilburn, yea or so much as
by buying or selling with him, and what your dealing with us has been in the
case of Esquire Hedworths Cattle, may be briefly given you in the copy of his
Petition, which he and I caused to be delivered in print at the Parliament door
to the Members thereof the very next day after M. Primat delivered his fore
recited Petition, which copy thus follows.

To the Supreme Authority of this Nation, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England.
The humble Petition of John Hedworth of Harraton in the County of Durham
Esquire:
Shows,
THAT in May 1650. about 60. head of your Petitioners Cattle were by order from
the sub-Commissioners for sequestrations in the County of Durham, taken off
your Petitioners grounds (where they were depastured) by some of Colonel
Hackars Soldiers, under pretense that they were the goods of George Gray of
Harraton Esquire, your Petitioners Father-in-law, whose goods they would have
taken under color that he owed some moneys to one Jackson a Delinquent, that
had compounded, and wanted some moneys to pay the latter moiety of his fine.

That your Petitioner being at that time in London, some of his friends
demanded his cattle, of the said Commissioners, and offered proof upon Oath,
that they were your Petitioners goods; but they refused to take any proof, or
to deliver the goods, but half starved the cattle, and then sold them at half
their value.

That in August 1650. your Petitioner made his address to the Commissioners for
compounding for relief, and had an order from them to the said
sub-Commissioners, that they should certine the grounds of such their
proceedings to take away your Petitioners goods; but they made a return that
they only were the goods of the said George Gray, without showing the least
ground for that their opinion.

That your Petitioner thereupon did again the 5. of February 1650. move them
about his said goods, whereupon they ordered, that the Commissioners in the
Country should certify within three weeks after notice of that order, all
their proceedings touching the said goods, which they would not do.

That your Petitioner thereupon, did the 28. of May last, again move the said
Commissioners for compounding, for satisfaction for his said cattle, he being
ready to prove them upon Oath to be his proper goods, and the said
sub-Commissioners certifying no grounds whereupon they forcibly and most
unjustly took them away, as the goods of the said George Gray; and Oath was
made that they were your Petitioners goods, and thereupon the said
Commissioners for compounding, would only order again, that the
sub-Commissioners should certify within ten days after notice, what proofs
they had, that the said cattle were the goods of the said George Gray; and your
Petitioner was enforced to send 200. miles to serve the said order, which was
done accordingly; yet the said sub-Commissioners would not obey the said order,
nor make any return: And your Petitioner was forced to his great expense, to
cause one to come 200. miles to make oath of their disobedience; yet the said
cattle also being fully proved by the Oaths of two sufficient witnesses before
the said Commissioners for compounding, to be the proper goods of your
Petitioner: some of the said Commissioners who over voted the rest refuse to
order your Petitioner any satisfaction, or to declare a permittance of your
Petitioner to sue for the same at Law, and would again send your Petitioner to
attend the pleasure of the said sub-Commissioners, who in several cases of your
Petitioner, have dealt most illegally and unjustly with him, and will obey no
Orders.

That your Petitioners said cattle being the whole stock upon his ground, the
taking away the same and forcing your Petitioner to above a years attendance
about them to no purpose, but vast expense and charge, and your Petitioner
being young, and left much indebted by his father sir John Hedworth, and not
being able to stock his ground again, and the reserved rent of the colliery of
Harraton, belonging to your Petitioner, being by the like unjust dealing of the
said sub-Commissioners, and some of the chief Commissioners with Josiah Primatt
Lessee to the said colliery detained from him, it has been almost the undoing
of your Petitioner, and yet he is hopeless of any relief or justice at all from
most of your Commissioners for compounding: whose particular interest he has
too just cause to say, overrules their judgments and consciences, these
amongst them that are willing to do him justice, ( viz, M. Moyer, Mr. Barn^rs,
and Mr. Moor, being over-voted by the others.

That your Petitioner having been always well affected to the Parliament, and
the said George Gray having been a zealous actor and a Committee-man, and a
great sufferer for the Parliament; and in case he had owed the said Delinquent
Jack^^n any money, the Delinquent having compounded for his whole estate, might
and ought to have recovered the same at Law; so that the sub-Commissioners had
no power to take away the said cattle, in case they had been the goods of the
said George Gray, as in the least they were not.

The premises duly considered: your Petitioner most humbly appeals to your
honors as his last refuge, and craves the justice of you that ought to be and
are the releevers of the distressed and oppressed, the maintainers of our
Liberties, freedoms, and proprieties; and therefore beseeches you, either of
your selves to appoint a Committee of your own House speedily to examine the
truth of his complaint, and to send for all papers at Haberdashers Hall or
elsewhere that concerns the case, and to order and award him a full recompense
for all his said cattle and all his expenses, and damages, which he judges
cannot amount to less then 500. l. and to do justice upon all your Petitioners
oppressors for their Arbitrary and most unjust dealing with him; or otherwise,
that it may be declared by you, that he is freely permitted to have his remedy
a Law against the said sub-Commissioners, and their assistanets: whose unjust
dealings with him, as in reference to his said Cattle, is by true Copies of
Affidavits hereunto annexed fully proved.

And he shall pray, etc. John Hedworth.
JO'm Clifton of Gateshead in the County of Durham Mercer makes Oath, that
about the 17 of June 1650 Certain Soldiers belonging to Col. Ha^ker, did drive
away from off the grounds of Harraton and Follensby in the said County, between
50 and 60 head of cattle, as being the goods of Mr. George Gray, for certain
Rents, pretended to be due from the said Mr. Gray, to one Mr. Jackson a
Delinquent, and indebted for his Composition money to the State: after which
time this deponent with one Mr. Thomas Cousin of Newcastle, Draper, repaired to
the Sub Commissioners for Sequestrations then sitting at Durham, with a
Petition from the wife of John Hedworth of Harraton Esquire (himself being at
that time here in London) the effect of which Petition was, that the said goods
were the proper goods of her husband; and that she desired the Commissioners
then sitting, would be pleased to give Order for the said goods to be restored
back to her; yet upon the engagement of this Deponent, and the said Mr. Cousin
to make good whatsoever should be proved to be due from her husband to the
State, which they refused; whereupon this deponent and the said Cousin offered
to enter bond, that within 14 days, upon answer from the said John Hedworth (if
any thing appeared due) we would pay it down: But the Commissioners would have
us to engage to make good what was pre^ended to be due from Mr. George Gray;
which thing we refused, because we knew the goods so driven were not the goods
of Mr. Gray, but Mr. Hedworths, as this deent offered there 3 several times to
depose; but the said Commissioners refused to take any proof that the said
goods were the only proper goods of the said John Hedworth. And this deponent
further makes Oath, that be certainly knows the goods at that time so
driven, were really the goods of Mr Hedworth, and not Mr. Grays; which this
deponent knows the better, because he knows that the said John Hedworth
bought the same for a valuable consideration without fraud or Trust.

Jur. coram commissariis 9. April 1651. R M. John Clifton.

Copia vera. T. Bailey.

Ralp^ Gray of Harraton in the County of Durham Gentleman, makes Oath, that
all the cattle (being be wixt 50 and 60 in number) driven off the grounds of
Harraton, North Beddeck and Follemby, al in the County of Durham, by virtue of
an Order of the Commissioners for Sequestration of the said County of Durham,
dated about June 1650. pretended thereby to be the cattle of George Gray of
Harraton aforesaid Esquire, were the proper goods of John Hedworth Esquire and
others and not the goods of George Gray, and this he the more persectly
knows, for that this deponent was present at the barg^in making, betwixt the
said John Hedworth Esquire, and the said George Gray Esquire, at the very time
that the said John Hedworth bought so many of the foresaid cattle of the
foresaid George Gray, as did belong unto him, which were about 40 head, for
which the said John Hedworth was to pay about three hundred pounds to the said
George Gray; which bargain was really made without fraud or trust, and the
cattle delivered thereupon into the possession of John Hedworth, above six
months before the foresaid cattle were seized upon by order of the said
Commissioners. And this deponent further deposes, that amongst the cattle
aforesaid were taken away at the same time (by virtue of the foresaid Order) 3
or 4 of the cattle of one George Gray of Sudwick in the County aforesaid.

And he also deposes that the said Esquire Hedworth bought several of the
foresaid cattle that were taken away out of the foresaid grounds, of his
neighbors, viz. John Lax, Will Fenwick. Will. Hol^. And he also deposes that
the said Esquire Hedworth bred several of the foresaid cattle, from the day of
their being calved, and never was out of the real possession of them, till the
time aforesaid, that they were taken away as is before declared; and all this
he the more perfectly knows, for that this deponent has lived in the house
with the said Esquire Hedworth, almost four years, and was by him admitted to a
constant privity, to all or most of the actions and bargains of the said
Esquire Hedworth, and in his absence managed his affairs and business for him.

Jur. Coram Commissariis 9 July, 1651. Ralph Gray.
R. M. vera Copia.



These foregoing are the copies of 2 orders mentioned in the foregoing
Petition, that were read in open Court, to prove the cattle taken away, to be
the proper goods of John Hedworth Esquire, and these two following papers are
Copies of Affidavits produced in open Court, to prove the Sub-Commissioners
slighting and contemning the Orders served upon them from the Commissioners
sitting at Haberdashers Hall.

John Hedworth of Harraton in the County of Durham Esquire, makes Oath, That
upon the sixth day of August 1650, being before the Commissioners for
Sequestration at Durham, with an Order from the chief Commissioners at London,
for putting him in possession of his lands, which Order Sir Arthur Haselrig
would not suffer them to obey, but questioned this Deponent how he came in
possession of several of them; unto which this deponent made answer, that part
of them he had and enjoyed by expiration of Leases, and part of others by
Judgment at Law, and that he had several trials of that nature to come before
the Judges at Durham the next assizes, which were within a few days after: Upon
which Sir Arthur Haselrig told this deponent that he sued for nothing but what
belonged to the State; whereas the houses and lands for which this deponent
sued, and upon which he had sealed Leases of ejectment, and expected trials,
were his own Inheritance, and not sequestered for his or any others delinquency;
and that at the same time Sir Arthur Haselrig turned him about in the Court,
and openly commanded Col. Wren, that at the Judges coming to town, he should
repair unto them, and cause them not to suffer any proceedings in Court
whatsoever, that had relation to any pretended lands of the said deponent: By
which means this deponent durst not go on with his trials, whereby this
deponent sustained very much loss and damage. And this deponent further says,
that upon the 13 of February 1650. presenting himself with his Council before
the said Commissioners sitting then at Durham, and that with a second Order
from the chief Commissioners at London, for their obedience to the first which
they refused, whereupon this deponents Council, Mr. John Heath made the
warrantableness of his cause to appear unto them, by virtue of that Order, and
advice they last received from the chief Commissioners at London, whereunto Mr.
Thomas Dallivale being one of the Sub-Commissioners then sitting at Durham,
answered and said unto the said deponent and Mr. Heath his Council, that
notwithstanding they had public Orders presented unto them, yet many times
they received private instructions to the contrary, or words to that effect.

Jur. Cotum Commissariis July 2. 1651. John Hedworth.
R.M. vera Copia.

Ralph Gray of Harraton in the Country of Durham Gentleman, makes Oath, that
upon the eleventh day of June last, he together with George Gray of Harraton
Esquire, did deliver unto the Commissioners for Sequestrations in the said
County, two Orders of the honorable the Commissioners for Compounding: the one
bearing date the 23 of May 1651. concerning the examination of witnesses in the
Case of George Gray of Harraton aforesaid Esquire, and to return the
examinations in five weeks, from the said 25. of May: and the other bearing
date the 28 of May 1651. whereby the said Commissioners were ordered to send up
to the said Commissioners for Compounding, the proofs upon Oath; whereupon
they judged the cattle taken from John Hedworth of Harraton Esquire, to be the
cattle of George Gray Esquire, and to examine witnesses on both sides if
desired, and to make return thereof within ten days after notice of the said
order; and both the said Orders were entered in the Book of the said
Commissioners for Sequestrations. And he further makes Oath, that upon ths
said eleventh day of June last, he together with the said George Gray, desired
the said Commissionerss for Sequestrations, that in obedience to both the said
Orders, they would set a time to examine witnesses in both the said cases; but
they could not prevail with them to set any time: and this deponent did upon
the eighteenth day of June last, together with the said George Gray again
attend the said Commissioners for Sequestrations, to appoint a time to examine
witnesses according to the two Orders aforesaid, that he delivered to them; but
they could not prevail with them to appoint any time, but Master Dalavall, one
of them, said, they knew what they had to do; so that this deponent and the
said George Gray waited for their obedience to the said Order until the time
limited in the said Order for a return from the said commissioners for
Sequestrations in the said County, was elapsed, and they would do nothing
therein.

Jur. Coram Commissariis 9. July 1651. Ralph Gray.
R. M. Vera copia.

Here follows the Copy of a third Affidavit of Mr George Gray's to prove the
goods to be John Hedworth's Esquire.
George Gray of Harraton in the County of Durham Gentleman, aged sixty eight
years or thereabouts, makes Oath, That whereas by a Certificate from the
Commissioners for Sequestrations in the County of Durham, dated 14 Novembris
1650. it is alleged that upon an Order made by the said Commissioners dated
March 19, 1649. whereby Colonel Hacker was Authorized to distrein the goods of
this deponent for some arrears of Rents, pretended to be due by this deponent
to one John Jakson a delinquent, that thereupon this deponent (upon or about
the time of the making of the abovesaid Order) did cunningly and fraudulently
pretend that he had assigned the cattle so distreined unto John Hedworth
Esquire, this deponents son in law, and that this was done in color to defraud
the State, to whom the said Rents were due, as is alleged in the said
Certificate. Now this deponent deposes and says, That the goods, nor any of
them so taken or distreined by the Order of the said Commissioners, upon the
grounds at Harraton or thereabout (pretended to be the goods of this deponent)
were not at the time of the said distress, nor had been for the space of
twelve months before that time, any of this deponents goods, neither had this
deponent any title or interest in any of them; but that the said cattle were
most of them really the proper goods of the said John Hedworth Esquire, and
some of them belonged to some other neighbors, who never yet got them again to
this deponents knowledge.

Jur. Coram Commissariis 9. April 1651. George Gray.
R. M. Vera copia.

Now laying these few things together, (which yet are but a part of what I have
to complain of) let me appeal to your consciences (as not long since I did at
your open B^^) whether Sir Arthur Haselrig, and his under Commissioners, or
petty slaves in the Country, have not dealt worse with us then ever wicked
Ahab dealt with poor Naboth, who scorned to take away his vineyard from him,
before he had proffered him a better for it, or the value in money? but Sir
Arthur etc. has taken away our poffession by force and violence, without so
much as ever proffering us one penny of consideration therefore, or ever so much
as setting up a man of straw by way of title against us; and has dealt with us
so, that as I then told you, so I aver now, it had been a happiness for us when
we fell into Sir Arthur's hands, we had fallen into the hands of thieves and
robbers upon the high way; for then we could have raised the hue and cry after
them, and have had some sport (at least) for our money and goods; or if it had
been done in the day time, we could at law have recovered our money of the
Hundred where the robbery was committed; whereas now, God knows, we are by Sir
Arthur, ( Strafford like) expressly denied the benefit of the Law, our
inheritance and birthright; and by you, whom the Parliament has appointed in
all such cases, as now I complain of, to do us justice and right, denied all
the rules of justice, conscience, and equity; and by you our blood-suck'd, and
exposed to pining by little and little, and made by you ten times worse, and
not better, by a constant attendance upon you for your Orders, and then when
they are got to ride above 200 miles to serve them in the Country, and there
dance attendance for their answers; and then post up above 200. miles again to
make Affidavit of the serving of them, and then to wait upon you till your
leisure pleases to vouchsafe to be told of your Under-Commissioners contempts
of your public Orders, upon the private instructions you send them; and then
upon the motion to struggle for a new Order, like horses in a mill, you will
just go round, and give only in effect what was in the former, after a months
attendance to our vast expense, and then make us stay a week, or ten days
sometimes, before you will vouchsafe to set four of your hands to it, some of
your four selves having got a trick to carp and pick quarrels at any orders you
like not, though made according to the public Vote that you are at the debate
of; yea sometimes, when three hands are to an Order, a fourth of you will except
against it, and make a new one to be drawn; and then in case of rubs when it
comes to be spoken unto, an answer is ready, that you are full of business,
and things must come in course: and so there is delay upon delay ad insinitum;
by means of which your Court is become a greater torment and purgatory than the
Pope's.

Nay, this is not all, for as I once averred at your Bar, so I do the same now,
that by Sir Arthur's dealing (so arbitrarily and tyrannically) with us, to rob
us of our Lands, Goods, Estates, and Inheritances at his will and pleasure, he
commits higher treason then Strafford did, (if destruction and levelling of
properties, subversion of laws, and exercising of an arbitrary tyrannical
power be treason.) For alas! poor Strafford did what he did, to Richard Earl of
Corck, and to the Lord Mount Norris, and to Thomas Lord Dillon, and to Adam
Viscount Loftus, and to George Earl of Kildare, etc. in a Prerogative time,
when there was little hopes or expectation of seeing a Parliament to redress
the peoples grievances; and yet for all that Strafford in those times did, he
had the then common received countenance of Authority, viz. the Kings
Commissions, who was then commonly reputed and styled the Fountain of Law and
Justice. But Sir Arthur Haslerig and his Associats has destroyed and levelled
our proprieties, and in our case subverted the Laws and Liberties of Enland,
and exercised an arbitrary and tyrannical power over us, against and without
law; and that after he himself was one of the Judges to condemn Strafford, as a
Traitor, to have his head chopped off for the like or less things; and during
the sitting of a Parliament, the people of Englands hopes for the redress of
all their grievances, has this been done by him; nay, after the Parliament
has raised and maintained a bloody War for the preservation of the laws,
proprieties and liberties of the people: and after the Parliament has chopped
off the Kings head for violation of the laws and liberties of England; and
after the Parliament has forced the people to take many Oaths, and after
themselves have put forth many Declarations to maintain the laws and liberties
of England, with all things incident and belonging to the lives, liberties and
properties of the people, has Sir Arthur Hasterig done this transcendent
wickedness, without any shadow or color from Order, Ordinances, or Act of
Parliament; to the unsufferable and unspeakable indignity and dishonor of the
Parliament, and to the apparent hazard of their ruin and destruction, by
alienating (as much as in him lies) the peoples hearts and affections from
them; yea, the hearts of their cordiallest friends. And therefore I hope in due
time to see the aggrieved, oppressed, and suffering people in the four Northern
Counties, that have suffered by him and his Officers, as one man petition the
Parliament to have their just complaints against him, and upon proof thereof to
confiscate his vast, suddenly but ill got estate, to make them satisfaction for
the wrongs he has done them; and for the overplus of his estate, to bestow it
upon the four Northern wasted and oppressed Counties, to be kept as an annual
revenue to help to pay their public Taxes; for it is impossible that so vast
an estate, as in so short a time he has got his together, should be come by
honestly and justly: And in Henry the Eighth's time it was esteemed an high
crime in Cardinal Wolsey and his servants to grow so rich of a sudden; as
appears by the Articles preferred against him to the King, by the then Lords of
the privy Council, recorded in the fourth part of the Lord Cook's Institutes,
fol. 89. 90. 91. 92. 95. See Article 21. 22. and in Article 44. Their words
are, That by his unsatiable avarice, and ravenous appetite to have riches and
treasure without measure, he has so grievously oppressed your poor subjects
with so manifold crafts of bribery and extortion, that the Commonwealth of
this your Graces Realm is thereby greatly decayed and impoverished. And also
his cruelty, iniquity, affection and partiality has subverted the due course
and order of your Graces Laws, to the undoing of a great number of your loving
people: And therefore they humbly pray of the King, That such a punishment may
be inflicted upon him, as may be to the terrible example of others, to beware
so to offend your Grace, and your Laws hereafter.

Gentlemen, I might further go on to illustrate, and show the further designs
of Sir Arthur to undermine and ruin my Family; but this Epistle is swelled
already to a greater bigness then I intended, and my shortness of time by
reason of an intended long journey, will not permit me further at large to
proceed; and therefore I shall reserve what is behind for another encounter,
or a second part to the same tune; where I shall pretty fully open the great
mystery and design of Sir ARTHUR by his specious pretenses to the Parliament,
to get them to overthrow all the old Committees of Sequestration. In short, he
could never in the Northern parts have put out all those faithful men that
would never bow their knees to Baal (I mean, his will and pleasure) if he had
not accomplished that, and with his huge zealous long speeches and pretenses
have blinded the House, to make them judge him a fit man to be one of the two to
name the seven principal Commissioners; amongst which, though there was a
mixture of honest men, yet the major part of you being his vassals, he had
thereby an opportunity to get you to place in to be under-Commissioners in the
North, the basest of men, that would soly captivate their reasons and
consciences to his lust and will; and there being in that County enough of all
the three sizes, that are fit for a tyrants use, viz. fools, knaves, or
beggars, he in the County of Durham, as I lately told you at your Bars, having
put us in two men to govern our Country, viz. Colonel Fran. Wren, and Master
Thomas Dalavall, that by reason of their baseness are fit for nothing but to be
kicked out of a Commonwealth; for besides their gross partiality and injustice
in their places, the one of them, viz. Col. Wren was, as I then told you,
casheered at the head of his army or Regimant, at his first expedition into
Scotland for the basest plundering fellow that ever marched at the heels of a
man of honor; and this I told you to be true and I would make it good: and now
I further tell you, that at the Generals coming back for England, at Barnard
Castle in the County of Durham he was pleased to give unto my Father, and some
other well affected Gantlemen, a narrative of his baseness, and the danger by
his unworthy carriage he put his army into: and for the other, viz. Mr Tho.
Dalavall, it was well known he was a constant adhe^er to, and liver in the
Earl of New-castles quarters, and never in times by past so much as reputed a
private well wisher to the Parliameur or their welfare, but rather strongly
judged to be a commissionated Captain for the Earl of Newcastle in the Garrison
of Newcastle; and therefore having, it may be, guilt enough in his own
conscience, and peradventure sufficiently known to Sir Arthur, he is a fi^man
for him to hold a rod over his shoulders, thereby right or wrong to do as he
would have him, as that Jury of Cavaliers did for Sir Arthur in one Master
Fenwicks case, about seven miles from Newcastle, who at my last being in the
North, came to my brother Gors to me, and freely told me to this effect, that
Sir Arthur having a mind to his land ( Ahab like) having the High-Sheriffe and
the Under-Sheriffe at his beck and command, whom he caused to pannell a Jury of
Delinquents to pass upon it, who being Master Fenwicks Neighbors, came all,
or the most part to him, and told him they were his neighbors, and in their
consciences knew well enough he had a good right and title to his land; but,
said they, Master Fenwick, you know we have been in enmity against the State,
and under the lash and indignation of Sir Arthur to destroy us at his will and
pleasure, with our wives, and children, and he has put us on purpose upon your
Jury, and been with us, etc. and we must either go against our consciences, and
do as he will have us to find your land for him, or else you know he will
destroy both us, our wives, and children, and therefore say they to him, We beg
of you for Gods sake to advise with your Council to find out some clause in
the Law to except against us, having been Cavaliers, as unfit to be of your
Jury, or else if you get us not put off, we must find against you, although it
be against our own knowledge and conscience.

But the man fully knowing the integrity of his cause, and believing they knew
it as well as himself, he said, If they would damn their souls let them; and so
was overthrown, and now is like, as he himself told me and others, totally
thereby to be ruined. And the truth of it is, Sir Arthur can in our County find
no man so fit for his purpose, as these that have guilt enough upon their
shoulders; and therefore it is that he has under him Master Thomas Shadford
for our high Sheriff, a strongly reputed Cavalier in both the wars, and
approved one in the first, but yet never sequestered. But besides, Sir Arthur
has not only the command over our bodies and estates there, but also he is
turned the Archbishop of our souls, having Master Wels under him for his
officiating Bishop or commissary, by whom he has almost made sure of all the
Pulpits and tithes in the country: So that truly and ingeniously, Sir Arthur
Haslerig there has reduced us to that nighnesse of affinity to French
Peasants, that can call nothing they buy or work for their own, longer then
their Lords and Masters please to let them enjoy it; that in good earnest, I
speak it from my very soul and conscience, that I verily believe, if I, or some
body else should not rise up against him, to endeavor to bring him to a just
account for his unjust actions, all the land that I have in that country, which
the Parliament (as the price of my blood, for my Episcopal and Star Chamber
sorrows) have (by the Honorable and Noble mediation of the present Lord
General) settled upon me and my heirs, in one year or two more, would not be
(as yet I will justify it, it has not been) worth unto me one groat, the
tenants rebelling both against the State and me, and telling my agents they
have powerful backers: and being it is the price of my blood, and the product
of so many piercing sorrows as I have undergone for it, I am resolved through
the strength of God, that never a private or particular man in England shall
deprive me of it, or of the privileges that belong unto me by it, unless his
sword be so long and strong that it is able to cut mine in pieces, and the hand
that holds it, and also the tongue that uses to plead cheerfully without
amazement for my life and liberty.

There is much more of your juggling and unjust dealing about my Uncle George's
delinquency behind, in your sending down private commissions, to examine
witnesses against him, without his knowledge, with such instructions as that
you are so ashamed to have seen, that when I bid Master Baily your clark five
pieces of gold to let Master Hugh Peter's then with us, to read them, or twenty
pieces to give me a copy of them, he ingeniously told Master Peter's and my
self, he durst not: and being asked by him, Why? he was by his Masters
commanded to the contrary; and being asked by which of them, he told us, he
durst not tell us, but they sat at the table, and if he pleased, he might go
and discourse with themselves, and see if he could find it out himself; for
truly he was but a servant and durst say no more, and therefore desired to be
pressed no further. Upon which Master Peter's with open mouth coming to the table,
cried shame of you to the purpose: and you may remember honest Master Moyer
told you he knew not of it, nor had no finger in it, and it was an abominable
shame any such thing should be done, and promised me a copy of it; but to this
day I could never set my eyes upon it. But the full discoursing of this with
much more must remain for a second part. And so at present I bid you farwell,
and rest,

From my house without Ludgate, at the end of the old Baily, this 30. July.
1651. JOHN LILBURNE, now as honest as ever, and as ready to justify the
esentiall substance of all here written with his life and fortune as ever he
was to do any action in the world.

POSTSCRIPT.
Gentlemen, Your interest with Sir Arthurs may be very great, and to do me a
mischief to the purpose, you may incense the Parliament against me to destroy
me for meddling with them; but truly, I hope, I have been too wise for you, by
totally (I hope) avoiding the meddling with them in the least. And I hope,
seeing lately they have taught me such a piece of gallant justice in the Lord
Howards case, they will not be offended at me for faithfully endeavoring to
prepare for them a greater offender then he, viz. Sir Arthur Haselrig: and I
hope, I stand now as right in the eye of the Parliament in general, as any man
in England, having of late done all such actions in respect and obedience to
them that is fitting for a wise man, or a man of conscience or honor to do, to
take off all their jealousies from him, that I go not about in the least to
disturb their peace and quietness, but mind and desire the tranquillity of this
Commonwealth in my little sphere, as much as they do in their great. And so I
remain.

August 2. 1651. The same John Lilburne, I used to be.

FINIS.

