Malice detected, In Printing certain INFORMATIONS And EXAMINATIONS CONCERNING
Lieut. Col. JOHN LILBURN, The morning of his TRIAL; AND Which were not at all
brought into his INDICTMENT.

Printed at LONDON, 1653.

Good men of England,
YOu cannot but take notice with what bitterness of spirit, and malice,
altogether unbecoming the profession of Christianity, my life is prosecuted: no
stone has been left unturned, no stratagem unattempted, to render me odious,
and fit for death, in the esteem of my friends, my Jury, and the Parliament. My
weaknesses and infirmities (which God knows are many, whose wisdom I have often
implored by his divine assistance to lessen) not only these, I say, are by
Agents of the basest of men purposely sent abroad aggravated to the highest
extremity, but they do also lay to my charge things that I know not, and that
my soul abhors. This very morning of my Trial, they have printed a Book full of
the most abominable falsities that ever proceeded from the wicked heart of the
falsest man. They know how I am on every hand beset with subtle, crafty, and
bloody-minded Prosecutors, whom at my Trial I have to deal withal; how I have
been wearied and spent in my spirits since my coming over, having had hardly
any leisure to sleep or eat; how I am at this time straightened, my Trial being
upon me, and it being therefore almost impossible that I should give any answer
to that malicious Paper. They have confidently dispersed it, supposing that its
poison will insinuate it self into the understandings of men, without any
possibility of an Antidote. I do therefore desire all good men, who love Truth
above Fiction, and whose hearts are not tainted with the desire of Blood, to
consider these Particulars, offered, to show the falsity and malice of these
informations, being yet not the hundredth part of what I could say, were I not
so oppressed with multitude of cogitations.

First, be pleased to take notice, that before and about the time of my Trial
at Guild Hall, there were in the same manner many Rumors dispersed of my
correspondencie with the King, and the mouths of many of my friends stopped, by
telling them that they had matters of that nature so notorious against me,
evidently showing my tampering with the King, the which they would produce
under my own hand at my Trial, that when they should see them, they would be
ashamed to own me: yet when my Trial came, not the least syllable of that
nature was produced; so that then it appeared all was feigning and falsitie, to
bias the People and my Jury, and make me fit for slaughter.

Secondly, the particular of greatest weight in these informations, is, That I
should offer the Duke of Buckingham, Sir Ralph Hopton, and other Cavaliers
abroad, upon the procurement of ten thousand pounds to destroy the Lord
General, the Parliament, and Council of State, and that (as Captain Titus
informs) in half an hour. To this I answer, That never any words of this nature
passed from my mouth, or any such thoughts ever entered into my heart, the Lord,
the Almighty God, is my witness: and those persons to whom these words are
pretended to be spoken, will (I am well assured) attest as much: though
besides, I do judge the folly of the speeches abovenamed, and the ridiculous
impossibility therein contained, will sufficiently manifest that they are the
officious coynage of Spies and Intelligencers, some whereof are no better then
Knights of the Post; who, to gain repute with their Masters, have basely forged
those suggestions, knowing well how great a means it is likely to prove, to
bring them into favor.

Thirdly, as to that acquaintance I have had with the Duke, I have spoken
thereunto largely in my Declaration printed since my coming over; wherein I
manifest, that it was only in order to his coming into England upon such terms
as should be acceptable to the General and Parliament.

Fourthly, and lastly, it is a stratagem of a new nature, and far unsuitable to
the way of true Christians, to print against the prisoner under Trial, such
particulars as are altogether foreign, and nothing relating to the way of his
Indictment: I believe, it is a malice that can scarcely be paralleled: I am
sure I find no such course taken by the blood-thirsty prosecutors of our
blessed Savior and his Apostles. Doubtless, if there were any thing of truth
material in these informations, which they could have proved, they would have
brought them into my Indictment, and have given me liberty, fairly, and in open
Court, to have made my defense: But it was sufficient to their end, that they
should the morning of my Trial (against which time they were particularly
provided) work their effect in corrupting the understanding of those into whose
hands my life is entrusted, little expecting that I should have this
opportunity to speak this little in my own defense, leaving the further
clearing of these particulars to a time of better leisure, if it shall please
God to afford it unto me; though I am not over-sollicitous for the matter, if
at least my death may be of greater advantage to the undeceiving of the People,
and recovery of their Liberties, then my preservation. Into the hands of God I
commit my self: Death or Life (as shall seem good to him) shall be alike
welcome.

John Lilburne.

FINIS.

