A Second Address directed to his Excellency the Lord General CROMWELL, and
the Right Honorable the Council of State sitting at WHITE HALL: Being, The
humble Petition of Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne.
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioner has long suffered a very hard exilement from his dearest
Christian friends, his nearest relations, his estate, employments, and native
Country, by virtue of an Act of the late Parliament. And your Petitioner has
been a very gazing-stock beyond the Seas, and in constant peril of his life,
only for his love to this Commonwealth, and faithfulness to their service.

That the late Parliament being dissolved, and the present care of the
Government devolved upon your Honors, who profess the fear of the Lord, and
the design of advancing Christ's Kingdom; your Petitioner believed that he
should find mercy and impartial justice from you, and a readiness to loose
every heavy yoke, and cut in sunder all wicked bonds, the Lord having led you
forth to break many of the bonds of men, in order to those ends: And in this
confidence the Lord persuading your Petitioners heart that he had mercy for him
and his poor ruined family, in his own Country, resolved to depend upon your
Justice and goodness to protect him, and to admit of a Legal examination of the
late Parliaments sentence of Banishment against your Petitioner: But having
thus cast* himself and his life at your feet, he finds your Order to apprehend
him, and execute the said Sentence; whereupon he is now a Prisoner.

That the authority of the late Parliament being taken from them for
misgovernment, your Petitioner hopes you will please to suspend at least the
execution of any Acts made by them, which shall not clearly and evidently
appear to your spirits and consciences to have such Justice in them, as God may
be truly glorified in your execution of them. And therefore he humbly offers to
your considerations these things following concerning the Act made by them for
his perpetual banishment.

1. First, that the Parliament in the said Act did not judge your Petitioner an
Offender according to any Law in being; and unless there were a Civil Law
against what he had done, he was no Offender in the least against the Laws of
man.

2. Secondly, the said Act is a Law made after a fact is done, to ordain a
punishment for that fact which was never ordained or heard of before; and if
that practice be admitted, the very foundations of all Government (which are
Laws) are utterly overturned, and every Man governing may destroy all or any of
the governed at his will, without possibility of account to man; for that
cannot be given or taken, but by a Rule between the Governors and the governed.

3. Thirdly, That your Petitioner was not tried with liberty of defense, for or
against any of the pretended crimes, for which he was banished by the said Act;
for nothing was examined by the Committee of Parliament, upon whose Report the
said Act was made; but the matter of Mr Primats Petition, for whom your
Petitioner appeared only as Council; and if that was scandal, and your
Petitioner concerned therein, he conceives that he ought then to have been
tried legally for that crime at the Common Law, and no where else.

4. Fourthly, that if your Petitioner were guilty of Scandal against Sir Arthur
Haslerigg, as the Parliament had judged; yet that sentence of absolute Ruin to
him and his whole Family is not a punishment proportionable to the Offense; and
the Laws of God, and the Fundamental Laws of this Land require a proportion
between Crimes and Punishments.

5. Fifthly, that if the said Act he admitted to be Just, and to be drawn into
President, then no Englishman whatsoever can justly or rationally claim from
the Governors any Freedom, Right, benefit, or Privilege of being Tried and
Judged according to the Laws, whether he offends or not, or whether his Life,
Liberty, or Estate shall be taken from him, or preserved.

And your Petitioner further Offers to your Honors, that he has neither in the
least offered, nor intended any Contempt unto any Authority, in coming into
this Nation against the said Act; he humbly conceiving, That in this juncture
of Time, wherein the Parliament is dissolved, and Right is declared to be
universally done to all of this Nation, he was capable of making his humble
Address to those who have so Declared, as a Party much grieved by the said Act
of the late Parliament.

Therefore the whole Premises considered; he humbly prays your protection, and
suspention of any proceedings against him upon the said Act, until the Justice
of the same, as to the matter and manner of it, be legally examined; That
whatsoever he now suffers, being to be under your Power, your Consciences may
be clearly satisfied, that you do therein glorify God, and do evident good to
the Commonwealth.

And he shall pray, etc. JOHN LILBURNE.
From Mr Sheriff Underwoods-House in Bucklers-Bury in London, June 16. 1653.
London, Printed by Tho. Newcomb dwelling in Thamestreet over against Baynards
Castle.


