A PLEA at large, For JOHN LILBVRN Gentleman, now a prisoner in NEWGATE.
Penned for his use and benefit, by a faithful and true well-wisher to the
Fundamental Laws, Liberties, and Freedoms of the ancient free people of
England; and exposed to public view, and the censure of the unbyassed and
learned men in the Laws of England, Aug. 6. 1653.
JOhn Lilburn Gent. now prisoner at the Bar says, That he having heard the
Charge contained in the Indictment now read unto him at the Bar; for Plea
thereunto he says, That it appears by the Act of Parliament of Jan. 30.
1651. That upon the 15 of January 1651 a judgment was given in Parliament
against one Lieut. Col. John Lilburn in the Act named, for high Crimes and
Misdemeanors by him committed; as by the same appears, for which the Fines and
other punishments were promulgated against him, mentioned in the said Act. But
the said John Lilburn now prisoner at the Bar says, That the said John Lilburn
in the said Act named, and he the now prisoner at the Bar, be not one and the
self same person, for that he the now prisoner at the Bar is a freeborn
English Gentleman, and never was legally Charged, Indicted, and convicted,
either by the Parliament or any other Court of Judicature, being a Court of
Record, in the English Nation, or Commonwealth. And he says, that the
Parliament being dissolved, and by the Law of Parliament in all dubious cases,
there being no other way to render the sense and meaning of the Parliament,
being a body politic, but by Vote of Parliament he says it is now impossible;
if the Speaker himself, and all the individual members of the said Parliament
should upon their oaths be produced at the Bar; yet it is impossible by all
their oaths, in Law to prove the John Lilburn now prisoner at the Bar, to be
that Lieut. Col. John Lilburn, that the said Parliament in the said Act of
banishment meant, because by the Law of Parliament there is no other way in all
dubious cases to render the sense of Parliament, but by the solemn Vote of the
Parliament fitting as a Parliament, and passing it thereupon as a body politic.

And the prisoner at the Bar further says, Neither was there any Judgment
given in Parliament against him the now prisoner at the Bar, for high Crimes
and Misdemeanors mentioned in the said Act, upon the said fifteenth of Jan.
1651. Votes and Resolves being not in the least any Judgments in Law, but at
most only preparatives, to more serious, solemn, and judicious things that are
to follow them; for what at most are they, or can they in Law be called or
styled? can they in any sense be styled Judgments? No, its impossible: because
they are no such things in themselves; for I resolve to go to such a place, on
such a day; and it may be within an hour after, I resolve to the contrary; is
this a Judgment? No: Vantrump the Dutch Admiral resolved at the last
Sea Fight, or the last sea fight before that, to beat the English Navy, but
when he came thoroughly to try it, he was not able to do it: was therefore his
resolve a Judgment, or the act of beating the English Fleet ever the more done
because he resolved it? No: and therefore John Lilburn Gent. the now prisoner
at the Bar says again, That a Resolve at most is but a preparative to the
doing or perfecting of a more solemn act: as for instance, a vicious man
resolves to lie with his neighbors wife, is that an act therefore ever the
more done, because he resolves it? No: for it may be for all his resolve he
will never be able to accomplish it, or do the act whiles he breaths. Again,
the Lord himself in Exodus 32. resolved to destroy and root out the children of
Israel for making them a golden Calf, and worshipping it, when Moses was in the
Mountain, yet that resolve never came to a Judgment, nor never was executed.
Again, David in the second of Samuel and the seventeenth, resolved to build God
a house, yet God would not let it be done by him (because he was a man of
blood) but it was done by his son Solomon: was that resolve therefore a
Judgment; or ever the more to be esteemed so, because David resolved it? no,
not in the least.

And the prisoner at the Bar further says, that it is in Law, Equity or Reason
impossible, that a Judgment in any legal Court of England should be past
against a freeborn Englishman, and that man daily forth coming, and never to
hear, read, nor see any of the proceedings anteceding the said Judgment: and
never summoned by any legal processes to any legal proceedings; nor called to
any legal Bar whatsoever, and demanded (according to Law) what he could say for
himself, why Judgment should not be past against him. Neither did the prisoner
John Lilburn now at the Bar, ever in all his life time, by kneeling at the Bar
of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England lately sitting at Westminster,
ever acknowledge that the said Parliament in Law ever had in all their life
times, any the least jurisdiction in the world, to sentence him in any kind,
or to fine, imprison or banish him, or any other freeborn Englishman of
England, though never so mean (that are none of their members or immediate
officers) for any crimes whatsoever; which is not by Law in the least within
their power, upon any pretense whatsoever: As John Lilburn the prisoner at the
Bar has fully and undenyably proved by Law in his Plea (upon the Writ of
Habeas Corpus) before the late Judges of the Kings Bench; viz. Judge Bacon and
Judge Rolls, upon the eighth of May, 1648. as in that printed Law-Argument
Entitled The Laws funeral, it is fully to be read, in page 8, 9, 10, 11. All
crimes whatsoever being for him, only and solely to be heard, determined, and
judged at the Common Law and nowhere else, all treasons being only to be tried
at the Common law, by a Jury of twelve legal men of the neighborhood, as
expressly appears by the Statute of 1 Hen. 4. chap. 10. and the 1 of May chap.
1. and 2 of Mary chap. 10. and so are all misdemeanors or breaches of peace,
though it be in affronting, beating, or wounding (which is much more then by
papers disgracing) any Parliamentman, for that's expressly to be tried by the
Kings (or now as it is called upper) bench, as clearly appears by the fifth of
Hen. 4. chap. 6. and the 11. of Hen. 6. cha. 11. Yea although a Sheriff by law
is to pay a hundred pound to the King, or now as they are called, To the
Keepers of the Liberties of England, and to suffer a years imprisonment, etc.
without Bail or Maineprise, for every false return of a Knight of the shire
that he makes, yet by law, the House of Commons in former time, were not in the
least to be Judges in this very business, so immediately concerning themselves;
but it shall be examined and tried before the Justices of Assizes in the
Sessions of the Assize, as appears by the 8. of Hen. 6. chap. 7. and 23. Hen.
6. chap. 15. Yea the Parliament are not to punish those that will not pay them
their wages for their service done in Parliament, but the refusers are to be
punished by the legal administers of the law in the ordinary of Courts of
Justice, as appears by the 23. of Hen. 6. chap. 11. Yea the law of England,
which is right reason, or as Sir Edward Cook styles it (in his second part
Institutes, folio 179.) the absolute perfection of reason; and which, as he
says, is the surest sanctuary that a man can take, and the strongest fortress
to protect the weakest of all; and therefore it is called the best birthright
the Subjects has, for thereby his goods, lands, wife, children, his body,
life, honor, and estimation are protected from injury and wrong; for (says
he) to every one of us, there comes a greater inheritance by the law then by
our parents, it being the Judges guide in all causes that come before them, in
the ways of right Justice, which never yet misguided any man that certainly
knew them, and truly followed them, 2 part. of the Lords Cooks Institutes, fol.
56, 63, 97, 526. and the 4. part folio 41. yea and the law-book of Ed. 6. folio
36. with the arguments in the Law in the Court of Kings Bench, upon the Writ of
Habeas Corpus in the cases of Sir John Eliot, Sir Thomas Daniel, etc. page 11.
in Michaelmas-terme, in the third of the late King Charles, calls the good old
fundamental Laws of England, the great inheritance of every subject, and the
inheritance of inheritances; without the enjoyments of which inheritance, we
have no inheritance at all. And therefore the said Oracle of the Law of
England, the Lord Cook, does bitterly cry out of the unexpressible mischief
that accrues to the whole body of the people of England, when any fundamental
maxims of their good old fundamental Laws are invaded or incroached upon,
either by Parliament, or any other power whatsoever, as appears in his 2 part
Institutes folio 29, 46, 48, 51 74, 103, 104, 179, 210, 249, 529, 533, 534,
540. and 3. part fol. 208. and 4. part fol. 41, 196, 197 198. and the preface
to the 4. part of the Lord Cooks Reports, where he says the Laws of England
consist of three parts, the Common Laws, Customs, and Acts of Parliament; for
any fundamental point of the ancient Common Laws and customs of the Realm it is
a maxim in policy, and a trial by experience, that the alteration of any of
them is more dangerous: for that which has been refined and perfected by all
the wisest men in former succession of ages, and proved and approved by
continual experience to be good and profitable for the Commonwealth, cannot
without great hazard and danger to be altered or changed: see also that old
Law-book, called The myrror of Justice, page 239.

And which law, as the author of the ancient and excellent law book, called the
Doctor and Student, chap. 4.8. is grounded upon six foundation, or basis, viz.
the law of reason. Secondly, the Law of God. 3. Upon diverse general customs of
common utility. 4. On diverse principals that be called maxims. 5. On diverse
particular customs. 6. On diverse Statutes made by the Kings and the
Common Counsel of the Nation; all which do abhor arbitra^iness in the
law-proceedings, especially in criminal cases; and especially it abhors the
arbitrary uncertain way of proceedings in Parliaments, the rules of which
certainly no man in heaven or earth knows (the vileness, wickedness, and
mischeviousness of which, is sufficiently demonstrated in the Lord Cravens late
printed case.) And says that worthiest of English Lawyers Sir Edward Cook, in
the Proeme to the third part of his Institutes, It is a miserable servitude or
slavery, where the law is uncertain or unknown; and therefore it is that the
twenty ninth Chapter of Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, and the Act that
abolished the Star Chamber, expressly says, That no freeman of England shall be
taken or imprisoned, or disseized of his freehold, or liberties, or free
customs, or be outlawed, or be exiled, but by lawful judgment (of a Jury of
twelve sworn men) of his equals (of the same neighborhood) according to the
law of the Land. And that none shall be taken (for any crime whatsoever, by any
person or Court whatsoever) unless it be by Indictment or Presentment of good
and lawful people of the same neighborhood, where such Deeds be done, in due
manner, or by Process made by Writ original at the Common Law; and that none be
put out of his franchise or freehold, unless he be duly brought in to answer,
and adjudged of the same according to the course of the law; and if any thing
be done (by any persons, or courts whatsoever) against the tenor of the same,
it shall be void in law, and holden for error: which two last Statutes of the
Petition of Right, and the Act that abol^sheth the Star Chamber, does expressly
and nominally ratify and confirm the Statute of the 42. of Edward the third,
which according to the peoples true fundamental law of England, makes void and
null all Acts of Parliament, Ordinances, Orders, Judgments, and Decrees
whatsoever, made by any power whatsoever, that are contrary unto, or in
diminution of the free people of Englands foresaid liberties and freedoms of
due Process of Law. And the Petition of Right expressly says, No man whatsoever
shall be any ways punished (especially in criminal cases) but according to the
laws and Statutes already established in the land. And those also by the said
Petition of Right, and the Statute that abolished the Star Chamber, are
precisely declared to be according to our good old native fundamental rights
and liberties, or else they are ipso facto null and void in law; this very
thing (or the securing thereof) alone, being the principal and chief declared
cause of all the late Parliaments, and present armies bloodshed and wars with
the late King and his son, and without the inviolable preservation of these our
fundamental laws and liberties, it is impossible that any in the Army, from the
highest to the lowest, in the least can acquit themselves of being justly
esteemed, both before God and just men, real and wilful murderers of all those
persons that they have stain in the late civil wars; and if so, woe unto them
when God makes inquisition for innocent blood.

Neither indeed is he the now prisoner at the Bar guilty of any such high
crimes and misdemeanors as is expressed in the said Act; neither ever was he
the now prisoner at the Bar in the least duly and legally banished and fined
by the said Act; nor yet is a Felon, nor guilty of felony in no manner of
respect whatsoever, as by the said Indictment now read unto him is supposed:
neither can he rationally imagine that by the Parliament that is mentioned in
the said Act of the 30 of January 1651. for banishing one Lieutenant Colonel
John Lilburn, is in the least meant the late Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England sitting at Westminster, (especially, because it is not so therein
expressed) who had taken many Oaths, and past abundance of Declarations, and
particularly that of the 9 of February 1648. inviolably to maintain the
Fundamental Laws of the Land, in reference to the Peoples lives, liberties, and
properties, with all things incident, appertaining, and belonging thereunto:
But that rather it was some ignorant sottish French Parliament sitting at Paris
or elsewhere in France, that understand nothing of the Laws, Liberties, and
Freedoms of England; or that it was the malignant Cavalier Parliament lately
sitting at Oxford, in the Kings Quarters there, post-dating their Act, and
thereby endeavoring by the said Act to create such a president as in the
consequence of it would destroy all the Laws, Liberties, and Properties of the
freeborn people of England, and thereby absolutely set up the Kings will and
prerogative above Law; the bare endeavoring of which, in the Earl of
Strafford, has been long since adjudged high treason. Or in the next place, it
the authors of the said monstrous and illegal Act of Banishment be neither the
ignorant Parliament of Paris, nor the Cavalier Parliament of Oxford, Then of
necessity, in the third place, it cannot in charity and reason but be judged
that the said Act of Banishment was drawn up by Mr. Scobel the Parliaments
Clerk, Mr. Hill their Chayr-man, and Mr. Prideaux their Attorney and
Post-master-general, when they were all riding post, and so jumbled or shaken
with fast riding, that it was impossible for them to hold their pens to write
right and true: and when they had framed it, then by some cunning artifice or
enchantment of theirs, they preferred it to the said Parliament, who in charity
and common reason must needs be judged to pass it when they were three quarters
asleep, against some silly natural fool called Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn,
that could not be imagined ever in his life to have read any thing of Law or
Reason, it being impossible (in the least in reason to be conceived) that the
late Supreme Authority, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England sitting
at Westminster, being only by their own Declarations, but trusted to provide
for the peoples weal, but not in the least for their woe, would ever in their
right wits, or not being three quarters asleep, pass such an Act of Parliament
against John Lilburn now prisoner at the Bar (who has much read the Law, and
very well understands the Fundamental Liberties of England, and has
hazardously adventured his life a thousand cimes, for the inviolable preserving
of them) because such an Act of Parliament as the foresaid Act of Parliament,
is in the first place an Act of Parliament against common right, common equity,
and common reason; and therefore is void and null in Law, and ought not to be
executed, as appears by these following authorities, viz. 1 part of Dr.
Bonham's Case, fol. 118. and the 8 of Edw. 3. fol. 3, 30, 33. F. Cessavit. 32
and 27 H. G. Annuity 41. and 1 Eliz. Dyer, 113. and 1 part Cook's Institutes,
lib. 2. Chap. 11. Sect. 209. fol. 140. and 4 Edw. 4.12. and 12 Edw. 4.18. and 1
H. 7.12, 13. and Plowd. Com. fol. 369. and Judge Jenkins learned works in the
Law, printed for J. Giles, 1648. but particularly, by his Discourse of Long
Parliaments, p. 139, 140. and see also Mr. W. Prynne's notable book of the 16
of June 1649. called, A Legal Vindication of the Liberties of England against
illegal Taxes, p. 11, 12, 13, etc. But especially see a book entitled The
Legal Fundamental Liberties of England revived, asserted, and vindicated,
printed and reprinted in the year 1649 page 54, 55, 56, 57. yea an Act of
Parliament that a man shall be judge in his own case, is a void Act in law, as
appears in Hubberts Case, fol. 120. and by the 8 part of Cook's Reports, in Dr.
Bonham's Case, and by the present Armies own Book of Declarations, p. 35, 52,
54, 59, 60, 61, 63, 132, 141, 142, 143, 144. yea, says that learned Oracle of
the Law of England Sir Edw. Cook, in the 4 part of his Institutes, fol. 330.
Where Reason cease, there the Law cease: for, seeing Reason is the very
life and spirit of the Law it self, the Lawgiver is not to be esteemed, to
respect that which has no reason, although the generality of the words, at the
first sight, or after the letter, seem otherwise. And says the said learned
Author, in his first part Institutes, fol. 140. All Customs and Prescriptions,
Acts of Parliament, Laws and Judgments, that be against Reason, are void and
null in themselves. And says the Armies Sollicitor-General, John Cook, in the
late Kings Case stated, p. 23. That by the law of England, any Act or Agreement
against the Laws of God and Nature, is a mere nullity: for as a man has no
hand in making the Laws of God and Nature, no more has he power to mar or
alter them. And he cites the Earl of Leicester's adjudged Case for a proof. And
in page 20 he also says, that all the Judges in England cannot make one Case
to be Law that is not Reason, no more then they can prove an hair to be white
that is black: which if they should so declare or adjudge, it is a mere
nullity: for Law (says he) must be Reason adjudged. And therefore says he,
page 8. That man or men that rules by lust, and not by law, is or are creatures
that were never of Gods making, nor of Gods approbation, but his permission:
and though such men be said to be gods on earth, it is in no other sense then
the devil is called the god of this world. And excellent to this very purpose
is that ancient Law-book called The Doctor and Student, who in his second
Chapter, page 4. expressly says, Against the law of Nature (which he calls the
Law of Reason) Prescription, Statute, or Customs may not prevail: and if any be
brought in against it, they be no Prescriptions, Statutes, nor Customs, but
things void, and against justice. And what this law of Nature or Reason is, he
excellently shows in the latter end of the fourth page, and the beginning of
the fifth: and therefore in page 7. he expresty says, That to every good Law
is required these properties, viz. That it be honest, right wise, possible in
it self, and after the custom of the Country; convenient for the place and
time, necessary, profitable, and also manifest that it be not captious by any
dark sentence, nor mixed with any private wealth, but all made for the common
good: for (says he) every man's law must be consonant to the Law of God,
otherwise they are not righteous nor obligatory. All which Judgments or Cases
in Law, in the equitable and rational part of them, are fully confirmed by that
commonly reputed able Lawyer Sergeant John Bradshaw, late Lord President of the
high Court of Justice against King Charles; who in his large Speech to him, and
against him, printed in the second Edition of his Trial, and sold by Peter
Cole, Francis Tyton, and John Playford, 1650. from p. 52. to 70. And amongst
other passages in p. 55. he has this: That the end of having Kings or any
other Governors, it is for the enjoying of justice; that is the end. Now Sir,
(says he) if so be the King will go contrary to that end, or any other
Governor will go contrary to the end of his Government, he must understand
that he is but an Officer in trust, and he or they ought to discharge that
trust, and they are to take order for the animadversion and punishment of such
an offending Governor. And in p. 53. he tells the King, That as the Law is his
superior, so also he tells him there is something that is superior to the
Law, and that is indeed the parent or author of the Law, and that is the people
of England: for Sir, as they are those that at the first (as other Countries
have done) did choose to themselves this form of Government, even for Justice
sake, that justice might be administered, that peace might be preserved: so that
Sir (says he to the King) the people gave Laws to Governors, according to
which they should govern: and if those Laws should have proved inconvenient or
prejudicial to the Public, the People had a power in them, and reserved to
themselves, to alter them as they shall see cause.

Secondly, such an Act of Parliament as the aforesaid Act of Banishment, is not
only against common right, common equity, and common reason; but it is
absolutely destructive to the very ends of the peoples Trust conferred upon the
Parliament, and so the highest of treasons that can be committed. And that it
is destructive to the ends of the peoples Trust, clearly appears by the
Statutes of 4 Edw. 3. cap. 14 and 16 Edw. 3.10. which expressly says, that a
Parliament at least shall be holden once every year; and that for the
maintenance of the peoples Laws and Liberties, and the redress of diverse
mischiefs and grievances that daily happen. And suitable to these things are the
ends contained in the Writs that summon them, and the intentions of those that
choose the Members and send them. And suitable to this, is the end of the
Parliaments sitting, as the present General and his Army in many of their
remarkable Declarations have fully declared, against the late 11 Members and
their accomplices, yea and forced the late Parliament to raze out of their
books and Records many wicked and unjust things, as they judged them to be,
after the Parliament had solemnly past them, as Votes, Orders, Judgments, and
Acts, yea and endeavored very earnestly to hang diverse of those as Traitors
that had executed them, as particularly Alderman Adams, Alderman Langham,
Alderman Bunce, with the Lord Mayor Sir John Gayre, and diverse others. But the
greatest grievances and mischiefs in the world are by the aforesaid mischievous
and unjust Banishing Act established, ratified, and confirmed: for by it a man
is condemned to lose his liberty and estate, and the comforts of this life, and
that without any the least crime committed, or accusation exhibited, or legal
Processes issued out, to summon the party to make any defense in the world, or
ever calling or permitting him to speak one word for himself; which is an Act
or proceeding against the light and law of Nature, Reason, the Law of God,
against the law of Honor, Conscience, and common Honesty; yea, a dealing worse
with the party, then ever the cruel Jews did with Christ, or then the bloody
butchers Bishop Gardner and Bonner did with the roasted Martyrs in Queen Mary's
days, who always suffered them to have due processes of Law, and to know and
see their accusers, and to have free liberty to speak for themselves; and never
condemned them, but for transgressing a known and declared law in being. Yea,
also dealing worse with the party, then ever the bloody Gunpowder-Traytors were
dealt with by King James, who always allowed them fair trials in law, from the
beginning to the end, at the Bar of Justice for their lives. Yea, it is a worse
dealing with the party, then ever the Parliament themselves dealt with the
bloodiest and most massacring Traitors that ever were in Arms against them to
cut their throats. Yea, the forementioned practice of the foresaid most illegal
and unrighteous Act of Banishment, is an Act and proceedings in the highest
subversion of the Fundamental Law and Liberty of England that can be invented
or imagined; and by consequence, if it may without the highest offense, or
soloecism in Law be supposed, that his Excellency the Lord Genesis Cromwell,
Major-Gen. Harison, and the rest of the Members of the late Supreme Authority
of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England sitting at Westminster. had any real
finger in it, or were actors of it, they may and ought all of them, with all
the rest under them, that have executed any part of the aforesaid unjust,
injurious, illegal Act of Parliament, to be apprehended, indicted, and
proceeded against at the Common Law, as Traitors, and subverters of the
Fundamental Laws, Liberties, and Freedoms of the freeborn people of England;
as that learned man in the Laws of England, Sir Edward Cook, in the second,
third, and fourth Parts of his Institutes (all three of which are published by
two special Orders of the late House of Commons, in anno 1641. for good Laws)
does declare and prove was dealt with by Empson and Dudley in less cases then
the fore-recited unjust act of Banishment, and of which severe punishments
those Arbitrary and discretionary Judges, viz. Trisilian, Fulthrop, Belknap,
Care, Holt, Burge, and Lockton, in Richard the seconds time sufficiently tasted
of; as also their arbitrary Accomplices, the then Lord Major of London, Sir
Simon Burley, Sir William Ellinham, Sir John Salisbury, Sir Thomas Trevit, Sir
James Barnis, and Sir Nicholas Dodgworth, some of whom were destroyed and
hanged for setting their hands to Judgments in subversion of the peoples
fundamental Law and Liberties, in advancing the Kings will above the same; yea
one of them was banished therefore, although he had a Dagger held unto his very
breast to compel him to set his hand thereto. But the two first mentioned
persons cases being the most remarkable, the prisoner at the Bar shall only at
present enlarge upon theirs.

Which Case of Empson and Dudley was thus: At the Parliament holden by King,
Lords, and Commons, in Henry the sevenths time, who was an undoubted lawful
king of England, and by his marriage of his wife, the Lady Elizabeth, heir
apparent to the House of York, as himself was to the house of Lancaster, had
united the two claims of Lancaster and York, in himself, and in a pitched
battle had slain King Richard the third the usurper; and by reason of the
extraordinary many troubles of his reign, and the ignorant Regal time in which
he lived considered, he had a thousand times more grounds to be arbitrary and
discretionary in his proceedings with the people of England, then the late
decapitated Parliament had; yet he summoned a free Parliament, who sat
peaceably and quietly, without the force or purging of soldiers; and after
that several Juries, at Assizes and Sessions, by corruption and savor, had
refused to find persons that were judicially proved guilty before them of
breach of penal laws, as in full and free Parliament by King, Lords and
Commons, is avowedly declared, an Act of Parliament, (recorded in the fourth
part of Cooks Institutes, fol. 40. 41.) in the 11. of Hen. 7. chap. 3. was
passed by King, Lords, and Commons, in full and free Parliament, to enable the
Justices of Assize in open Sessions to be holden before them, and the Justices
of the Peace in each County in England, upon information for the King before
them to be made, to have full power and authority by their discretion (without
trials by Juries) to hear and determine all offenses and contempts committed
against penal laws; in all which arbitrary or discretional proceedings,
murder, treason, and felony, was excepted out of their cognizance or
jurisdiction; as also all other offenses whereby any person should lose life,
or member, or lands, goods, or chattels to the party complaining. By pretext of
which Statute, says the Lord Cook in his last recited folio, Empson and Dudley
(privy Counselors and Justices of Peace to Henry the seventh) did commit upon
the subject insufferable pressures and oppressions, which yet at the highest
was but the taking away some small part of the persons estates from them that
they condemned. And therefore this Statute was justly soon after the decease of
Henry the seventh, repealed at the next Parliament after his decease, by the
Statute of the 1 Hen. 8. cha. 6. A good caveat, says he, to Parliaments to
leave all causes to be measured by the golden and straight met-wand of the law,
and not to the uncertain and crooked cord of disrcetion, for it is not almost
credible to foresee, says he, when any maxim, or fundamental law of this
realm is altered, as elsewhere in the fourth part of Lord Cooks Reports has
been observed, what dangerous inconveniences do follow; which most expressly
appears by this most unjust and strange Act of 11 H. 7. for hereby not only
Empson and Dudley themselves, but such Justices of Peace (corrupt men) as they
caused to be authorized, committed most grievous and heavy oppressions and
exactions, grinding the face of the poor subjects by penal laws (be they never
so obsolete or unfit for the time) by information only, without any
presentment or trial by Jury, being the ancient birthright of the subject, but
to hear and determine the same by their discretion, inflicting such penalty, as
the Statutes not repealed imposed: these and other like actions and oppressions
by, or by the means of Empson and Dudley, and their instruments, brought
infinite treasures to the Kings Coffers, whereof the King himself in the end,
with great grief and compunction repenced, as in another place we have
observed. This Statute of 11. H. 7. We have recited, and showed the just
inconveniences thereof, to the end that the l^ke should never hereafter be
attempted in any court of Parl^ament; and that others might avoid the fearful
end of those two time-servers, Emp^on and Dudley Qui little v^stigia insistant,
little exitus per^o^ rescan, that is, those that follow their footsteps may fear
the same destruction that they had, whose end in the third part of the
Institutes, fol. 208. and the fourth part, fol. 198, 199. may be seen, was
severally to be Indicted at common law (whose Indictments is there to be read)
and convicted and executed as traitors, for subvert^ng the fundamental laws and
liberties of England, viz. trials by Juries, which the Conquest of the Rom^n^,
Saxons, D^n^^, or Normans, could never blot out of the Calendar of English men's
fundamental liberties, but has from time to time, with the infinite hazards of
their lives and bloods been preserved, as the choicest of their Jewels, and as
one of their chiefest fundamental rights; of whom the said L. Cook in his
exposition of the 29 Chapter of Magn^ Charta, in his 2 part Instit. fol. 51. upon
the words of lex terrae, or the law of the land (where he plentifully shows,
that no Englishman whatsoever, ought, for any Crime whatsoever, in any Court
whatsoever, by any power or authority whatsoever, to be tried but by juries,
and due process of law as is before showed, expressly says, yet against the
ancient and fundamental las^, and in the face thereof, I find an Act of
Parliament made, says he, that as well justices of Assize, as Justices of
Peace (without any finding or presen^ment by the Verdict of twelve men) upon a
bare information for the King, before them made, should have full power and
authority by their discretions, to hear and determine all offenses and
contempts committed or done by any person or persons, against the form,
ordinance and effect of any Statute made and not repeal^d, etc. by color of
which Act, shaking this fundamental law, it is not cred^ble what horrible
oppressions and exaction, to the undoing infinite numbers of people, were
committed by Sir Richard Empson knight, and Edmund Dudley, being Justices of
the Peace, throughout England, upon this unjust and injurious Act (as commonly
in like cases ^t falls out) a new office was erected, and they made masters
of the Kings forfeitures. But at the Parliament, holden ^n the first year of
Henry the eighth, This Act of the 11. of H^nry the seventh is rejected, and
made void, and repeater, and the reason thereof is yielded, for that by force
of the said act it was manifestly ^nown, that many sinister and crafty feigned
forged informations, had been pursued against diverse of the Kings subjects, to
their great damage and wrong^ul vexations, and ill success hereo^: and the
fearful ends of the two oppressors, should deter others from c^m^^tt^ng the
l^ke, and should admonish Parliaments, that in stead of the ordinary and
precious trial per legem terrae, by the law of the land, they bring not in
absolute an partial trial by discretion. And in the fourth part of his
Institutes, folio 37. he expressly says. That he finds an Attainder by
Parliament of a subject ( viz. Thomas Cromwell, then Earl of Essex) of high
treason, who was committed to the Tower, and thereby forth coming to be heard,
and yet was never called to answer in any of the Houses of Parliament. Of the
manner of which proceedings, he thus says, Aus^^a (...), si potest, si non, ut
cunque silontiam legate, That is, let the Parl^aments crime be buried in
oblivion if it be possible, and if not, nevertheless yet let it give place to
silence for the present; for says he, The more high and absolute the
jurisdiction of Court is, the more just and honorable it ought to be in the
proceeding, and to give examples of justice to inferior Courts. And fol. 38. He
is confidently persuaded, that the rehearseal of this unjust Attainder will
hereafter cause the Honorable Members of both Houses of Parliament to be so
tender of their duty in perserving the fundamental Laws and Liberties of the
people of England, as that never hereafter such an unjust Attainder shall be
brought, where the party is forth coming to condemn him without hearing of him.
And consonant unto this, is the Scripture, and the Law of God therein
contained, as appears by the third of Gen verse. 9. where God after Adam had
transgressed his law, summons him before him to answer for himself, before he
would pass judgment against him. And when Sodom had abominably defiled its
ways with the height of wickedness, yet the just God of heaven and earth would
not judge, condemn, or pass sentence against them, till he went down to see
whether they have done altogether according to the cry that is come up against
them or not and says God, I will know, Genesis 18 and Deuteronomy. 17.6.11. and Chap.
20.15. God says expressly, One witness shall not rise against a man for any
iniquity, or for any sin, in any sin that he sins; at the mouth of two
witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses shall the matter be established.
And by the hand of Moses he required the people of Israel to do according to
the sentence of the Law, and the judgment which shall be given thereupon, and
not to decline from the law and the judgment which shall be given thereupon,
and not to decline from the Law to the right hand or to the left. And suitable
to this, is the judicial and legal proceedings of the great congregation of the
children of Israel (consisting to the number of four thousand able men) in the
case of the Levite, and his ravished and slain concubine, who in their judicial
proceedings in that case, first demanded of him how so great a wickedness came
to be committed in Israel. And the conclusion, after their hearing and
examining the cause, was, to consider, consult, and then to give sentence. And
says Nicodemus that learned man in the law of God, against the Scribes and
Pharisees in behalf of Christ, Does our law judge any man before it hear him
and know what he does? John 7.51. And says Festus the heathen Roman Governor
in Judea, that had no other guide to walk by, but the light and Law of Nature,
In the behalf of Paul, against his bloody enemies, It is not the manner of the
Romans to deliver any one to dye, before that he which is accused have the
accusers face to face, and have license to answer for himself concerning the
crime laid against him, Acts 25.16. And says righteous Paul, who writ the
Oracles of God infallibly by the Spirit of God, Where there is no law, there is
nor can be no transgression, Romans 4.15. But says that judicious and learned
Lawyer Sir Edward Cook in the third part of his Institutes, folio 35. of
Rhadamanthus, that cruel and wicked Judge of hell:

First, he punishes before he hears (like the late Parliament) and when he
does hear the denial, then he compels the party accused by torture to confess
it: but, says he, far otherwise does Almighty God proceed; for after that the
guilty person is accused, he calls, he examines, and then judges or condemns,
Luke 16.1, 2. But in his fourth part Institutes, he proceeds and goes on, and
says in his last fore-recited folio, As evil was the proceedings in
Parliament, in the second of Henry the 6. Number 18. against Sir John Mortimer,
the third son of Edmund the second Earl of Marsh (descended from Lionel Duke
of Clarence) who was Indicted of high treason, for certain words, which
Indictment (without any arraignment or pleading) being merely feigned to
blemish the title of the Mortimers, and withal being insufficient in law, as
by the same appears, was confirmed by authority of Parliament, and the said
Sir John being brought into the Parliament, without arraignment and answer,
judgment in Parliament was given against him upon the said Indictment, that he
should be carried to the Tower of London, and drawn through the City to Tiburn,
and there hanged, drawn and quartered, his head to be set on London Bridge, his
four quarters on the four gates of London, as by the Record of Parliament
appears. And therefore, in the next folio, being folio 39. he says, that
whereas by order of Law, a man cannot be attainted of high treason, unless the
offense be in law high treason: he ought not to be attained by general words of
high treason, By authority of Parliament (as sometime has been used) but the
high treason ought to be specially expressed, seeing that the Court of
Parliament, is the highest and most honorable Court of Justice, and ought (as
has been said) to give examples to inferior Courts. And further, to show that
Parliaments (which in their right constitution are the best conservators of our
laws and liberties) are erroneous things (when they walk by their own wills)
and forsake their true and only guide, the fundamental laws of England) What
need there any more instances then many of the Armies own Declarations, in
several of which and their frequent discourses they have declared the late
Parliament a traitorous Parliament, breakers of their trust, and imbroylers of
the Nation in bloody wars, and subverters of the peoples liberties and
freedoms; yea, and in the conclusion, the Lord General Cromwell himself, and
Major Genesis Harison, with their own hands have pulled them out by the ears, and
plucked them up by the very roots, as final breakers of their trust; and as a
pack of the vilest knaves and villains that ever breathed in England, although
they were fenced in, and about by an Act of Parliament made before the wars, by
King, Lords, and Commons, in the seventeenth of the reign of the late King
(being in the year 1641) that they should not be dissolved, but by their own
free and voluntary consents. And also, since they changed the Kingdom into a
Commonwealth, by two several Acts of Parliament of the 14. of May, 1649. and
the 17. of July 1649. In which it is expressly made high treason, for any
Englishman, or men, by writing, printing, or words declaring, or by
endeavoring to raise or stir up force to dissolve the late Parliament, or
their Council of State, without their own consents, or to say that the said
late Parliament or their Council of State is tyrannical, usurped, or unlawful,
as by the said Acts of Parliament, with reference thereunto being had, more at
large does appear (which Acts are printed in the first part of the trial or
arraignment of the prisoner at the Bar, at Guild Hall, Oct. 1649. page 86, 87*
88, 89. the first of which Acts, viz. that of the 14. of May, 1649. thus
follows Verbatim.

An Act Declaring what offenses shall be adjudged Treason.
WHereas the Parliament has abolished the the Kingly Office in England and
Ireland, and in the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging; and has
resolved and declared, that the people shall for the future be govern^d by its
own Representatives, or national meetings in council, chosen and entrusted by
them for that purpose, has se^tled the Government in the way of a Commonwealth
and free State, without King or House of Lords; Be it Enacted by this present
Parliament, and by the Authority of the same, That if any person shall
maliciously or advisedly publish, by writing, printing, or openly declaring,
That the said Government is tyrannical, usurped, or unlawful; or that the
Commons in Parliament assembled are not the Supreme Authority of this Nation;
or shall plot, contrive, or endeavor o^ stir up, or raise force against the
present government, o^ for the subversion or alteration of the s^m^, and shall
declare the same by any o^^n de^d, that then every such ofence shall be taken,
deemed, and adjudged by the Authority of this Parliament to b^ high treason.
And whereas the Keepers of the liberties of England, and the council of State,
construted, and ^o be from time to time consti^ut^^ by A^^uo^y of Parliam^nt
are to be under the said R^presentatives in Parliament, ^n ^u^ for the ma^n^ce
of the said government, with several powers and Authorities limited, given and
appo^nt^d unto them by the Parliament; Be (...) likewise Enacted by the
authority aforesaid, that ^f any person shall maliciously and advisedly ^o or
endeavor the subversion of the said Keepers of the liberties of England or the
Counc^l of State, and the same shall declare by any op^n De^d, o^ shall move
any person o^ p^^sons for the do^ng ther^of, or stir up the people to rise
against them, or eith^r of them, the^ or either of (...) au^horities, That then
every sum off^nc^ and off^nces shall be taken, d^^med and a clored to be high
treason, And w^ ^as the Parliam^n^ for their just and lawful def^nce, has
raised, levied the Army and fo^^es now under the command of Thomas Lord
Fairfax, and are a^ present necessitated, by reason of the manifold
distractions with^n this commonwealth, and invasions threatened from abroad, ^o
continue the same, which under God must be the instrumental means of preserving
the well-afflicted p^opl^ of this Na^^on in peace and safe^y, Be it further
Enacted by the aut^o^i^y aforesaid, that if any person, ^o being an Officer,
Soldier, o^ Member of the Army, shall ^o, contrive, o^ endeavor to stir up
any mutiny in the said Army, or withdraw any Soldiers o^ Officers from their
obedience to their super^ou^ Officers, o^ from the present Government as
afo^^said; o^ shall procure, invite, and, o^ assist any fo^raigners or
strangers to invade England o^ Ireland: or shall adhere ^o any forces raised by
the enemies of the Parliamen^ or Common wealth, o^ keepers of the Liberty of
England: Or if any person shall counterfeit the Great Seal of England (for the
time being) used and appointed by authority of Parliament, That th^n every ^uch
offense and off^nces shall be taken, deemed, and declared by the authority of
this Parliam^nt to be high treason; and every such person shall suffer pains of
death, and also forfeit un^o the Keepers of the Liber^y of England, to and for
the use of the Commonwealth, all and singular his and their lands, ten^m^n^s,
and hereditament, goods and chattels, as in c^s^ of high treason has been used
by the Laws and Statutes of ^^is land to be forfeit and lost. Provided always,
that no persons shall be indicted and arraign^d for any of the off^nces
mentioned in this Act, unless such offenders shall be indicted or prosecuted
for the same within one year after the offense committed.

Die Lunae, 14 Maii, 1649. Ordered by the Parliament, That this Act be
forthwith printed and published. Hen. Scobel, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by Edw. Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parl. of
England. 1649

And the said John Lilburn, now prisoner at the Bar, for further Plea says,
that for supposed violating those two last forementioned Acts of Parliament,
and that but for supposed words, and for the supposed comp^ling, writing, and
caused to be printed Arguments, founded and grounded upon the known and
declared fundamental laws of England, received principles of Reason, and the
Armies own pr^nted and publ^shed Declarations, he the said John Lilburn, now
prisoner at the bar, was arra^gned and ^ndicted as a Traitor for his lite at
Guild Hall London, in October 1649. and that principally by the inst^gation and
means of his Excellency the present Lord General Cromwell: which Trial was with
that violence and fury, that the said prisoner at the Bar was absolutely denied
the declared benefit of the known laws of England, viz. the help of Counsel
learned in the Law, and a copy of his Charge and Indictment, which were not
denied, but granted to the Lord Mocqu^^, that grand ^^sh^^be; and those
Arch-trayt^rs, as the year commonly called, Scrasso^c, Can^^^bury, Hamilton,
and Cap^l, etc. which also was granted to the prisoner at Bar as his right by
Law, when he was pr^^^ner a^ O^fo^^, and a^^agned by judge Heart, etc. for his
l^^ as a traitor So that the said John Lilburn now prisoner at the bar,
considering, the several penalties declared to be due to any person or persons
whatsoever, that by force or otherwise should but endeavor to dissolve the
late Parliament or their Council of State, ^e cannot either in Reason or Law
see or apprehend which way his Excellency the said Lord General Cromw^l, and
Major General Ha^son, etc. if they continue and persevere as they have begun,
to execute the said unjust and injurious Act of Parliament upon the said Jo^n
Lilbu^n prisoner at the Bar, (which is one of the most wickedst and unjust that
ever the Parliament in their lives made, and of the highest and most notorious
acts of their breach of trust that ever they committed, as is before fully
proved) can ^n the least, either before God or men, acquit themselves of being
guilty of the highest of treason, both by the letter and equity of the two last
forementioned. Laws lately made in part by themselves, but principally by
their instigation, in forcibly dissolving the late Parliament, against their
own voluntary wills and consents.

Therefore John Lilburn, the now prisoner at the bar, for further plea says,
That it is most just, equitable, and reasonable, to indict, arraign, condemn,
and execute the foresaid declared Parliament Traitors, Olive^ Cromwell Esquire,
Captain General, and Mr. Thomas Harison, commonly called Major General Harison,
before the prisoner at the bar be indicted, arraigned, condemned, and executed,
for being a supposed Parliament felon, especially considering their
tran^gressions is a fact committed after the declaring, printing, and divulging
of a visible and plain Law; and a^ the prisoner at the Bar's supposed crime is
for a fact done before there was a Law in being, as in searching into the
bottom of the whole illegal proceedings against him will eviden^ly appear. 2.
The prisoner at the bar's tran^gression, at most, is but a supposed or a real
scandal of one Member of Parliament, viz. Sir Arthur Haslerig, in which at most
he was but of Counsel for Mr. Pr^mate, upon a Petitionary Appeal; which
Primate, at the open Bar of the Parliament, freed John Lilburne the now
prisoner at the Bar from drawing his said Petition at which the Parliament took
the offense, and at whose Bar he avowedly laid the draw^ng of it upon another;
and yet the prisoner at the Bar must be thought worthy to be banished, and
robbed by Sir Arthur Hazlerig of all his estate, that at the most was but an
accessory to a scandal, and Primate the principal, that owned the Petition for
his, and justified the printing of it by his own order, has no such punishment
at all inflicted upon him n^ nor yet his Coun^el that he avowed drew it. But
the crime of the said Oliver Cromwell Lord General, and Major-Gen. Harison, in
forcibly d^ssolving the Parliament, is not only a scandalizing of one Member
of Parliament, but of all the Members thereof, as a pack of Rogues, and
traitors to their trust, and thereby fit for nothing, but to be knocked on the
head by the enraged people wherever they meet them, and as unsavory salt,
that is good for nothing, but to be plucked our by the ears, and plucked up by
the roots, and thrown to the dunghill. 3. The Parliaments Laws were either good
and just, or they were not If good and just, why were they that made them
plucked up by the roots, and dissolved without their free consents, and that by
their hired servants, that had no power either in Law or from the people so to
do, and upon whom out of the peoples moneys they have bestowed many thousand
pounds gratuities? If they were wicked and unjust, why is the basest and vilest
of them endeavored to be executed upon the prisoner at the Bar for supposed
Felony, and that principally by the means of those, that both by the letter and
equity of the said Parliaments Laws, are guilty of highest of treasons, in
dissolving the Parliament by force of Arms, without their own free consents;
and who have been, and yet are, the only and principal prosecutors of me the
prisoner at the Bar for his life, for returning into the land of his Nativity
(against the Fundamental Laws and Liberties, which in all his days he never
committed the least transgression) after he was forced, by reason of Sir Arthur
Hazlerig's robbing him of all his estate, for diverse months together, to borrow
all the money that bought him bread, and after he had continued about a year
and a half in constant danger of his life, of being murdered beyond the Seas,
by the hands of the mad or ranting Cavaliers, by the cunning artifice and
designs of the pensioned Agents of some of the principallest of those that
most in Parliament studied his Banishment, yet in which Act that they pretend
to banish one Lieut. Col. John Lilburn by, there is no crime of Law at all in
Law laid unto the said Lieut. Col. John Lilburn's charge (generals being no
crimes in law, nor signify nothing, as fully appears by the Lord Cook's second
part of his Institutes, fol. 52, 315, 318, 590, 591, 615, 616. and third part,
fol. 12, 13, 14. and fourth part, fol. 39, 333, 334.) as appears by the Act it
self, which thus verbatim follows.

An Act for the execution of a Judgment given in Parliament against Lieut.
Col. JOHN LILBVRNE.
WHereas upon the fifteenth day of January, in the year of our Lord One
thousand six hundred fifty one, Judgment was given in Parliament against the
said Lieut. Col. John Lilburn, for high Crimes and Misdemeanors by him
committed, relating to a false, malicious, and scandalous Petition heretofore
presented to the Parliament by one Josiah Primate of London Leather seller, as
by the due proceedings had upon the said Petition, and the Judgment thereupon
given, at large appears: Be it therefore Enacted by this present Parliament,
and by the authority of the same, That the Fine of three thousand pounds
imposed upon the said John Lilburn to the use of the Commonwealth, by the
Judgment aforesaid, shall be forthwith levied by due Process of Law to the use
of the commonwealth accordingly. And be it further enacted, That the sum of two
thousand pounds imposed by the said Judgment upon the said John Lilburn, to be
paid to James Russel, Edw. Winslow, William Molins, and Arthur Squib, in the
said Judgment named, that is to say, to each of them five hundred pounds for
their damages, shall be forthwith paid accordingly: And that the said Sir
Arthur Hazlerig, James Russel, Edw. Winslow, William Molins, and Arthur Squib,
their Executors and Administrators, shall have the like remedy and proceedings
at Law respectively against the said John Lilburn, his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, for the recovery of the said respective sums so
given to them by the said Judgment, as if the said respective sums had been due
by several Recognizances in the nature of a Statute-staple acknowledged unto
them severally by the said John Lilburn upon the said 15 day of January 1651.
And be it likewise enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the said John
Lilburn shall within twenty days, to be accounted from the said fifteenth day
of January 1651. depart out of England, Scotland, Ireland, and the Islands,
Territories, or Dominions thereof. And in case the said John Lilburn, at any
time after the expiration of the said twenty days to be accounted as aforesaid,
shall be found or shall be remaining within England, Scotland, Ireland, or
within any of the Islands, Territories, or Dominions thereof the said John
Lilburn shall be, and is hereby adjudged a Felon, and shall be executed as a
Felon, without benefit of Clergy. And it is lastly enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, (...) all and (...) and persons who shall after the expiration of
the said twenty days accordingly relieve, harbor, or conceal the said John
Lilburn, he being in England, Scotland, or Ireland, or any of the Territories,
Islands, or Dominions thereof, shall be hereby adjudged accessory of Felony
after the fact. And all Judges, Justices, Majors, Bailiffs, Sheriffs, and all
other Officers, as well Military as Civil, in their respective places, are
hereby required to be aiding and assist^ng in apprehending the said John
Lilburn.

1651. Ordered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and
published. Hen. Scobel, Cleric. Parliamenti.

Fourthly, the prisoner at the Bar's return into England tends not in the least
to the disturbance of the public peace, quietness, or tranquillity of the
Nation, nor to the destruction and overthrow of all the Peoples Fundamental
liberties and freedoms; and therefore no reasons at all can be drawn from
public utility or profit to try me John Lilburn now prisoner at the bar for
his life as a Felon, upon the unjust letter of a void Act of Parliament. But as
for the said Generals, and the said Major General Harisons dissolving the late
Parliament by force, against their own consents, and thereby against several
Acts of Parliament before mentioned (partly of their own making) committing
high treason against the apparent letter of a known, printed, and declared Law,
before their fact committed; out of which evil action (as it is in it self
simply considered) though it be granted, that that God that can and has
brought light out of darkness, and order out of confusion, and good out of
evil, may out of it, by his wisdom, power, and omnipotency, bring abundance of
good to this poor nation of England; yet already it has visibly produced this
grand mischief and evil, viz. to give the said General a colorable pretense of
a Necessity of his own making and creating, to assume unto himself all the
Civil powers in the Nation into his own hands; and thereby not only to make
slaves (if he please) of all his own private soldiers, in subjecting them to
Trials for their lives by Military or arbitrary Discipline in times of peace,
when all the Courts of Justice for administering the Law are or ought to be
open, which is expressly against the Petition of Right, and the declared end
wherefore the Wars were engaged in against the late King; but also of the free
people of England, that have fought as heartily and faithfully for the
preservation of their Liberties and Freedoms as himself, who have already
thereby lost two of the chiefest of their fundamental rights and freedoms, viz.

First, to have Taxes laid upon them by the General, with the advice of his
Military Officers, all of whom at most are but the peoples hired and paid
servants, to kill the Weasels and Polecats that would destroy their Liberties;
which is not only contrary to the express tenor of that most excellent Law
(as the late Parliament, in their remarkable Declaration of March 17. 1648.
calls it) of the Petition of Right, which expressly says, That no Taxes, Ayds,
or Contributions whatever, shall by any person or persons, or any Authority
whatsoever, be laid or levyrd upon the people, but by common consent of their
chosen Deputies or Trustees in Parliament ass^mbled for that end. See also the
Lord Cooks 4 part Institutes, chap. High Court of Parliament, fol. 14, 34. and
by the Statute made in the late Parliament, in the 17 year (being anno 1641) of
the late King, entitled, An Act for declaring unlawful and void the late
proceedings touching Ship money. The Judgment of the Judges in that case is
declared null and void, and against the right of Proprieties, although their
judgments were grounded upon these plausible Questions, viz. That when the
good and safety of the Kingdom in general is concerned, and the whole Kingdom
in danger, Whether the King might by writ under the Great Seal of England
command all the Subjects of his Kingdom at their charge to provide and furnish
such number of Ships, with Men, Victuals, and Munition, and for such a time as
the King should think fit, for the defense and safeguard of the kingdom from
such peril and danger: and, Whether by Law the King might compel the doing
thereof, in case of refusal or ^^f^actari^ss. And whether that the King (who
was then a far more legal Magistrate then the Lord General Cromwell now is) were
no^ the sol^ judge both of the danger, and wi^^n and ^ow the same is to be
prevented and avoided. According to which grounds and reasons, all the justices
of the said Courts of Kings Bench, and Common pleas, and the said Barons of the
Exchequer, having been formerly con^ul^^d with by his Majesty's command, had
set their hands to an extrajudicial Opinion expressed to the same purpose, That
he might: and yet notwithstanding all this, thus decreed and adjudged by all
the judges, all such Ship-writes and all proceedings thereupon are by King,
Lords, and Commons, in full, legal, and free Parliament, declared that they
were and are contrary and against the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and the
Petition of Right made in the third year of the Reign of his Majesty that then
was. And it is there further declared and enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That all and every the particulars prayed or desired in the said Petition of
Right, shall from henceforth be put in execution accordingly, and shall be
firmly and strictly holden and observed, as in the same Petition they are
prayed and expressed: And that all the said Judgments and Proceedings about
the said Ship money be vacated and cancelled. One of the makers of which Law
was the said Oliver Cromwell, now Lord General, and also one of the impeachers
of the said Ship money-Judges of high treason, for arbitrary subverters of the
free people of England's fundamental Laws, Liberties, and Proprieties.

Secondly, the General, with whom of his Officers by his will he is pleased to
join with him, has not only by their late forcible dissolving of the late
Parliament, assumed the whole Civil power of the Nation into his own hands; by
means of which already, by his Declaration with the advice of his Office^s, of
the 9 of June 1653. he has arbitrarily laid a Tax of Sixscore thousand pounds
per month upon the free people of England, by which all their proprieties are
confounded and destroyed. For, by the same Rule that he lays Sixscore thousand
pounds Tax a month upon the people, he may (when he pleases) lay six Millions
a month upon them, and so ad infinitum; and ingross into his own coffers and
hands, and his Officers, not only all the peoples treasure, but also their
whole lands and estates, as Joseph did the slavish Egyptians unto Pharaoh, Gen
47. but that which is worse, he has not only there by created a president to
destroy all their proprieties, but his choosing the people Legislators or
Lawmakers, (though it is possible the men may prove in their actions the
justest men in the Nation) and denying those that never forfeited their
Liberties in their lives, that inherent and natural right, he has created a
president to destroy their Laws, Liberties, and Lives, and absolutely subject
them to his will and mercy: which crimes put together, are in the eye of the
Law the highest Treason that ever I read any transgressor in the Nation charged
with, ever since it became a Politic Society or Nation, and an act that the
highest of three Tyrants or Conquerors, either under the Romans, Saxons,
Danes, or Normans, durst never attempt to put in execution: By means of which,
he has given away the just and honest Cause betwixt the King and Parliament,
and done as much as in him has to make all those murderers that have since the
beginning of the late Civil war engaged in the Parliament-quarrel against the
late King, his actions as evidently as the ^un declaring it was not in the
least for the securing of the peoples incroached upon Liberties and Freedoms,
that he and his accomplices took up Arms against the King for, but to pull him
out of his Throne, slay him, and divide his inheritance amongst him and his
accomplices, and then to set up his lust, will, and pleasure, as the peoples
standing Laws. By which apparent, and in the face of the ^un avowed practices
of his, he has all over the Christian world brought more scorn and contempt
upon the zealous profession of God and godliness, and all the pretenses of
struggling for Liberty and Freedom, then any one man that ever I read of ^n all
the Histories of the world that ever my eyes were fixed upon: yea, and in the
doing of the forementioned things, has given in the face of the sun the
absolute and perfect lie to himself, and all his many printed Declarations,
both as he is to be considered as a Parliament Man, or as an Officer in Arms.
And first, consider him as a Parliament Man, how many Oaths, Covenants,
Protestations, and Engagements, has he formerly taken, to maintain the
fundamental Laws and Liberties of the people of England; and also, after he had
caused the Parliament to be purged over and over, again and again, and left
none to sit there, but those that then pleased his tooth, and by their
authority taken away the Kings life, and altered the form of Government
nominally into a Commonwealth or free State, did not he and his said friends or
Counselors immediately after that publish a solemn Declaration of Febr. 9.
1648. in these very words verbatim.

A Declaration of the Parliament of England, for maintaining the Fundamental
Laws of this Nation.
THe Parliament of England now assembled does declare, That they are fully
resolved to maintain, and shall and will uphold, preserve, and keep the
fundamental Laws of this Nation, for and concerning the preservation of the
lives, properties, and liberties of the people, with all things incident
thereunto, with the alterations touching Kings and House of Lords already
resolved in this present Parliament, for the good of the people, and what shall
be further necessary for the perfecting thereof; and do require and expect that
all Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, and all Officers and ministers of Justice for
the time being, do administer justice, and do proceed in their respective
places and Offices accordingly: which resolution, with the reasons thereof,
shall be hereafter publ^shed in a larger Declaration touching the same. And it
is hereby ordered and appointed, that this Declaration shall be forthwith
proclaimed in Westminster Hall, and at the Old Exchange: and the Judges in
their respective Courts at Westminster, and at the first sitting thereof, are
to cause this Declaration to be publicly read. And the Sheriffs in their
several Counties are to cause this Declaration to be likewise published.

Die Veneris, 9 February, 1648. Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament,
That this Declaration be forthwith printed and published; and that the Members
of this House do take care to disperse the said Declaration into the several
Counties with all speed. H. Scobel, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed by Edward Husbands.

Which said Declaration was backed also with a large and pithy one, the 17 of
March 1648. which expresses the grounds and reasons of their late proceedings,
and settling the present Government in way of a Free State.

Yea, John Lilburn now prisoner at the bar for his further plea says, That by
the Act of the late Parliament entitled, An Act for the abolishing the Kingly
Office in England and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, it is
there amongst other things enacted and declared, that the Office of a King in
this Nation shall not henceforth reside in, or be exercised by any one single
person. And that no person whatsoever shall or may have or hold the office,
style, dignity, power, or authority of King of the said Dominions, or any of
them, upon pain of high treason against the Parliament and People of England,
to all such said persons, and to all their aiders, assisters, comforters or
abettors.

Now whether or no that the said actions of laying Taxes, and choosing the
people Law makers, be not the absolute exercising the office, dignity, power,
and authority of the greatest King that ever was in England, the prisoner at
the Bar submits it to the judgment of the learned Judges of the Law.

And in the last forementioned Act, it is further declared and averred, that by
the abolishing of the Kingly Office, a most happy way is made for this English
Nation to return to its just and ancient rights of being governed by its own
Representatives, or National Meetings in Council, from time to time chosen and
entrusted for that purpose by the people. And further it is therefore there
resolved and declared by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That they will
put a period to the sitting of this present Parliament, and dissolve the same,
as soon as may possibly stand with the safety of the people that has betrusted
them, and with what is absolutely necessary for the preserving and upholding
the Government now settled in the way of a Commonwealth. And that they will
carefully provide for the certain meeting choosing and sitting of the next and
future Representatives, with such other circumstances of freedom in choice, and
equality in distribution of Members to be elected thereunto, as shall most
conduce to the lasting freedom and good of this Commonwealth. And in several
other Acts immediately made after the last forementioned Acts; and particularly
those two Acts of Parliament of the 14 of May and the 17 of June 1649.
declaring what offenses shall be judged treason, it is thus expressed: Whereas
the Parliament has abolished the Kingly Office in England and Ireland, and in
the dominions and territories thereunto belonging, and has resolved and
declared that the people shall for the future be governed by its own
Representatives, or National Meetings in Council, chosen and entrusted by them
for that purpose.

And the Prisoner at the Bar for further plea in the second place says, that
his Declarations as a Soldier or Commander to this purpose are so full as more
cannot be said; and particularly that remarkable Declaration of the 14 of June
1647. printed in the Armies Book of Declar. p. 36. 37. etc. in which 37. p.
there he positively declares that the settling of the liberties, and freedoms,
and peace of the Nation is the blessing of God, then which of all worldly
things, nothing (say they) is more dear unto us, or more precious in our
thoughts; we having hitherto thought all our present enjoments (whether of live
or livelihood, or nearest relations) a price but sufficient to the puchase of
so rich a blessing, that we and all the freeborn people of this Nation may
sit down in quiet under our Vines, and under the glorious administration of
justice and righteousness, and in full possession of those fundamental rights
and liberties, without which we can have little hopes (as to humane
considerations) to enjoy either any comforts of life, or so much as life it
self, but at the pleasures of some men ruling merely according to will and
power. And therein, page 43. they declared it is their earnest desire, that
some determinate period of time may be set for the countinuance of this and
future Parliaments, beyond which none shall continue, and upon which new Writs
may of course issue out, and new Elections successively take place, according
to the intent of the Bil for triennial Parliaments; which Bill or Act being one
of the first Laws past by the late Parliament, in the year 1640. Expressly by
name in diverse places of it declares it is the undoubted right of the
Freeholders, Citizens, and other Freeborn persons of England, to elect such
persons as they please for their Representors in the Parliament or Common
counsel of the Nation, as at large appears by the Act it self, reference
thereunto being had; Unto which the prisoner at the Bar for further
confirmation refers himself, and in his, and the Officers of the Armies
large Declaration for trial of the late King, dated at St. Albons November,
1948. they in page 14. 15. thus declare themselves; that the sum of the
public interest of the Nation, in relation to common right and freedom (which
they there a vow to be the chief subject of their contest with the King) and in
opposition to tyranny and injustice of Kings or others they judge to lie.

First, that all matters of supreme trust or concernment to the safety and
welfare of the whole, they have a common and supreme counsel of Parliament, and
that (as to he common behalf, who cannot all meet together themselves) to
consist of Deputies or Representors freely chosen by them with as much equality
as may be: and after in that Remonstrance, they have made large Declarations of
diverse things for the good of the people of England, in page 65. they desired
that the Parliament would set some reasonable and certain period to their power
and sitting; by which time (say they) That great and supreme trust reposed in
you, shall be returned in^o the hands of the people, from, and for whom you
received it, that so you may give them satisfaction and assurance, that what
you have contended for against the King (for which they have been put to so
much trouble, cost, and loss of blood) has been only for their liberties, and
common interest, and not for your own personal interest.

And in the next page, being page 66. they vehemently press for the equal
distribution of elections thereunto, to render the house of Commons as near as
may be, an equal Representative of the whole people electing; and they there
also press, for the establishing a certainty for the peoples meeting to elect,
and for their full freedom in election, provided that none who have engaged,
or shall engage in war against the right of Parliament and interest of the
kingdom therein, or have adhered to the enemies thereof, may be capable of
electing, or being elected (at least during a competent number of years) nor
any other who shall oppose, or not join in agreement to this settlement: and
in the next page being 67. In their first head, they desire liberty of entering
dissents in the said Representatives, that in case of corruption, or abuse in
these matters of highest trust, the people may be in capacity to know who are
free thereof, and who guilty, to the end only the people may avoid the future
trusting of such: and suitable to these heads and others of public freedom
there laid down, the said General Cromwell and the rest of his Officers,
concluded upon a platform of Government, for the securing the future liberties
and freedoms of the people in all the aforesaid concernments; and entitled
it, An Agreement prepared for the people of England, and the places there
incorporated, which was with seriousness presented by Lieut. General Hamond,
Col. Okey, and other Officers of the Army to the Parliament upon the 20 of
January 1649. as the sum of all they had been fighting for, and all that which
they desired to establish for the future good of the Nation; as more at large
does appear by the printed Model of the said agreement; reference thereunto
being had, and unto which for further satisfaction the prisoner at the Bar
refers himself.

And in the Generals last Declaration of April 22 last, p. 6. there he declares
it his earnest desire to reform the Law, and administer justice impartially,
hoping thereby the people might forget Monarchy; and understanding their true
interest in the election of successive Parliaments, may have the Government
settled upon a true Basis.

And the prisoner at the Bar for further plea says, That he cannot see or
apprehend how the said Lord General, or Major General Harison, can, if they
continue and persevere as they have begun, to execute the said unjust and
injurious Act of Parliament upon the said John Lilburn prisoner at the Bar
(which is one of the most wicked and unjust that ever the Parliament in their
lives made, and one of the highest and most notorious acts of their breach of
trust that ever they committed, as is before fully proved) can in the least,
either before God or man, acquit themselves of being guilty of the highest
Treasons, both by the letter and equity of the two forementioned Laws of the
14 of May and the 17 of June 1649. lately made in part by themselves, but
principally by their instigators, in forcibly dissolving the late Parliament
against their own voluntary wills and consents; or how they can acquit
themselves in the least, in the eyes of all the understanding people in
England, to be justly esteemed guilty of plucking up the Parliament by the
roots, not in the least for evil, oppression, injustice, or breach of trust
they had committed against the Nation, or honest people thereof, (that never
yet in the least, upon their own principles, forfeited their Liberties and
Freedoms) but only because they would destroy the Parliament, to have the
power in their own hands, thereby to dispose of all the lives, liberties, and
proprieties of all the people of England, by then absolute wills and pleasures,
and to deal worse and in arbitrarily with the honest inhabitants thereof, then
any Conqueror that every ^n before them did, although themselves, against the
late King, have in The King Cas^ stated, p. 22. by John Cook their own
Atturney-General publicly declared, That Conquest is a Title o^ Government fit
to be exercised amongst Bears and Wolves, but gol^^n (...) least among men. And
for any to aver us in England to be a conquered Nation, is not only expressly
against the tenor of the Armies many and remarkable Declarations, but it is
such an averment, then which there can be none more pregnant and fruitful in
Treason then it, as Mr. John ^ym in his learned and rational printed Argument,
by the special Order of the House of Commons, the 29 of April 1641. against the
Earl of Strafford, avers. And further, in page 6. says, There are few Nations
in the world that have not been conquered: and no doubt but the Conqueror may
give what Laws he please to those that are conquered; but if the succeeding
pac^s and Agreements do not limit and restrain that right, what people can be
secure? England has been conquered, and Wales has been conquered; and by this
reason will be in little better case then Ireland: if the King by the right of
a Conqueror give Laws to his people, shall not the people by the same reason
be restored to the right of the Conquered, to recover their liberty if they
can? what can be more hurtful, more pernicious to both, then such propositions
as these, which must needs be most truly averred, have no end of blood shed
and murder, and all the miseries besides that tongue can express, or heart can
imagine? And it is impossible that ever the honest people of England should
entrust (as in some measure they have done) the General and his Officers with
the custody, and preservation of their lives, liberties, freedoms, and
proprieties, with any the least intention, that when they had subdued their
common enemies, they should subdue their fundamental laws and rights (for the
preservation of which, the only contest with the common enemy was begun) and
then give them a law flowing from their uncertain discretionary wills and
pleasures. Sure I am, that righteous and just David calls those sons of Belial,
and wicked men, that would go about to deprive those that stayed with the stuff
of an equal share in the Conquest, even with those that went out to fight, 1 Samuel 30.21, 22, 23, 24, 25. etc. And righteous and just Abraham, out of his
affection to his brother Lot, ventured his life by fore of Arms, to redeem him
from his captivity, and with him redeemed the people of the King of Sodom, and
their goods, after they were overthrown in pitched battle: after which valiant
and friendly service, the King of Sodom entreated of Abraham, to give him the
persons, and to take the goods to himself: unto which the righteous man answers
(although the King of Sodom was an al^en and stranger to him and all his, and
all that he had taken was by our present Christian Soldiers Marshal-law good
priz) I have lift up my hand to the Lord (as the present General has often
done, and solemnly protested and sworn, to make this Nation free and happy) the
most high God, the possessor of heaven and earth, that I will not take from a
thread even to a shoo-latchet, and that I will not take any thing that is
thine, lest thou should say, I have made Abraham rich. And honest and Godly
(not in word and show, but ^n real substantial actions) Nehemiah, when the
cries of the poor Jews and their wives were very great, by reason of the sword
and violence of their adversaries, and the grinding oppression of their Nobles
and great men; Just Nehemiah was very angry when he heard the poor peoples cry,
and rebuked the Nobles and Rulers for their oppression, and set a great
assembly against them; and said unto them, It is not good that you do, ought
you not to walk in the fear of our God, because of the reproach of the heathen
our enemies? and made them restore to the poor people their lands, their
Vineyards, their Olive yards, and their houses, etc. that they had taken by
usury, and oppression from them, in the day of their straites and calamity; and
so far was that just and righteous soul in the day of their Warfare, and hot
contest with their enemies for their liberties and freedoms, from going from a
poor and mean condition, to be worth many thousands a year amongst them, and to
exercise more then princely jurisdiction and Lordship over them by his will and
pleasures in robbing them of all their ancient, native, fundamental rights and
freedoms, that he did the quite contrary: for, says he, when the time came, I
was appointed to be their Governor in the land of Judah, from the 20 year to
the 32 year of Artaxerxes the King; that is, twelve years I and my Brethren
have not eat the bread of the Governors; but the former Governors that had
been before me, were chargeable unto the people, and had taken of them bread
and wine; besides forty Shekels of Silver; yea even their servants bare rule
over the people; but so did not I, because of the fear of God; yea also I
continued in the work of this Wall; neither bought we any land, and all my
servants were gathered theither unto the Work. Moreover, there were at my Table
150 of the Jews and Rulers; besides those that came unto us from among the
heathen that are about us: yet for all this required not I the bread or the
Govenour, because the bondage was heavy upon the people his brethren and
countrymen, and therefore in the cleanness of his heart, and the integrity of
his soul he cries out, Think upon me my God for good, according to all that I
have done for this people.

And sure I am that worthy man in his age, Mr. John Pym in his foresaid
excellent speeches, page 22. says, That such Treasons as the subversion of
fundamental laws, violating of liberties, can never be good or justifiable by
any circumstance or occasion, and therefore by how much the more a trust is
upon a man, or generation of men, by so much the more it makes their crime in
this kind to be the more capital and heinous. Therefore to conclude, though
John Lilburn the prisoner at the Bar, could and might urge many things more
against the Parliaments legallest power, in all manner of special acts; or acts
of Attainders, the arguments against which are excellently set down in that
rational and highly to be commended plea in law, entitled The laws subversion
(page 32.) or Sir John Maynards case truly stated in 1648. by John Houlden
Gentleman; and to say that a freeman of England by Law may be tried by a Bill
of Attainder, is irrational and unjust; for such a proceeding is no trial, but
rather a sentence, and it is no act of jurisdiction, but an act of the
legislative power, but no sentence can be past against an offender, but by some
fore-declared visible, known rule or law; of which the supposed offender,
either actually had, or might have had knowledge. The Law says, invincible
ignorance of the Law excuses a toto from the whole offense; but surely then no
judgment can be passed justly upon any man by a law that was not in being,
when his supposed offense was committed in that case; though the fact were in
it self evil, yet it were not judicially evil, if no law in the Nation were
extent against it: and so by consequence a law to punish a person in that case,
were a law to destroy an innocent man: and whosoever shall duly we^gh the
law-giving power, shall find that the essential properties of that power is to
respect things or actions that are to come, not bypast, and their no
jurisdictions in the least as to punish man whatsoever that is not of them; for
if my crime whatsoever, which in part is already touched upon in the former
part of the Prisoners Plea at the Bar, and also the absolute Irrationality and
Illegality, of their making a particular law, or their sett^ng up of a
particular Court, for a particular man: which are notably and rationally
discussed upon, in the se^ond Edition of the book Entitled, The Picture of the
Council of State, page 45. and the second Ed^tion of The L^gal, Fundamental
Liberties of England rec^iv^d, asserted, and vindicated, page 71 72, 73. For
though a Parliament has power to levy what money they judge convenient upon
the people, by a general tax for common safety of the Nation, which Act both by
Law and reason they may do; yet they cannot in law equity, or reason lay all
tax upon one, two, or three men alone, and so make them bear all the charges of
the public, even so though Parliaments may pass Acts for the good of the
People, to administer law indifferently to all the people of England alike,
without exception of persons; yet they can neither by law nor reason, pass a
particular Act of Parliament on purpose to destroy or condemn one, two, or
three individual persons, and which shall not in his extent or intention reach
any body else, because such an Act is against common reason, common equity, all
English men or people being all borne free equally alike, and the liberties and
freedoms thereof being equally intailed to all alike without exception of
persons, and theref^ ^e in common reason not to be burdened with an Iron yoke
of a particular Act of Parliament, when the universalities goes scotfree in
that particular

Yea, he might urge many Arguments lawful to prove, that the Parliament was no
Parliament: when they past the said Act of Banishment, but were long before
dissolved, and that by their own consents, when the late Parliament took upon
them the exercise of regality, and the dissolution of Kingship, and the house
of Lords, as it is notaly endeavored to be proved, in the late discourse of
the Armies champions: as for particularly, one licensed to be printed for Giles
Calvert, and another by Richard Moon at the ssven sters in Paul's Church yard;
and that it was long since dissolved, by that learned man in the Law of
England, Judge Jenkins, renders many reasons in Law to prove it, as in his
works printed for J. Gyles, are to be read, p. 19. 20. 26. 27. 48. 49. 50. 96.
139. 140. 142. 147. But much more full to prove its absolute dissolution long
since, is Mr. Will. Prynne Barrester at Law, In his Law-Arguments of the 16 of
June, 1649. called A Legal vindication of the Liberties of England against
illegal Taxes and pretended Acts of Parliament, p. 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. and p. 44,
45, 46, etc.

And that the Parl. Acts long since in Law dissolved, the prisoner at the Bar
for further plea says, The death of tde King in law indispensibly dissolved
the late Parl. as appears by the express Judgment of the Parl. of 1 H. 4. Rot.
Parl. Number. 1. and the Parl. of 14 H. 4. and 1 H. 5. Rot. Parl. N. 26. and 4
part Cooks Iast. f. 46. (which book was published for good Law by two special
Orders of the House of Commons, in an. 1641) and 4 E. 4. 44 b. For the Writ of
Summons of the late Parliament, that was directed to the Sheriffs, by virtue of
which men were chosen for the last Parl. runs in these words: King Charles
being to have conference and treaty with and upon such a day, about or
concerning (as the words of the Triennial Act has it) and high and urgent
affairs, concerning his Majesty, the State, and the defense of the kingdom,
and Church of England. But how it is possible for a Parl. to confer or treat
with King Charles now he is dead, is not to be imagined. See 2 H. 5. Cook tit.
Parl. 3. and therefore the whole current of the Law of England (yea Reason it
self) from the beginning to the end, is expressly, that the Kings death does
ipso facto dissolve this late Parliament, though it had been all the time
before never so entire and unquestionable to that very hour. And it must needs
be so, he being in Law, yea and by the authority of this very Parl. styled, The
Head, the Beginning, and End of Parliaments. See Cooks 1 part Instit. f. 109.
b. 110. a. and 4 part Inst. f. 1, 2, 3. and Mr. Pym's forementioned Speech
against Strafford, p. 8. and the Lord St. Jo^ns Argum. against Strafford, p.
12, 70, 71. and therefore as a Parl. in Law cannot begin without the Kings
presence in it, either by person, or representation, Cook ibid. in part 4. fol.
6. see also Rot. Parl. 25 E. 3. N. 10. so it is positively dissolved by his
death: for thereby not only the true declared, but intended end of their
assembling (which was to treat and confer with King Charles) is ceased. See 1
Edw. 6. cap. 7. Cooks 7 Rep. 30, 30. and Dyer 156. and 4 E. 4. f. 43, 44. and 1
E. 5. f. 1. Brooks Commission, 19, 21. and thereby a final end is put unto all
the means that are appointed to attain unto the end, and therefore it is as
impossible for the late Parliament, or any Parliament summoned by the King, to
be the Parliament in law after his death, as it is for a Parl. to make King
Charles alive again. The Kings Writ that summoned this Parl. is the basis in
Law, and foundation of this Parl. If the foundation be destroyed, the Parl.
falls: but the foundation of it, in every circumstance, is destroyed; and
therefore the thing built upon that foundation must needs fall: it is a Maxim
both in Law and Reason. But if it be objected, the law of necessity required
the continuance of the Parliament against the letter of the Law. The Prisoner
at the Bar answers; first, its necessary to consider, whether the men that
would have it continue as long as they please, or after it is in Law dissolved,
be not those that have created the necessities on purpose, that by the color
thereof, they may make themselves great and potent; and if so, then that
objection has no weight, nor by any rules of Justice can they be allowed to
gain this advantage by their own fault, as to make that a ground of their
justification, which is a great part of their offense, and that it is true in
it self, is so obvious to every unbyassed knowing eye, it needs no
illustration. Secondly I answer, There can be no necessity be pretended, that
can be justifiable for breach of trusts that are conferred on purpose for the
redress of mischiefs and grievances, yea to the subversions of Laws and
liberties. I am sure Mr. Pym by the Parliaments command and order told the Earl
of Strafford so, when he objected the like, and that he was the Kings
Counselor, and might not be question for any thing he advised according to his
conscience. But says Mr. Pym p. 11. he that will have the privileges of a
Counsel, must keep within the just bounds of a Counselor, those matters are
the proper subjects of counsel, wihch in their times and occasions may be good
or beneficial to the King or Commonwealth. But such Teasons as these, the
subversion of the Laws, violation of liberties, they can never be good or
justifiable by any circumstances or occasions; and therefore says he, his
being a Counselor makes his fault much more heinous, as being committed
against a great trust: and in page 12. he answers another excuse of his which
was, that what he did, he did with a good intention. Its true, says Mr. Pym,
Some matters that are hurtful and dangerous may he accompanied with such
circumstances, as may make it appear useful and convenient, and in all such
cases good intentions will justtifie evil counsel; but where the matters
prepounded are evil in their own nature, such as the matters are with which the
Earl of Strafford is charged, viz. to break a public says to subvert laws and
Government; they can never be justified by any intentions, how specious or good
soever they pretended; see in Mr. Steels answer to Duke Hambletons objection in
the like case, in his case stated, page 12. 13. 14.

The prisoner at the Bar shall close all at present with this plea, viz. that
although by the said unjust Act of Banishment the Act it self does authorize
all Judges, Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and all other Officers, as well
Military as Civil, in their respective places to be aiding and assisting in
apprehending, viz. the said banished Lieut. Col. John Lilburn; yet it
authorizeth none of them in the least to arraign, try, condemn, and execute the
said John Lilburn mentioned in the said Act: and therefore by reason of the
insufficiency of the said Act in that very particular, although John Lilburn
Gent. now prisoner at the bar were that Lieut. Col. John Lilburn mentioned in
the said Act of Banishment, (as with confidence, for the just and legal reasons
at the beginning of this Plea mentioned, he does a vow he is not) yet in regard
the Parliament is dissolved that made the said Act, which in reason (by reason
of the said insufficiency of the said Act) cannot otherwise be supposed, but as
they past the Act of Banishment themselves against the John Lilburn therein
mentioned and meant; so they resolve to o reserve only to themselves the final
judging and condemning of him; which cannot be now without their sitting again:
And that in special and extraordinary acts of Parliament (as the aforesaid Act
of Banishment is) there ought in law to be plain, evident, and full words,
(especially when it does concern life) to demonstrate and express who shall
finally put the said Acts in execution. And that this is Law, the same
Parliament that made the foresaid Act of Banishment does in several Acts since
fully justify this the prisoner at the Bar's averment of several of their Acts
of Parliament, as particularly that of Aug. 2. 1650. entitled, An Act to
prohibit all commerce and traffic between England and Scotland, and enjoin
the departure of the Scots ou^ of this Commonwealth. In the Preamble or
beginning of which, the mischievous designs of the Scottish nation are
declared, and their compelling of England to make war upon them. In the body of
which Act it is declared (for the raking off, as the Act says, all pretense of
ignorance) and enacted, That all and every person or persons within this
Commonwealth (of England) or the Dominions thereof, that shall from and after
the 5 of August 1641 use, hold, or maintain any correspondency or intelligence
with any person or persons of the Scottish nation, etc. or shall abet, assist,
countenance, or encourage the said Scottish nation, or any other person or
persons adhering to them, in their war against the Parliament and Commonwealth
of England; or shall go o^ send, or cause to be sent or conveyed any men,
mon^ys, horse, arms, ammunition, or other fu^niture of war, plate, goods, or
merchandise, or other supply whatsoever, in^o Scotland, or any ports or places
thereof, etc. all and every such person or persons so offending, (without such
license as is therein mentioned) shall be adjudged as Traitors to this
Commonwealth, and shall undergo all the pains, penalties, and forfeitures, as
in case of high-tr^ason. And although the Scots were at present as great
enemies to the Parliament, as the Parl. could imagine any persons in the world
could be, and the offenses aforementioned of any of them against this nation as
criminous, and the time as arbitrary a time (being a time of war) as could be
imagined; yet the Parliament would be so just, even to strangers and aliens,
and people or a foreign nation, as not to leave them arbitrary for their
transgressions, to be punished by whom were pleased first to lay hold of it;
but in ample and plain words fixes upon the persons that are to do it or
execute it; therefore the Act expressly says, The same offenses shall be
enquired of, tried, judged, and determined by the Commissioners for the high
Court of Justice lately established, in such manner and form as other offenses
already reserved to the power and cognizance of that Court are to be hdard and
determined. And in the second part of the Act, the makers of it come to declare
it treason for any person or persons of the Scottish nation (without such
license as is therein mentioned) to be found within the Lines of Communication
after Aug. 10. 1631. And in the third place, the matter of the said Act makes
it high treason for any person or persons of the Scottish nation (without
license as is therein mentioned) to stay within the limits of the Commonwealth
after Sept. 1. 1651. Yet the prisoner at the bar, as he says before, does now
avow, that the said Parl. that made the said Act, would be so just men unto
strangers and aliens, and people of a foreign nation, as not to leave them
arbitrary for their transgressions, to be punished by whom were pleased first
to lay hold on them; but in ample and plain words fixes upon the persons that
are to do it, or execute it: and therefore the Act again expressly says, That
the said offenses and treasons shall be proceeded against by the said
Commissioners of the high Court of Justice, who are required to give Judgment
and Sentence of death against offenders. And every person and persons so found
guilty of the said offenses, shall suffer the pains of death as traitors and
enemies, in such manner as the said Commissioners shall adjudge and appoint.
And the same ample and full words as in that special Act for suppressing of
Incest, Adultery, etc. which by plain and evident words does refer the
punishment of the offenders therein named to the next Assizes or Jail-delivery
to be held for the said County where the fact is committed. And the very
self-same particular words are in the Act entitled An Act against several
atheistical, blasphemous, and execrable Opinions derogatory to the honor of
God, and destructive to humane society, to refer the punishment of all the
transgressors thereof at common law before the Justices of Assize or
Jail-delivery, as by the Acts themselves does more fully appear; unto which the
prisoner at the bar for more safety refers himself.

And lastly, the prisoner at the bar for his final plea says, That Lieut. Col.
John Lilburn indicted in the said Indictment now read, is none of the prisoner
at the bar's name, and so he is not the party mentioned in the said Indictment
now read.

All which premises he is ready to prove for good Law: and therefore humbly
prays the judgment of the Court before he put himself upon any further Trial.

July 13. 1653. John Lilburn Gentleman.


