A Third Address directed to his Excellency the Lord General CROMWELL, and the
Right Honorable the Council of State sitting at WHITE HALL: Being, The humble
Petition of Lieutenant-Colonell John Lilburne Prisoner in Newgate.
SHOWS,
THat since your Petitioner in the confidence of your goodness and
righteousness cast his life at your feet, he has truly showed by his humble
Addresses to your Honors, that whilst he lived in banishment, his life was no
better then a constant dying unto him, besides other straits and extremities;
his life being daily sought for, and exposed to constant and desperate hazards
by his enemies. And upon that account, together with the unwearied
importunities and tears of his tender Wife, he was induced to come into
England, being neither in the least invited nor encouraged thereunto by any
other but she alone. Only he believed it better and more safe for him to cast
his life (notwithstanding any prejudices of spirit whatsoever against him) upon
the mercy and favor of those, who zealously profess the fear of the Lord, and
faith in the tender mercies of God in Christ, and had engaged in the same
public Cause with him against Tyranny and Oppression; then to be at the mercy
of his false, cruel, and bloody Enemies beyond the Seas, who have no such bonds
upon their spirits.

Yet to his grief, he finds no effect of his former addresses but his
Imprisonment, in the most dishonorable Goal; and as he is informed, an Order
for his speedy Trial upon the Act for his Banishment; without any the least
notice taken of what he has humbly offered to your Honors in his said former
addresses, concerning the illegality of the said Act and all the proceedings
thereupon.

That upon a most serious search into his own actions, and the very intentions
of his heart, your Petitioner cannot find the least cause why he should be
rendered a person so abominable, that he is unfit to live or breath in this
Commonwealth; only he fears that his intentions in coming hither in this
juncture of time may be misrepresented to your Honors. Whereas he does
seriously and really profess as in the sight of the Lord (that searches all
hearts) that he has herein truly and in the integrity of his soul, without
deceit or guile in the least, clearly declared the occasion of his coming; and
that he had no design, end, or intention, but merely to crave the protection
of the present Power in all humility, and a peaceable and quiet submission to
their Government, and to endeavor in all peaceable ways, that the justice of
the sentence passed against him might be legally and judicially examined, and
the judgment revoked, that he might quietly live a private life, and enjoy the
fellowship of his Christian friends, and the society of his dearest wife, and
tender babes: and unto this kind of life he is ready most solemnly to bind and
engage himself, and he believes many of his friends will freely engage for his
truth and integrity of real performance of his promise therein; and that he
shall neither directly nor indirectly disturb, or in the least molest the
present Power and Government.

That your Petitioner having never in the least been charged nor accused of any
Capital Crime in reference to his banishment, humbly craves your Honors
seriously to consider, wherein God shall be dishonored, or the Commonwealth
damnified, or any honest member thereof prejudiced by his living and breathing
in England; for whose real welfare, and the honest Inhabitants thereof, and
their true tranquillity, he has for many years together run most real and
apparent hazards, and that without eying in the least any mercinary or
pecuniary advantageous ends unto himself.

And likewise he most humbly entreats you seriously to consider, wherein God
shall be glorified, and his people comforted, the Commonwealth advantaged, or
any Capital offenders terrified, by shedding your Petitioners innocent blood,
upon the breach of the said Act for his banishment. And therefore if God shall
so incline your hearts, he humbly prays, That all Proceedings against him upon
the said Act may forthwith be suspended; and that he may have free liberty to
make his humble Addresses in a peaceable submissive manner to those that are
and shall be entrusted with the Supreme Authority, for the repealing the said
Act. And that in the interim he may be freed from his chargeable Imprisonment,
upon his most solemn engagement and security to live peaceably and quietly with
his poor Family, in all obedience and submission to the present Power and
Government.

Newgate, this present Monday, being June the 20. 1653. And he shall pray, etc.
JOHN LILBURNE.

London, Printed by Tho. Newcomb dwelling in Thamestreet over against Baynards
Castle.


