The second Part OF ENGLANDS New-Chaines DISCOVERED:

Or a sad Representation of the uncertain and dangerous condition of the
COMMONWEALTH:

DIRECTED To the Supreme Authority of England, the Representors of the People
in Parliament assembled.

By several well-affected persons inhabiting the City of London, Westminster,
the Borough of Southwark, Hamblets, and places adjacent, presenters and
approvers of the late large Petition of the Eleventh of September. 1648.

And as it is avowed by Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn, Mr. Richard Overton,
and Mr. Tho-Prince, upon peril of their lives; and for which they are now
committed to the Tower as Traitors.

London, Printed in the Year, 1649.

To the Supreme Authority of ENGLAND, the Representors of the People, in
Parliament Assembled.
THE Sad Representation of the uncertain and dangerous Condition of the
Commonwealth: By the Presenters and Approvers of the Large Petition of the 11.
of September, 1648.
IF our hearts were not overcharged with the sense of the present miseries and
approaching dangers of the Nation, your small regard to our late serious
Apprehensions, would have kept us silent; but the misery, danger, and bondage
threatened is so great, imminent, and apparent, that whilst we have breath, and
are not violently restrained, we cannot but speak, and even cry aloud, until
you hear us, or God be pleased otherways to relieve us.

Nor should you in reason be withheld from considering what we present you
withal, through any strangeness that appears there in; For what was more
incredible, than that a Parliament trusted by the people to deliver them from
all kinds of oppression, and who made so liberal effusion of their blood, and
waste, of their estates (upon pretense of doing thereof) should yet so soon as
they were in power, oppress with the same kind of oppressions, which yet was
true in the times of Hollis and Stapletons faction, and who, (as the King and
Bishops had done before) labored for an Army to back and perpetuate them
therein.

Nor were our Petitions then presented (wherein we justly complained of those
oppressions, and forewarned them of the danger ensuing) the less considerable
for their burning them by the hand of the common hangman; Nor the Petitioners
the more blameworthy for being reproched with the names of Atheists,
Heretics, and seditious Sectaries (as now with Jesuit, and Levelier)
Aspersions being the known marks of corrupt Statesmen, and usually working no
other effect, but the discredit of the Aspersers. Yet were there then many who
believed their reports of us, and they were as impatient with us, for our
taxing them with their wicked and pernicious designs, as others are now for our
presuming to detect them, who are so high in present power and repuration: But
it is now evident, that it is possible for our Physicians to bring us into a
more dangerous condition than they found us.

And though experience has made us woefully sensible, that nothing is more
dangerous to any people than their bearing with unjust, covertous, or ambitions
practices in those they trust; Yet did we forbear to interpose our judgments,
or to oppose those men's designs, until they had made a large progress toward
our bondage, and endeavored to grasp the power of the Army into their hands,
thereby to enforce their Tyranny upon us; insomuch that it was almost too late
to give check to their wicked intentions: so unwilling were we to believe it
possible for men who all along pretended liberty and redress of grievances, to
degenerate so soon into the grossest Principles and practices of long settled
Tyrannies.

And much more do our Consciences bear us witness of our backwardness to
believe any evil intentions in those who not only were most vigorous and
successful against the common enemy, but seemed so sensible of the injustice
and treachery of that prevalent faction in Parliament, as to engage with the
utmost of their might, as if they had really intended to deliver the Nation
from that dangerous thraldom, so that we both durst, and did many of as,
venture our lives upon their fidelity; Yea so powerful, persuasive, and
contentful were their first Engagements, Papers, and Remonstrances, to fraught
with self-denying Doctrines, tender regard to the peace of the Nation, and
satisfaction to all interests; as even lulled all peaceable People into a sound
sleep of security, casting all their care upon the General Council of the Army,
as upon a People they thought could never have the face to decline either those
principles, or to neglect the performance of so many engagements, promises, and
protestations, made as in the presence of the all-seeing God, frequently
calling upon him, the searcher of all hearts, to bear witness to their
integrity and sincerity therein: Insomuch that we (who always with some
wariness observed them) many times denied our own understandings rather than
we would draw hasty conclusions from evident testimonies of their defection.

But when after they had once slighted the Agitators. and discountenanced
those Officers and Soldiers, who first engaged against the destructive Votes
of Parliament; such as stood firm to their engagements at New Market, and
Triploe Heath: when we saw they not only neglected them, but adhered to persons
sent from Parliament and City, in those corrupted times, and fell immediately
to plead for Negative Voices in the King, and Lords; checking and controuling
th^se that opposed: When we understood their General Councels (which according
to their engagements ought to have consisted only of two select Commission
Officers, and two private Soldiers, chosen by every Regiment, with such
General Officers as assented to the Engagement, and no other) were
nevertheless overgrown with Colonels, Lieut. Colonels, Majors, and others,
not chosen; and many of them dissen^ers from the said Engagement; and that some
few eminent persons presumed above measure therein, and in effect overawed and
controuled those Councels: and that the contrivance of a Counsel of State, was
the great engine which those Councels labored to bring about: when we found
them not only to Court the King, by kissing his hand, and the like, and that a
correspondency was held between him and the General Officers, and Agents sent
to and fro continually, whereby they came to so near a close, as that their
Proposals were not only received, but corrected and amended by the King, before
they were sent to the House, till they became very consistent with his ends and
Prerogative: and those Officers so engaged thereby, as to be moved to
impatience toward any that spoke a syllable against this their trafique and
intercourse with him: upon which likewise, they concluded an Agreement with the
opposing Citizens of London, without so much as calling the Agitators to
advize thereupon. Seeing, Hearing, and Understanding these things, no marvel if
we were staggered in our Beleese of their integrity.

But that a person so deeply charged as the Earl of Manchester, and other grand
s^lf-seekers of this House should be entertained with so great respect, and
guarded to their places in Parliament, and that notwithstanding the prevailing
power of the Army, those who had usurped the Authority of the House, and Voted
a new war, were nevertheless permitted to sit and Vote there, and that
contrary to the importunate desires of the Agitators, and the Remonstrance of
the Army: and then one of the first fruits of this their conjunction was the
passing of an Ordinance for Tithes, upon trebble damages, which the corrupt
Clergy had presented (in the absence of the Speaker) to Pelhams Parliament; and
the burning of Mr Biddles Book, by the Common Hangman; and imprisoning his
person: and that notwithstanding their glorious March through London, the
prerogative Prisoners in the Tower, Newgate, and else where, were utterly
neglected, and the Council of those friends slighted, who had been
instrumental, even to the loss of some, and the hazard of all their lives, to
make an easy and unbloudy passage for the Army into Southwark and the City.
Upon observation of these and abundant more particulars, which we could
enumerate, we concluded, that the Councels of the Army were not steered as at
their first engagement, by the select persons chosen thereunto, nor for the
ends in that engagement expressed; but by some other powerful and; overruling
influences, that intended other matters then were pretended, a dthat labored
by all possible means to convert the honest endeavors of good men in the Army,
and elsewhere, and the happy success God had blessed them withal, to the
advantage of their Lusts, Pride, and Domination: And as time came on, it more
and more appeared, that they intended merely the establishment of themselves in
power and greatness, without: any regard at all to the peformance of their
promises and engagements, or any respect to the faith and credit of the Army,
or to the peace and prosperity of the Common wealth, and that they walked by no
rules or principles either of honesty or conscience; but (as mere pollititians,
were governed altogether by accasion, and as they saw a possibility of making
progress to their designs, which course of theirs they ever termed a waiting
upon providence, that with color of Religion they might deceive the more
securely.

Now that this may appear no slander, we entreat that without partiality, their
after proceedings may be thoroughly scanned: as first, at Kingston it was
proposed by the Agitators, friends of London, Southwark, and the places
adjacent, that the Tower, City, and Borough, might be secured by the
well-affected Inhabitants, and not by Soldiers, that so trade and traffic
might be preserved, which otherwise would be driven away (as it soon after
proved) And that it was hoped they intended not to secure any place by
Soldiers, when the well-affected Inhabitants were able to secure it. Which
advise proceeded as well from ourrespects to the City and neighbor places, as
upon fears of what we know to be the practice of other Tyrants (and therefore
doubted would be exercised by those) namely, the garisoning great Towns,
thereby to keep the people, as well in poverty, as in continual aw and
subjection.

Which advise, though assented unto by the Agitators, was yet rejected by the
grand Officers, and a new Regiment raised, to the further charge of the
Commonwealth; the Proposers themselves being dismissed with reproaches, and the
Agitators thrust out, and not permitted to observe how they were dealt withal.

At which time also its very remarkable with how much height of State they
observed the King at Hampton Court, visiting him themselves, and permiting
thousands of people daily to visit him, to kiss his hand, and to be healed by
him, whereby his party in the City, and every where, were exceedingly animated,
his Agents being as familiar at the headquarters, as at the Court. Then on a
sudden, when the House complied not with their purposes, in all have it was to
be purged, and thereupon they publish a large Remonstrance, Aug. 18. stuffed
with public reasons, to show the justness and necessity thereof: but the House
again complying, through the sight of their Remonstrance, though no whit
changed in respect of its corruption; and they finding, if it were purged, it
would not be for their design; they make nothing of their former resolution,
but continue it in its corrupt condition, and sit with them themselves.

Then they fall to work again about the King and send the propositions of
New Castle to him, which they knew, and were agreed he should not sign; in the
mean time, they so wrought the King by deep promises, and hopes of
restoration, as that (...) inclined much to countenance the Army, gave out
words in t^eir favor, and in his answer to the House, prefer^d their
Prop^sals, before the Parliaments Propositions; in lieu thereof, the great ones
of the Army themselves, endeavored the revival of a Tre^^y and some of them in
the House, were very violent against (...) no more Address, and expressed it
wa^ the sen^e of the (...) further Address should be made, and that except they
(...) Addresses of another nature to the King, they could not promise them the
assistance of the Army; and according they take pains to work every man at the
headquarters; upon which, petitions were attempted in the Army, in favor of a
Treaty, and some conscientious, but weak people, were drawn to second their
design, with a Petition for a Personal Treaty, which they had ready at the
House door.

These strange and mysterious proceedings occasioned a new face of things in
the Army, many of the Officers being much distasted thereat, and whole
Regiments choosing new Agents to look after the public, as fearing things were
running headlong into a most dangerous condition: The far greater number of the
Officers, would not by any means endure to hear of the Armies complaince with
the King, and the Agents finding all former engagements, promises, and
declarations broken, and utterly neglected, and the Common wealth in danger of
utter dissolution, produce an Agreement of the People, upon grounds of Common
Right, for uniting of all unprejudiced people therein; the great Officers very
much oppose it a while, as having set up another Interest: but seeing the same
take with the Army, profess though at present their judgments could not so far
close with it as to act for it, yet they would never oppose it. Hereupon the
whole frame of the design alters, and the matters in projection with them, were
how to dis-ingage themselves, and be rid of the King, and how likewise to
discountenance and keep under the discerning party in the Army. In order to the
first, they cast about how to get the King into the Isle of Wight, where they
might both easier keep others from him, and the more entirely possess him
themselves; and that he might with willingness be hurried thither, they work
upon his fear; suggesting to him, that there was an intention in some violent
persons to murder him, and persuade him to leave that in a letter, as the cause
of his remove. To make which the more credible, they wrought L. Col. Hen.
Lilburn to asperse his brother John (who then stood in the way of the great men
of the Army) with a base and abhorrid resolution of being one that intended to
murder the King; to the proof whereof they would never suffer the Asperser to
be brought (though solicited thereunto by a Petition from diverse well-affected
persons) but instead thereof, for that perfideous service, they advanced him to
the government of Tinmouth Castle, above his brother Robert, where retaining
the leven of his Apostasy, which the Genesis Officers had laid in him, he ussered
the deserved reward of a perfidious traitor.

And though the General Officers inclined him to this revolt themselves, as
well by their example, as by countenancing him in the beginning hereof; and
though for the same he incurred the extreme displeasure of his Father, and
Kindred, yet are both his Father and Kindred by the Officers themselves and
their Associates aspersed with the fact, as if tainted with guilt and
contammination thereof.

Thus did they kill two birds with one stone, framing a Name for them which of
all others is most distastefull to the People, and was therefore most likely to
beget a belief of the pretended assassination.

Where (by the way) we desire it may be observed, that notwithstanding the word
Leveller was framed and cast upon all those in the Army (or elsewhere) who are
against any kind of Tyranny, whether in King, Parliament, Army, Council of
State, etc. And though it was not so much as believed to concern those upon
whom they cast it, the inventers having often professed as much, yet have they
both themselves and by their Instruments industriously propagated the same, and
insinuated both this and other slanders of us into the hearts of all the easy
and credulous people they could meet withal.

But to return, The King thus removed, they judge themselves at good leisure
to deal with the Agreers for the People, and so suddenly violent they became
in that work, that at the first Randezvous near Ware, they shot a Soldier to
death, for pursuing the ends of the Engagement at New Market, and for insisting
upon the Agreement for the People: unworthily abused Major Skott, a Member of
this House, sent him up a prisoner, and accused him and Col. Rains borough for
appearing in behalf of the Agreement, and there withal sent Col. Airs, Major
Cobbet, Capt. Bray, and many others after them prisoners to Windsor, where, as
Parties, Judges, and Juries, the Officers did what they would against them,
sentencing some to deata, others to disgraceful punishments, restraining and
releasing at pleasure, and with as much Arbirrarinesse as ever was in the
world, and could not be diswaded though Mr Saltmarsh and others bore full
restimony against the cruelty and injustice thereof. Hereupon at the House they
procured at once the imprisonment of five cordial Citizens, for justifying the
Agreement of the People, and requiring Justice for the blood of the Soldier
that was shot at Ware, disfranchized them, and under the notion of London
Agents forbad their meetings. And when now they thought they had molded and
qualified the Army to their own bent, and had gratified their complying
Officers, with the cruelty upon the Levellers, (for so they have styled all who
have manifested any sense of Common Right) and had found that they could be
nothing so great, rich, and potent, upon a close with the King, and that it
would be impossible for them to hold either Officer or Soldier firm to them,
in case of such composure. Hereupon uterly to frustrate his hopes that way,
they prevail with the House to Vote no more Addresses; and so vanished away all
their glorious flattery of the King and his Party, and their notorious
dissimulation appeared, abusing thereby the Faith of the Army, and making it
clear to all discerning men, that such as could so break with one sort of men,
will make no Conscience of keeping faith with any.

Their next work was to new-mould the City, and make it theirs, for which
purpose they brought some Regiments of Horse and Foot, to White Hall and the
Muse, to the extreme discontent of the City, and provoke them further by
keeping their Lord Mayor, and some of their Aldermen in the Tower, without
admitting them to a Legal Trial, though upon Petitions and earnest Desires: at
last they were referred to be tried by the Lords, contrary to the known Law of
the Land; but their jurisdiction being disclaimed, after a while they were
released without any Trial at all, their end being accomplished, which was the
terror of the City, and changing the Magistrates thereof, so as should best
serve their designs.

About this time also they began to exercise their Marshal power over persons
not of the Army, and did sentence Mr William Thomson to death at White Hall.
And then also they began to new moddel the Army, and for that end, (though the
new raised Regiment for the Tower was thought no burden, yet upon pretense of
easing the charge of the Common wealth, the Lifeguard must be disbanded,
because consisting of discerning men, faithful to their Country and former
promises, and many others of like principles were picked out of every Regiment;
the design being by weeding the choicest and best resolved men, to make the
Army wholly mercenary, slavish, and the Executioners of a few men's lusts and
lawless Pleasures.

All which those good men perceiving and resolving thereupon not to be
disbanded, according to the Agreement at New market, till the ends therein
expressed were fully gained, they were enforced there nto by Tyrannical
sentences of Imprsonment and Death (though the Officers themselves had formerly
refused to disband upon command of Parliament upon the same grounds and
strength of the same engagement:) By all which it is evident, that acording to
the maxim of Polititions, they judge themselves loose, where other men are
bound; and that all Obligations are to them Transitory and Ceremonial, and
that indeed every thing is good and just only, as it is conducting to their
corrupt and ambitious Interests.

And thus the most hopeful opportunity that ever England had for recovery of
our Freedom, was spent and consumed, in such their uncertain,
staggeringmotions, and Arbitrary, irrationa^l Proceedings, whereby all parties
became extremely exasperated, as people that had been merely mocked and cheated
by fair promises and under the most religious pretenses etc. Hereby the Army,
that but few momenths before, had been the joy and hope of all sorts of
Rational People, was made a byword, a hissing, and a reproach to the whole
Nation: insomuch that those (in hope of their large good Promises, and protest
in their Declarations,) who thought nothing too precious for them, now grudged
them bread, and were ready to stone them in all places where they came; Trade
fled, Poverty increased, and dicontents abounded, till at length broke out such
a flane, as no time had ever seen before; and no doubt, was the proper issue of
such horrid delusions, ministering such matter for a general Rising and Revels,
as all former Policies could never attain to, and more threatening the ruin of
the Nation then all the former forces and Stratagems of the Enemies; and which
is rightly to be imputed to the unjust, partial and persidsous dealings of
these men.

But when they saw what a strange predicament they had brought themselves into,
and which thye would never believe, till it was come upon them (no more then
now they will) they had before manifested a greater Obstinacy, then now they
did a serious Repentance (which yet as the sequel proves, was but counierfeit)
though (as God knows) we were overjoyed to believe it real: Acknowledging,
with the greatest expressions of sorrow, that they had walked by corrupt
Pollitick Principles; That they had been to blame in Actings against honest
men; That the name of Levelier, Jesuit or the like reproaches, should never be
more heard amongst them, that if ever the Nation be happy, it must be by a
conjunction in the Levellers Principles, calling upon all, to lay by all
Discontents, to forget and forgive, and to unite all against the Common enemy,
and promising with greatest asseverations, That if God, upon our joint
endeavors, should be pleased to deliver us out of this Sea of danger, that they
would never divide from just Principles, nor in the least discouncenance honest
men as they had done, nor endeavor to set up a party, but cast themselves upon
an agreement of the People for the future settlement of the Peace of the
Nation: but how and what performance they have made, that we shall entreat, may
be impartially observed in the ensuing story; And for a full and timely proof
of their Relapse, and Discovery of their dissimilation; No sooner had they
(through Gods blessing and the assistance of their reconciled friends) finished
their work at Colechester, but presently they call to question certain
Persons, that had appeared at St. Athanes in behalf of Captain Reynald:
choosing rather to forsake the Service, then to be commanded by Captains, that
had been violent against them, that had drunk the Kings Health upon their
knees, and professed they could rather sight against the Levellers then
Cavaliers, and these (according to their old wont) they sentenced to Death, and
soon after releast them, as finding or supposing this kind of Discipline most
effectual, to the breaking and debasing the spirits of the English.

And because Col. Rainsborough had ever opposed their unjust Proceedings, they
withdraw him from the Army, by a plausible, but only a Tittular command at
sea, where by the straitness of his Commission; he not having thereby the
command of the Ships or Officers, he could neither restrain their Revolt, nor
preserve himself from being expussed at the Seamans pleasure out of that
employment.

Then upon his return, the ruling Officers finding him as inflexible to their
ends as formerly, they put him upon that dangerous and unhappy Service before
Pomfre^ (notwithstanding a Commander had been appointed thereunto by the
Committee of York) whether he went with much Reluctance and discontent, as
wondering at the Cause of his being Designed thither, and expressing as much to
his Friends, his sad soul presaging the misfortune, which after befell him. But
that which gives greatest cause of grief and suspect to his friends, is, that
his Brother receives no furtherance, but rather, all discouragement that may be
in searching after, and prosecuting the causers of that so bloody and inhumane
a Butchery.

In the North, though during the Service and Necessities of the Army, the
Levellers (as they are called) were countenanced, and taken into the Boosme,
who thereupon (forgetting all former affronts and disrespects) did liberally
hazard their lives, without suspicion of fraud and delusion; Yet the
Necessities being over; and the enemies subdued, they renew fresh disgraces,
and fall into a greater (...), and contempt then ever.

First, divers-Souldiers for Petitioning in the behalf of Major Reynolds, that
he might serve in the room of Major Huntington, were therefore rated, and
threatened to have their skilles cut, and some of them struck for so
Petitioning; Major John Cobit, who with the extremest hazard had regained
Tinmouth Castle, where his Superior Commander had through the dangers thereof
refused, was not withstanding rejected, and a Member of Parliament taken from
his duty there, and contrary to the self denying Ordinance, made Governor
thereof, Major White, who in all the desperate services in the North, had
performed the duty of Lieutinant Colonel and Major both in the Generals
Regiment, yet because a constant man to his Promises and Principles, was
refused the Lieftenant Colonelship, and a man of a more complying Spirit
fetched from another Regiment to officiate therein.

And this was the usage not only to these Gentlemen, but to all others whether
Officers, or soldiers in North or South (for their Counsels were one in both)
that did retain a sense and Resolution to prosecute those good things
intimated in their former Engagements.

And as before, upon their first great Success against the City, when now
again it justly was expected they should have made use of so notable and
unexpected Blessings to the benefit and advantage of the Commonwealth, (as
their late repentances, promises and Pretenses gave men cause to hope) the
event proved, they intended another use thereof, for (having now subdued all
their enemies, they proceed with greater confidence to their former purposes,
of making themselves absolute masters over the Commonwealth, wherein there yet
appeared one main obstacle, and that was an unanimous and universal Resolution
in all Well-minded People (especially in that numerous PEOPLE that concurred in
the PETITION of the Eleventh of September to center in an Agreement of the
People, which if not evaded, it would be impossible for them) to go through
with their Work: Hereupon again they cry out for Union, and employ their
Agents, to get meetings, and Treaties with those that were most forward for an
Agreement and contract with them to center in an Agreement, and that the matter
of the Petition of the Eleventh of September (as was desired) should be the
substance of that Agreement: there being no other way then by this yielding in
show, to amaze this busy watchful Party, and to keep them quiet, whilst they
went on with other pieces of their work.

For what else has all the time spent thereabouts produced, but a mere
amusing, blinding and deluding all that cordially desired the same, it being
(before they left it) so obscured and perplexed in the sense thereof, so short
of what was intended, and so corrupted in many particulars, that those most
loathed it, that most desired it; In the mean time, whilst they had fixed good
Men's eyes and thoughts upon that Work, they secretly and swiftly prosecute
their other Designs, as principal in their purposes, wherein questionless
they had not had the Assistance of good men, but that it was verily believed in
show of driving on their own Design; they were really and cordially producing
a perfect and complete Agreement of the People, as large both in grounds of
^^^^dome, and redress of grievances, as the petition of the Eleventh of
September, in the uttermost extent thereof did import.

Many of which Petitioners were not satisfied but that such an Agreement of the
People might then have been obtained without any of those extraordinary sudden
and violent Courses lately taken, neither in bringing the Army to the City,
breaking the House in pieces, or removing the King by such an extra-juditiall
Proceedings and Court of Justice, as had no place in the English Government;
and did really foresee there would be nothing but abuse in their pretense of an
Agreement of the people: and that their own domination, in and by a Counsel of
State, was the maine thing aimed at, and intended.

The Removing the King, the taking away the House of Lords the over-awing the
House, and reducing it to that pass, that it is become but the Channel,
through which is conveyed all the Decrees and Determinations of a private
Counsel of some few Officers, the erecting of their Court of Justice, and
their Counsel of State, The voting of the People the supreme Power, and this
House the Supreme Authority: all these Particulars, (though many of them in
order to good ends, have been desired by We^l-affected People) are yet become
(as they have managed them) of sole conducement to their ends, and Intents,
either by removing such as stood in the way between them and the power, wealth
or command of the Commonwealth; or by actually possessing and investing them
in the same.

And though all this was foreseen by us, yet so persuasive were their
insinuations in the ears of many good and well-disposed People, both Soldiers
and others, that they have been really carried away with belief of them, and
reliance upon them, and have thought they could not better employ their time
and abilities, them in affording them all furtherance, and assistance that
might be.

So that their only fears remain upon our Discoveries, to prevent which, they
use means, that either we might not have opportunity to lay open their
Treacheries, and Hypocrisies, or not be believed if we did it.

In order to the first, They strictly stop the Press; In order to the second;
They blast us with all the Scandalls, and false Reports their Wit or Malice
could invent against us; and so monstrously wicked have they been in this
particular, That they have pried into all our Actions, made use of all our
Acquaintances, and friendly Intimacies, and in conclusion, have only produced
such Scandalls, as have been customarily used by former Statesmen, and such,
when scanned and examined, contain both contrariety in themselves, and have not
the least ground of Truth, as concerning us.

By these Arts are they new fastened in their Power, till either by opposition
from the enemy, which they may well expect God will raise against them, as the
deserved Recompense of their vile Apostasy; or by the weight and Violence of
their many Injustices (which in the wicked course they are in) must every day
be multiplied, till they be thrown down from their usurped greatness.

They have already lost the Affections of all People, and are only supported
by their present strength; but when once those good men that hold them up,
shall perceive how Instrument all they are made, contrary to their intentions,
in advancing a few losty and imperious men's designs; and how easy it is for
them to convert their abilities and power to better, and more common ends
expressed in their former engagements, and which the complaints of the agrieved
people, and their own understandings can furnish them withal, they will then
lament that they have so long been out of the way, and set themselves with the
utmost courage and resolution to free their distressed Country from the fears
and captivity it now groans under. They may talk of freedom, but what freedom
indeed is there, so long as they stop the Press, which is indeed, and has
been so accounted in all free Nations, the most essential part thereof,
employing an Apostate Judas for executioner therein, who has been twice burnt
in the hand, a wretched fellow, that even the Bishops and Star Chamber would
have shamed to own. What freedom is there left, when honest and worthy
Soldiers are sentenced and enforced to ride the horse with their faces
reverst, and their swords broken overtheir heads for but Petitioning and
presenting a Letter in justification of their Liberty therein: if this be not a
new way of breaking the spirits of the English, which Strafford and Canterbury
never dreampt of; we know no difference of things. A taste also of Liberty of
Conscience they have given us in the Case of a worthy Member of your House; so
as we may well judge what is like to follow, if their Reign continue. And as
for Peace, whilst the supreme Officers of the Army are supreme in your House,
in the Council of State, and all in all in the general Counsel of the Army,
when the murtiall power is indeed supreme to the Civil Authority, what Peace
can be expected; we profess we see no counsels tending to it, but hereof
mighty and vast sums of money to be taxed upon the People per mensem, as if
war were become the only trade, or as if the people were bound to maintain
Armies whether they have trade or no; yea, whether they have bread or no.

And as for the prosperity of the Nation; what one thing has been done that
tends to it? Nay, has apy thing been done since they were in power? but what
increases the rancor, hatred, and malice, which our late unhappy differences
have begotten amongst us, as if they had placed their happiness and security in
the total devision of the People, nothing being offered by them, that has any
face of reconcitement in it, nothing of cheerfulness or general satisfaction,
the mother of trade and plenty, that might take away the private remembrances
and destinctions of parties, nothing indeed, but what tends to implacable
bitterness of spirit, the mother of confusion penury, and beggary.

Nay what sense of the heavy burden of the people have they manifested of late?
has it not been by their procurement that the Judges their Creatures have a
thousand a year allowed to every one of them above the ordinary fees, which
were ever esteemed a heavy oppression in themselves? is there any abridgement
of the Charge, or length of time in trial of Causes? are they touched with the
general burden of Tithes, that cankier of industry and Tillage? or with that of
exize, which out of the bowels of laborers and poor people enriches the
Userers, and other Catterpillars of the Comon-wealth: or what have they done to
free trade from the intolerable burden of Customs, except the setting fresh
hungry flies upon the old sores of the people? what one matterial thing did
they offer unto you in their late Petition, which you gave them so many thanks
for? terming their Desires modest and discreet; when it is evident by the
contents, they did it only to stop the mouths of their Soldiers, and to amuze
them into a pleasing dream, whilst they go on in their Design of absolute
domination, and which should you in the least oppose, you would find their
modesty no more toward you, then toward your excluded Members: In the mean
time, where is their Charge against those Members? or why find they not who
amongst them have conferred offices upon each other and upon their Creatures
and relations? or who they were that gave so large Donations of thousands and
hundreds per an. whilst the public faith is broken, and Families are ready to
starve for emptying themselves to serve the public necessities; or why
discountenance not they al those who have betrayed the trust of feoffes for
Bishops and Delinquents lands and are purchasers themselves of great Estates
for few years purchases, the due value rightly considered; or why blame they
not the L. chief Justice, and L. chief Baron for keeping their places, which
were conferred on them (and the like on others) by this House, when those
members sat there, they have excluded? or why find they not out those
perfidious persous that have made no Conscience of breaking the self-denying
Ordinance and persist therein? or is the reason visible why they have nothing
to say against those sorts of men namely, because these are their own, and
their creatures cases? Oh wretched England; that sees, and yet suffers such
intolerable Masters. What can be expected from such Officers, who frequently
manifest a thirst after the blood of such People, and Soldiers, as are most
active for the common freedom, peace and prosperity of the Common wealth, and
against whom they have nothing else to object: or what can be expected from
such a counsel in the Army, as shall agree that the supreme Authority should
be moved to make a Law, That that Counsel of Officers may have power to hang
all such Persons (though not of the Army) as they should judge, were disturbers
of the Army.

Certainly these things cannot but manifest unto you their very hearts, their
inward purposes and Intentions representing visibly before you and all the
World, the most dangerous condition, that ever yet this Nation has been in:
And if there be any Conscience toward God or man to be found amongst you, the
whole series and Progress of this our sad Representation is so fully known, and
fresh in memory, that it is impossible, but it must work upupon all amongst you
that are not Copartners with them in their Design, or are not engaged (as the
Lawyers are) in some corrupt Interest.

But though this long betrayed and miserable Nation should prove so unhappy as
that there should not be one found amongst you, to own these known Truths,
which yet ring in every man's ears, throughout the Land; but through fear, or
other vile respects, should shut your eyes against the light: it shall be so
far from inducing us to repent of what we have herein (or in our late
Apprehensions) expressed, and set before you, that we shall rejoice above
measure, that we have witnessed to the Truth; and against all those Delusions
and perfidious Stratagems laid by those men to betray and enslave the
Commonwealth, to their own Pride Ambition, Lusts, Covetousness, and
Domination if not Dukeship, or Kingship; their Creatures discoursing of late,
That the Power must be reduced to One: What their meaning is, time (if they be
not hindered) will manifest: but the Premises duly weighed, does evidence, what
ere it be, it will be as bad, as bad possibly can be.

And as we shall not altogether doubt of the appearance of some, in this
Honorable House, that will conscionably perform that Supreme Trust which is
really and essentially resident in your integrity; what ever may be suggested
to the contrary: (it being not others treachery, nor anyes violence, that can
divest you of that Authority: but if you all should fayl therein, as God forbid
yet we shall not doubt, but that what we have here presented, and published,
will open the eyes, and raise the hearts of so considerable a number of the
Souldiary and People in all places, and make them so sensible of the bondage
and danger threatened, as that these men, this Faction of Officers, shall never
be able to go through with their wicked intentions.

It being an infinite shame that they should be suffered to proceed so far
therein, as they have done, there having been no party hitherto so inexcusable
for it is possible, if not probablethat the King and his party might at first
be induced to offend through error of breeding, long custom, and sway of
times, (although that excuse neither him nor them) That Hollis, and that party,
might at first be drawn into their violence, against people faithful to the
Common wealth through an erroneous zeal against supposed Sectaries, and for
uniformity in Presbytery (though that also but little extenuates their offense)
but neither the one nor the other can be imagined to have transgressed against
so evident light. nor against so many and great obligations of love, and great
respects from the people as this party has done; So that the in entions, and
endeavors of these men, to enslave the Commonwealth or their continuing of
burdens, without any remorse at the dearnesse of food, and and utter loss of
trade, exceeds in the nature and measure of it, all the wickedness of both the
other parties put together.

And therefore upon due consideration of the premises, and in utter detestation
of their most perfidious and treacherous dealing with the Army, Parliament and
Commonwealth; we do in behalf of our selves and all wel-minded people, here
before this Honorable House, as in the presence of Almighty God, protest
against their breaking the says of the Army with all parties, their dissolving
the Council of the Agitators, and usurping a power of giving forth the sense of
the Army to the Parliament and people also against the shooting of the Soldier
to death at Ware, and their cruelties exercised on other persons, to the
debasing of their spirits, and thereby new moulding of the Army to their own
designs, then playing fast and loose with the King and his party, till they
brought a new and dangerous War upon the Nation.

We also protest against their dissembled repentances, as in no measure
satisfactory for so abominable offenses: we also protest against all their late
extraordinary Proceedings, in bringing the Army upon the City, (to the ruin of
trade) there breaking the House in pieces without charging the Members
particularly: And then judging and taking away of men's lives in an
extraordinary way, as done for no other end, but to make way for their own
absolute domination: we also protest against the Election and Establishment of
those High-Courts of Justice, as unjust in themselves, and of dangerous
Presidence in time to come: as likewise against the Council of State, and
putting some of themselves therein contrary to their own Agreement: we also
protest against all other the like meetings of those officers, that on Thursday
the 22. of February last, voted for so bloody a Law, as to hang whom they
should judge, disturbed the Army, (as having no power either by such Councels,
either to give the sense of the Army, or to judge any Person not of the Army,
or to do any thing in reference to the Commonwealth, more then what any, so
many fifty Soldiers or persons not of the Army have power and may lawfully do:
though all the General officers were continually present:) these we protest
against, as things unjust abominable and dangerous and declare that our present
not seeking for Justice or relief therein, shall be no bar against us for the
future, when we shall see cause to seek for Justice and relief therein.

And for the truth of our Judgments herein: we should with gladness submit
unto the determinations of this Honorable House, were not their High hand as
yet held over you. And therefore we are enforced to appeal to a new
Representive, equally chosen in such like manner, as is expressed in our serious
apprehensions lately presented unto you, and do likewise desire that you would
encourage the Army in choosing a Representative, consisting of select Persons,
chosen by every Regiment of the Army, as at the first at New Market: and shall
humbly pray that you will not any more receive the result of a few officers, as
the sense of the Army: the officers of an Army having no more power to make
Laws for an Army, then the officers of the Common Wealth to make Laws for the
People; both of them being constituted only for the Discipline, and Government
thereof. We hope you will proceed to further an Agreement of the People;
according to our late desires in our serious Apprehensions, and also speedily
take in hand and effect those other things therein desired, tending very much
to the abrogation of the bondage intended.

Thus have we once more unburdened our hearts before you, and faithfully
discharged our duties to our Country, giving timely warning of the most
dangerous thraldom and misery that ever threatened this much wasted Nation, and
much we doubt not, will, by wisdom mixed with some honest resolutions, be timely
prevented: which we shall exceedingly rejoice to see, that so after so many
years of sorrow, the people may at length be comforted, and the Land enjoy her
rest; and that all the world may be enforced to confess, That There is a reward
for the righteous, and that there is a God that judges the earth.

FINIS.

