The Second LETTER FROM JOHN LILBURN Esquire, Prisoner in Newgate: TO THE Right
Honorable JOHN FOWKE, Lord Major of the City of LONDON.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1653.

To the Right Honorable John Fovvk, Lord Major of the City of London, these
humbly present.
SIR,
I Was committed to this prison by your Warrant, and I am now informed, that
sundry Witnesses are summoned to give evidence to the grand (or first) Jury
against me; upon which, they may have seeming ground for finding some
Indictment, without which it is known I cannot be further proceeded against.

It has been an evil custom for many Ages (taken up merely upon Prerogative
Interests) and that without Law, Reason, or any Statute, or Act of Parliament
to warrant it, for the Grand (or first) Jury, upon return of private
Chamber-examinations of parties or witnesses, to find the first Indictment
against the prisoner, without his privity, or being called to give his just
Challenge to the Witnesses Testimony; which Indictment, so found or presented,
billa vera, can be no less then a Condemnation without public or open
Examination of the first, contrary even to the laudible practice of the ancient
Heathen^ Rom^n Judges, as is most excellently set forth by the Evangelist Luke
in the Acts of the Apostles, chap. 24.16. in the Case of Paul, upon his Appeal
to Caesar. And suitable to this, another Heathen Writer could say, Quis aliquid
Statuerit, altera part^ inaudita, equum licit Statuerit, injustus est; That is
to say, Whosoever judges any cause or party unheard, though the Sentence be
agreeable with Law, yet in so judging is unjust; And this favor, in case of
Treason; was not denied to Major Rolf, upon his Trial in Hampshire, in case of
high Treason about 4 years since, before the Lord chief Ba^on Wild; as is well
known to Judge N^cholas, and Mr. John Maynard then of Council with Major Rolf:
But Major Rolf with His Council was admitted to be present in open Court upon
the Examination of the Witnesses produced against him, before the grand Jury
there, and to give his legal exceptions to the Witnesses: By means of which
the prisoner Rolf was freed.

And in case of Felony, I am well informed that at Carlisle Assizes about
1642. by Sir R^bert Heath, the like favor and justice was gran^ed to sundry
prisoners, as their legal Right, to the preservation of their lives: For then
there were sundry of Sir Richard Grimes Tenants committed to Carlisle prison by
their said Masters procurement; and a Rogue called Burney there kept in prison
likewise for Felony, and therein maintained by Sir Richard Grimes to give
evidence upon the prisoners Trial, as an Approver, wherewith Judge Heath being
informed at the prisoners Suit, The Witnesses against them at the Bar in open
Court were examined by the Grand Jury in presence of the prisoners; and upon
the prisoners legal Exceptions and Challenge, the Rogues Evidence was waved,
and the prisoners acquitted by the Grand Jury, and so their lives never came in
jeopardy.

I being a free born Englishman, I hope shall not be denied that right granted
of course to prisoners, charged with higher crimes then I am; And that the
Grand Jury being to return their Indictment against me upon their Oaths, I
expect the like justice from them, and you; which if denied, will render both
you and them unjust men: As before by the practice of the Heathens, and the
Judges and Sages of the Law of this Nation is clearly made out, and approved of
God.

Therefore I desire you before any Witnesses be judicially sworn and examined
before the Grand Jury against me, That I may be present, and allowed with my
Council, to give my legal Exceptions against them; and that no Witnesses may be
examined against me, but in open Court, in the face of the free people of
England: So having my Accusers face to face, I may have license to answer for
my self concerning the Crime laid against me.

Sir, The blood thirsty Jews could not, neither do we find they offered to
procure Pontius Pylate, the Roman Judge, to examine Witnesses against Christ,
otherwise th^^ (...) the public Judicatures, and in the very presence of
Christ.

I further desire you to assign me Counsel, being my absolute Right by Law, to
advise, consult, and be assistant to me in matter of Law upon my Trial; as was
granted to the Earl of Strafford in case of High Treason upon his Trial by his
Peers in Parliament, to Duke Hamilton an Alien to the Earl of Holland an
English Peer, and to the Lord Capel in Case of High Treason, upon their trial
before the High Court of Justice, and to the abovenamed Major Rolfe, in case
of Treason at the Assizes or Jail-delivery in the aforesaid County of
Hampshire, and to Vaux the Lawyer in case of Felony upon his trial for his
life, in the Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth, as is by Judge Cook in Vauxes
Case of Appeals learnedly set forth, and which was granted to my self at
Oxford, by the Cavalier Judges there, as my Right by Law, when I was there
arraigned for my life upon an Indictment of High Treason.

My Lord, I have prevailed with my Father and some other my honest friends, to
be the Bearers hereof to your Honor, to receive such an answer from you, as
you need not hereafter at the Bar of Justice to be ashamed of: So with my
service presented to you, entreating you seriously to remember the Punishment
of the Arbitrary Lord Major of London in King Richard the seconds time,
mentioned in the last Page of the first Edition of Lieutenant Colonel John
Lilburne's Plea in Law, I rest

Newgate this 10th of July, 1653. Yours, if you be Englands real Friend, JOHN
LILBURNE.

I humbly desire your Lordship to communicate this to the Sheriffs of London.

READER,
THis Letter being presented to his Lordship by Master Lilburnes Father and
four other of his friends, his Lordship having read the same, returned this
Answer.

GENTLEMEN,
I See what it is he desires, and for my part I do declare unto you, that I
shall not go about to hinder him of any thing that is his Right; but this he
desires I cannot do alone. I shall to morrow being the Sessions, communicate
this Letter to the Recorder and the Sheriffs, and he shall have my best
assistance. -- And so wished his Father to repair to the Sessions, to receive
an Answer from the Bench.

FINIS.

