The Legal Fundamental LIBERTIES OF THE PEOPLE of ENGLAND Revived, Asserted,
and Vindicated. OR, An EPISTLE written the eighth day of June 1649, by Lieut.
Colonel JOHN LILBVRN (Arbitrary and Aristocratical prisoner in the Tower of
London) to Mr. William Lenthall Speaker to the remainder of those few Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses that Col. Thomas Pride at his late purge thought
convenient to leave sitting at Westminster (as most fit for his and his Masters
designs, to serve their ambitious and tyrannical ends, to destroy the good old
Laws, Liberties and Customs of England, the badges of our freedom, (as the
Declaration against the King, of the 7 of March 1648, page 23. calls them) and
by force of arms to rob the people of their lives, estates and properties, and
subject them to perfect vassalage and slavery, as he clearly evinceth in his
present Case etc. they have done) who (and in truth no otherwise) pretendedly
style themselves (the Conservators of the peace of England, or) the Parliament
of England, entrusted and authorized by the consent of all the people thereof,
whose Representatives by election. (in their Declaration last mentioned, page
27. they say) they are; although they are never able to produce one bit of a
Law, or any piece of a Commission to prove, that all the people of England, or
one quarter, tenth, hundred, or thousand part of them authorized Thomas Pride,
with his Regiment of Soldiers, to choose them a Parliament, as indeed he has
de facto done by this pretended mock-Parliament: And therefore it cannot
properly be called the Nations or Peoples Parliament, but Col. Pride's and his
associates, whose really it is; who, although they have beheaded the King for a
Tyrant, yet walk in his oppressingest steps, if not worse and higher.

JOHN 7. 51. Does our Law judge any men, before it hear him, and know what he
does? ACTS 24. 23. And he commanded a Centurion to keep Paul, and to let him
have liberty, and that he should forbid none of his acquaintance to minister,
or come unto him, (although in ver. 5. he was accused for a most pestilent
fellow, and a mover of sedition throughout all the world.) ACTS 25. 27. For it
seems to me unreasonable (says the heathen Judge) to send a prisoner, and
not withal to signify the crimes laid against him. ACTS 28. 30. And Paul (IN
HIS IMPRISONMENT AT ROME UNDER THE HEATHEN PERSECUTORS) dwelt two whole years
in his own hired house, and received all that came in unto him. LONDON, Printed
in the grand year of hypocritical and abominable dissimulation. 1649.

SIR,
FOr distinction^ sake, I will (...) style you Mr. SPEAKER, although it be but
to Col. Pride's (...) Parliament, sitting at Westminster, (not the Nation's,
for they never gave him Authority to issue out Writs, elect or constitute a
Parliament for them) and you being their mouth, I could not think of any man to
whom I could better direct my Lines at (...) (in my gr^^t Oppressions by You
and your Lord and Master CROMWELL) then your self: And therefore cannot now
choose but put you in mind, That the 4th. April, 1648. when I was like unjustly
to be destroyed by Mr. Oliver Cromwell in my late unjust and tyrannical
Imprisonment in the Tower; I writ you a large Epistle, and styled it in print,
The prisoners Plea for a Habeas corpus; in the 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 pages of
which, I positively accuse Mr. Oliver Cromwell for a wilful murderer, and
desire you there to acquaint your House therewith (who then had some little
face of a Parliament stamp upon it) and, That I would engage upon my life to
prove him to be so by Law: You your selves in your Declaration of the 4th.
March, 1647. in answer to the Scotch-Commissioners Papers Declare p. 5. 16.
that the subduing the enemies forces in the Nation, (which then were, as you
there say, wholly subdued and suppressed) though the Parliament keep up an
Army, in a time of peace, when all the ordinary Courts of Justice were open,
where only and alone, all Law and Justice ought to be dispensed to all
Englishmen in all cases whatsoever, yea, even to Soldiers as well as others; as
in the aforesaid pages, and in Mr. Overtons and My printed Epistle to the
General (in Mr. Lockiers behalf) of the 27 April, 1649. is by Law undeniably
proved; which Epistle you may read at the last end of the second Edition of my
Pictur^ of the (...) to of State: And yet about or upon the 15 Nov. 1647. your
Were in Hertford-shire, He, (...) wilfully and of^et-malice murdered Rich.
Arnell, a freeborn Englishman; and so shed the blood of War in the time of
Peace, which was Joabs case in reference to Abner and Amasa, 2 Samuel 3. 27. and
20. 10. of whom when David delivered his charge to his son Solomon, he says
thus, Moreover, thou knew also what Joab the son of Zervich did to me, and
what he did to the two Captains of the best of Israel, (...) Abner the son of
Ner, and unto Amasa the son of Jother, whom he slew, and shed the blood of war
in peace, and put the blood of war upon his girdle that was about his loins;
and in his sho^s that were on his feet: Do therefore (says he) recording to
thy wisdom, and he not his bo^ry head get down to the grave in peace, 1 Kings
2. 5, 6. which charge he accordingly performed; and so delivered himself and
his Fathers house from the guilt of innocent blood, ver. 29, 30, 31, 32, 33.
And you may also remember that upon the 19 of Jan. 1647, at your Bar I openly
delivered a formal charge or impeachment of high Treason (according to your own
Ordinances) against the foresaid Mr. Oliver Cromwell, and his subtle
machevilian son-in-Law Mr. Henry Iveton, for their notorious doing that in
reference to the King; for but the petty acting of which in comparison to
theirs, they impeached Mr. Denzill Hollis, Sir Philip Stapleton, etc. of high
Treason, (as appears in their own Book of Declarations, page 81, 82. Article
2 and 3.) and forcibly expunged them your House as Traitors therefore.

And in the foresaid pages of my plea for a Habeas Corp^^^, I truly acquaint
you with the plot and design, Master Cromwell laid to take away my life, for
but a little opposition to the King, whose professed and avowed (...) he and his

(...) The PLEA it self thus follows.
May it please this Honorable Committee,
I Was commanded by you, upon Tuesday the 13 day of this present June 1648, to
bring in an Answer this day to the Petition and complaint of Henry Wollastone
Kepeer of the prison of Newgate, in which Petition he complains that I have
brought an action at the common Law against him, for detaining me in safe
custody according to his duty, by virtue of a Warrant from the House of Lords;
and therefore prays indemnity for his acting therein in obedience to the
Authority of Parliament, and his trebble damages, and that at common Law there
may be no further proceedings in the said Action. And being demanded by the
then Chairman of this Committee whether I had caused such an Action to be
commenced, yea or no, I positively declared, I had, and that I had very good
ground in Law so to do, considering that the Law of England (which is my
Birthright and Inheritance) requires, That I shall not be deprived of my
Liberty but by due process of Law, according to the Laws of the Land; and that
if any shall detain my body in prison without legal Authority, he is liable in
Law to make me satisfaction therefore: but Mr. Wollastone had kept me in prison
diverse weeks by virtue of a pretended Warrant of the single House of Lords, who
in Law, I will maintain it, have not the least power in the World to commit my
body to prison: yet they did (upon the tenth day of June 1646, laying no crime
to my charge) command me to be kept for all my short eternity in this world;
for the Warrant is, during their pleasures: and then by another illegal
Warrant, within fourteen days after, dated the 23 of June 1646, they (for no
cause in the world) commit me close prisoner, and command that I be not
permitted to have pen, ink nor paper, and that none shall have acceffe unto me
in any kind, but only my Keeper, until the Lords otherwise please. Which
most illegal Warrant Mr. Wollastone executed upon me with a great deal of
severitie and barbarism, not permitting my Wife to come into the prison yard to
speak with me at a distance out of my grates, nor suffering me to receive
either meat, drink, or money, or any other necessaries from the hands of my
Wife, servant, or friends, nor suffering me to see their faces when they sent
me in my diet: All which usages are against the Laws and Statutes of this
Kingdom; and therefore I have cause and ground enough in Law, to seek for my
remedy in Law against the said Mr. Wollastone; and I hope the Members of this
Committee have taken too many Oaths to maintain the fundamental Laws of the
Land, and the Liberties of the People, then now to go about to deprive me of
the benefit of them.

It is true, you sit here by verue of an Ordinance of both Houses, to
indemnifie all those that have acted or done, or commanded to be acted ordone,
any thing by sea or land, by the Authority, or for the service or benefit of
this present Parliament: But under the favor of this Committee, I do conceive,
That the said Ordinance, which is your Commission, does not in the least
authorize you to meddle with my present case; forasmuch as I do not prosecute
Mr. Wollastone for actions done by the Command and Authority of Parliament, but
for actions done directly against their Authority publicly declared in the
Laws of the Kingdom, and their own Declarations: and I hope this Committee will
not so much undervalue their own House, as to adjudge the House of Lords singly
to be the Parliament of England, nor their single Order to be the Parliaments
Authority of England: and if not, then I clearly conceive, that upon your own
principles, you have nothing to do with my business before you; neither can I
conceive, that you can in the least judge Mr. Wollaston's illegal and barbarous
actions done upon me, to be for the service and benefit of the Parliament, but
rather the quite contrary, by rendering them odious and adominable in the eyes
of the people, if they shall (...) such tyrannical doings, after they have
taken so many Oaths (...) the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, and caused so
much English blood to be shed pretendedly therefore.

Whereupon, after a little debate amongst the members of this Committee by
themselves, my L. Munson the Chairman thereof was pleased to tell me, then the
business was weighty, and did concern the Privileges of the Lords Houses; and
therefore they judged it convenient to put it off till this day, and to
acquaint the Lords with it, that so, if they pleased, some of them might here
be present: and you also ordered me to fit my self with a formal Answer to the
Petition, which accordingly I have done, and with the favor of this Committee,
giving me free leave to speak, I am ready to deliver unto you, and do deliver
it unto you thus.

My Lord, I read in the Statutes of 4. Edw. 3. chapter 4. and 36. Edw. 3 chapter 10.
and in the tyrannical Act made this Parliament 16 C. R. and in the 4 part Cooks
Instit. fol. 9 11. 37. 38. 39. 41. 42. and 1 part Book Decl. page 701, 702.
that Parliaments are principally called for the maintenance of the Laws, and
for the redress of diverse mischiefs and grievances that daily happen; and
suitable to this are the ends contained in the Writs that summon them, and the
intentions of those that choose the Members and send them.

And if Parliaments be principally called for the maintenance of the Laws, and
redress of mischiefs and grievances, then not for the destruction of the Laws,
not for the increase of mischiefs and grievances. And therefore when this
present Parliament in the days of their verginity and primitive purity, in
their Actions, Declarations, and Remonstrances expressed much zeal, for
accomplishing of those ends for which they were trusted in providing for the
safety of the Kingdom, and peace of the people, which you call God to witness
is your only aim, protesting in the presence of the all seeing deity, that the
foresaid ends is the only end of all your counsels and endeavors, wherein you
are resolved to continue freed, and enlarged from all private aims, personal
respects or passions whatsoever, and persevere in the vigorous indevoring to
preserve the Laws and Liberties of this Land, though you should perish in the
work, 1 Part. Book Dec. page 172, 195, 214, 281, 342, 464, 494, 497 498, 663,
666, 673, 750.
calling upon God, that sees your innocence; and that you have no aims but at
his glory and the public good for protection in your straits; I say yet
notwitstanding all this, the King to make you odious, and to be deserted of the
people, in several of his Declarations Declares that all these were but gilded
dissimulations, it being your real intentions to destroy Liberty and property,
meum and mum, and to subvert the Laws and introduce new forms of arbitrary
government, and to introduce Anarchy, a paritie and confuon by levelling of all
degrees and conditions, and to monopolise into your hands all the rich and
great places in the Kingdom, for your own particular advantage and profit; and
to get such a power into your hands, as thereby to enable you inevitably to
destroy all that opposed you; and that the maintenance and advancement of
Religion, Justice, Liberty, Property, and peace, are really but your stalking
horses, and neither the grounds of the war, nor of your demands; and that for
all your fair pretenses to the people, you will extirpate the Law, root, and
branch, alter the whole frame of Government, and leave not any thing like Law,
Liberty or Property, introduce Democracy and Parity, and leave nether King, nor
Gentlemen; and so the people will too late discover all this to their costs,
that they have undone themselves with too much discretion, and obtained nothing
by their compliance with you, and adherence to you, but to be destroyed last, 1
part Book Declar. page 284, 285, 298, 316, 320, 334, 378, 514, 515 520, 521,
530, 539, 543, 550, 558. 2 Part, page 100, 102, 112, 113, 117. In answer unto
all which, to disprove what he says, and keep up your rereputations amongst
the people for a company of honest men, that really sought their good, and
always intended to be as good as their words, promises, and engagements, in
your declarations of the 19 of May 1642. 1 Part, Book Decl. Page 207. you repeat
your votes, against which the King excepts, the weight of which lies in these
words: That the Kingdom has been of late, and still is in so eminent danger,
both from enemies abroad, and a popish discontented party at home; that there
is an urgent and an inevitable necessity, for putting the Kingdom into a posture
of defense, for the safeguard thereof; and that in this case of extreme danger,
and his Majesty's refusal, the Ordinance of Parliament agreed upon by both
Houses for the Militia, does oblige the people, and ought to be obeyed, by the
fundamental Laws of this Kingdom. By all which (say you) it does appear, That
there is no color of this tax, that we go about to introduce a new Law; much
less to exercise an Arbitrary power, but indeed to prevent it; for this Law
(say you) is as old as the Kingdom, That the Kingdom must not be without a
means to preserve it self and in the conclusion of the same Decl. Page 214.
speaking of the many difficulties you grapple with, the many hazards you
undergo in your places, you conclude thus, yet we doubt not but we shall
overcome all this at last, if the people suffer not themselves to be deluded
with falfe and specious shows, and so drawn to betray us to their own undoing,
who have ever been willing to hazard the undoing of our selves, that they might
not be betrayed by our neglect of the trust reposed in us; but if it were
possible the Kings party should prevail, herein yet (say you) we would not
fall, through Gods grace still to persist in our duties, and to look beyond our
own lives, estates and advantages, as those who think nothing worth the
enjoying without the liberty, peace, and fafety of the Kingdom; nor any thing
too good to be hazarded in discharge of our consciences, for the obtaining of
it; and shall always repose our selves upon the protection of the Almighty,
which we are confident shall never be wanting to us (while we seek his glory.)
And in your Declaration of the 26 of May 1642, which is an answer to the Kings
Declaration of the 4 of May, a out the business of Hull, in the 1 Part Decl.
page 263. speaking of the new engine of the Malignant party about the King, to
beget and increase distrust, and disaffection between the King, the Parliament,
and the People; We cannot (say you) be so much wanting to our own innocence, or
to the duty of our trust, as not to clear our selves from those false
aspersions, and (which is our chiefest care) to disabuse the peoples minds, and
open their eyes that under the false shows and pretexts of the Laws of the
Land, (frequently interwoven in his Majesty's foresaid Declaration) and of
their own Rights and Liberties, they may not be carried into the road-way that
leads to the utter ruin and subversion thereof, and to destroy them both
with their own hands, by taking their Lives, Liberties, and Estates out of
their hands whom they have chosen and entrusted therewith, and resigning them
up unto some evil Counselors about his Majesty, who can lay no other
foundation of their own greatness, but upon the ruin of this Parliament; and
in it of all other Parliaments, and in them of the freedom of this Nation: And
these are the men that would persuade the people that both Houses of Parliament
containing all the Peers, and representing all the Commons of England, would
destroy the Laws of the Land, and Liberties of the People; wherein besides the
trust of the whole, they themselves in their own particulars have so great an
interest of honor and estate, that we hope it will gain little credit with any
that have the least use of reason, that such as must have so great a share in
the misery, should take so much pains in the procuring thereof, and spend so
much time and run so many hazards to make themselves slaves, and to destroy the
property of their estates. But remarkable are your words in the same
Declaration page 267. where you say, You have given no occasion to his Majesty
to declare his resolution with so much earnestness, that he will not suffer
either or both Houses by their votes without or against his consent to enjoin
any thing that is forbidden by the Law, or to forbid any thing that is enjoined
by the Law; for our votes (say you) have done no such thing, and as we shall be
very tender of the Law (which we acknowledge to be the safeguard and custody of
all public and private interests, etc.) And in the same declaration having
argued it soundly against the King, for the calumniations and aspersions call
upon you as you are pleased to call them in; p. 270. you have these words, All
this considered, we cannot but wonder, that the contrivers of the aforesaid
message, should conceive the people of this land to be so void of common-sence,
as to enter into so deep a mistrust of those that they have, and his Majesty
ought to repose so great a trust in, as to despair of any security in their
private estates, by dissents, purchases, assurances, or conveyances, unless his
Majesty should by his vote, prevent the prejudice they might receive therein
by the votes of both Houses of Parliament, as if they who are especially chosen
and entrusted for that purpose, and who themselves must needs have so great a
share in all grievances of the Subject, had wholly cast off the care of the
Subjects good, and his Majesty had soly taken it up.

And in your most notablest of Declarations, made about Agust 1642. 1 Part Book
Decl. page 491. wherein you endeavor to give an account to the world of the
justice of your proceedings, in being necessitated to take up arms against his
Majesty, who you say was then in arms against you and the Kingdom, for the
suppression of the Laws and Liberties thereof; which you say every honest man
is bound to defend, especially those that have taken the late Protestation, in
which Declaration you declare, that the long design which has been carried on
to alter the frame and constitution of the Government of the Kingdom, from Law
and Liberty, to slavery and vassaladge, is now come to ripeness; there you go
on to declare an Epitome of the Kings dealings with the Kingdom before this
Parliament; in which time you say the Laws were no defense nor protection of
any man's right; all was subject to will and power, which imposed what payment
they thought fit, to drain the Subjects purse of, and supply those necessities
which ill councels had brought upon the King, or gratify such as were
instruments in promoting those illegal and oppresive courses. They who yielded
and complied, were countenanced and advanced, all others disgraced and kept
under, that so men's minds made poor and base, and their Liberties lost and
gone, they might be ready to let go their Religion, whenever they should be
resolved to alter it; and then ennumerate diverse strange actions of his done to
the Kingdom since this Parliament; and in page 494. you declare, that after his
ill council had got him from the Parliament, then they doc work upon him and
upon the Queen, and persuade her to retire out of the Kingdom, and carry him
further and further from the Parliament, and so possess him with a hatred of
it, that they cannot put words bitter enough into his mouth, to express upon
all occasions; they make him cross oppose and envy upon all the proceedings of
Parliament, encourage and protect all those that will affront it, take away all
power and authority from it to make it contemptible, and of less esteem then
the meanest Court, draw away the members, commanding them to come to him to
York, and instead of discharging their duty in the service of the Parliament,
to contribute their advice, and assistance to the destruction of it.
endeavoring an arbitrary Government, a thing (say you) which every honest
Moral man abhors; much more the Wisdom, Justice, and Piety of the two Houses
of Parliament; and in truth such a charge as no rational man can believe is, it
being unpossible so many several persons at the Houses of, Parliament consist
of about 600; and in either House all of equal power, should all of them, or
at least the major part, agree in Acts of will and Tyranny, which makes up an
arbitrary Government; and most improbable that the Nobility and chief Gentry of
this Kingdom, should conspire to take away the Law by which they enjoy their
estates, are protected from any act of violence and power, and differenced from
the meanest sort of people, with whom otherwise they would be but fellow
servants; so having given an answer to his charges laid upon you in page 496.
you vehemently pre^^e the people to come in to the help of the Parliament
(against the Kings forces) And save themselves their Laws and Liberties, and
though both they and we (say you) must perish, yet have we discharged our
consciences, and delivered our souls, and will look for a reward in heaven;
should we be so ill required upon earth, as to be deserted by the people, whom
in the next page you tell, nothing will satisfy the King and those evil men
with him, but the destruction of this Parliament, and to be Masters of Religion
and Liberties, to make us Slaves, and alter the Government of this Kindom, and
reduce it to the condition of some other Countries which are not governed by
Parliaments, and so by Laws, but by the will of the Prince, or rather of those
who are about him; And thersore in the zeal of your Spirits, you declare your
resolved resolutions to continue firm to maintain the Laws and Liberties of
your Country, according to your duty; saying, Woe be to us if we do it not, at
least do our utmost endeavors for the discharge of our duties, and the saving
of our souls, and leave the success to God Almighty; and you conclude with
these words; and therefore we do here require all who have any sense of piety,
honor, or compession, to help 2 distressed State, and to come in to our aid
and assistance.

And in your reply to the Kings Answer of yours, of 26 May 1642. 1 par. Book
Declar. page 693. you declare with indignation your abhorrance of the Kings
charging you by your votes to dispose of the peoples lives, liberties and
estates, (...) to the Law of the Land, and throw back the Charge upon himself
and those that are about him. And in the next page you say thus; and for that
concerning our inclination to be slaves it is affirmed, that his Majesty said
nothing that might imply any such inclination in us, but sure, what ever be our
inclination, slavery would be our condition, if we should go above to overthrow
the Laws of the Land, and the propritey of every man's estate, and the liberty
of his person; for therein we must needs be as much Patients as Agents, and
must every one in his turn suffer our selves, what ever we should impose upon
others as in nothing we have laid upon other we have ever refused to do or
suffer our selves, and that in a high proportion And then when you come in the
next page to speak of the Kings, charging of you that you afect to be Tyrants,
because you will admit no rule to Govern by but your own wills, yea worse then
those thirty most perfect Tyrants of Athens, spoken of by Sir Walter Rawley in
his third Book of the History of the world, Chap. Sect. 2. you abhor the charge
with the height of detestation, and therefore in the next page unto it, being
page 696 you say We do still acknowledge that it were a very great crime in us,
if we had or should do any thing whereby the title and interest of all the
Subjects to their lands were destroyed; which I say of necessity must be, if
they be deprived of the benefit of the Law, which is all I crave at your hands,
and which I hope you will not deny me; especially considering in your
Declaration of the 10 of June 1642, 1 par. Book Decla. page 342, for bringing
in money and plate, you positively declare, that whatsoever is brought in, shall
not at all be employed about any other occasion, then to the purposes
aforesaid, which amongst others, are principally for destroying Tyranny,
maintaining of Liberty and Propriety, the free Course of Justice according to
the known Laws of the Land; but Propriety cannot be maintained, if Liberty be
destroyed; for the Liberty of my Person is more nearer to me then my Propriety,
or goods; and he that contrary to Law and Justice, robs or deprives me of the
Liberty of my Person, the nighest to me, may much more by the some reason, rob
and deprive me at his will and pleasure of my goods and estate, the further of
from me, and so Propriety is overthrown and destroyed; and this if done
avowedly by you, is distructive to your honors and engagements; yea, and in an
absolute violation of all your Oaths and Promises; whereby you will be rendered,
by your own actions, in the eyes of the people that trusted you, the basest and
worst of men, fit for nothing but desertion, opposition and destruction; Again
how can Law be maintained, when the free execution of Justice in the ordinary
course thereof shall be hindered by you? which you in your Declaration 23 of
October 1642. 1 par. Book. Declar page 656) call the soul and life of
all-Laws, which ordinary course of Jestice, you in your first Remonstrance page
7 call the common birthright of the Subject of England; And therefore 1 par.
Book Decl. page 660 you own it as your duty, to use the best of your endeavors
that the meanest of the Commonalty may enjoy their own birthright, freedom and
liberty of the Laws of the Land, being equally entitled thereunto with the
greatest subject; and if so? how can you in justice and honor or conscience,
deprive and ebereave me of my birth right? the benefit of the Law of the Land,
in the ordinary course of Justice in the Judicatures thereof? who have done no
actrons either by Sea or Land, but what does become an honest, true-bred
Englishman and constantly in the midst of many deaths, maintaining the Laws i
and Liberties of my Native Country, which actions are consonant to the
Authority of Parliament, and for the service and benefit thereof; and therefore
I ought not to be molested and troubled therefore; especially by you, who in
your Declarations in the case of the Five Members, declare 1 par. Boo. Decl.
pa. 39. you are very sensible that it equally imports you, as well to see
Justice done against them that are criminous, as to defend the just rights and
Liberties of the Subjects and Parliament of England; but if you shall stop my
proceedings at Common Law against Master Wollaston the Jaylour of Newgate, for
keeping me there against Law by the Lords Order, You are so far from punishing
the criminous, that you justify the wicked, and condemn the righteous, break
all your Oaths, Protestations and Covenants, that you have taken to maintain
the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, and dissolve the whole frame and
constitution of the Civil Policy and Government of this Kingdom into the
original Law of Nature, which crime you tax the King with, 1 par. Book. Decl.
page 690. yea, and thereby become destructive to the being of the Commonwealth,
and the safety of the people, the preservation of which is the chief end of the
Law, the institution of all Government, as you declare in your Declarations of
the 6 of May 1643 and 17 April 1647. 2 part. Book. Decla. fol. 95. 879.

For the Illustration of which I desire to observe this Method.

First. I aver that the House of Lords have not the Least Jurisdiction in the
world over me in the case in controversy betwixt us; and I am ready upon my
life to make this good by the Laws of the Kingdom against all the Judges and
Lawyers in England; but I conceive, I have already so fully done it in my three
pleas against the Lords, that they are unanswerable, viz. First in my Plea
before the Committee of the House of Commons, where Master Henry Martin had the
Chair 6 November. 1646. And Secondly in my Plea the 20 of October 1647. before
another Committee of the House of Commons, where M. John Maynard had the
Chair; And Thirdly, in my Plea before the Judges of the Kings Bench, the 8 of
May 1648. all three of which I desire to communicate unto your consideration.

And if the Lords by Law have no original Jurisdiction over me, then no power
to summon me, nor no power to try me nor commit me; Wherefore M. Wollaston by
Law ought to have refused to have received my body, or detained it in prison,
by virtue of their illegal warrant, which being both illegal in the power
that made it, and in the form of drawing it up, he is liable to make me
satisfaction in Law for executing it, which at present I illustrate out of your
own Declarations, which are the most unanswerable arguments against you that I
can use, Acts 17 26. Titus 1. 12.

And first in your Declaration of the 17 of January 1641. 1 par. Book. Decl.
page 38. 39. where speaking of the Five Members, you say his Majestic did issue
forth several warrants to diverse Officers, under his own hand for the
apprehension of the persons of the said Members, which by Law he cannot do,
there being not all this time any legal charge or accusation, or due process
of Law issued against them, or any pretense of charge made known to the House
of Commons; all which are against the Fundamental Liberties of the Subjects,
and the Rights of Parliament; Whereupon we are necessitited according to our
duty to declare, That if any person shall arrest M. Ho^^^, Sir Arthur Haslerig,
Master Pym, Master Hamden, Master Strode, or any of them, or any Member of
Parliament, by pretense or color of any warrant issuing out from the King
only, is guilty of the breach of the Liberty of the Subject, and of the
Privileges of Parliament, and a public enemy to the Commonwealth; and that
the arresting of the said Members, or any of them, or any Members of
Parliament, by any Warrant whatsoever, without a legal proceeding against
them, and without consent of that House, whereof such a person is a Member, is
against the Liberty of the Subject, and a breach of Privilege of Parliament:
and the person which shall arrest any of these persons, or any other Member of
the Parliament, is declared a public enemy of the Commonwealth. Yea, and upon
the 15 of January 1641, you voted and ordered a Charge to be brought in against
Mr. Attorney General Herbert, to require of him satisfaction for his great
injury and scandal that particularly be had done to the said Mr. Hollis, etc.
and generally to the public Justice of the Kingdom, in so illegally accusing
the foresaid five Gentlemen, without due process of Law, as appears in your
first part Book Declarat. page 53. And therefore in your Petition of the 2 Feb.
1641. 1 part. Book Decl. 67. you rel the King, It is your duty to tell him of
the injustice done unto the five Members, for impeaching them without due
process of Law, and to require reparations for them. And therefore in your
second Petition of the same month, 1 par. Book Decl. page 76. 77. you tell the
King again, notwithstanding all your importunity, the said five Members and the
Lord Kimbolton still lie under that heavy charge of Treason, to the exceeding
prejudice not only of themselves, but also of the whole Parliament. And
whereas by the express Laws and Statutes of this Realm, that is to say, by two
Acts of Parliament, the one made in the 37, and the other in the 38 year of the
reign of your most noble Progenitor King Edward the 3 its said, If any person
whatsoever make suggestion to the King himself of any souls committed by
another, the same person might to be sent with the suggestion before the
Chancellor, or Keeper of the great Seal, Treasurer, and the great Council,
there to find Surery to pursue his suggestion: which if he cannot prove, he is
to be imprisoned till he has satisfied the party accused of his damages and
stander, and made Fine and Ransom to the King: The benefit of these Laws you
claim at the Kings hand, and there tell him, he ought not of right and justice
to deny it to you. And also in 1 part Book Decl. page 101, speaking to the
King, you say Your Majesty lays a general tax upon us; if you will be
graciously pleased to let us know the particulars, we shall give a clear and
satisfactory Answer: But what hope can we have of ever giving your Majestic
safaction, when those particulars which you have been made believe were true,
yet being produced and made known to us, appeared to be false? and your
Majestic notwithstanding will neither punish, nor produce the Authors, but go
on to contract new jealousies and fears, upon general and uncertain grounds,
affording us no means or possibility of particular answer, to the clearing of
our selves. For proof whereof we beseech your Majestic to consider;

The heavy charge and accusation of the Lord Kimbolton, and the five Members
of the House of Commons, who refused no Trial or Examination which might stand
with the Privilege of Parliament: yet no Authors, no Witnesses produced,
against whom they may have reparation for the great injury and infamy cast upon
them, notwithstanding three several Petitions of both Houses, and the
Authority of two Acts of Parliament vouched in the last of those Petitions.

And in a fourth Petition about the same business, 1 part Book Decl. page 123.
We beseech your Majesty (say you) to remember, that the Government of this
Kingdom, as it was in a great part managed by your ministers before the
beginning of this Parliament, consisted of many continued and multiplied acts
of violation of Laws, the wounds whereof were scarcely bealed, when the
extremity of all those violations was far exceeded by the late strange and
unheard of breach of our Laws in the accusation of the Lord Kimbolton and the
five Members of the Commons House, and in the proceedings thereupon; for which
we have yet received no full satisfaction. And in your Declaration of the 19 of
May 2642, 1. par. Book Dec. p 200. 201. you are very remarkable, and fly, The
accusation of the L. Kimbolton, and the 5 Members of the House of Commons, is
called a breach of Privilege; and truly so it was and a very high one, far
above any satisfaction that has yet been given: How can it be said to be
largely satisfied, so long as his Majestic labored to preserve his Attorney
from punishment, who was the visible Actor in it? so long as his Majestic has
not only justified him, but by his Letter declared, that it was his duty to
accuse them, and (...) he would have punished him if he had not done it; so
long as those members have not the means of clearing their innocence, and the
authors of that malicious Charge undiscovered, though both Houses of Parliament
have several times petitioned his Majesty to disco^^^ them; and that not
only upon grounds of common Justice, but by Act of Parliament his Majesty is
bound to do it; so long as the King great such to pass a Bill for their
discharge, alleging, that the Nati^^tive in that Bill i^ against his Honor;
whereby he seems still to ^^ow the matter of that false and scandalous
Accusation, though he deserts the Prosecution, offering to pass a Bill for
their acquital; yet with intimation, that they trust desert the avowing their
own innocence, which would more wound them in (...), that secure them in Law.

And in vindication of this great Privilege of Parliament, we do not (...)
that we have invaded any Privilege belonging to his Majesty, as is alleged in
his Declaration.

But we look not upon this only in the notion of a breach of Privilege, which
might be, though the Accusation were true or false; but under the nation of an
heinous crime in the Attorney, and all other Subjects, who had a hand in it, a
crime against the Law of Nature, against the Rules of Justice, that innocent
men should be charged with so great an offense as Treason, is the face of the
highest Judicatory of the Kingdom, whereby their (...), and estates, their
blood and honor are in danger, without witness, without ^isdence, without all
poss^bility of reparation in a legal course; yet a (...) of such a nature,
that his Majesty's Command can no more warrant, then it can any other act of
injustice. It is true that those things which are evil in the^^ can nature,
such as a false testimony, or a false accusation, cannot both subject of any
Command, or induce any obligation of obedience upon any man, by any Authority
whatsoever; therefore the Attorney in this case was b^^^^ to refuse to execute
such a Command unless he had had some such evidence or testimony as might have
warranted him against the parties, and (...) make satisfaction if it should
prove false. And further, to prove that (...) liable to punishment, that puts
in execution the Kings illegal Commands, is must excellently proved, and
largely evident from your own words in (...) Book Decl. page 259. 260. 276.
279. 280. 721. 722. 723. 727. 803. (...) largely declare, that Alexander
Archbishop of York, Robert de Ve^^^ (...) Irland, etc. were executed in Richard
the Second's time as Traitors, for (...) in execution the commands of the King
against the Law; and if they are punishable that execute the commands of the
King the Primitive, against Law: then much more by Law is Mr. Wollaston
punishable for executing the commands of the single House of Lords the
Derivative, against Law: and if in my own defense, when I was in Mr.
Wollaston's custody, I had served him, for his actions done to me in pursuance
of the Lords single illegal commands, ^4 Simson of Northamptonshire did
Johnson in the 42 of Elizabeth for his doing actions in pursuance of the Queens
Letters Patents, contrary to Law, in endeavoring by a Warrant (flowing from
the High Commission, which was established by Act of Parliament, and had legal
cognizance of any facts in Controversy grounded thereupon) to imprison his
body: for doing of which, Simson (in his own defense, and his Liber^^^^) slew
the said Johnson: For which he was justified by the Judges of Affi^e, and all
the Judges of England, as you may read in Sir Edward Cook 4. part Iustitutes,
fol. 333. 334. and in my Plea before the Judges of the Kings Bench, called The
Laws funeral, page 214. 25. I say in case I had in my own defense, and the
defense of my legal Liberties slain Wollaston etc. for executing the Lords
single illegal Orders upon me for any thing I can read in the Law, he had his
mends in his own hands.

But to come more close upon your own principles, to prove that a single Order
of the Lords cannot stand in competition with the Law, I do it, thus; In all
your Declarations you declare, that binding and permanent Laws according to the
Constitution of this Kingdom, are made by King, Lords, and Commons, and so is
the opinion of Sir Ed. Cook whose Books are published by your own Order, and
who in the 2 part of his Institutes, fol. 48. 157 and 3 part fol. 22. and 4
part fol. 23. 25. 48. 292. says that Act that is made by King and Lords, in
Law binds not, nor by King and Commons binds not, or by Lords and Commons binds
not in Law; if so, then much more invalid is the single Order of the Lords made
against Law, and can indemnifie no man that acts by virtue of it, and your
Ordinances made this Parliament in time of extreme necessity, during denounced
Wars, are by your selves in abundance of your own Declarations, esteemed,
adjudged, declared but temporary and invalid as durable Laws, which is
evidently clear out of the 1 par. Book Decl. p. 93. 102. 112. 142. 143. 150.
171. 173. 179. 207. 208. 267. 277. 303. 305. 382. 697. 705. 709. 727. your
expressions in the last page are, we did and do say that the Sovereign power
does reside in the King and both Houses of Parliament, and that his Majesty's
Negative voice does not import a Liberty to deny things as he pleases, though
never so requisite and necessary for the Kingdom, and yet we did not nor do
say, that such bills as his Majesty is so bound both in Conscience and Justice
to pass, shall notwithstanding be law without his consent, so far are we from
taking away his Negative voice. And if such Ordinances and Bills as pass both
Houses are not Laws by your own Doctrine, without the Kings Consent; then,
muchlesse can the Order of the single House of Lords be Laws or supersedeaes
to the Laws; And besides, when diverse honest and well-affected Citizens, it
may be out of a sensible apprehension of the mischiefs that acrue to the
Kingdom by having the Supreme authority lodged in three distinct Estates, which
many times so falls out, that when two Estates grant things essentially good
for the welfare of the Kingdom, the third Estate opposes it, and will not
pass it, which many (...) occasions war and bloodshed, to the hazard of the
being of the Kingdom; for the preventing of which, they framed a Petition to
your House, Entitling it, To the Supreme Authority of this Nation, the Commons
assembled in Parliament; in which they entreat you to be careful of the
mischief of Negative Voices in any whomsoever; which said Petition your House
upon the 20 of May 1647. Voted to be burnt at the Exchange and Westminster by
the hands of the Common Hangman, and lately as I am informed, there was a
Petition of Master John Mildmans presented to your House, and it was rejected
by them, for no other cause, but because it had the foresaid title; and
therefore you your selves, having rejected to be styled the Supreme Authority of
this Nation; I can see no ground or reason, how you can upon your own
Principles, grant a supersedeas to Master Wollaston to overule my action at law
against him; and so de facto exercise the Supreme Authority, which in words,
you would have the Kingdom believe you abhor; neither can I i^ reason or
Justice conceive, that if now you should own your selves for the Supreme
Authority of the Nation, and the single and absolute Law-Repealers, and
Lawmakers thereof, how you can deprive me of the benefit of those just Laws,
viz. Magna Charta, Petition of Right, and the Act that abolished the
Star Chamber, that you have not avowedly and particularly declared to be void,
null and vacated, as never to be in use any more in England; Again, yet in your
Protestation, in your Vote and Covenant, and in your League and Covenant, swore
to maintain the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom with your estates and lives,
and make the Kings Person and Authority but subservient thereunto, or dependant
thereupon; And you have been so zealous to make Votes to disfranchise all those
that will not take your Covenant, as unfit to bear any Office in the
Commonwealth, or to give a Vote to choose an Officer, and can it stand with
your Justice and Honor to deny me the benefit of that (viz the Law) which you
have been so zealous in forcing the People of England to swear to maintain? or
can you in Justice and Honor, be angry with me for standing for that (viz.) the
Laws and Liberties of England,) which you have engaged, incited and forced,
thousands and ten thousands of the people of England, to loose their Lives and
Bloods for, which I amongst others have upon zealous and true principles, as
hazardously ventured my life for as any man in England? O let such an
abominable thing be far from men of honor, conscience and honesty, and let
the fearful judgments that befell the Hungarians, as it were, from God from
heaven for breaking, violating and falling from their faith and Covenant, made
with Amurah the Second, the Sixth Emperor of the Turks Recorded in the Fourth
Edition of the Turks History sol. 267. 269. 273. 277 deterr all Covenant
Makers, and Covenant takers from breach of their Oaths, Covenants, and
Contracts, the breaking of which is highly detested and abhorred of God as a
thing that his soul loathe as he declares in Scripture, as you may read Exo.
20. 7. Lev. 19. 11, 12. Deuteronomy. 23. 21, 22, 23. Psalm. 15. 4. Eccels. 5. 45. Ezekiel.
17. 13, 14, 15. 10. 17, 18. (...). 5. 3, 4 and 8. 16. 17. Yea I say let the
fearful judgments, wrath and vengeance Recorded by Sir Walter Rawley in his
excellent preface to his history of the World that befell Tyrants and
Oppressors, whoafter they had broke their Oaths, Faith, Promises and Laws made
with the People, and then turned Tyrants, deterr you from such practices, but
especially the fearful judgments of God that befell the most execrable thirty
Tyrants of Athens, who after the people of that City had set them up for the
Conservators of their Laws and Liberties, and who did many things well til they
had got power into their own hands which they had no sooner done, but they
turned it poin blank against the people, and fell a murdering, robbing,
spoiling and destroying the innocent people, and raised a Guard of three or
four thousand men of their own Mercenary faction, whose destruction was fatal
by the steeled resolution and valor of seventy faithful and brave Citizens,
as you may ^^ad in Sir Walter Rawleys History Lib. 3. Chapter 9. sec. 2 and 3. Yea
the Tyranny of Duke d' Alva cost his Master the King of Spain the revolt of
the Hollanders to his unimaginable loss. But to return, did not you and the
Lords the other day pass Votes and Communicated them to the Common Council of
London to declare to them and the whole Kingdom, you would continue the
Government, by King, Lords and Commons? and can it new stand with your Honor
and Justice, to go about to advance a single, illegal Order of the Lords
above all the Laws made jointly by you the Lords and King, and to make Ciphers
of your selves and your House as well as of the King? which undeniably you do,
if you indemnifie Master Wollaston by superseding my action at Common Law
against him; Again, have you not in your Declaration of the 15 of June 1647.
(in which is contained your Votes, to lay the King aside and make no more
applications or addresses unto him) declared to preserve unto the people their
Laws, and to govern them thereby? sure I am these are your own words, having
received an absolute denial from his Majesty: The Lords and Commons do hold
themselves obliged to use their utmost endeavous speedily to settle the present
Government in such a way as may bring the greatest security to this Kingdom, in
the enjoyment of the Laws and Liberties thereof: And can it now stand with your
honor and Justice to fall from this and all other your public Declarations,
by denying me the benefit of the Law against Master Wollaston, that unjustly
imprisoned me, and Tyrannically and closly imprisoned me, to the hazard of my
life and being, and that by an illegal warrant of the Lords, who have no power
in Law to commit me, or so much as to summon me before them, in reference to a
trial? much less when I do come at their Bar, to deal with me like a Spanish
Inquisition, by examining me upon Interrogatories to ensnare my self, and
refuse to let me see either accuser, prosecutor, indictment, charge or
impeachment: but press me again and again to answer Interogatories against my
self, and so force me to deliver in a Plea, according to my privilege and the
Laws of the Land, against their illegal dealings with me, and then to wave all
pretense of any foregoing crime, and commit me the 11 July 1646 to Master
Wollaston to Newgate prison during their pleasure for delivering in that my
very Plea, which has not a word in it but what is justifiable by Magna Charta,
and the Petition of Right; and then when I am at Newgate, by pretense of a
Warrant of the 22 of June after, for Master Wollaston to cause his servants to
break into my Chamber and by force and violence to carry me before the Lords,
who had, nor have no more Jurisdiction over me by the Laws of England to try
me, pass upon me, or condemn me, then so many Turks have: and when I come
there, they only look upon me, but lay nothing to my Charge, neither by word of
mouth, nor writing but pass an Order in these very words,

Die Martis 23. Junij.
Ordered by the Lords assembled in Parliamen, That John Lilburn shall stand
Committed close Prisoner in th Prison of Newgate, And that he be not permitted
to have pen, ink or paper, and none shall have accusse unto him in any kind,
but his Keeper, until this Court does take further (...).

And that is when they (...) and just, which I do confidently believe (...)
never be; here is illegal (...) illegality, and Tyranny upon the neck of that,
and yet Master Wollastone and that Barish fellow Briscoe, executed it to the
height without any scruple of conscience, although they might have as well by
virtue of the same Warrant have cut my throat, as have used me as they did,
till the 11 of July 1646. at and upon which day they by force of arms, with
thirty or forty of the hangmans guard of Halberteers, and against all Law and
Justice, carried me before the Lords, upon pretense to hear my Charge read,
although the Lords had not, nor have not in Law the least power in the world to
try me or to summon me, as has been notably and undeniably proved in the Case
of Sir John Maynard and the four Aldermen, in the releasing of whom as the
Lords have done, if ever they had any Jurisdiction over Commoners in any kind
whatsoever, they have now (...) given it away; for they were all impeached by
the House of Commons, and their impe^^hments transmitted from them before ever
they meddled with them, which I never was, and yet flew as high in their
Protestations and Declarations against the Lords Jurisdiction over them as ever
I did, whom notwithstanding for all this, without stooping, submitting, or so
much as petitioning, the Lords released, and of their own accord took all their
proceedings against them off the file, thereby declaring to the whole Kingdom,
that their own conscience told them they had no Authority in Law to go about to
try them, being (...) of their Legal Judges, though they were impeached by the
House of Commons, and that they had done nothing but their duty in protesting
against them, and their Jurisdiction over them.

Therefore (my Lord Munson) can it stand with the Justice and (...) of your
House, in your first Remonstrance to the Kingdom, page 6. to cry (...) so
bitterly as you do against the Kings Ministers, who durst be so bold and
presumptuous to break the Laws, and suppress the Liberties of the Kingdom,
after they had been so solemnly and evidently declared by the Petition of
Right, by committing diverse free men of England to prison for refusing to stoop
unto the Commission of Loan, whereby many of them contracted such sicknesses as
cost them their lives, and detaining others close prisoners (...) many months
together, without the liberty of using Books, pen, ink, or p^per, denying them
all the comforts of life, all means of preservation of (...) nor permitting
their Wives to come unto them: And for the completing of that cruelty, after
years spent in such miserable durance, to keep them still in their oppressed
condition, not admitting them to be bailed according to Law, and oppressing and
vexing them above measure; and the ordinary course of Justice (the common
birthright of the Subjects of England) wholly obstructed unto them: and diverse
others oppressed by grievous Fines, Imprisonments, Stigmatizings, Mutilations,
Whippings, Pillories, Gaggs, Confinements, Banishments after so rigid a manner,
as has not only deprived men of the society of their friends, exercise of
their professions, comfort of books, use of paper or ink, but even violated
that near union which God has established betwixt men and their wiv^^, by
forced Was this wicked and illegal in the King? and can your denying my wife
(as in my present imprisonment you have don) so much as to see me, or speak
with me, or bring me food to preserve me alive, be legal, just, and righteous
in you? Let God and all righteous men judge betwixt you and ^^ in this
particular.
and constrained separation, whereby they have been bereaved of the comfort and
^^^versation one of another. Can all these doings be criminous and wicked in
the King's Ministers? and can your denying of justice for seven years together
to me, that suffered the grievousnesse of these very torments, be just and
righteous? Let God and the world judge, whether you by your actions do not
justify all the foregoing unjust proceedings, nay, and outstrip them, in that
you your selves do, or suffer to be done (when you have power enough in your
hands to remedy, but will not) diverse of the very self same things to some of
the very self same men, after (in obedience to your commands, in the sincerity
of their souls) they have freely adventured their lives (and so carried
themselves in all their actions toward you, that all their adversaries are not
able, nor ever were, to lay in law my crime to their charge) for the redress
of all the foresaid grievances? and yet the best recompense you your selves
give unto them, is, to toffe and tumble them year after year, from Gaol to Gaol
(without laying any crime unto their charge) denying them the benefit of their
Birthright, the Law of the Land, keeping thousands of pounds of their own from
them, and endeavoring in their long imprisonments to starve and murder them,
their Wives and Children, by being worse then the King was to your Members,
(who allowed them three, four, and five pounds a man weekly, notwithstanding
their own great estates to live upon) in allowing them never a penny to live
upon, endeavoring to protect all those unrighteous As particularly that old
guilty Traitor Sir Henry Vane, who was one of the principal men that passed
that bloody murdering Sentence in the Star chamber against me, in the year
1637: and whose power (by his crafty Machiavel Sons interest, young Sir Henry)
kept me above eight years together in suit in the House of Commons, that I
could not get one dram of Justice, or reparation against my Star Chamber
Judges; although the purfuing of that Suit one way and other, cast me above a
thousand pound: Yet at lest, when I got a^ Ordinance for 3000 li. for
reparation (me from those that did me wrong, but from the Commonwealth's
Sequestrations) yet in the passing of that Ordinance, steps up John Blackston
in the House, (one of Vane's creatures, for the many thousand pounds sake of
the Commonwealths money he has helps him to) and he gets all confideration of
interest for the forbearance of the money, cut off; so that it would be many
years before the whole sum abhorted would come in: only there was a thousand
or fifteen hundred pounds worth of wood feld of Sir Henry Gibs in Brandsborth
Park which Sir Henry Vane by his pounds, in the Knights absence and mine both,
gets an Order to possess, although he has no right unto it: so that my 3000
l. will be well nigh this ten years before the annual rent of the Lands
allotted will bring it in: which will scarce be Use for the Principal. Of all
which usage, when I come out of the North to the City, (immediately after the
execution of the King) ^ comp^^ined to Sir Arthur Hasterig, (then my familiar
friend) and begged of him to deliver a Message for me to Lieut. Genesis Cromwell;
in which I acquinted him step by step, how old (...) Henry Vane had without
cause, for this twelve years together sought my blood, and had got a good part
of it; and I knew that Litus. Genesis Cromwell had (by his son's similiarity with
him) been of late the staff and stay of the old Traitor: and therefore I
desired him to tell him, I thought (...) had been out-folling enough betwixt
Cromwell and me already, occasioned by himself; but for my part, I desire to
have no more jarring betwixt us, and therefore did earnestly entreat him to let
old Henry Vane and me alone instand or sall^y our selves: For seeing he would
never give over the pursuing of my life's: I must be forced to have much to his;
for I told Sir Arthur, I was resolved either to impeach him or indict him for a
Traitor in betraying all the North of England to the Earl of Newcastle and
sending his Magazine of Arms to him to Newcastle from Raby Castle, assuring him
moreover that if L. G. Cromwell would yet protect him, for all his greatness ^
would try another fall with him, cast i^ what it would; but as if it were the
highest treason in the world for any (...) in England, but he that is a
Parliament man, to say that blacks the eye of any man in that House, old Sir
Henry and young Sir Henry Vane are both endeavored by King Nol to be brought
in again to the House (having been formerly excluded for three quarter
Cavaleers) and to be (...) Members of the New Council of State, and King Nol
by his Beagles at the Counsel of War (...) Vote to pass to desire him to get a
saw made by the House to authorize that bloody and (...) Council to hang poor
peal-garlick or any other that they should judge worthy of (...); so that here
was a fine morse-trap for old and young Vane to catch poor John in, not
obtained (...) doubt of the greatest engagement in the World to be King Nols
Slaves and Vassals, to engage with him, and drive on any interest be would have
them, for his so seasonable help of them at this (...) great time o^ need,
against furious John (as they call him) who in Feb. last offered a (...) of
Parliament (where S. Arthur then sat Chairman) upon his life upon the
Authority of that own Ordinances to prove old Sir Henry and his son Sir George
Vane both Traitors, and to ^^y them to transport their soldiers for Ireland
(out of their states and their traiterous Confederates in the County of Durham)
50000l. and earnestly begd of S. Arthur and the Committee to (...) the House
herewith; but the next news I hear King Olivers paws was laid upon poor John^
(...) he and his Cozen Prince Arthur come to burn their fingers before they and
John has (...) Oliver thank himself, and leave Traiterous old Sir Henry Vane
and his wicked sons to (...) their own legs without the help of his Crutches
the next time.
men that (contrary to Law) have endeavouted to murder and destory them, and
take away their lives and beings from the earth. And all this is my own case
and sufferings from you your selves. Therefore Hear, O Heavens! and give ear, O
Earth! and the righteous God, and all just men judge betwixt ^^.

And therefore if there be any truth or resolutions in you to stand to any
thing that you say and declare, I challenge at your hands the benefis of all
your Declarations and Remonstrances, which are all of my side; and particularly
the notablest of Declarations of the 6 of May 1643, and 17 April 1646. which
was made before my contest with the Lords, in which you declare (2 par. Book
De. fo 95. and 879) that although the necessity of war have given some
disturbances to loyal proceedings, stopped the usual course of justice, (...)
the Parliament for the preservation of this right to impose and require many
great and unusual payments from the good Subjects of this Kingdom, and to take
extraordinary ways for the procuring of monyes for their many pressing
occasions; It having pleased God to reduce our affairs into a more (...)
condition then heretofore: We do declare, that we will not, nor any by color
of any authority derived from us, shall interrupt the ordinary course of
Justice in the several Court of Judicatures of this Kingdom, not intermeddle
incases of private interest otherwhere determinable, unless it be in case of
male administration of Justice, wherein we shall so provide, that right be
done, and punishment inflicted as there shall be occasion according to the Law
of the Kingdom, and the trust reposed in us.

Therefore seeing that you that style your selves the fountain and conserva^^ry
of the Law, first par. Book Declar. page 272 have declared in answer to the
Kings Complaint against scandalous pamphlets (which was the original pretense
of the Lords quarrelling with me) that you know the King has ways enough in
his ordinary Courts of Justice to punish such seditious (...) and Sermons, as
are any way prejudicial to his rights, honor, and authority, page 208. and if
the King the Superior or Creator of the Lords, must be tied in this case to the
ordinary Courts of Justice, according to the Laws of the Kingdom, then much
more the Lords the creature or inferior to the King; And therefore I hope you
will not be angry with me for refusing obedience to the illegal commands of
the single Lords, the inferious, or hinder me from obtaining Justice, according
to Law, upon those that most barbarously executed them upon me, seeing you and
the Lords themselves have taught me, and all the people of England,
disobedience to the illegal commands of the King the greater, as clearly
appears by your Declarations of July the 12, and July 26, 1642. 1 par. Book
Decl. p. 201. 458. 483. The words of which last are, That the Lords and Commons
in Parliament do Declare, That it is against the Laws and Liberties of the
Kingdom, that any of the Subjects thereof should be commanded or compelled by
the King to attend him at his pleasure, but such as are bound thereunto by
special service; And if any Messengers or Officers shall by color of any
command from his Majesty, or Warrant under his Majesty's hand, arrest, take, or
carry away any of his Majesty's Subjects to any place whatsoever, contrary to
their wills, that it is both against the Law of the Land, the Liberty of the
Subject, and it is to the disturbance of the public Peace of the Kingdom; and
any of his Majesty's subjects so arrested may lawfully refuse to obey such
Arrests and Commands. To the same purpose you also were and declare, in page
93. 95. 112. Therefore, seeing the Law of the Land is so often by you declared
to be the undoubted Birthright of me, as well as the greatest Lord in England,
or Parliament man whatsoever, I earnestly crave, and challenge at your hands,
as much for my self, as you did at, and from the hands of the King, for the
Lord Kimbolton and the five Members, Sir John Hothan, and the Lord Mayor
Pennington, Alderman Foulke, Col. Vean, and Col. Manwaring, viz. the benefit of
the Law of England in the ordinary Courts of Justice; which is, not to be
taken, or imprisoned, passed upon, nor condemned but by due Process of Law,
before a Justice of Peace, according to the Law of the Land, and not to be
imprisoned but for a particular crime in Law, expressed in the Commitment, by
those that have power in Law to commit me; nor to be tried or condemned, but by
presentment, etc. before a Jury of twelve men of my Peers or equals of the same
Neighborhood where the fact was committed; which is, as you declare by Sir
Edward Cook in 4 part Institutes fol. 41. the ancient and undoubted Birthright
of all the Subjects of England, and to have my remedy at Law, against all those
that shall deal with me contrary to Law. And that you challenged all these
things for them beforementioned, you may read in your own Declarations, page 7.
38. 39. 41. 53. 67. 77. 101. 123. 140. 162. 201. 203. 208. 210. 245. 277. 278.
459. 660. 845. All which I cannot doubt but you will grant unto me, because it
cannot rationally enter into my breast to conceive, that you your selves can
judge it consonant to Justice to set me, and thousands, and ten thousands of
the people of the Kingdom to fight at your command for the preservation of our
birthright the Law, and then for you to deny it unto us, and deprive us of it,
and to recompense us with slavery, which we are in, when we lose the benefit of
the Law. Surely, this cannot in honor and justice become you, that call your
selves the Conservators of the Law. But if you shall avowedly deny me the
benefit of the Law, you frustrate your end in making Judges to be in
Westminster Hall to execute the Law, and put a mock upon the people, and
dissolve the whole frame and constitution of the civil Policy of the
Government of this Kingdom into the original law of Nature, and leave every
man to judge within his own breast what is just and righteous, and thereby (...)
me, whether I will or no, to do that in reference to you, which you in your
great straits, did in reference to the King; viz. Appeal to the righ^^^ Judge
of all the would, and the judgment of the people to decide the controversy
betwixt you as appears in your own Declarations, 1. part Book Doc. p. 192 196
214. 263. 278. 464 491 495. 496 498. 629. 636. 666. 690. 639. 701. 908. and if
I perish, I perish. For what greater tyranny can there be in the world, ^^ what
greater straits can a man be put to, then to delayed justice, (which is worse
than to be denied) for above seven years together, by those that have raised a
bloody war, and pretended for justice: and then, after I have spent above 1000
li. in endeavoring to obtain Justice and my own at your (...) and after I have
served you faithfully, and adventured my life in the field for you, and
undergone multitudes of other hardships and hazzards at (...) for you, and
carried my self in all my actions toward you unspotted, and that upon you own
declared principles: and after all this, to be tossed and tumbled by you from
Gaol to Gaol, year after year, for nothing but my honesty; and can come to no
legal trial, although I have endeavored it with all my might; and to have by
you thousands of pounds of my own kept from me, and not a penny in all my
captivity allowed me to live upon, but in the eye of reason exposed to famish
and sterve, or to eat my Wife and Children O monstrous and unnatural cruelty!
which I will maintain upon my life, it not to be paralleled in all Queen
Marie's days, nor in the worst of King Charles his Reign.

So (my Lord) I have done with my PLEA, and take leave to remain a true hearted
Englishman, JOHN LILBURN.

NOw Master Speaker, having finished my Plea to the Committee of Indemnity; I
must acquaint you that I brought it to the said Committee, with whom I had some
verbal expostulations, after which I began to open my Plea, having it fair
writ in my hand, which the Committee no sooner saw but presently they left (me
according to my desire) to the ordinary course of the Law, where I was
necessitated at present to cease prosecution of Woll^ston, because I was
continually in expectation of my Liberty from the Lords, and therefore judged
it but wisdom in me not to provoke them, and also for perfecting of my
Ordinance, for my long sought, dear bought, and hard suffered for reparatious,
from old Sir H. Vane and the rest of my cruel Star Chamber Judges; which
Ordinance with much ado was as last concluded, though to little purpose as
before truly is noted in p. 15, 16. And for my Liberty, I was chiefly beholding
for that to my friends in London, who in seven days got eight or nine thousand
hands to a Petition for me, in the day of your straits by the Cavaleers, and
presented it to your House, which my true friend, and faithful and courageous
fellow sufferer Sir John Maynard took the advantage of, and improved the utmost
of his interest, and thereby became principally isntrumental both in your
House and in the House of Lords for my Liberty then, unto whom I must and do
return the chiefest thanks for it.

But now Sir, seeing my life (for nothing but my honesty, and because I will
not be a slave to men's lusts) is so strongly sought for to be taken away by
those that have made the largest pretenses and promises, that can be made in
the world to deliver this Nation from thraldom, bondage, vassallage and
slavery; and seeing they are such painted Sepulchers that they are like to
cozen all the honest men in England with religious cheaters, such as Master
Edmond Rozer, with whom as teacher to the Congregation where I was a Member, I
walked many years in fellowship, and Master William Kiffin who was once my
servant, and unto both whom the indearedest of my affections run out unto; to
either of which I never gave a provocation to, nor wronged in all my days to
my knowledge, neither of which (although the first of them and I have been
familiar together for almost twenty years) I am confident of it, in reference
to my actings to the sons of men, are able to my face to say black is my eye,
yet for these men so high and mighty in their pretense of religion, and in
their former familiarity and friendship to me, to persecute me bitterly, and
write reproachful books etc against me and in the day of my calamity (when the
great men of the Nation make deep furrows upon my back for nothing) when I am
as it were in the Kennell, and my hands and feet tied, then to beat, buffe^,
wound me, and pursue my very life; O the height not only of unchristianity, but
even of unmanhood it self! such actions differing nothing in beastliness and
brutishness from the brutest of Beasts themselves; if it had been enemies (as
David did in the like case Ps. 55. 12, 13, 14. that had done it, I could have
born it; but for my familiar, bosom, indeared friends, to deal thus with me,
and that in the day of my adversity, when my life is hunted for like a
Partridge upon the mountains, in this they are more unnatural then the very
Pagans and heathens themselves; for says Isaiah, cha. 21. 14. The Inhabitants
of the land of Tema brought water to him that was thirsty, they prevented with
their bread him that fled; and for their mal^ing a frothy light, giddy headed
fellow of me in their late book called Walwyns wyles, easily deluded and drawn
aside, being of no depth in my self; I am confident there is no two men in
England that know me, whose consciences are more persuaded of the falsity of
that their own assertion in every particular then M. Rozer, and Master Kiffin
are, if they would speak the truth from their very hearts, the whole stream of
my actions extraordinarily well known to both of them for these twelve or
thirteen years together, being as a large demonstration that I understand the
things I go about; and am not to be biased with favor, flattery, frowns, nor
hard usage; (but act singly and nakedly upon my own principles that I believe
God distills into my soul) I believe as the actions of any man upon the face of
the earth are, having never forsaken nor changed my principles from better to
worse the space of one hour from the day (...) fatherly discovering, and
distinct, and assured making known of his turnall, everlasting and unchangable
loving kindness in the Lord Jesus unto my soul, to this day, although I am
confident it is now above 13 years, since I know God at my (...) and reconciled
father, that had particularly wasted and cleansed my soul with the (...) blood
of Jesus Christ, and had cansed the grace of God to appear in my soul, to (...)
me (as a reciprecall duty spread abroad in my heart by the overflowings of the
fountain of love within me) to abstain from all ungodliness and worldly
best, and to live soberly and righteously, in this present evil world, doing
good to all, his especially to the household of Faith, Ingraving with his Spirit
upon my heart as with a point of a Diamond those Divine Laws, viz. to do to
all men as I would they should do to me, and in all the carriages of my life to
be watchful over my actings, and not to be evil that good may come of it, and
thirdly that seeing that I am bought with a pri^^ by Redemption, that therefore
I should not be the servant of men (to serve their best and wills) but entirely
and solely the servant of God, to glorify him with my body, in rightous and
just actions amongst the sons of men, as well as in my soul, in speculation,
imgra^tion or adoration; and so at present I leave them to the reflections of
their own consciences, if the vanity of the world and the fadeing promotions
thereof has not eat out the life and sensible part of them; into whose secrets
(...) let not my soul (O Lord) enter into. But as for the rest of their
subscribing Comrades, being in all six or seven, I know not some of them, only
(...) Price, and Richard Arnold I know to be men fitly to deserve the name of
(...) Baristors, or known Eves-dropers, so detestable and abominable therefore
to all truly and really honest unbialed men that know them, that a man shall but
defile himself to touch them with a pair of tongs, deserving no other answer
from me for their indefatigable and restless pains to bespatter and destroy
me, but either the highest of scorn, or a good cudgel in due time; and so at
pres^^^ I leave them to the serious perusal of their own ugly forms and shapes,
lively pictured out in that most excellent and masculine Anatomy of them, by
Doct. Brooks in his Law Book entitled the Charity of Churchmen, or a
Vindication of (my most choice and honest Comrade and Fellow-sufferer) Master
William Walwyn.

But in regard my grand adversaries, and their little Boagles in London, do
continually report me to be a man of contention, and one that is never (...)
from broyls, nor never content with any Government; but full of self
^^^ceitedness, malice and revenge; it will be very necessary for me to return
a^ effectual answer to this, before I come to the main thing I intend.

And therefore in the first place, When I was a child (as Paul says) I
thought as a child, I did as a child; but after I came to have any
discretion, well ngh twenty years ago, my Father brought me to London, and
bound me Apprendes to Mr. Thomas Hewson near London-stone; whom I served as
faithfully about six years, as every Apprentice served a Master: And though he
had no more but my self, and had many thousands of Pounds went through my
hands, driving a large Wholesale trade; yet directly, nor indirectly, I cannot
remember that ever I wronged him of a Groat, or the value of it; or that ever
all the (...) I was with him, I was ever branded or taxed with one bafe visible
action; or that I either gave or took a box on the ear, or any thing like it,
or ever quarrelled with any Flesh alive all the time I was there, (although I
had then as much mettle, life and spirit as most young men in London had) only
I must confess, my old Master offered me sometimes some abuse, for which I
carried him before the Chamberlain of London, and ever after lived in peace
with him: And after that, in all the days of my calamity by the Bishops, had
the truest and cordiallest friend of him, that ever servant had of a Master in
the day of his trial. And though in his service (keeping only a Warehouse)
several days in the week I had spare time enough, yet I never misspent it, but
continually spent it in reading the Bible, the Book of Martyrs, Luthers,
Calvin's, Bezaes, Cartwrights, Perkins, Molins, Burtons, and Rogers Works, with
multitude of other such like Books that I had bought with my own money; till
the foresaid Mr. Edmond Rozer, my familiar friend and neighbor, and
fellow-professor of Religion, (conversant at my Masters house from the
beginning of my coming to him) brought me in anno 1636. acquainted with Dr.
Bastwick then prisoner in the Gatehouse, whom after I visited constantly, and
for whose service I could have laid down my life; and for my true affection to
him, I was forced by the Bishops and their Catchpoles to fly into the
Low Countries for refuge, just about the time of his Banishment, where I was
diverse months, and where the Kings Ambassador, Sir William Boswell, laid for
me (as I was informed) several designs to put me a Ship board, and send me
over to England to the Bishops here, for my visible activity there against
them, which forced me continually to wear my sword about me; yet in all my time
there, I never gave nor took a box on the ear, nor had so much as a single
quarrel; and at my coming to England I was in danger enough, and therefore
went like a swaggerer disguised, and yet was betrayed by my pretended bosom
friend, John Chilliburn servant to old Mr. Wharton in Bow-lane, and so fell
into the devouring clutches of the High Commission, Councell-board, and the
Star Chamber, all three of which had a sting at me: But in all my troubles and
trials by them for diverse years together, I never saw or heard of any other
prosecutor, but only two most desperate, forsworn, false Oaths of my then
familiar acquaintance, Edmond Chillington then Button seller in Cannonstreet,
and now a forsworn lieutenant in Colonel Whaleys Regiment of Horse: which
false Oaths he was hired unto by the Bishops and their Chaplins, Mr. Baker,
etc. and by means of which he got his own Liberty, and this he did for my
courtesy and kindness to him in his then captivity, etc. owing me at this day,
I am confident of it, upon that account well nigh 30 pounds: by means of which
Oaths, I had above 500 stripes with knotted cords, given me by the bloody
decree ofold Sir Henry Vane, etc. and endured a world of other unheard of
miseries and barbarous cruelties for three years together: and at my
deliverance by the Parliament, I could have had his ears for perjury, as
easily as to have kissed my hand, if I had been revengefull; but so far was I
from that, that I never questioned him for it, but contrarily I requited him
good for evil, when he was prisoner in Oxford Castle with me, and ready to
starve, being destitute both of money and friends there; and to save him alive,
I readily lent him both gold and silver, as he very well knows, by the same
token I was without my money long enough; and in the day of his prosperity
here, I was fain to ask often enough for it, before I could get it again.

So here it is true, I was in contestation with the High (...) Board, and
Star Chamber, but they began with me, and not I (...) story of which you may
read in my book called the Christian man's (...), for Mr. Will. Larner) It is
true also, I had in them sufferings, (...) contestations with Gaolers, but it
was to preserve my life, when they (...) to Law would have murdered me; but
with all my fellow prisoners, etc. I lived as peaceably, as lovingly and
friendly as any man in the world did; and all this contestation was but for the
maintaining my legal rights due to me by the Nation of Right, which before the
beginning of those troubles I had read, and a little understood: In which
contest this Parliament in its Primitive (...) has justified me, in not only
by abolishing the foresaid unjust Court by Act of Parliament; but also in and
by their Votes of the 4th. May, 164^. which thus follows; Resolved upon the
Question. That the sentence of the (...) chamber given against John Lilburne,
it illegal, and against the liberty of the subject; and also bloody, wicked,
cruel, barbarous and tyrannical. Resolved (...) on the Question, That
reparations ought to be given to Mr. Lilburn, for his (...) forment, sufferings
and losses sustained by that illegal sentence; Which I could I never got to
this day, but had been a rich and happy man in reference (...) world, if it had
been voted I should never have expected any; for then might I have spent my
eight years time in my trade beyond sea, that I have in a (...) spent in
following these Votes; and one way or other 1000 or 1500 (...) to boot; with
seven or eight imprisonments besides for nothing.

Well, after this I fought with C. Lunsford, and diverse others at Westminster,
(who drew first) with my sword in my hand', to save the Parliament (...)
throats from being out, conscienciously judging nothing that I had too good to
hazard for so just an Authority as I then judged them to be; and they have
(...) well rewarded me for my pains, with 7 or 8 cruel imprisonments, and
(...) told me nor any body else to this hour wherefore, with many strong
endeavor to take away my life in the said imprisonments unjustly; but I hope,
they ^p^cially will justify me in that contest; however, I from my heart
beseech the righteous Lord of Heaven and Earth to judge righteously and
impartially betwixt them and me, and to manifest his Righteous judgment betwixt
to visibly to the world, that so the sons of men may see it, and behold it, and
fear, and tremble before him.

Well, in the next place the Wars begun betwixt them and the Kings and truly
having seriously read all their primitive most excellent Declaration, and
sufficiently my self smarted under the Kings irregular government, in the
violating of the Laws of England, the compact betwixt him and his people; which
he in my judgment had then notably violated; And not in the least doubting but
they would be as good as their words and Declarations, which were to secure the
Peoples Laws and Liberties to them, and not in the least to seek themselves;
to provide for their weal, but not for their woe: and reading in the
Scripture, Romans 13. that the end of the institution of all Magistracy in the
world, is for a terror to evil doers, and for a praise to those that do well;
the ^^^^ous consideration of which, wrought out something in reason in my one
thoughts, to balance the letter of those Laws, (which I then knew were
absolutely for the King) something like those general rules or maxims in Law,
recorded by that most excellent of English Lawyers, Sir Edw. Cook in his 4
part. Institut. fol. 330. which are, That although the Law (of England) speak
in general terms, yet it is to be bound up, or accepted, but where reason
causes, there the law cease; for seeing reason is the very life and spirit
of the Law is self, the Law giver it not to be eseemed to respect that which
has no reason, although the generality of the words at the first sight, or
after the Letter seem otherwise: And it, in my reason, could not be rational
for any men to appoint a compact to be betwixt two parties, but to bind both
equally alike, King as well as People; and not to keep the people bound to the
express letter of the Kings part, or any others, when the King or that other,
shall break his or theirs in twenty particulars, as by Ship Money, Projects,
etc. And further, says Cook, fol. 328. ibid. Such an interpretation of
ambiguous things (in Law) it always to be made, that absurdities and
inconveniences may be avoided: but absurdities and inconveniences cannot be
avoided, if the express and single letter of any Law, in reference to a King or
Parliament, shall tie or bind me to cut my own throat, or any other ways
destroy my self, or my companions, brethren, or neighbors, which is
irrational or unjust for me to do: 1 Part. Book Decl. p. 150. So upon these or
the like grounds, I took up arms in judgment and conscience against the King,
and contested with his misgovernment in subduing my legal and native Rights,
and in my sufferings and arraignment at Oxford therefore, carried my self with
a great deal of resolution and undauntednesse of spirit; for which the
Parliament by special Declaration of the 17 of December 1642, justified me:
which Declaration you may see 1 part Book Decl. page 802, 803. yea, and
exchanged me very honorably, high above my quality and condition; and at my
coming home, some of them that were no mean ones, proffered my wife a place of
honor and profit for me, then reputed worth about 1000 l. per annum: which I
conscientiously scorned and slighted, professing unto my wife, to her
extraordinary grief, that I must rather fight (though it were) for 8 pence a
day, till I see the liberties and peace of England settled, then set me down in
a rich place for mine own advantage, in the midst of so many grand distractions
of my native Country as then possessed it: and so I left old Essex, that had
been so generous unto me in giving me almost 300 l. ready money at my
deliverance, as Colonel Flettwood and Colonel Harrison very well know: But him
for all that (I say) I left, for his persecuting for non-taking the Covenant,
and down to Lincolnshire I posted, to my then two Darlings and familiar
Friends, Monchester and Cromwell; where I engaged heartily, [and spent all Essex
his money freely] and contiued in many a desperate service, till Manchester
visibly degenerated, and would have hanged me, for being overhonest, and over
active in taking in Tikel Castle too soon: which with his visible turning
knave, and apparently betraying his trust at Dennington, in defigning his Army,
or the best part of it, a sacrifice to the Kings fury, made me engage against
him and others of his Associates, with Cromwell, who thereunto solicited me,
and also threw up my Commission; and so his baseness spoiled a Soldier of me,
that I could never fight as a Soldier since; although Cromwell by himself face
to face, and by his Agents (I am confident of it) has from time to time much,
and as earnestly solicited me, as is possible for a man to be solicited, to
take up command in Fairfax his Army. But no sooner was I by the ears with
Manchester, who first began with me, but Mr Prynn wrote his desperate invective
Books against us all that would not be conformable to the Covenant (that
Cheat,) and the Scots Presbytery (that every thing and nothing;) and would have
bad us all destroyed, or banished the Land of our Nativity: so in conscience to
God, and safety to myself and brethren (Mr Edmund Roser, my present unworthy
Antagomst, being that my pastor or teacher) I was inwardly compelled to deal
with him, that then sought to destroy the generation of the righteous; and
accordingly I wrote him a sharp Epistle, now in print, dated 7 Jan. 1644. which
brought upon ^^ back a whole sea of troubles; and a Vote or Votes in the House
of Commons past against me: whereupon, without any more a do, black Corbet and
the Committee of Examinations makes me a Prisoner, and tosseth and ^umbleth me
to the purpose: So before him, upon the 13 of June 1645, was I forced of give
in my reasons (now in print) wherefore I wrote that excellent and seasonably
Epistle (which was the first avowed public Cannon I know of in England,
discharged against the then insulting Presbyter, for the liberty of the
consciences of my present bloody and malicious persecutors, that now style
themselves the Pastors and Leaders of the Churches of God; but do indeed and
in truth, by their unnatural, unchristian, and unjust actions deserve no other
style, but men fit for nothing but to be the Pastors and Leaders of the
Synagague of ^atan.) The whole story of which contest with Mr Prynn, you may
read at large in the beginning of my Book, called innocence and Truth justified
shall I hope my present Adversaries, who pretend themselves to be Leaders in the
Churches of God, will justify and acquit me from guilt or crime in these
contests; especially considering that they themselves (that now are so violent
in hunting after my blood, and the blood of my Associates, in the day of our
trouble and calamity, now we are under hatches) durst then do not thing manlike
for themselves; but sat in silence like a company of (...) without souls or
hearts.

And then before I well got rid of this broyl, you your self got the House of
Commons the 19 day of July 1645. to fall upon my bones, and Vote (...) prison I
know not wherefore, unless it were for riding post from Summerset-shire
through twenty dangers to bring you the first news of the Lord Gorings (...)
being routed at Lampert; for you never told me other to this hour; but yet I
was to^^ed by your own means, from Hunt your Sergeants hands, to the hands of
Knight his Deputy; and from thence the 9 of August to Newgate, by that old
Patentee Monopolizer Lawrence Whittaker, then Chairman to the Committee of
Examination; and when you had got me to Newgate, then you got your Bull-dogs in
the House to bait me to the purpose, and also turned me over to be araigned at
the sessions in Old-hatly and so to be hanged at Tyburn; for you appointed
Bradshaw your bloody and unjust Lord President, Master Seal and Walker etc. to
prosecute me for my life; But after I had sufficiently baited both you and your
unjust house; you sent me to Newgate a hundred pound in money, I think to get
me to hold my peace, and the 14 of October 1645. most honorably Voted me out of
Prison, and so your self being my accuser, prosecuter and Judge, Justified me
in this contest, the relation of which you may at large read in that notable
book called Englands Birthright, and in my Epistle of two sheets of paper in
print dated 25. July 1645. but especially in my Large Book (...) and called
Innocence and Truth Justified; and in this contest with you, any old
acquaintance Doctor Bastwick, (for whose sake in the Bishops days I underwent
more sorrows then is to be found in any ordinary death) fell upon me also, so
that likewise I was feign to contest a little with him, but he begun first.

And after this, viz. upon the 14 day of April 1646. Colonel Edward King
arrests me in an Action of 2000 l. at Westminster for calling him Traitor,
which was only in truth, for discharging my duty in prosecuting him, for
betraying his trust to the Kings Party, while he was my Colonel in
Lincolnshire, and in this contest abundance of your own Ordinances justified
me: which while I pleaded them in my Epistle to Judge Reeve of the 6 of June
1646 now in Print, before whom Kings action were dependent; the guilty
conscioned Judge grew as angry with me therefore, as the Lawyers in Christ's
time did at him, for reproving the hypocrisy of the Scribes and Pharisees,
although nominally he meddled not with them, yet their own guilty consciences
did inwardly accuse them, which made one of them say, Master, in saying then,
thou reproachest us also, Luke 11. 45. unto whom Christ replies and says,
verse. 46. etc. Woe unto you also ye Lawyers; for ye lade men with burdens
grievous to be (...) and you yourselves touch not the burdens with one of your
fingers. Woe unto you for you build the Sepulchers of the Prophets, and your
Fathers killed them. Truly ye bear witness that ye allow the deeds of your
Fathers: for they indeed killed them, and you build their Sepulchers. Therefore
also said the wisdom of God. I will send them Prophets and Apostles, and some
of them they shall slay and persecute; That the blood of all the Prophets which
was shed from foundation of the world may be required of this Generation, from
the blood of Abel unto the blood of Zacharias, which perished between the Altar
and the Temple: Verily I say unto you it shall be required of this Generation.
Woe unto you Lawyers for ye have taken away the key of knowledge; ye entered not
in your selves, and them that were entering in you hindered.

And accordingly Judge (...) being wounded within at the downright truth of my
forementioned Epistle or Plea. that lasheth the base and abominable coruptions
of him and the rest of his Brother-Judges, then and now Administrators of the
Law; and finding something in it that brands Manchester for an unjust man in
his late Generalship, who then was Speaker of the House of Pee^s, away to him
trudgeth the Judge in all post haste with my Book, to get him by his power to
be revenged of me which he was easily provoked and persuaded too and
accordingly the 10 of June 1646. He gets an Order to pass the Lords House, To
summon me up to the Lords Bar to answer to such things as I stood Charged
before their Lordships with, concerning the writing the foresaid Letter or
plea, and when I came to their Bar they dealt with me like a Spanish
Inquisition, in examining me against my self, which forced me then at the Bar
to deliver in my plea in Law, to prove that by the Laws of England they had no
Jurisdiction over Commoners, to try them either for life, limb, liberty, or
estate, which you may read in my Printed Book, called The Freemans freedom
vindicated, which plea and protestation made them mad, and for which they sent
me to Newgate, from whence upon the 16 of June I sent my appeal for Justice to
the House of Commons against them, which made the Lords madder, whereupon they
upon the 12 of June 1646. issurred (...) bring me to their Bar again, where in
contempt of their Jurisdistion, (...) to kneel, for which they committed me to
the foresaid Wollastone (...) of Newgate, to be kept close Prisoner without
pen, ink or paper, the (...) or any other friend, which was with rigor
sufficiently exercised upon me, till the ^^ of July 1646. which day they issued
our another Order to bring me again to their Bar, at which when I came, in the
height of contempt of their Jurisdiction, I marched in amongst them with my bat
or, and not only refused to kneel at these Bar, But also with my fingers stops
both my ears when they went about to read my ^^tended Charge, for all which
they fined me 4000 l. to the King, and forther sentenced me to be a prisoner
seven years, or during their pleasure, in the T^^er of London, to be for ever
disfranchised of being capable to bear any (...) Military or Civil Government,
in Church or Commonwealth; and accordingly I was committed to the Tower, where
I was in the nature of a close prisoner, divorced from the society of my Wife,
till the 16 of September (...) Whereupon a strong war was made upon the Lords
and their Jurisdiction, by the Authors of those two notable Books, called Vane
plebis, and Royal, and I also paid them pretty well my self, in my two large
books, Called, Londons Liberty in chains discovered, and Londons Charters, and
by a large (...) of my Wives, and accompanied at the delivery of it with diverse
of (...) friends, I got my business to the examination of a Commities of the
House of Commons, before whom I appeared, and pleaded the 9th. November, 1646.
and had fair play, but waited month after month, and (...) get no report of it
made by reason of the swoy and power that Mr. Denail (...), Sir Philip
Stapleton, and the rest of their Associates had been in the House of (...), who
were then strong confederates with the Lords in their unjust (...), and my then
professed enemies, in keeping me from Justice, the (...) of the Law and my
right: whereupon I was compelled and necessitated by a hard, long. and almost
starving imprisonment to engage against them; which I did to the purpose, as
you may read in my Books, called, The oppressed ^^^ oppressions declared; The
outcries of oppressed commons; The resolved man resolution; and Rash-Oaths.
And then the Army turned up the chief of (...) heels, by a trick of Ho^r^^
Porus, alias, An IMPEACHMENY; And the^ up got Mr. Oliver Cromwall my pretended
friend, with whom, and in whose quarrel (for the Liberties of the Commonwealth
(as he pretended) at his earnest follcitation of my wife in London, to send for
me from the (...) then at Crowland; (and by his message delivered unto me for
that end, by his brother-in-law Major Desborough, near Sir Will. Russels in
Cambridg-shire) I engaged against the Earl of Manchester, etc. and was one of
the first ^vidences that gave in my testimony against him, before Mr. Lisle
then (...) to that committee, where Manchesters impeachment did then depend;
but alas, Mr. Oliver impeached him only for this end, (as the fequel fully
(...)) not in the least for Justice-sake, but only to get him, etc. out of his
command) that so he might get in a friend of his own into it that he could
rule, and it may be in time himself; both of which he has completely done: but
I say Mr. Oliver; by the help of the Army at their first Rebellion against the
Parliament, their Lords and Masters, was no sooner up, but like a most
perfidious base unworthy man, he turned my enemy and Jailer, and was as great
with Manchester in particular as ever; yea, and the House of Peers were his
only white Boys; Being more then his drudges, and more conformable to his will
then the House of Commons it self; and who but Oliver (that before to me had
called them in effect both tyrants and usurpers) became their Proctor where
ever he came, yea, and sot his son Ireton at work for them also, insomuch as at
some meetings with some of my Friends at the Lord Whartons lodgings, he clapped
his hand upon his breast, and to this purpose, professed as in the sight of
God, upon his conscience, That the Lords had (...) a right to their Legislative
and Jurisdictive power over the Commons, as he had to the coat upon his back;
and he would procure a friend, viz. Mr. Nath. (...), should argue and plead
their said right with any friend I had in England; and not only so, but did he
not get the General and council of War as Windsor (about the time when the
Votes of no more Addresses were to pass) to make a Declaration to the whole
Kingdom, declaring the legal Rights of the Lords House, and their fixed
Resolutions to maintain and uphold it? which, as I remember was sent by the
General, etc. to the Lords by Sir Hardiasse Waller; and to indear himself the
more unto the Lords (in whose House without all doubt he intended to have fate
himself;) he required me evil for good, and became my enemy to keep me in
prison, out of which I must not stir, unless I would stoop and acknowledge the
Lords jurisdiction over commoners, (and for that end he set his Agents and
Instruments at work to get me to do it;) And it became the aboveboard work of
him and his son-in-law, after a little underhand working, to make all means
gone about in the Army for my liberty, ineffectuall, or a seat to me; so that
I was pinched and forced for my own preservation, to fall about Olivers ears,
and his Sons both, to discover their depth of (...) by themselves and agents in
their base dealing with me, (who was them almost destroyed in prison by their
villainy) as you may partly read in my Books, called, The Juglers discovered;
Jonah's cries out of the Wholes holly; The Peoples Prerogative; My additionall
Plea before Mr. John Maynard of the House; and my Whip for the present House of
Lords.

But to fill up the measure of his malice against me, after by my own induttry
and importunity, I had got a little Liberty, in spite of him and his faction,
from your House, he and his Faction got your House again to commit me and Mr
Wildman prisoners as Traitors, upon 19. Jan. 1647. for but mannaging an honest
Petition, that did but a little touch upon the Lords power: And yet this very
Mr. Oliver has since been the principal Instrument to pluck up the House of
Lords by the roots, as usurpers and encroachors, because they would not join
with him to cut off the King's head (for that which he is as guilty of himself)
and so take him out of his way, that he might be absolute King himself, as now
he is, and more then ever the King was in his life: for he can, and has taken
several free men of England by the shoulders at the House door, and in
Westminster Hall, and by his will, without any ^ne process of Law, committed
them prisoners to his mercinary Janisaries, (as lately he has done to honest
Cornet Chesman, (not of the Army) for but delivering a Letter of his unjustly
imprisoned Captains, Cap. Bray, to the Speaker, and soliciting him for an
Answer to it:) The like of which Tyranny the King never did in his Reign; and
yet by Saint Oliver's means, lost his head for a Tyrant. But the thing that I
principally (...) at here, is, to declare, that Oliver and his Parliament now
(...) (for the Nations it is not) having plucked up the House of Lords by the
roots, as usurped, tyrannical, and unjust, has thereby himself justified not
in all my contests with them, in denying their Jurisdiction over Common^^^ by
Law.

And although Oliver had his hands full with Poyer, Goring, Holland, Hamilton
and Langdale the last year; but especially with the general (...) was then in
both Houses against him; upon the notable Impeachment of his Major Huntington,
and I then by my absolute freedom was a little up, and could have at my
pleasure been revenged of him, if I had so pleased, either by divisions in his
Army, which was easily then in my power; or by joying in impeaching him with
Major Huntington; which I had matter enough to do, and was earnestly solicited
to it again and again, and might have had ^^^ enough to bost in my then low and
exhausted condition: yet I scorned it, and rather applied my hand to help him
up again, as not loving a Scotch Interest, it is very well and fully known to
his present darling Mr Cornelius Holland, and also to Colonel Ludlow, and Mr
Thomas Challoner, with other Members that I could name; and which was
demonstrated to himself by a Letter I sent him by Mr Edw. Sexby, whom on
purpose I procured to go down to him: the true Copy whereof thus follows:

SIR.
WHat my Comrade has written by our trusty Bearer, might be sufficient for us
both; but to demonstrate unto you that I am no staggerer from my first
principles that I engaged my life upon, nor from you, if you are what you (...)
to be, and what you are strongly reported to be; although, if I prosecuted ^^
desired revenge for an hard and almost sterving imprisonment, I could have had
of late the choice of twenty opportunities to have paid you to the purpose; but
I (...) it, especially when you are low: and this assure your self, that if
ever my band he upon you, it shall be when you are in your full glory, if then
you shall decline from the righteous ways of Truth and Justice: Which, if you
will fixedly and impartially prosecute, I am

Yours, to the last drop of my heart blood, (for all your late severe hand
toward me) JOHN LILBVRN.
From Westminster the 3 of August 1648, being the second day of my Freedom,

Which Letter etc. as I have been told by the Bearer, was not a little welcome.

But his dealings with me now manifest that Proverb to be very true, ^^ Save a
Thief from the Gallows, and for your requital, he will be the first shall have
you. But to this I shall say no more but what the Spirit of truth says in
(...). 17. 13. That he that rewards evil for good, evil shall not depart from
his (...). And being at liberty, not liking in the least the several juglings I
observed in diverse great ones in reference to the personal Treaty, and that
there was nothing worth praising or liking thought of or presented by the
Parliament in reference to the Peoples Liberties or Freedoms, (especially
considering their late large expenses and hazards for the procurement of the
settlement of them) I was compelled in conscience to have a hand in that most
excellent of Petitions of the 11 of September. 1648. which (I am sure) was no
small piece of service to Cromwell and his great Associates: though his
Churchmen, now my chiefest Adversaries, durst not join in it, nor own it for
very fear. And having been in the North about my own business, where I saw
Cromwell, and made as diligent scrutinies into things about him, as I could;
which I then to my self judged, savoured more of intended self-exalting, then
any thing really and heartily (of what before I had strongly heard of him) to
the through advancement of those things that were worthy to be accounted indeed
the Liberties and Freedoms of the Nation.

And being come to London, my self and some other of my friends, by two
Messengers, viz. Mr. Hunt one of Cromwell's creatures, and another, sent a
Message down to him to Pomfret, to be delivered to himself, and to debate it
with him, and bring his express Answer back again speedily: the effect of
which Message was,

That to our knowledge, God had caused him to understand the principles of a
just Government, under which the glory of God may shine forth by an equal
distribution unto all men.

That the obtaining of this was the sole intended end of the War: and that
the War cannot be justified upon any other account, then the defense of the
peoples right, unto that just Government, and their Freedom Under it.

His Answer to which Message by Mr. Hunt was principally directed to the
Independents; some of whom appointed a meeting at the Nags-head Tavern by
Blackwell-Hall, and invited M. Wildman and my self, etc. thither, whether we
went accordingly, and where: we met with Colonel Ti^hburn, Col. J^hn White,
Dr. Parker, Mr Tailor, John Price, and diverse others; where we had a large
debate of things, and where the just ends of the War were as exactly laid open
by Mr. VVildman, as ever I heard in my life. But toward the conclusion, they
plainly told us, The chief things first to be done by the Army, was first To
cut off the Kings Head, etc. and force and thoroughly purge, if not dissolve the
Parliament: All of which we were all against, and pressed to know the bottom of
their center, and in what they would absolutely rest for a future Settlement:
and I plainly told them in these words, or to this effect.

Its true, I look upon the King as an evil man in his actions, and diverse of
his party as bad: but the Army had couzened ^^ the last year, and fallen from
all their Promises and Declarations, and therefore could not rationally any
more be trusted by us without good cautions and security: In which regard,
although we should judge the King as arrant a Tyrant as they supposed him, or
could imagine him to be; and the Parliament as bad as they could make them; yet
there being no other balancing power in the Kingdom against the Army, but the
King and Parliament, it was our interest to keep up one Tyrant to balance
another, till we certainly knew what that Tyrant that pretended f^irest would
give us as our Freedoms; that so we might have something to rest upon, and not
suffer the Army (so much as in us lay) to deceive all the Government of the
Kingdom into their (...) and (...) (which were two things we nor no rational
man (...) and leave no persons nor power to be a counter balance against them:
And if ^^ should do this, out slavery for future (I told them) might probably
be gro^n that ever it was in the Kings time, and so our last error would be
greater then our first and therefore I pressed very hard for an Agreement
amongst the People first, utterly disclaiming the thoughts of the other, ill
this was done. And this (I told them) was not only my opinion, but I believe
it to be the unanim^m opinion of all my friends with whom I most constantly
conversed.

At which the Gentlemen Independents were some of them most desperately
choleric: But my opinion being backed with the Speeches of some (...) of my
Friends, we came calmly to choose out four and four of a side to (...) and
conclude of some Heads toward the accomplishment of an Agreement of the
People: and (as I remember) their four were Colonel (...) Col. White, Dr
Parker, and Jo. Price; and our four were M. William Walwyn, Li^^^^nant-Col.
Wetton, M. John Wildman, and my Self. But John Price seat some of the company
to tell us (after we were parted, and some of us drinkings ^^ of wine below) he
would not make one, if Mr Walwyn was one, for he had a prejudice against him.
Unto which I replied, M. Walwyn had were (...) and integrity in his little
finger, then John Price had in all his body; and therefore No meeting for me,
seeing John Price was so base, unless Mr VValwyn ^as one, though we had but
two of a side: but the business being much debated and expostulated, Mr.
VValwin and John Price both (for peace sake) were at present laid aside: and
according to appointment (as I remember) all the other six met the fifteenth of
November. 1648, being Wednesday, at the forementioned Nage head; and there,
after some debate, unanimously agreed in these words, viz. That in our
conceptions, the only way of So^^ment is,

1. That some persons be chosen by the Army to represent the whole Body: Act
that the well affected in every County (if it may be) choose some persons to
repress^^ them: And those to meet at the Headquarters.

2. That those persons ought not to exercise any Legislative power, but only to
(...) up the foundations of a just Government, and to propound them to the
well-official people in every County to be agreed to: Which Agreement ought to
be about Law; and therefore the bounds, limits and extent of the people's
Legislative Deputies in Parliamens, contained in the Agreement to be drawn up
into a formal contract, to be Mutually signed by the well-affected people and
their said Deputies upon the days of their Election respectively.

3. To prevent present confusion, the Parliament (if it be possible) may not be
by force immediately dissolved; but that the day of its dissolution be inserted
in that Agreement, by virtue whereof it shall be dissolved.

4. That this way of Settlement, (if it may be) should be mentioned in the
Arm^'s first Remonstrance.

5. That the matter of the Petition of September. 11. be the matter to be settled.

Which Agreement of ours (as I remember) was immediately some away, to the Head
Quarters at St. Alban's by Mr Hila^^ of Southwark, where (to it was afterward
told us, it was very well accepted and approved of by the great ones there;
whose high and (...) Declarations (...) by (...) Windsor, when he pretended to
lay down his Commission) against the King coming to our view, we made diverse
objections against many passages in it, but especially at diverse lashes that
excitely at the beginning of is (...) us: which we told some of their friends,
could not be put in with a spirit of peace toward us, or intention of good to
the Nation, in those good things we desired and propounded for it: But it was
with many fair expressions salved up by them; upon which we judged it requisite
for some of us to go to Windsor, to speak with Mr (...) the S^^^-man himself;
and accordingly (as I remember) Lieut. Colonel VVeiton, Mr Petty, Mr VVildman,
and my Self met there; and having drawn up our thoughts in writing, we
communi^ted them to Col. Tychburn, Col. White, M. Moyer, and diverse others of
the Independent Party, who went with us to the Governors house, where we met
with Mr Peter's, the grand Journey-^^ Ha^kney-man of the Army; and after we had
acquainted him with out winds, we delivered him a copy of our Paper,
containing distinctly the Heads of what we desired, and entreated him to
deliver them to Commissary Ireton, with whom we desired to discourse about
them; who sent us word, at such an hour be would come to our Ion at the Garter,
to speak with us about them; and accordingly he did, accompanied with a whole
Train of Officers; and a large and sharp discourse we had; our principal
difference lying at his desire in the too strict restraining liberty of
conscience, and in keeping a power in the Parliament to punish where no visible
Law is transgressed; the unreasonablenesse of which was much spoken against by
diverse of the principal Officers with him, but especially by Col. Harrison,
who was then extreme (air and gilded: And so little satisfaction had we at that
meeting, from Ireton (the Army's Alpha and Omega) that we despaired of any good
from them, and were in a manner resolved to come away in haste to London, and
acquaint our friends with our conceptions, and so improve our Interests
forcibly, as much at we could, to oppose their sounded designs. But Colonel
Harrison coming to us again it ten a clock, according to our desire, we had a
private and large discourse with him, and fully and effectually acquainted him
with the most desperate mischie vousnesse of their attempting to do these
things, without giving some good security to the Nation for the future
settlement of their Liberties and Freedoms, especially in frequent, free, and
successive Representatives, according to their many Promises, Oaths, Covenants
and Declarations; or else is soon as they had performed their intentions to
destroy the King, (which we fully understood they were absolutely resolved to
do, (yea, as they told us, though they did Mutiall Law) and also totally to
^oot up the Parliament, and invite so many Members to come to them as would
join with them, to manage businesses, till a new and equal Representative
could by an Agreement be settled; which the chiefest of them protested before
God, was the ultimate and chiefest of their (...) and desires) I say, we
pressed hard for security, before they (...) these things in the least lest
when they were done; we should he solely left to their wills and swords; by
which, we told them, they might rule over us (...) Laws, as a (...) people, and
so deal with us as (...) slavish peasants ^^ France and deal with, who enjoy
nothing that they in call their (...). All besides, we plainly valid we would
not trust their bare (...) rall only, for they had broke their promise once
already, both with (...) the Kingdom; and he that would break once, would make
no conscience of breaking twice, if it served for his ends, and therefore they
must come to some absolute particular compact with us, or else, some of us told
him, we would post away to London, and stir up our Interest against them, yea
and spend our bloods to oppose them. To which he replied to this effect, he was
true in what we said; for he must ingenuously confess, they had ones (...)
with us and the Kingdom, and therefore acknowledged it was dangerous ^^^sting
them upon Generals again: Bursaith he, we cannot slay so long from going to
(...) with the Army as to perfect an Agreement; and without our speedy going,
we (...) unavoydably destroyed: For (says he) we fully understand, that the
Treaty (...) the King and Parliament is almost concluded upon; at the
conclusion of which ^^ shall be commanded by King and Parliament to disband,
the which if we (...) unavoydably destroyed for what we have done already: and
if we do not (...) will by Act of Parliament proclaim us Traitors, and declare
in to be the only (...) of settling peace in the Nation; and then (says he) we
shall never be (...) with both the Interest of King and Parliament: so that you
will be destroyed it well as we: sor we certainly understand that Major
General Brown etc. (...) hand preparing an Army against us. And therefore I
profess, I confess, (...) not well what to say to your Reasons, they are so
strong; but our Necessities (...) that we must speedily go, or perish; and to
go without giving you some content, is ^^^^^able too.

Well Sir, (said we) we have as much cause to distrust the Parliament (...), as
we have to distrust you; for we know what and how many large (...) they have
made to the Kingdom, and how little they have performdely (...) we also know
what a temptation Honor, Power, and profit are even to this spirits that were
pretty ingenuous and honest before; and when you have done your work, and got,
as you pretend, forty or fifty of the honestest Members of the House to you;
alas, (said we) it will be a mock Power; yet they may find, such sweetness
and delight in their pretended power, that they may sly to your swords for
their protection; and bid us go shake our (...) our Agreement, and go look it
where we can catch it. And therefore we will trust generals no more to your
forty or fifty Members of Parliament, then to you: for it is possible, if we
leave the Agreement to their (...), they may frame us such a one as will do us
no good, but rather make (...) by our own consents, if signed by us: and
therefore we pres^'d him that we might agree upon a final and absolute Judge
of the matter and (...) the Agreement, that so we might not spend months and
years in dispute about it. And therefore we would propound this unto him, That
if (...) ^^nest friends in the Parliament, as they called them, would-^^use
(...) amongst themselves, and the Army four from amongst themselves, and ^^
Independents four from amongst themselves; we that were (...) L^vellers, would
choose four from among ourselves; and (...) dra^ ^p the Agreement finally,
without any more appeal to any (...) for our parts, so far as all our Interest
in England extended, (...) willing to acquiesce in, and submit to the
determinations of them 16, or the major part of them: And we would be willing
the Presbyterian party should be^^vi^ed and desired to choose four more to be of
equal authority with the other sixteen. Provided, they did it by the first day
we should appoint to meet upon.

Which P^oposition he approved of extraordinary well, and said, It was ^^ just,
as rational, and as equitable as possibly could be; and said, He doubted not
but all Interests would center in it, and engaged to acquaint them with it: and
so we parted, very glad that we were likely to come to some fixed agreement for
the future enjoyment of our dear bought, and hard purchased Fr^edoms.

And the next morning we went to the Gentlemen Independents, that lay the next
door to us, who were almost ready to horse for London, and we acquainted them
with it, who liked it very well, and with whom we fixed a night for several
distinct meetings in London, to choose our retpective trustees for this work,
and also appointed a day to meet at Winsor again about it, and from them we
went to Master Holland, who then was the chief stickler, for those they called
honest men in the House of Commons, and as I remember we ^et Colonel Harison,
Master Holland, and Captain Smith a Member, and his Son in Law in the Street,
and Master Holland seemed exceedingly to rejoice at the Proposition. Colonel
Harison having told him of it before, which we repeated over distinctly to him,
that so in conclusion we might not be gulled through pretense of mistakes or
misunderstandings; which we were continually a^^aid we should meet with; so we
went all together to Commissary General Ir^^ons chamber to have his
concurrence, which of all sides was taken for the concurrence of the whole
Army, or at least for the powerful and gove^ning part of it; he being in a
manner both their eyes and ears: so when we came to his Chamber in the Castle,
he was in Bed with his Wife, but sent us out word by Colonel Harison as he
averred to us that he did absolutely and he^^tily agree to the foresaid
Proposition, which to avoid mistakes, was again repeated, so we seemed joyful
men of all sides, and appointed a day speedily to meet at Winsor, about it,
Master Holland again and again engaging for four Parlsament men, and Colonel
Harison, with Commissary Ireton for four of the Army, as we Londoners had done
for each of our tribe; and so to horse we went, and I overtook upon the road
the whole gang of Independants, with whom I discoursed again, and acquainted
them all fully with the absolutenes of our agreement, which they acquainted
their friends with in London, who chose Colonel Tichburn, Colonel John White,
Master Daniel Tailor, and Master Price the Scrivener; And for our party, there
was by unanimous consent of the Agents from our friends in and about London, at
a every large meeting chosen Master William Walwyn, Master Maximilian Pe^^y,
Master John Wildman and my Self, and for the honest men of the Parliament as
they were called, they had several meetings at the Bell in Kings-street, and
at Summerset-house, where as I was informed, they chose Colonel Hen^y Martyn,
Colonel Alexander Rig^y, Master Thomas Challi^^ and Master Sc^t, with one or
two more to supply the places of those of them that should be absent at any
time about their: occasions; so when we cam^ to Winsor the Army men had chosen
Commissary General Iret^^, Sir William Constable, and as I remember Colonel
Tomlinso^, Colonel Baxster, Lieutenant Colonel Kelsey, and Captain Par^^^,
(...) two of the which last 4 should always make up the number; so we had a
^^ting in their Councel-Chamber at the Castle, where we were all of all (...)
present, but only the Parliament men, for whom only Colonel M^^^^^ app^^ed, and
after a large discourse about the foundations of our agreement, we departed to
our Lodging, where Colonel Martyn and we four nic^-named Lovellers, locked our
selves up, and went in good earnest to the consideration of of our Agreement,
but much was not done in it there, because of their ha^^^ ^^ London to force
and break up the Parliament (which Journey at all* was very much opposed by M.
Wa^wyn, and many reasons he gave against their (...) ^^ London at all) the
absolute desolution of which their friends in the (...) would no ways admit of,
although Ireton, Harison etc. commonly styled it (...) a Parliament that had
forfeited its trust, a mock Parliament, and that if they did not totally
dissolve it, but purge it, it would be but a mock Parliament, and ^ mockpower
however; for where have we say they either law, warrant or (...) purge it, or
c^n any thing justify us in the doing it; but the height of (...) to (...) the
Kingdom from a new war, that they with the conjunction with the (...) will
presently vote and declare for, and to procure a new and free representative
(...) successive and frequent free Representatives, which this present
Parliament (...) never suffer, and without which the freedoms of the Nation are
l^st (...), and (...) doing of which can only justify before God and man ou^
pres^^^ (...) formr extraordinary actings with, and against legal Authority,
and so all our fighting fruitless; and this was their open and common
discourse, (...) more of the like nature; and to those that objected against
their total ^^^^^ving or breaking the House, (and the illegalitie of their
intended and (...) trying of the King, which also was opposed by us, till a new
and unquesti^^^ble Representative was sitting;) as I am able sufficiently by
plurality of ^^nesses to prove and justify, yea when they were come to
London, (...), etc. and some Members of the House (in a Chamber near the long
Gallery i^ White Hall,) had a large conference, where and to whom he stiffly
(...) the same to their faces, calling this Purged Parliament, a mocks power
and (...) Parliament, which Members I believe if there were a necessiry of it,
I could produce to justify it; for I am sure one of them told me the substance
of all the discourse immediately after it happened; So that if it be treason to
(...) a Pretended Parliament, a mockpower, a mock Parliament, yea and to say in
(...) English, that it is no Parliament at all, then they themselves are the
pr^^^, the (...) and original trayto^^* and if this be true, as true it is;
then there (...) Legal Judges, nor Justices of Peace in England; and if so;
then all those (...) executed at Tiburne, etc. by their sentences of
condemnations given against them, ^^ merely marthered and the Judges or
Justices that condemned the^ (...) liable in (...) (...) (and that justly)
therefore, for acting without a just and ^^gall ^^^mission either from true
Regal, or true Parliamentary power; see for this purpose the notable arguments
in the 13* 14, but especially 15 page of the second Edition of my late picture
of the Council of State: But to (...) to our acting to complete the Agreement,
all parties chosen of all sides ^^^stantly met at White Hall after the Army
came to town, saving the Parliament men failed, only Master Mortin was most
commonly there, and a long and ^^dious ^ug we had with Commissary General
(...) only, yea (...) whole nights together, Principally about Liberty of
C^^sci^^^^, and (...) Parliaments punishing where no law provides, and very
angry and Lordly in his debates many times he was; but to some kind of an
expedient in the first, for peace sake we condescended in to please him, and so
came amongst the major part of the 16 Commissioners, according to our original
Agreement, to an absolute and final conclusion; and thinking all had been done
as to any more debate upon it, and that it should without any more ^doe be
promoted for subscriptions, first at the Council of War, and so in the
Regiments, and so all over the Nation; but alas poor fools we were merely
cheated and cozened (it being the principal unhappiness of some of us (as to
the flesh) to have our eyes wide open to see things long before most honest men
come to have their eyes open; and this is that which turns to our smart and
reproach) and that which we Commissioners feared at the first, viz. (that no
tie, promises not engagements were strong enough to the grand Juglers and
Leaders of the Army, was now made clearly manifest, for when it came to the
Council, there came the General, Crumwell, and the whole gang of creature
Colonels and other Officers, and spent many days in taking it all in pieces)
and there Ireton himself showed himself an absolute King, if not an Emperor,
against whose will no man must dispute, and then ^^ittlecock (...) their Scout,
Okey, and Major Barton (where Sir Hardres^e VVa^^er sat President) begun in
their open Council to quarrel with us by giving some of us base and unworthy
language, which procured them from me a sharp retortment of their own
baseness and unworthiness into their teeth, and a CHALLENG from my self into
the field besides seeing they were like to fight with us in the room, in their
own Garrison, which when Sir Hardresse in my ear reproved me for it, I
justified it and gave it him again for suffering us to be so affronted: And
within a little time after I took my leave of them for a pack of dissembling
juggling Knaves, amongst whom in consultation ever thereafter I should scorn to
come (as I told some of them;) for there was neither says, truth, nor common
honesty amongst them: and so away I went to those that chose and trusted me,
and gave publicly and effectually (at a set meeting appointed on purpose) to
diverse of them an exact account how they had dealt with us, and couzened and
deceived us; and so absolutely discharged my self for meddling or making any
more with so perfidious a generation of men as the great ones of the Army were,
but especially the cunningest of Machiavilians Commissary Henry Ireton: and
having an exact copy of what the greatest part of the foresaid sixteen had
agreed upon, I only mended a clause in the first Reserve about Religion, to
the sense of us all but Ireton, and put an Epistle to it, of the 15 of December
164^, and printed it of my own accord, and the next day it came abroad; about
which Mr Price the Scrivener and my self had a good sharp bout at Colonel
T^^bburn's house within two or three days after, where I avowed the publishing
of it, and also putting my Epistle to it of my own head and accord. And after
that I came no more among^ them, but with other of my friends, prepared a
complaint against their dealing with us, and a kind of Protest against their
proceedings; which with my own hand I presented to the Generals own hands at
the News, the 28 of December 1648, being accompanied with Major Robert Cobbet,
Mr. Thomas Prince, Mr. George (...) ^^ Mr. Robert Davies, Mr. Richard Overton,
Mr. Edward ^e^ch, Mr. D^^i^l Li^ton, Mr. William Bottom, Mr. John Harris, Mr.
Thomas Dafferne, Mr. Thomas Goddard, Mr. Samuel Blaiklock, Mr. Andrew Dedn^m,
Mr. John Walters, and Mr. Richard Pechel; and which was immediately printed by
Ja. and Jo. Moxon, for William Larner, at the sign of the Black Moor near
Bishops-gate: within two or three days of the delivery of which, I went
toward my Journey to Newcastle; and about five weeks after my arrival in
those parts, I heard that the General and his Council had presented their
Agreement to your House: which, when I read the title page of it, I found it to
be upon the 20 of January 1648, which is complete 35 days after my publishing
of that which is called ours.

And yet in the third and fourth pages of a Declaration of the proceedings of
the General in reducing the late revolted Troops, appointed by his Excell^ncy
and his Council of War to be printed and published May 22 1649, and signed by
their Order, Richard Ha^ter Secretary, and first printed at Oxford, and then
reprinted at London May 23* 1649. I find these very words, viz.

The grounds and manner of the proceedings of these men that have so much
pretended for the Liberty of the people, have been as follows:

There was a paper styled the Agreement of the people, framed by certain select
persons, and debated at a general Council of Officers of the Army, to be
tendered to the Parliament, and to be by them commended over to the people of
the Nation: It being hoped, that such an Expedient, if assented unto, at least
by the honest part of the people that had appeared for this common Cause, to
which God has so witnessed, it would have tended much to settlement, and the
composing of our differences; at le^s^ have fixed honest men to such grounds of
certainty as might have kept them firm and entire in opposing the common enemy,
and stand united to public Interest.

The general Council of the Army, and the other sorts of men, going then
under the name of Levellers (so baptized by your selves at Putney) who (by
their late actings have made good the same which we then judged but an
imputation) had (as now it appears) different ends and aims, both in the matter
and manner of their proceedings: That which was intended by those men, was to
have somewhat ^^dred as a test and coertion upon the people, and all sorts of
men and Authorities in ^he Land: That which these, to wit, the Council of the
Army aimed at, was to make an humble Representation of such things as were then
likely to give satisfaction, and unite, and might be remitted to MEN'S
JUDGMENTS, to be owned or disowned as men were satisfied in their consciences,
and as it should please God to le^ men SEE REASON for their so doing; that so
it might not be only called ^^ Agreement, but through the freedom of it, be
one INDEED, and RECEIVE IT IS STAMP OF APPROBATION FROM THE PARLIAMENT TO WHOM
IT WAS HUMBLY SUBMITTED.

HEREUPON THOSE OTHER MEN TOOK so much DISSATISFACTION, that they forthwith
printed and spread abroad their paper, which was different from that of the
Army; using all possible m^ans to make the same to pass: but with how little
effect, is very well known. And finding by the Armie's application to the
PARLIAMENT, that they were likely, according to their duty, to STAND BY AND OWN
THEM AS THE SUPREME AUTHORITY OF THE NATION, they have by all means assayed to
vi^^pend that Authority, presenting them to the people (in printed Lib^ls, and
otherwise) as worse Tyrants then any who were before them.

In which passage of the Generals and his Council, I shall desire to observe
these things, which plainly to me are in the words: and if they can make it
appear that I mistake their words as they are laid down, I shall cry them mercy.

First, That they give a false and untrue Narrative of the original occasion of
that Agreement, to which by our importunate importunity they were necessitated,
and drawn unto that little they did in it as a Bear to the stake, as is truly
by me before declared; and which, as the sequel shows, they undertook merely
to quiet and please us (like children with rattles) till they had done their
main work; (viz. either in an^hilating or purging the House to make it fit for
their purpose, and in destroyng the King; unto both which they never had our
consents in the least) that so they might have no opposition from us, but that
we might be lulled asleep in a fools paradise with thoughts of their honest
intentions, till all was over; and then totally lay it aside, as they have
done, as being then able to do what they pleased whether we would or no: for if
they ever had intended an Agreement, why do they let their own lie dormant in
the pretended Parliament ever since they presented it? seeing it is obvious to
every knowing English eye, that from the day they presented it to thi^ ^our,
they have had as much power over their own Parliament now sitting, as any
Schoolmaster in England ever had over his Boys. But to them it was presented
(who scarce ought to meddle with it) on purpose, that there, without any more
stir about it, it might be lodged for ever: For alas, an Agreement of the
People is not proper to come from the Parliament, because it comes from thence
rather with a command then any thing else; so that its we, and not they that
really and in good earnest say, it ought not to do, but to be voluntary.
Besides, that which is done by one Parliament, as a Parliament, may be undone
by the next Parliament: but an Agreement of the People begun and ended amongst
the People can never come justly within the Parliaments cognizance to destroy:
which the General and the chief of his Council knew well enough; and I dare
safely say it upon my conscience, that an Agreement of the People upon
foundations of just freedom gone through with, is a thing the General and the
chiefest of his Council as much hates, as they do honesty, justice and
righteousness, (which they long since abandoned) against which in their own
spirits they are absolutely resolved (I do verily believe) to spend their heart
bloods, and not to leave a man breathing in English air, if possibly they can,
that thoroughly and resolutely prosecutes it; a new and just Parliament being
more dreadful to them, then the great day of Judgment spoken so much of in the
Scripture. And although they have beheaded the King, yet I am confidently
persuaded their enmity is such at the Peoples Liberties, that they would sooner
run the hazard of letting the Prince in to reign in his Fathers stead, then
further really a just Agreement, or endure the sight of a new Parliament
rightly constituted.

Secondly, Its plain to me out of their words, That they positively aver, that
their Agreement was presented to the Parliament before ours was published in
print; which I must and do here tell both the (...) Council, is the arrantest
lie and falsehood under the cope of he^ven: for I have truly before declared,
and will justify it with my life, that ours (...) printed above thirty days
before theirs was presented; yea, it was printed before theirs was half
perfected. But it is no wonder, when men t^^n their backs of God, of a good
conscience, of righteousness and common hon^^y amongst men, and make lies and
falsehoods, oppression and bloody cruelty their sole confidence and refuge, that
then they say or swear any thing; all which, if the General and his Council
had not done, they would have scorned and abhorred, in the face of the Sun, to
have affirmed and printed so many lies, as in their foregoing words is
literally (without wresting) contained.

Thirdly, They positively hint, our dissatisfaction was taken at them for
presenting theirs to the Parliament; which is also as false as the former:
(...) 1. Our dissatisfaction was above a month before declared in their open
Council by my self, etc. as Sir Hardresse Waller and diverse others of them
(...) but justify. 2. Our dissatisfaction was long before taken, upon the
grounds by me before specified: the manifestations of which dissatisfaction I
presented to the Generals own hands the 28 of December 1648, acco^^^^^ and
subscribed with my own name, and fifteen more of my Co^^^es, i^ behalf of our
selves, and all our friends that sent us, which we also ^^^^^ately caused to be
printed. And their Agreement, as the ^itle of it decl^^^* was not presented
till the 20 of Jan. after.

Fourthly, They say, We used all possible means to make ours pass; (...) how
little success, they say, is very well known. If they mean, we used all
p^ssible means to make ours pass with them, it is true; but the reason i^ (...)
better effect, was because they had no mind to it, it was too ho^^ct for
(...): and I am sure, in the very Epistle to it, it is declarared, That the
(...) reason of the printing of it, is, that the people might have ^^
opport^^ity (...) the equity of it, and offer their reasons against any thing
therein (...). And (...) was all the means, after the printing of it, we used
to make it pass. A^^^e, we knew the Armies swords were longer then ours, and
would by force ^^ in pieces all our endeavors that we should use against their
minds and (...), by reason of the peoples cowardlinesse; and therefore we let
ours rest, and were willing to sit still to see them perfect theirs, and never
did any thing in it since amongst the people to make it pass, that I know of.

Fifthly, They say, We were troubled at their doing their d^ty, in (...) to
authority, and ow^ing the Parliament a^ the Supr^m^ Authority of the (...):
When as alas, it is as visible as the Sun when it shines in its glory and
splendor, That CORAH, DATHAN and ABIRAM of old were never such Rebels against
Authority as the General and his Council are, (...) Anabapt^^^s at M^ns^er
with JOHN of LEYDON and NEPERDULLION were never more conte^^^ers of Authority;
nor JACK STRAW, nor WAT TILER, nor all those faomous men mentioned with a black
pen in our Histories, and called Rebels and Trayt^rs, can never be put in any
seal of equ^ll balance, for all manner of REBELLIONS and TREASONS (...) all
sorts and kinds of Magistracy, with the General and his Council: And I will
under take the t^^k upon my life, to make good every particular of this I (...)
say, to the G^^^^l's face. For did any, or all of them (...) mentioned, (...)
against their Advancers, Promotors and C^eators, as those have done two
several times? Did ever any, or all of them chop off (without all (...) of
Law) a KING's and NOBLES HEADS? r^vish and (...) a Parliament twice? nay, raze
the foundation of a Parliament to the ground? and under the notion of
performing a trust, break all Oaths, Co^^^^nts, Protestations and
Declarations, (and make evidently void all the declared ends of the War) which
was one of Strafford's principal Treasons, and which is notably aggravated
against him by M. Pym in his forementioned Speech against him? page 9. 11. and
under pretense of preserving their Laws, Liberties, and Freedoms, destroy,
annihil^te, and tread under their feet all their Laws, Liberties, Freedoms and
Properties (although they could cite against S^r^^ord the precedent of
Tri^^lian chief Justice, who lost his life for delivering of opinions for the
subversion of the Law, as S. John's Argument of Law against him, page last but
one declares; yea, and against the Ship Money Judges, and also the Precedent of
Judge Belknap in King Richard the Second's time, who was by the Parliament
banished for but subscribing an opinion against Law, though forced by a dagger
held to his breast, thereto; yea, and ci^e also the preced^nt against him, which
was against Justice Thorp in Edward the Third's time, who was by the Parliament
condemned to death for bribery: the reason of which Judgment, they say, was,
because he had broken the Kings Oath, that solemn and great Obligation (as Mr.
Pym ibid. calls it) which is the security of the whole Kingdom.) All which
forementioned, either with pen or tongue by dispute, I will particularly
maintain and make good upon my life, publicly, before the face of the Kingdom,
against the stoutest and ablest of their Champions in all their pretended
Churches of God, either Independent or An^baptistical; and that they are
altogether unsavory salt, good for nothing but to be abominated, and thrown
out to the dunghill, as fit for nothing but the indignation of God, and the
peoples wrath.

And as for their stiling this their own J^^to the supreme Authority; I know
the time not long since, when that style to be given to the House of Commons
single, was accounted an abominable wickedness in the eye of the chiefest of
them: Yea, I also know the time, and am able sufficiently to justify and prove
it, that they were absolutely resolved and determined to pull up this their own
Parliament by the roots, and not so much as to leave a shadow of it (frequently
then calling it a MOCK-POWER, and a MOCK-PARLIAMENT:) yea, and had done it, if
we, and some in the House of our then friends, had not been the principal
instruments to hinder them; we judging it then, of two evils the least, to
choose rather to be governed by the shadow of a Parliament, till we could get a
real and true one (which with the greatest protestations in the world they
then promised and engaged with all their might speedily to effect) then simply,
solely and only by the will of Swordmen, whom we had already found to be men
of no very tender consciences: But to me it is no wonder, that they own this
for the supreme Power, seeing they have totally in Law, Reason and Justice
broke the Parliament, and absolutely, by the hands of Tho. Pride, set up indeed
a MOCK-POWER, and a MOCK-PARLIAMENT, by p^rgi^g (...) all those (...) they
(...) way jeolous of, would not vote as they would have them, and suffering and
(...) none to sit but (for the major part of the^) a company of absolute School
boys, the will, like good boys, say their lessons after, them their Lords and
Masters, and (...) they would have them; and so be a screen (as young H. Vane
used to call the King) betwixt them and the people, with the name of
Parliament, and the (...) and imperfect image of legal and just Authority, to
pick their pockets for the^ by Assessments and l^x^^ions; and by their
arbitrary and tyrannical Courts (...) Committees, (the best of which is now
^ecome a perfect Star chamber, High Commission and Council board) (...) them
their perfect slaves and (...) their constant and continual breaking and
abasing of their spirits; a thing so much complained of against the E^rl of
Strafford, by the late Parliament (...) his trial, especially in M. Pym's
notable Speech against him, page 7 as it is printed 1641, at ^he lat^r end o^ a
book called Speeches and Passages: where speaking against Oppression, and the
exercise of a tyrannical and arbitrary pow^^, (the Earl of St^afford, sins,
which now are become more the great men's of the Army) ^e says,

It is inconfistent with the peace, the wealth, the prosperity of a Nation, it
is destructive to Justice, the mother of peace; to Inductry, the spring of
wealth; ^^ Valor, which is the active virtue whereby the prosperity of a
Nation can (...) be procured, confirmed, and enlarged.

It is not only ape to take away Peace, and so entangle the Nation with Wars;
(...) does corrupt Peace, and puts such amalignitie into it, as produces the
effects of War, as he there instanceth in the Earl of Straffords Government.
And as for Industry and Valor, Who will take pains for that (says he) which
when he (...) gotten, is not his own? or who will fight for that wherein he
has no other int^^est, but such as is subject to the will of another? The
ancient encouragement to (...) that were to defend their Countries was this,
That they were to hazard their persons, pro aris and socis, for their Religion,
and for their houses; But by this arbitrary way, which was practiced (by the
Earl) in Ireland and counseled here; ^^ man had any certainty, either of
Religion, or of his House, or any thing else to be his own: But besides this,
such arbitrary courses have an ill operation upon the courage of a Nation, by
IMBASING THE HEARTS OF THE PEOPLE; A servile condition does for the most part
beget in men a slavish temper and disposition. Those that live so much under
the Whip and the Pill^ry, and such SERVILE engines, as were frequently used by
the Earl of Strafford, they may have the dregs of valor, sullenness, and
stubbornness, which may make them prone to mutinies and discontents; But th^se
nobie and gallant affections which put men on ^rave designs and attempts for
the preservation or enlargement of a Kingdom, they are hardly capable of: Shall
it be treason to embase the Kings coin, though but a piece of Twelve-pence or
Sixpence; and must it ^^ needs be the effect of a greater ^reason, to EMBASE
THE SPIRITS of his Subjects, and to set a stamp and CHARACTER OF SERVITUDE upon
them, when by it they shall be disabled to do any thing for the service of the
King or Common wealth? O most excellent and transcendent saying! worthy to be
writ in a ^able of gold in every Englishmans house.

But Sir, I say, No wonder, all the things foregoing rightly (...) (...) ^^ own
you (now as Thom^^ Pride has made you) for the (...) of the Nation, although
before they would neither submit to the Kings not the Parliament, when it was a
thousand times more unquestionably (...) Law and Reason, then now you are; but
fought against both King and Parliament, their setters up, conquered them,
repelled them, subdued them, and broke them both; and so pulled up by the roots
all the legal and visible Magistracy and Authority in the Nation, and thereby
left none but themselves, who stand in parallel to none (as they have manage ^
their business) but to a company of murderers, thieves and robbers, who may
justly be dispossessed by the first force that are able to do it (as Mr. Py^
undenyably and fully proves in the foresaid Speech page 3. 9. 11.) no pretended
Authority that they of themselves and by their swords can set up, having in the
sight of God or man, either in Law or Reason, any more just Authority in them,
then so many Argier Pirates and Robbers upon the Sea have. And so much in answer
at present to the forementioned part of the Generals Declaration.

But now to return back, after this necessary Digression, to my own S^^^y of
going down into the North, where etc. I received of my 3000 l. allotted me, for
my hard suffered for, deer purchased, and long expected Reparations, 400 l. of
Sir Arthur Hasterig, for sequestered Coals and Iron, of Mr. Bowes's, and got
besides betwixt 100 and 200 l. in Rents, Free Quarter and Taxes having eat out
the bowels, soul and life of them, being served in the wood allotted me, (the
principal thing in my e^e, by old Sir Henry Van^ my old blo^dy enemy) as is in
part declared before in page 15 and 16. who has Treason and crimes enough upon
him, not only to throw him out of the House, if it were any, but also to send
him to a Sca^^old or Gallows, as is very notably declared in print in England's
Birth right, page 19. 20. 21. in which pages you may read his Charge of High
Treason exhibited against him to the Earl of Ess^x in anno 1643. by several
Gentlemen of the County of Darham; for his traiterous betraying their Country
(and so consequently all the North) to the Earl of Newcastle; for which etc. ^e
better deserved in Law, equiry and reason to lose his head, then either
H^mbleton, or stout Capel did for theirs, they having betrayed no trust (but
had the letter of the Law of England etc, to j^stifie them in what they did) as
^e most palpably has done. And as for his breaking up the little Parliament,
his Star chamber wickedness, and his desperate Gunpowder Monopoly, with his
and his so^^ Sir Geo^ge Vane's late jugglings in the County of Durham* I have
pretty well anatomised in my book called The resolved man's resolution, page 13.
14. 15. 16. 17. 18. his very having a hand in the Gunpowder Monopoly alone
being sufficient long since to throw him out of your House, as being incapable
to be ^ Member therein, as clearly appears by your Votes and Orders of the 19.
and 25 of Nov. 1640. one of which, as it is printed in the foresaid Speech^^
and Passages, page 329. thus follows:

It is ordered upon the Question, That all Projectors and Monopolizers
whatsoever; or that have had any share in any Monopolies, or that ^^receive, or
(...) receives any benefit by any Monopolies or Patent, or that have procured
any Warrant or Command for the restrain^ or molesting of any that have refused
(...) themselves ^^ any Proclamation or project, are disabled by Order of this
House, to be ^ Member thereof, and shall be dealt with as a stranger, that has
no power to sit there.

In the compas^e of which Order is ^oth Sir Henry Mil^^ore and Law^^^
VVhittaker, and ought in justice, for their no^orious Monopolising, to be both
long since thrown out of the House.

But again to return: After I had done as much in the North as I could ^^
present do about my own busines^e, I came again to London, where I fixed up my
resolution wholly to devote my self to provide for the future wellbeing of my
wife and children, and not without the extraordinariest necessity engage in any
public contests again, making it my work to enquire into the true estate of
things with the great men that s^t at the ^elm, and whether the bent of their
spirits now after they had taken off the King, was to set the Nation free from
Ty^anny, as well as from some they called principal Tyrants; and whether or no
the drift of all their actions were but a mere changing of persons, but not of
things or tyranny it self: and truly my observations and inquiries brought me
in so little satisfaction in the visible intention of the ruling men, for all
their many solemn Engagements to the contrary, the I looked clearly at the
whole tendency of their ways, to drive at a greater Tyranny then ever, in the
worst of the Kings Reign, (before the Parliament) was exercised: at which I bit
my lip, but said little, and went to no meeting; which made many of my old
faithful friends be jealous of me, some of whom gave out some private hints,
that I had now served my self by my pretended Rep^rations, and I was thereby
quieted, and was become like all the rest of the world, and so there was an end
of me. But I confess, I was in a kind of deep muse with my self, what to do
with my self; being like an old weather-beaten ship, that would fain be in some
harbor of ease and rest, and my thoughts were very much bent of going into
Holland, where I conjectured I should be out of harms way, and get a little
repose. And while I was thus musing, I heard from thence of a most transcendent
^eight and rage that the Kings party there were in, especially about the
beheading the late King; so that I judged there was no safety for me there,
especially when I called to mind what the Postmaster of B^rrow-brigs and
others in Yorkshire told me as I came up from Newcastle, which was, that the
C^^liers in those parts were most desperate mad at me in particular, about the
beheading of the late King: although I were as far as Newcastle when it was
done, and refused to give my consent to be one of his Judges, although I was
solicited so to be before I went out of London; yea, although I ^^^^edly
declared my self at Windsor against the manner and time of their intended
dealing with him; arguing there very stiffly, that upon their own principles,
which led them to look upon all legal Authority in England ^^ now broken, they
could be no better then murderers in taking away the King^ life though never so
guilty of the crimes they charged upon him: for as justice ought to be done,
especially for blood, which they then principally charged upon him; so said I,
and still say, It ought to be (...) justly: (...) in case another man murder
me, and a day, a week, or a year after my brother or friend that is no legal
Magistrate, execuces him* therefore, yet this is ^^^der in the eye of the Law,
because it was done by a hand had no Authority to do it. And therefore I
pressed again and again, seeing themselves confessed all legal Authority in
England was broke, that they would stay his trial till a new and equal free
Representative upon the Agreement of the well-assected people, that had not
fought against their Liberties, Rights and Freedoms, could be chosen and sit,
and then either try him thereby, or else by their Judges sitting in the Court
called Kings Bench. But they at Windsor asked me how by Law I could have him
tried: I told them, the Law of England expressly says, Whosoever ^^rders or
kills another shall die; it does not say, excepting the King, Queen, or Prince,
etc. but indefinitely, whosoever murders shall ^e; and therefore where none is
excepted, there all men are included in Law: But the King is a man: Ergo, he is
included as well as I. Unto which it was objected, that it would hardly be
proved, that the King with his own hands killed a man: To which I answered, by
the Law of England, ^e that counsels or commissionates others to kill a man or
men, is as guilty of the fact, as he or they that do it: And besides, the
advantage of ^rying of the King by the rules of the Law, would be sufficient to
declare, that no man is born (or justly can be made) lawless, but that even
Magistrates as well as people are subject to the penal part of the Law, as
well as the directive part: And besides, to try him in an extraordinary way,
that has no real footsteps nor paths in our Law, would be a thing of
extraordinary ill Precedent; for why not twenty upon pretended extraordinary
cases, as well as one? and why not a thousand as well as twenty* and
extraordinary cases are easily made and pretended by those that are uppermost,
though never so unjust in themselves. And besides, to try him in an
extraordinary way, when the Law has provided all the essentials of justice in
an ordinary way, (and merely wants nothing (if it do want) but twelve Kings as
his Peer^ or Equals) will nourish and increase in men that erroneous conce^^,
That Mag^^^rates by the Law of God, Nature, and Reason, are not, no nor ought
not to be subject to the penal part of the Laws of men, as well as the
directive part of it, which is the bane, ruin and destruction of all the
Commonwealths in the world.

I say, the confideration of the things forementioned put me off the thought^
of going to Holland my self: and then I put the query to my self, What course I
should (being now a free man) take for my livelihood: for if I and my family
lived upon the main stock, which was not very much, (now that I had paid almost
all my debts) that would soon waste and be gone; and to take a place for my
future livelihood, as I have been offered often, and that ^^ considerable one;
that I could not do, for these reasons: First, because I was not satisfied in
the present power or Authority to act under them; and so if I should, I should
be a supporter of so unj^st and illegal a fabric as I judged an everlasting
Parliament (p^rged twice by force of Arms by the hands of their mere mercenary
servants) to be; who were principally raised, bired and paid to kill those they
esteemed and judged Bears, Wolves, (...) and P^^kass: that took up Arms against
the true, chaste and legally co^^^^tu^ed Representative of the Nation, being not
in the least bir^^ or raised to be the Masters of their Masters, or the
Lawgivers to the legal Law*^^kers of the Nation in case of necessity. And that
an everlasting Parliamnet is dostructive to the very life and soul of the
Liberties of this Nation, I (...) prove; first by Law, and secondly by Reason.

And first by Law: The Law Books do show, That a Parliament (which in its own
institution is excellent good physic, but never was intended, no^ safely can
be used for diet, because it is so unlimited and arbitrary) was called and held
sometimes twice a year before the Conquest, as is declared by Lambert, in his
Collection of Laws before the Conquest, amongst the Laws of Edgar, chap. ^. and
by Sir Edward Cook* in his margent in the ninth page of his par 4. Inst^^. in
the Cha^t. of High Court of Parliament: which with other of the Liberties of
England being by force of arms subdued by the Bastard Norman Conquetor,
although he three several times took his oath after his being owned for King,
to maintain their Laws and Liberties, as being not able, nor judging his
Conquest so good, just and secure a Plea to hold his new got Crown by, as an
after mutual compact with the people, or their Representatives over whom he
was to rule: and therefore, as Co^k in the foresaid Chapt. page 12. declares, a
Parliament, o^ a kind of one, was held in his time. See also 21 Edw. 3 fol 60.
and 1 part. Institut. lib. 2. chap. 10. Sect. 164. fol. 110. a. and came to be
more frequently used in his Successors time; yea, even to be (...) in two years
in Edward the First or Second's time; at which notwithstanding the people
grumbled, as being an abridgment of their ancient and undoubted Liberty, to
meet more frequently in their National and public assemblies, to treat and
conclude of things for their weal and better being; the want of which, of
ancient time lost this Island to the Romans, as Co^k declares, 4 part. (...).
fol. 9. out of Ta^itus in the Life of Agricola, page 306. whereupon it was
^nacted in full Parliament in Edw. the Thirds time, That the King (who is their
Officer of trust) should assemble and call them together once every year, or
more often if need require; as appears by the Statute of 4 Edw. 3. 14. But
because this was not constantly used by that King, but there sometimes was
intervals of three or four years betwixt Parliament and Parliament, which was a
diminution of the soul and life of all their Liberties, viz frequent and often
(...) Parliaments; therefore in the 36 year of his Reign annual Parliaments
are provided for again, and also the causes of their assembling declared in
these very words:

Item, For maintenance of the said Articles and Statutes, and redress of
diverse mischiefs and grievances which daily happen, a Parliament shall be
holden every year, as another time was ordained by a Statute of 4. Edw. 3.
chap. 14. But King Charles exceedingly breaking his trust, in the frequent
calling of Parliaments, and dissolving them at his pleasure, when they came to
treat of any thing that he liked not, and so made them useless to the Nation;
both which was against his trust, as you notably declare in your Declaration of
November. 2. 1642. 1 part Book Decl. page 701, 702. And of which you most
bitterly complain in your first Remonstrance, 1 part Book Decl. page 5. 6. 11.
and in page 10. 11 ibidem you declare, That his destroying of these two grand
Fr^^d^ms of the People, viz. Frequent, successive Parliaments, and free D^^a^es
therein, bad corrupted and distempered the whole frame and Government of the
King^^^, and brought in nothing but ways of destruction and Tyranny. For the
preventing of which for the future, you got an Act to pass in the s^xte^^th
year of the late King, and the first year of this long-winded Parliament, to
(...) of the two forementioned Acts for an annual Parliament: And further
there say thus:

And whereas it is by experience found, that the not holding of Parliaments
according to the two forementioned Acts, has produced sundry and great
mischiefs and inconveniences to the Kings Majesty, the Church and
Commonwealth; For the prevention of the like mischiefs and inconveniences in
time to come, Be it enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, with the
consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal. and the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, That the said [LAST FOREMENTIONED] Laws and Statutes be
from henceforth duly kept and observed. And you there go on and enact, that in
case the King perform not this part of his trust in calling annual
Parliaments, that then a Trienniall one shall be CALLED BY THE LORD KEEPER,
etc. whether the King will or no.

And there being no provision in this Act, but that the King might break up
this Parliament at his pleasure, as before he used to do, and so dis-inable you
to discharge your trust and duty to the people, in providing fit remedies for
those many grievances then extraordinarily spread over the whole Nation, that
the long intermission of Parliaments had occasioned; you therefore press the
King to grant an Act, that the two Houses might not be dissolved but by your
own consents; which the King condescended unto the rather, because the Scotch
Army was then in the Kingdom, which he longed to be rid of, and which you
pretended you could not pay without such an Act; these being the true declared
and intended causes of it, both in King and Parliament: There being not one
word in the Act that authoriseth the two Houses to be a constant and perpetual
Parliament, which was never so much as intended nor pretended; and which if in
the Act it had been absolutely declared, it had been a void and a null Act in
it self, as being both against the nature of the Kings trust and Yours: which
(as in your Book of Decl. part 1. page 150. you declare) is, to provide for the
peoples weal, but not for their woe; for their better being, but not for their
worse being. For, your Interest and the Kings both being Interests of Trust, as
your Declarations do plentifully and plainly declare, 1 part Book Decl. page
206. 266. 267. 382. but especially your present Junto's late Declaration,
against the late beheaded King, and Kingly Government of the 17 of March 1648.
page 2. 11 13. 15. 16. compared with 24. 25. 27. And all Interests of trust
whatsoever are for the use of others, and cannot, nor ought not to be employed
to their own particular, nor to any other use, saving that only for which they
are intended, according to the condition and true intent thereof, 1 part Book
Dec. page 266. 267. 700. And your trust is only for the good of the Nation;
which is the principal, or only end of all Government in the Nation; as you
confess in your foresaid Declaration of March 17, page 6. and in 2 part Book
Decl. page 95. 879. And therefore, if you had put the King upon such an Act as
the establishing of a perpetual Parliament, you had thereby destroyed
frequent, successive and annually chosen Parliaments; for which you had been
T^aytors in the highest nature to your trust, in destroying the very PILLARS,
LIFE, MARROW and SOUL OF ALL THE PEOPLES LIBERTIES, for the presentation of
which they chose you, and which would shortly bring in (as is too evident ^^
this day) greater disorders, confusions, and tyrannies then ever were in all
the Kings Reign before; and so wholly and fully make your selves guilty of that
which he was but in part (viz. the establishing of a perfect Tyranny by Law) an
everlasting Parliament being ten thousand times worse then no Parliament at
all; for no such slavery under the cope of heaven, as that which is brought
upon the people by pretense of Law, and their own vol^^tary (...); and no
greater Treason can there be in the world committed, then for ^^ i^teressed
Power to keep their Commission longer then by the letter, equity or intention
of their Commissions their Masters really intended they should; especially when
it is kept by force of Arms, to the Masters hurt, and the danger of his total
destruction, for the mere advancement of their servants and their Associates:
all which is the case of your pretended Parliament, whereof you are now
Speaker, and that you were never intended to sit so long as you have done, nor
to be everlasting. I shall here recite the Act it self ^^^batim, the only and
alone pretense of a Commission you have, and then take it in pieces by
paraphrasing upon it. The Act it self thus follows:

Anno XVII CAROLI Regis.
An ACT to prevent inconveniences which may happen by the untimely Adjourning,
Proroguing, or Dissolving of this present PARLIAMENT.
WHereas great Sums of money must of necessity be speedily advanced and
provided for the relief of his Majesty's Army and people in the Northern parts
of this Realm, and for the preventing the imminent danger this Kingdom is in,
and for supply of other his Majesty's present and urgent occasions, which
cannot be so timely effected as is requisite, without credit for raising the
said moneys; which credit cannot be obtained, until such obstacles be first
removed as are occasioned by fears, jealousies, and apprehensions of diverse of
his Majesty's loyal Subjects, that this present Parliament may be adjourned,
prorogued, or dissolved BEFORE JUSTICE SHALL BE DULY EXECUTED UPON DELINQUENTS,
public Grievances redressed, a firm Peace betwixt the two Nations of England
and Scotland concluded, and before sufficient provision be made for the
repayment of the said moneys so to be raised: All which the Co^^^^^ in this
present Parliament assembled having duly considered, do therefore humbly
beseech your most excellent Majesty, that it may be declared and enacted,

And be it declared and enacted by the King our Soveraig^ Lord, with the assent
of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
Authority of the same, That this present Parliament now assembled, shall not be
dissolved, unless it be by Act of Parliament to be passed for that purpose;
nor shall be at any time or times during the continuance thereof, pr^rogued or
adjourned, unless it be by Act of Parliament to be likewise passed for that
purpose: And that the House of Peers shall not at any time or times during this
present Parliament, be adjourned, unless it be by themselves, or by their own
Order: And in like manner, That the House of Commons shall not at any time or
times during this present Parliament, be adjourned, unless it be by
themselves, or by their own Order; and that all and every thing or things
whatsoever done or to be done, for the adjournment, proroguing, or dissolving
of this present Parliament contrary to this present Act, shall be utterly void,
and of none effect.

The true intent and meaning of this Act in the Framers, Makers, and Contrivers
of it, was merely to secure their sitting for some reasonable time, that so
they might be able to apply fit plasters to the great sores of the Nation, and
not be broken up suddenly, before they had applied them to the so^es, and laid
them on; and their fear was, the King would, as he used to do, dissolve them
suddenly; security from which was their only end in procuring this Act, and
not in the least to make this a perpe^uall Parliament; which I demonstrate thus:

First, A perpetual Parliament is repugn^nt to the Act made this Parliament for
a Triennial Parliament (which in your Declarations is so highly extolled after
the making of both the Acts*) for how can every three years a Parliament be
begun, if this be perpetual? which by the Act may be so, if the two Houses
please. But in all the Act there is not one word of the an^i^ilating or
repealing of the Act for a T^ienn^all Parliament; which, if it had been
intended, it would have mentioned, and not left such a business of consequence
in any doubtfulnesse whatsoever: and the not mentioning of it, is a clear
declaration to all the Readers of it, That their design solely in the last
Act* was only to secure themselves from the Kings sudden and quick dissolving
them at his will and pleasure. And therefore,

Secondly, In Law, according to the constitution of ou^ Parliaments, an
Adjournment of the Parliament makes no Session; howbeit, before the Adjournment
the King gives his affent to some Bi^s; as is plain out of Cook^* 4 Instit.
chap. High Court of Parliament, fol. 27. authorized to be printed by the late
Parliament, in its purest purity for good Law.

Thirdly, In Law there is no Session in a pr^^^gation or (...) the Parliament;
they are the words of Cook himself, fol. 27. ibid.

Fourthly, This Parliament, as appears by the Act for not dissolving (...) of,
before mentioned, cannot be prorogued by the King, but by Act of Parliament:
but there has been as yet no Act of Parliament in that behalf* and therefore
all the Acts of this Parliament are in law Acts of one Session, (...) pears by
Plo^d Com. 33. H. 8. B ^. relation 3^. (...). Parl. ^6. Di^^ 1. (...). 8^.

Fifthly, In Law, all Acts of one Session, relate to the first day of the
Parliament, and all the Acts of such a Parliament are Act* of one day; so the
(...) for the Triennial, and the Act for this perpetual Parliament, are two
Acts of one day, by the Law.

Sixthly, the 4 Edw. 3. chap. 14. and 36. Edw 3. chap. 10. forementioned, (...)
cla^es that a Parliament ought to be holden once every year, and mo^^ (...)
need be, those very Acts are every clause of them confirmed this Parliament,
which also provides, that in case the King break those Laws, and do not
annually call Parliaments, as is before declared, that then the Lord Keeper,
whether he will or no, shall call a triennial one. Now I would fain know of any
^^^ional man, How an everlasting Parliament does agree with a Parliament (...)
year, o^ oftener if need require, or with the intention of those Laws? And (...)
does a Parliament every three years (provided for as sure as its possible for
Law to provide, (in case the King annually should not call one) agree with a
Parliament for ever, which may be by the letter of the perpetual Act, (...) the
two Houses please?

The conclusion of all is this, that at one day in law, the late Parliament
passed two Acts, (for, howbeit the one was in the 16 of the King, and the other
in the 17 year of the King: yet both in law are Acts of one (...) the one
says, the King shall call a Parliament once a year, after the sitting of this
Parliament, and in case he does not, the Lord Keeper, etc. shall (...)
Parliament three years after the sitting of this Parliament. The other (...) in
the letter, or litterall construction of it, says, this Parliament shall (...)
ever if the two Houses please. The one will have a Parliament with an (...) the
other a Parliament without an end: Now the question is, which of these two was
the true intent and meaning of the Makers of this Act: for as L^^^ned Cook
rationally and well observes in his excellent exposition of the 1 Eli^ chap. 1.
4. part. Institut. fol 328. (which Act established the power of the
High Commission, that by color of this Statute did many (...) illegal things)
such an interpretation of ambiguous and doubtful things is (...) be made, that
absurdities and inconventences may be avoided; but the highest ^^^^dities and
inconveniences in the world would follow, if this last S^ar^^^ (...) be taken
according to the literal construction of it, and not according to the equity
and true intent and meaning of the makers of it, which was not to (...) this
everlasting if they pleased, and so totally to destroy annual Parliament, or
in the Kings default of calling them, then trienniall Parliaments whether he
would or no, but only to secure them from the Kings sudden bre^^^^ them up at
his pleasure: that so they might sit some reasonable short (...) dispatch the
great business of the Nation; and that reasonable time (...) by any words (or
the true meaning of any) in either of the Statutes, (...) (...) to be above
(...) at most, especially from the (...) of the (...) (in the right and true
meaning) notwithstanding the last Act, were y^^ (...) in force to bind the
King to call Annual Parliaments; but two Parliaments by Law cannot sit
together: but without two Parliaments should sit together, (viz. An everlasting
one, and an an^^^ll one, which is our right by Law) (...) enjoy the benefit of
those good and excellent Laws, for Annual Parliaments or oftener if need
require. And therefore to take the utmost extent of the length of that time,
the two Houses were enabled to sit by virtue of the force and power of the last
Act, it could not be above a year at most, from the day of the date of it, and
yet they have sat almost eight since, by virtue and color of that alone, and
of nothing else in law, having no other visible Commission under the Sun, to
authorize them to destroy our undoubted natural and legal Rights, of having
often and frequent successive Parliaments totally new, which they have done by
their long and unwarrantable sitting, principally to enrich the most of
themselves, and enslave our spirits.

And that an everlasting Parliament was never intended by that Act, I think
their own words printed in December, 1641. which was immediately after the
passing that Act, will easily decide the controversy.

And in their or your first Remonstrance of the state of the Kingdom, after
excusing of your selves from any invasion of the rights of the Crown, 1 Part.
Book Declar. page 1^, 17. there is these very expression, viz. The trienniall
Parliament, for the matter of it, does not extend to so much as by law we ought
to have required, there being two Statutes still in force, for a Parliament to
be once a year: And for the manner of it, (viz. THE TRYENNIALL PARLIAMENT) it
is in the Kings power, that it shall never take effect, (...) by a timely
summons shall prevent any other way of assembling. In the (...) for continuance
of this present Parliament, there seems to be (...) of real power in
dissolving of Parliaments, not to take it out of the Crown, but to suspend the
execution of it for THIS TIME AND OCCASION ONLY, which was not necessary for
the Kings own security, and the public peace that (...) it we could not have
undertaken any of these great charges, two must have left both the Armies to
disorder and confusion, and the whole Kingdom to (...) and ^apine.

Which words are a (...) and (...), That the (...) of the makers of the
fore^^id Act was never to make this a perpetual Parliament, but only for
(...) the King's sudden breaking them up when he pleased; whose (...) from by
this Act: which thing only is and was the clear meaning of the makers of it.

And that the general words of a Law, or the literal sense of (...) ^^ld forth
absurdities, and inconveniences, and visible mischiefs, a^^ (...) by
interpreted and controuled by the intent of them that made it, is clear, from
their own Oracle Sir Edw. Cook* who in his exposition of the (...) of 1 Eliz.
chapt. 1. in his 4 part (...): N^w that diverse and many other Acts of
Parliament (BESIDES THIS OF ELIZ.) which are general in words, have, upon
consideration of the mischief, and all the parts of the Act, (for the avoiding
of the (...) absurdity that might follow) received a particular interpretation,
is (...) ^^^ks in cases of far less inconvenience and absurdity.

Plo. Com. in Stowels Case fol. 369. The Preamble is to be (...) it is the key
to open the meaning of the makers of the Act, and mischief (...) intend to
remedy. The Judges of the Law have ever in such sor^ (...) the intents of the
meaning of the makers of such Acts of Parliament, as they (...) ^^pounded Acts
g^nerall in words to be particular, where the intent (...) been (...) (Which
are the words of the Book) And therefore upon that rule i^ is there adjudged,
That where the Statute of 7. Edw. 6. i^ general, IF ANY RECEIVER OR MINISTER
ACCOVNTANT etc, RECEIVE O^ ANY PERSON ANY SVM OF MONEY FOR PAYMENT O^ ANY FEES,
etc. HE SHALL FORFEIT vis. viii d. FOR EVERY PENNY. That this do not extend,
according to the generality of the words, to the Receiver of common persons,
because these words subsequent be added (otherwise (...) be lawfully may by
former Laws and Statutes.) Now the Judges restr^ined the generality to a
particular, to the Kings Receiver only; for that no Law ^^ ^^tute was formerly
made concerning common persons Receivers, etc. But i^ the Case in question, as
well the precedent clause of Restitution, as the (...) expressing offenses in
particular, and the words in the same general sentence, viz. UNDER YOUR
HIGHNESS, etc. and principally the cause of the (...) of this Act do qualify
the generality of the words. And yet notwithstanding ^^ was resolved by all the
Court in the said case of Stradling, fol. ^0^. (...) Receiver of common persons
were within the words of the said (...) it is said, that if a man consider in
what point the mischief was before the (...) and what thing the Parliament
meant to redress by this, be shall (...) intent of the Makers of the Act, was
to punish only the Ministers of the King (...) a little after the Judges say,
That the style of this Act is, AN ACT FOR (...) TRUE ANSWER OF THE KINGS
REVENUES. And by this (...) intent of the makers of the Act is to be collected;
and these be the words of the (...) which is a far stronger case, then the case
in question.

4 Ed. 4. fol. 4. and 12. Every Statute ought to be expounded according (...)
intent of them that made it, where the words thereof are doubtful and (...),
and according to the rehearsal of the Statute; and there a general Stat^^^
(...)strued particularly, upon consideration had of the cause of making of the
Act, (...) the rehearsal of all the parts of the Act.

To conclude this point with a general R^le allowed by all Laws (...)
^^struction of Statutes, viz. Although the Law speak in general terms, (...)
^o be bound up or accepted, That WHERE REASON CEAS^TH, TH^^^ THE LAW CEASE:
FOR, SEEING REASON IS THE VERY LIFE AND SPIRIT OF THE (...) IT SELF, the Law
giver is not to be esteemed to respect th^^ which (...) Reason; although the
generality of the words at the first sight, or after the (...) otherwise. Mark,
I entreat you, these last words well, for they are (...) and full.

And much more i^ there to this purpose: for he is (...) said Statute of 1
Eliz. 1. And that this equitable and intentionall (...) of expounding Laws in
dubious eases, or where absurdities or mischiefs do depend upon the taking of
it in the litteral sens^, is justifi^ble, legal and good, is unquestinably
demonstrated out of your own 1 part Book Dec. page ^50. (...) these very weeds,
viz. That there is in the Laws an equitable and literal sense. His Majesty
(^et it he granted) ^^ entrusted by Law with the Militia; but it is for the good
and preservation of the Republique, against foreign Invasions and domestic
Rebellions: For it cannot be supposed that the Parliament would ever by Law
entrust the Militia against themselves, or the Commonwealth that intrusts them
to provide for their WEAL, NOT FOR THEIR WOE. So (...), when there is certain
appearance, or grounded suspicion, that the letter of the Law shall be improved
against the equity of it, (that is, the public good, whether of the body
real, or representative) then the commander going against its equity, gives
liberty to the commanded to refuse obedience to the letter: For the Law taken
abstract from its original reason and end, i^ made a shell without a kernel,
a shadow without a substance, and a body without a soul: ^t is the execution of
Laws according to their equity and reason, which (as I may say) is the spirit
that gives life to Authority, the letter kills.

Nor need this equity be expressed in the Law, being so naturally employed and
supposed in all Laws that are not merely Imperial, from that analogy which
all Bodies politic hold with the natural, whence all Government and
Governors borrow a propo^^ionall respect. And therefore when the Militia of an
Army is committed to the General, it is not with any express condition, that
he shall not turn the ^outhes of his Canons against his own soldiers; for that
is so naturally and necessarily employed, that its needless to be expressed;
insomuch a^ if be did attempt or command such a thing, against the nature of
his trust and place, it did (...) facto estate the Army in a right of
disobedience, except we think that obedience binds (...) to cut their own
throats, or at least their companions.

Yea, the very title of the Act in hand literally declares, it was never
intended to be perpetual; no, nor to extend to so long a time as to be
mi^chievous to the Commonwealth, by subduing the SOUL of all our Liberties,
frequent (...) Parliaments* (...) wholly and (...); for it is called, An Act^o
prevent inconvenientes which may happen by the (...) adjour^i^g, (...) or
d^sso^^ing of this present Parliament. Mark^ the words well, and it puts all
out of dispute, that th^^ Act was ^at merely done to tie the Kings hands for a
certain reasonable time, that so it should not be dissolved u^timely: and the
Title declares, it was made to avoid Inconveniences, and therefore (...) to
beget and increase them; which it must needs do as is already fully proved, if
it (...) frequent, successive, (...) Parliaments.

But yet once again more fuller; Reason and Nature it self sai^^, yea and the
Law of England says, That when (...) Act of Parliament is against (...) Right,
or Reason, or (...), or impossible to be performed or kept, the common Law
shall (...) it, and adjudge this Act to be void: they are the words of the Law,
1 pars Dr. Bo^^am's Case, fol. 118. and 8. Ed. 3. fol. 3. 30. 33. E. cess^vil
3^. and 27. H. G. (...) 41, and 1 Eliz. Dier 313. and 1 part Cooks Institutes
lib. 3. chap. 11. ^. 209. fol. 140. 2. An Act of Parliament that a man shall be
a Judge in his own case, is a void Act in Law, Hubbert fol. 120. and the ^ part
Cooks Reports in Dr. Bo^hams case. See the Army Book Declarat. page 35. ^9. 61.
63. 143.

First therefore let us begin with Common Right; and we shall easily see this
perpetual Act is against that. For it is against common Right, that indebted
men (as most, if not all Parliament men ar^) should not pay their debts. Or
that, if any Member of ^^^liament do any of the People of England w^ong (as
daily they do) by unjust and (...) r^^^ble (...) of him o^ them of hi^ la^d, or
disp^ssessing him of his goods, (...) of his fame, or doing violence to his
person by beating, wounding, or imprisoning, etc. that (...)sons, during their
lives, by a privilege of Parliament (that was intentionally (...) and just in
its institution, when Parliaments were often and short) should be (...) and
s^^^red from all manner of question at the Law, by any parties so wronged by
them, is absolutely against common Right. Nay, and more, That this should
extend (...) ^^ltitudes of persons besides, that are their servants or
attendants; and also that any, o^ all of these shall have the benefit of the
Law in any Court of Justice in England at their pleasure, against any man whom
they shall pretend wrongs them, are such trans^^de^^ and grievous enormities,
that common Right abhors; and yet this, with a thousand (...) as much more as
bad as these, are the fruits of a perpetual Parliament, if they please; which
tends to the utter destruction of all men's Actions, real, personal, or mixed,
who have ^o do with Parliament men; as appears expressly by the Statute of
Limitations of the a^ of James, chap. 16. which strictly confines all manner of
Suits to be commenced within (...) after the occasion given.

Secondly, For common Reason: Parliaments were ordained and instituted (as is
before truly and legally declared) for remedies to redress public and
capital griev^^ces th^^ (...) where else could be redressed: but it is against
reason (and the very end of the Institution of Parliament) that Parliaments
should make and create multitudes of public and insufferable grievances; The
law of the Land allows no protection for any man i^ployed in the service of
the Kingdom, but for a year at most, as to be free from Sui^s; and in many
Suits none at all, howbeit he be in such services. But a perpetual (...) may
prove a protection (in all manner of wickedness and misdea^^eanours (...)
against other men, not of the Parliament, amongst any of whom they may pi^k and
choose whom they please, to ruinate and destroy) and that no^ for a year, but
for ever; which is against all manner of Reason, or the shadow or likeness of
it. And therefore, a^ (...) Sir Henry Vane said against Episcopal Government in
the beginning of his larg^ (...) of the 11 of June 1641 now in print, at a
Committee for passing the Bill against ^^^^pall Government, so say I of an
everlasting, or of any Parliament that shall do (...) you have done, in largely
sitting beyond the time of your Commission* etc. That (...) thing is
destructive to the very end for which it should be, and was constituted to be;
(...) only so, but does the quite contrary (as your House in every particular
does) cer^ai^ly, we have cause sufficient enough to lay it aside; and not only
as useless, in that it (...) its end; But is dangerous, in that it destroys
and contradicts its end.

Thirdly, For Imp^ssibilitie: The death of the King in law undisputably
dissolves the Parliament, spoken of in the foresaid act, which is pretended to
be perpetu^ll; for (...) Writ of Summons, that is directed to the Sheriffs, by
virtue of which, Parli^^^^^ (...) are chosen, runs in these words: King Charles
being to have conference and (...), etc upon such a day, about or concerning
(as the words of the T^ie^^^ial Act has it) the high and urgent affairs
concerning his Majesty (and he writes US) the State, and the (...) of the
Kingdom and Church of England. But I would fain know how it is possibl^ for a
Parliament to confer or treat with King CHARLES now he is dead: it is
impossible. Se^ 2 H. 5. Cook in. Parl. 3. part. And therefore the whole current
of the Law of England (yea, Reason it self) from the beginning to the end, is
expressly, That the Kings death does ipso facto dissolve this Parliament, though
it had been all the time before (...) so entire and unquestionable to that very
hour; and it must needs be so, he being in Law, yea, and by the authority of
this very Parliament st^led, the head, the begi^^ing, and end of Parli^ments:
See Co^ks 4 part Institutes fol. 1. 3. Mr. Py^^'s for (...) Stra^^ord page 8.
S. John's forementioned argument against Strafford, page 42. And therefore as a
Parliament in l^w (...) begin without the (...) in it, (...) person (...)
representatives, Cook ibid. so. 6. so it is pos^^ively (...) by his (...);
(...) thereby not only the true declared, but intended end of their assembling
(which (...) (...) and confer with King CHARLES) is ceased, and thereby a final
and is put (...) the means that are appointed to attain unto that end: And
therefore it is as (...) for this Parliament, or any Parliament to continue as
long as they please, a^ for a Parliament to make King Charles alive again.

Fourthly, For Repugnancy: That which is but for a time, cannot be affirmed to
have continuance for ever [it is repugnant:] but this Parliament in the
intention of the makers of the Act, was to be but for a time, not above a year
at most, after the d^^e of the Act* as is before proved and declared from their
own words; And therefore it cannot be reputed perpetual, for there is a
repugnancy betwixt them.

Again, The King's Writ that summoned this Parliament, is the Basis in law, an^
Foundation of this Parliament: If the Foundation be destroyed, the Parliament
falls: But the Foundation of it, in every circumstance thereof, is destroyed:
And therefore the thing built upon that Foundation must needs fall. It is both
a Maxim^ in Law and Reason.

But if it be objected, The Law of Necessity requires the continuance of the
Parliament against the letter of the Law.

I answer, First, Its necessrry to consider whether the men that would have it
continue as long as they please, be not those that have created the necessities
on purpose, that by the color thereof they may make themselves great and
potent; and if so, then that Objection has no weight, nor by any rules of
Justice can they be allowed to gain this advantage by their own fault, as to
make that a ground of their justification, which is a great part of their
offense. And that it is true in it self, is so obviou^ to every unbiased
knowing eye, it needs no illustration: but if it shall be denied by any of
their pens, if God please to give further opportunity, I shall prove it to the
full.

Secondly, I answer, There can no necessity be pretended that can be
justifiable for breach of trusts that are conferred on purpose for the redress
of mischiefs and grievances, when the trust is perver^^d to the quite contrary
end, to the increase of mischiefs and grievances, yea, to the subversion of
Laws and Liberties. I am sure, Mr. Pym by their command and order, told the
Earl of Strafford so, when he objected the like, and that he was the King's
Counselor, and might not be questioned for any thing he advised according to
his conscience. But ^aith Mr. Pym page 11. He that will have the privilege of
a Counsell^^r, must keep within the just bounds of a Counselor. Those matters
are the p^oper subjects of Counsel, which in their times and occasions may be
good or beneficial to the King or Commonwealth. But such Treasons a^ th^se,
the subversion of the Laws, violation of Liberties, they can never be good or
justifiable by any circumstance or occasion; and therefore (says he) his being
a Counselor makes his fault much more (...), o^ being committed against a
GREATER TRUST. And in page 12. he answers another excuse of his, which was,
That what he did he did with a good intention. Its true, says Mr Pym, Some
m^^ers ^^^tfull and dangerous, may be accompanied with such circumstances, as
may m^ke it appear useful and convenient; and in all such cases, good
intention will justify (...) ^^unsell. But where the matters propounded are
evil in their own nature, such a^ the matters are with which the Earl of
Strafford is charged viz. To BREAK A PUBLIC FAITH, to sub^ert Laws and
Government, they can never be justified by any intentions, h^^ specious or good
s^^ver they pretended.

And that they have perverted the ends of their Trust more then eve^ Str^^^ord
did, I ^^^ll instance at present but in 3 parti^^lars, the main (...) of their
(...) the People ^f their grievances; and what their Grievances were, (...) in
the Parliaments first Re^^^strance of the st^te of the Kingdom: First,
destruction of (...) Trades by Monopolize, etc. Secondly, exhausting of their
estates to maintain and promote pernicious designs to their destruction.
Thirdly, their essential Liberties (...) Freedoms quite destroye^: Where is
the remedy now* has not the Parliament contraty to that excellent Law against
Monopolize, of the 21 Jame* Chap. 3. of (...) erected Monopolise by O^dinances,
Orders and Votes, (although in the first month of your sitting, you made Orders
to throw down Monopolizers out of your House:) as particularly, Whale Oil,
White sine, Wire, Ty^n, with many others; yea, and co^in^ing of the old
Mon^polies, Merchants, Companies that Trade beyond se^^; yea, and set up for
(...) that Monopoly of all Monopolies, the Excise; the bare endeavoring of
which* they call^^ unjust and pernicious attempt in the King in the
forementioned, Declar. page 6.

And then for exhausting of their estates, the King did it by a little Shipmony
and Monopolies etc but since they begun they have raised and extorted more money
from the people and nation then half the Kings from the Conqueror ever did, as
particularly, 1 By Excise. 2 Cont^tbu^ions. 3 Sequestrations of lands to an
infinite, value. 4 Fifth P^ts. 5 Twenty parts. 6 Meal^n^ony 7 Sa^le of
plundered goods. 8 Loanes. 9 Benevoknces. 1^ Collections upon their sost days.
11 New Impositions or Customs upon Merchandse. 12 (...) maintained upon the
charge of p^^^ate men. 13 Fifty Sub^dies at one time. 14 (...) with Delinquents
to an infinit^ value. 15 Sale of Bishops Land^. 16 Sale of D^a^ and Chapters
Lands, and now after the wars are done. 17 Sale of King, Queen, Prin^e, Duke,
and the rest of the C^ildrens revenue 1^ Sa^le of their r^ch goods which cost
an infinite sur^^^. And 19 To conclude all a t^x^tion of ninety thousand pound
a mo^th, and when they have gathered it pretendedly for the Commonwealths
use, divide it by thousands and ten thousands, apeece amongst themselves; and
wipe their mouths after it like the impudent Ha^^ot as though they had done no
evil; and then purchase with it public lands at small and trivial values; O
Brave Trustees! that have protested before God and the w^r^d, again and again
in the day of their st^aits, they would never seck themselves, and yet besides
all this (...) all the chiefest and profit^blest p^aces of the Kingdom amongst
themselves; And then thirdly; what regulating of Courts of Justice, and
abridging of delays, and charges of Law (...) have they performed as in their
first Remonstrance they promised? Nay are they (...) worse then they were
before the wars, and besides, then High-Comm^ssion, Star Chamber and Counsel
board were all down; and have they not now made a Star Chamber,
High Commission and Councel-Board of most of their petty Committees? but most
dreadful ones of the House and their New-Councel of State? as is evident to be
seen in my Comrades and my illegal and arbitrary imprisonment, and cruel close
imprisonment Thirdly, Nay have we at all any Law left Master Peter's your grand
Teacher (...) lately to my face we have none?) but their mere wills any
pleasures; saving Fell^^s La^^, or Ma^tiall law, where men-Butchers are both
informers, Parties, Jurymen and Judges; who have had their hands imbr^ed in
blood for above this seven years together, having served ^^ ^^^^t^ship to
k^lling of men, for nothing but money, and so are mo^e bloudier then Butchers
th^^ (...) and calve for their own livelihood, who yet by the Law of England,
are net (...) ^^ ^^ of any Jury fa^l^se and death, because they are conversant
in shedding of blood of beasts (...) thereby, through a habit of it, may not be
so tender of the blood of men; as the (...) ^f England, ^eason and Justice
would have men to be. Yea, do not these men by their swo^^^, being but
servants, give what law they please to their Masters: the pretended Lawmakers
of your house, now constituted by as good and ^egall a power as he that r^b^ or
kil^s a man upon the highway.

But to conclude this tedious point, I shall end it with such an Authority, as
to th^^ ruling men in your House must needs knock the Nail on the ^ead, and
that is with the Declaration of the Army, (Your Lords, M^sters, L^w givers, and
(...)) who in their most excellent of Declaratrons of the 14 of June, 1647.
About the just and fundamental rights and liberties of themselves and the
Kingdom, page 40, 41, 42. of their book of Declarations, after they have
sufficiently cried out of Stapleton and his party, for abusing, deluding and
over-swaying the house from their true end for which they were assembled
together: say thus,

But yet we are so far from designing or complying to have an abso^ute or
arbitrary power fixed or settled for continuance, in any persons whatsoever; a^
that (if we might be sure to obtain it) we (...) wish to have it so in the
persons of any whom we could must confide in; or who should appear mo^^ of our
own opinions and principles, or whom we might have most personal assurance of,
or interest in, b^t we do^, and shall much rather wish, That the Authority of
this Kingdom in Parliament (rightly constituted, that is* freely, equally and
successively chosen, according to its orteinall intention) may ever st^nd and
^ave its ^ourse. And therefore we shall apply our selves chiefly to such things
^^ (by having Parliaments settled in such a right constitution) nay give most
hope^ of Justice and Right^ousnesse, to flow down equally to all, in that its
Ancient ch^^nell, without any overtures, tending either to OVERTHROW that
^^undation of Order and Government in this Kingdom, or TO INGROSS THAT POWER
FOR PERPETUITY INTO THE HANDS OF ANY PARTICULAR PERSONS, OR PARTY WHATSOEVER.

And for that purpose though (as we have found it doubted by many men, minding
sincerely the public good, but not weighing so fully the consequences of
things) it may and is not unlike to prove, that, the ending of this Parliament,
and the election of a New, the constitution of succeeding Parliaments, (as to
the persons Elected) may prove for the worse many weyes; ye^ since neither in
the present purging of this Parliament, nor in the Election of a New, we can
promise to our selves or the Kingdom, and asurance of Justice, or other
positive good from the bands of men; but those who for present appear most
righteous, and most for common good (having an unlimited power fixed in them
du^ing life or pleasure) in time may become corrupt, or settle into parties, or
factions; or, on the otherside in case ^f new Elections* those that should
succeed, may prove as bad or worse then the former. We therefore humbly
co^ceive that (of two inconveniences the less being to be chosen) the main
thing to be intended in this case (and beyond which humane providence cannot
reach, as to any assurance of positive good) seem to be this, viz* to provide,
that however unjust or corrupt the persons of Parliament men, in present, or
future may prove, or whatever ill they may do to particular parties (or to the
whole in particular ^^ngs) during their respective terms or periods, yet they
shall not have the temptation of an ^^^imited power fixed in them during the^r
own pleasures, whereby to perpetuate injustice or oppression upon any (without
end or remedy) or to advance and uphold any one particular party, faction or
interest* whatsoever, to the oppression or prejudice of the Community, and the
enslaving of the Kingdom unto all posterity, but that the people may have an
equal hope or possibility, if they have made an ^ll choice at one time, to
mend it in another, and the Members of the House themselves may be in a
capacity to taste subjection as well as rule* and may be so inclined to
consider of other men's cases, as what may come to be their own. Thus we speak
in relation to the House of Commons, as being entrusted on the Peoples behalf,
for their interest in that great and supreme power of the Common wealth (viz.)
the Legislative power with the power of final Judgment) which being in its
own nature so arbitrary, and in a manner unlimited, (unless in point of (...))
is most un^it and dangerous (as ^o the peoples interest) to be (...) in the
(...) the sa^e men, during life or their own pleasures. Neither by the
original (...) of this State, was it, of ought to continue so, nor does it
(wherever it is, (...) continues so) render that sta^e any better then a mee^
tyranny, or the people subjected to it, any better then vassals; But in all
States where there is any f^^^ of common freedom, and partic^larly in this
State of England (as it is most evid^^^ (...) many positive laws and ancient
constant custom) the people have a right to (...) successive Elections, unto
that great and supreme trust, at certain (...) time, which is so essential and
fundamental to their freedom, as it is, ^^not or not to be denied them, or
witheld from them, and without which the House of Commons is of very little
concernment to the interest of the Commons of England. Yet in this we could not
be understood in the least to blame (...) worthies of both Houses, whose zeal
to vindicate the Liberties of this Nation, did (...) that Act for the
continuance of this Parliament; whereby it was secured from (...) dissolved at
the Kings pleasure, (as former Parliaments had been) or reduced to (...) a
certain^y as might enable them the better to assert and vindicate the Liberties
of this Nation, (immediately before so highly invaded* and then also so (...)
^^dangered) and those we take to be the princip^ll ends and grounds for which
(...) exigency of time and affairs it was procured, and to which we acknowledge
it has happily been made use of; but we cannot think it was by those Worthies
intended, or ought to be made use of to the perpetuating of th^^ ^^pream trust
and power into the persons of any during their own (...), or deb arring of the
people from their right of elections totally new.

But it here it should be objected although the King be dead, yet the
Parliament (...) altered the Government into a Commonwealth, and so may if
they please cha^^e the Constitution of Parliaments.

To which I answer, First, that those company of men at Westminster, that g^^e
Commission to the High Court of Justice to try and behead the King, etc. were
^o more a Parliament by Law, nor a Representative of the people, by the rules
of Justice and Reason, then such a company of men are a Parliament, or
Representative of the People, that a company of armed Thieves choose and set
apart to try, judge, (...), hang, o^ behead any man, that they please, or can
prevail over by the power of their swords, to bring before them by force of
arms, to have their lives taken away by pre^^^ce of Justice, grounded upon
rules merely flowing from their wills and swords; for I would fain know any Law
in England, that authoriseth a company of Servants to punish o^ correct their
Masters, or to give a Law unto them, or to throw them at their pleasure out of
their power, and set themselves down in it, which is the Armies case wi^^ ^^e
Parliament, especially at THO. PRIDES late Purge; which I call (and will (...)
to be) an abs^lute dissolution of the very essence and being of the House of
(...)* and I would fain see any Law or Reason in Writing or Print to justify
th^^ a (...)* upon my other a^^^unt, then in hindering them from raising a new
War, and from destroying he peoples Liberties by their eternal sitting,
seeing they keep their power ^^^ger by fa^ then their Masters, or impowers the
people intended they should, and also employ it to their mischief by hindering
them, (I mean those that had not acted agai^^^ the Liberties of the Parliament)
entering into a mutual engagement to appoint (...) whereby to choose (seeing
they cannot all meet in one place themselves) and i^power new Trustees
Commissioners, or Represento^s, to make equal and just Laws to bi^^ all, and
provide for their future well-being, there being no other may justly, either in
Law or Reason; to settle this Nation in peace and quietness, but by one of
these two means: First, either by admitting the King in again upon terms: or
else, secondly, to lay foundations of a just Government, by an Agreement made
amongst the generality of the people capable of it: and if any man upon earth
can either by Law or Reason show me a third way, that has any more shadow of
Justice in it, then for William the Conqueror, or the great Turk by their
swords to give a Law unto this Nation, I will forfeit my life.

But secondly I answer, the main end of the peoples choosing of the Members of
the House of Commons was not to come to Westminster to set up a commonwealth,
especial to invest all power in themselves, and with that at their pleasure
rob and take away (by the rules of their wills) the liberties and lives of
those that choose them, and be unaccountable as long as they live, although they
do what they please; therefore I would fain see any bit or shadow of a
pretended Commission to this end, either in writing, or ^acitly in intention;
nay, or so much as in the thoughts of the major part of the Members themselves,
when they were empowered; I am sure all their Declarations declare the
contrary. And therefore I say, and will make it good against all the
tyrannical Sophisters in England, in a Public dispute before the People,
That the m^^^ end wherefore they were sent, was to treat and confer with King
Charles, and the House of Peers, about the great affairs of the Nation, etc.
and therefore are but a third part, or a third estate of that Parliament, to
which they were to come and join with; and who were legally to make permanent
and binding laws to the people of the Nation* and therefore having taken away
two of the three Estates, (through a pretended necessity, for a pretended good
end, the accomplishment of which can only justify this act) that they were
chosen on purpose to join with to make Laws; the end both in reason and Law of
the Peoples trust is ceased; for a Minor joined with a Major for one and the
same end, cannot play Lord paramount over the Major, and then do what it
please; no more can the Minor of a Major, viz. one estate of three legally or
justly, destroy two of three without their own consents, or the Authority of a
higher power, then all given and deligated for that end intended and declared,
which is the People, the fountain and original of all just power, which they
never did in their lives; and therefore the whole power of all is returned to
them singly and alone, (but if an^ part of it is yet inherent in any, then it
is in PRINCE CHARLES as Heir*apparent to his Fathers Crown and Throne) over
whom I mean the people) no persons nor power on earth can now set no change of
Government whatever, but what is done by their own mutual consent by AGREEMENT
AMONGST THEMSELVES, but with as real a face of Tyranny, as ever was acted by
any Conqueror o^ Tyrant in the world; unto which whosoever sto^ps and supports
it, is as absolute a Traitor both by Law and reason, as ever was in the world,
(if not against the King, yet against the Peoples Majesty* and Sovereignty, the
fountain of all power on earth;) and the present setters up of this Tyrannical
new Commonwealth, considering their many Oaths, Covenan^s, Promises,
Declarations and Remonst^ances to the contrary, (with the highest promises and
pretenses of God for the People and their declared Liberties, that ever was
made by men) are the most perjure^, pe^fidio^^, fall Faith and Trust breakers
and Tyrants ^^at ever lived in the world; and ought by all rational and honest
men to be the most detested and abhorred of all men that ever breathed, by how
much the more under the pretense of friendship and brotherly kindness they have
done all the mischief they have done in destroying our Law^^ and Liberties,
etc. Is any Treason like Juda^ his Treason* who betrayed his Lord and Master
with a kiss: Is any murder in the world, like that of Joab co^^i^^ed upon
A^^er and Amasa? who while he kissed and embr^^ed them with the highest
declarations of friendly and brotherly affection, stabbed them under the fif^h
Rib, 2 Samuel a* 29. and 10. 9, 10. Is any wrong or mischief done unto an
ingenuous spirit, so bitter to his soul, as the treachery and baseness of a
pretended and familiar friend? No undoubtedly, for against a professed enemy a
man has a fence, for he will not trust him, but is always jealous of him: but
against a pretended friend he has none, for ^e lies in his bosom, from whom
he fea^s no ill, but sleeps in security, in the height of which he is ^^in^ted
and dest^yed: which kind of dealing was most bitter to David's soul* wh^^h
made him say, P^alm 55. 12, 13. 14, 15. For it was not an ENEMY ^h^^ repr^a^hed
^re, then I could have b^rn it: neither was it he that HATED me, that (...)
magnifi^ ^^mself against me then I would have hid my self from him. But it was
th^n, (...), mine equ^ll, MY GUID^; MINE ACQUAINTANCE. We t^^k SWE^T COUN^ELL
together, and walked into the house of God in COMPANY* Let death seiz upon
them, and let them go^ domn quick into hell, for wickedn^sse is in their
d^^^ling, and among them* and let the p^esent generation of swaying men* that
under the pretense of good, kindness and friendship, have destroyed and trod
under their feet all the Liberties of the Nation (and will not let us have a
new Parliament) and set up by the Sword their own unsufferable, unsupportable
Tyrannical Tyranny; consider the ends of JWDAS and JOAB, and they shall find,
that for their treachery and blood; the one Hanged himself, and the other was
executed in the Tabernacle of the Lord, (...) the horns of the Altar, whether
he fled for refuge and sanctuary, 1 Kings 2. 30, 31. yea, also remember Cains
treachery to his innocent brother Abel, Gen 4. 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

Thirdly and lastly, I answer, the House of Commons sitting freely within its
limited time, in all its splendour of glory, without the awe of armed men,
never in Law, nor in the intention of their chuse^s were not a Parliament; and
therefore of themselves alone, have no pretense in Law to alter the
constitution of Parliaments, especially as to free and successive Elections
totally and wholly new; neither if ever it had been in the power of a true and
real House of Commons; Yet this present pre^ended One now sitting at
Westminster is now a true House of Commons; as the Armies ancient Declarations
do notably prove; see their Book, Declar page 125, 127, 134, 135, 13^, 139,
140, 141, 14^* For I would fain know in Law, where Col. THOMAS PRIDE was
authorized to choose the people of England a Parliament; or to purge away at his
pleasure by his sword three quarters of four of the House of Commons, (and so
committed the affairs of Parliament to a few, which was never intended by the
i^powerers, but has always been holden to be against the honor and dignity of
a Parliment, and that no such Commission can or ought to be granted, no not by
a ^egall A^^h^rity if self* see 4 part. Cooks Institutes, fol 42. chap. High
court of Parliament*) and send whom of them he pleases to prison, without
charge or declared crime, and to stand at the House door in a warlike posture,
with Swords and Muskets to keep ou^ whomsoever he pleased, against the Law and
constitutions of Parliaments, which ^ught (...) Sit free from the force of
Armed men, 4 part. Institut* and let none go into the House, b^^ only those
that he knew, or did believe would vote AS HE AND HIS Masters WOULD HAVE THEM;
For shame let no man be so audaciously and sottishly void of reason, as to call
Tho. Prides pitiful Jun^o a Parliament, especially those that called* avowed*
protested and declared again and again those to be none, that sat at
Westminster the 26 and 27, etc. of July, 647. when a few of their Members were
seared away to the Army, by a few hours Tumult of a ^ompany of a few disordred
Apprentices: And being no Representative of the people, no nor so much as a
thadow of it, much less a PARLIAMENT, with pretense in Law, reason, Justice or
Na^^^e can there be for them to alter the constitution of successive and
frequent Parliaments, and force upon the people the show of their own wills,
lusts, and pleasures, for Laws and rules of Government, made by a pretended*
everlasting, nulled Parliament, a Council of State, or Star Chamber, and a
Council of War, or rather by Fairf^^, Cromwell and Ireton. And so much for my
unsati ^^ednesse in the present Authority.

But secondly, In case the Justices either in Law, or by reason of the power
that now rules England, had to my understanding been a thousand times less
unquestionable then it is, and had neither against the rules of reason ejected
two parts of three to set up themselves, nor outstrip'd its Commission in
sitting longer then they should, nor never had been forced on^e by the
Apprentices, which the Army called and declared Treason, and th^se that
remained a mock and pretended Parliament; and if so, the^ it was dissolved,
^^ing sine die* and could legally meet no more at all: nor once forced by the
Army; and then the second time not only forced, but picked and culled, and one
of four left behind, by means of which it was total^y d^stroyed and ann^h
lated, and none left in a manner but such as ^ould d^ what those that left them
would have them: I say, if none of all this had been, I could not with
freeness of my own spirit live upon the sweat of poor peoples brows, by a
large Salary for my place, who are ^^in (now their Trades are gone, their
estates spent for the int^^^ed recovering of their freedoms (of which
notwithstanding they are cheated, and that by their pretended friends) and a
famine come upon some parts of the Land, and thousands ready to starve) to pay
taxations and Excise for the small beer they drink, and the poor clothes they
wear, thousands of Families having never a penny in the world to buy bread for
them, their wives and children, but what they earn with the sweat of their
brows, and notwithstanding are almost as much without work, as without it: and
yet out of the bowels, and pining bellies of these poor people, in this sad and
deplorable condition must my salary have come, in case I had taken a public
place upon me: Therefore when I seriously consider how many men in the
Parliamen^* and elsewhere of their associates (that judge themselves the only
Saints and godly men upon earth) that have considerable (and some of them vast)
estates of their own inheritance, and yet take five hundred, one, two, three,
four, five, six thousand pounds per annum salaries, and other comings in by
their places, and that out of the too much exhausted public Treasury of the
Nation, when thousands, not only of the people of the world, as they call
them, but also of the precious and redeemed Lambs of Christ, are ready to
sterve for want of bread, I cannot but wonder with my self, whether they have
any conscience at all within them or no, and what they think of that saying of
the Spirit of God: That whosoever has this worlds good, and sees his brother has
need, and shuts up his bowls of compassion from him, (which he absolutely
does, that any way takes a little of his little from him) how dwells the love
of God in him? 1 John 3. 17. These actions and practice^ are so far from being
like the true and real children of the most high, that they are the highest
oppression, theft and murder in the world, thus to rob the poor people in the
day of their great distress, by Excise, Taxations, etc. to maintain their
pomp, super^^uities, and debauchery; and many of those from whom they take it,
do perish and sterve with want and hunger in the mean time; and be deaf and
adamant hearted to all their TEARS, CRY^S, LAMENTATIONS and MOURNFUL HOWLING
GROANS; without all doubt these pretended godly, religious men have got a
degree beyond those Atheists or fools, that say in their hearts, There is no
God, Psalm. 14. 1. and 53. 1. And these are my reasons (with my resolvednesse of
walking by a known rule amongst men, the declared Law of England) for not
taking a public place upon me, though I have often been prof^ered considerable
ones, yea, that very fore-noon the Votes of Treason passed in the House against
that honest Book or Address for which I am imprisoned, called, THE SECOND PART
OF ENGLAND's NEW CHAD^ DISCOVERED.

In the third place, I considered with my self, that seeing I could do neither
of those, then I must do one of these two; first, ^ither ^ollow a Trade; or
else, Go and b^y, (...) farm some Land in the Country: and when I considered
the grand oppressions there, as by Tithes, which is not only annually the
tenth part of the Husband man's prof^t to the lazy, antichristian, time
observing Priests; but annually the fourth part of his increase, labor,
h^zards, yea, and stock too; which Tithes I should sooner (...) then pay: and
not only so, but also the Taxations and Excise, with that un (...) gulf of
free quarter, by means of which a great Officer that bore me a spleen (amongst
whom I have enemies enough) with a Pegiment, or more, or fewer, in two or three
nights (with free quarter) might eat me (by force of arms) out of house and
home and so not only waste the increase, but also destroy the principal. And
so for these ^^sons I was bloc^t ost from going to live in the Country.

Then secondly, for a Trade, I must either follow it in London, or in some
other Corporation: and in another Corporation (although the King the root and
(...) of them be destroyed, and although I am not only a Native and free
Denizen of England, and served many years to learn a Trade in London, yet in
any considerable Corporation in England) can I not with indrustry be suffered
to follow a Trade or Merchandising to get me bread, unless I be a Free man
thereof; yea, Newcastle, the chiefest place in my eye, being nigh the abode of
my Father and kindred, is so grand i^haunsing a Monopol^zer, that it
monopoliseth the River of Time, yea, and the (...) for seven miles distance;
although it can produce neither Law nor Reason therefore, (...) only a large
bribing purse of the whole Corporation; which they in that Town say, is so
heavy, it will break any private particular man's back: which yet I should
(...) have feared, had there been any equal Law to have been had from the
Administration thereof in any of the Courts of Justice in England, being as
well able (at least in my own thoughts) to plead my own case in Law at any Bar
against an inhaunsing Corporation, or a Patentee Monopolizer (both of which are
against the fundamental Law^ and Liberties of England, as is notably proved by
Cook in his exposition of the (...) of Monopolies, 3 part Instit. fol. 181.
182. etc.) as any Lawer in England, it being (...) undoubted right both by Law
(See 28. Ed. 1. chap. 11. and the Statute that abolished the Star Chamber) and
Reason, to plead mine own cause, or any of my friends that will (...) and trust
me; (...) any Barristers in the Nation, which I will publicly dispute with
(...) any day in the week; and for the unjustnesse of Corporations and
Monopolies, (...) are both sons of one father, read my forementioned Book,
called, Innocence and Truth j^stified, from the 46 page to the 63. and my book
called, Londons Liberties in (...) covered, but especially page 21. 22. 36. 38.
41. 43. 44 45. to 58. And my second part of it, called Londons Charters, page
36. 37. to 64. So being for the foregoing reasons blocked off from following a
Trade any where else but in or about London, where I had the choi^^ of three
things.

First, Either to set up a Shop in the City; which I was staved off from, for
these Reasons:

First, Because the Court of Aldermen are so oppressive in their Government of
the City, setting up their own wills, humors, and irrational ridiculous
Customs above both the Law, Reason and their own Charters; which I knowing so
well as I do, (and which is pretty well anatomized in my foresaid Books) I
should never bear, and so ^e continually in broils, which was my earnest desire
to avoid.

Secondly, A man cannot well keep any considerable Trade i^ a Shop, but he m^st
trust much; which I man many times hazard the loss of; especially in these
impo^^ishing times, or else to L^w for it, which I never loved (never having
had two S^its in my life, that I can remember) not only for the j^ngling part
of it, but also for the tedious, chargeable, intricate, hazardous uncertainty
of the proceedings therein, as the Judges on purpose have made it to get money;
for being often in company with an able, and a very honest man for a Lawyer,
with other understanding friends, where we (...) ^ouble discourses of the
abuses of the Law, which were particularly instanced to be many, I took special
notice* of two things he often averred (to his praise I spe^^ it) besides the
proceeding for the most part in an unknown tongue, and an unlegible hand as
write, etc. which two things were these, that he would make good;

First, According to the practice in Westminster Hall, If a man lent another
man 100 l. 500 l. or 1000 l. etc. and had as good security as any in England
can give; yet when the day of payment comes, if the party be a crafty b^ffling
man, and have a good purse, he shall keep a man in the Courts in Westminster
Hall three or four years in suit, let him do the worst he could, before he
could get his money; nay, nor never shall get it neither, unless he have a
purse also able in some reasonable measure to bold pace with him: but in case
in any of that time (by sickness, loss or other c^sua^ties) he happen to fall
poor, and so not able in money to pay fees, etc. its lost for ever: besides all
this, the h^zards he runs (are sufficient) by being betrayed, bought, and sold
by his Solicitor or Attorney, etc. Besides the danger of common Knights of the
post, to swear the money's paid, etc.

Secondly, He did aver, that he would make it good before the Speaker at the
Bar of the House of Commons upon his life; that for the Chancery (which trades
men upon book accounts etc. are subject often to use, and there is not a decree
of 100l. from one years end to the other made in that Court, but jumbling all
the decrees together one with another, some suits holding 10, 15, 20, 30
years, nay some above, but first and last it costs the P^^intief 500l. for
eveey hundred pound decreed one with another; O brave, honest and reforming
Parliament who in three days might mend all this easily and plainly, by a
County record, by which a Suit never need to be of a months continuance, and
for which they have often been Petitioned, but yet will not, but suffer it to
continue worse then they found it, for all their great promises in their first
Remonstances, etc. to the contrary; yea and give their Judges their places
freely, and 1000l. per annum out of the Co^mon-wealths money, besides all their
illegal and unf^domable fees; whereas in the Kings time they had but 200 l.
per annum sallery and their fees; and most commonly paid 5, 6, 7, 8, 9000 l for
their places, an[yet were every whit as just as these are, for any thing that
over I could hear of to to the contrary, and I think I have enquired as
diligently into both as any one private man in England has done; so for these
reasons I durst not meddle with a shop in London.

And then in the next place, having multitudes of acquaintance both in City and
Country, I had thoughts out of the Cities Freedom to turn Soap-boyler, being a
good trade and most vendible for ready money, and in it I met with these
discouragements; viz. First, That there are new Monopolies upon some of the
principal materials that makes them double prised to what they used to be,
which most commonly are all imported from beyond seas, as oil, tallow and
potashes, for which is paid both custom and Excise, yea and for the very
coals that boyles them 4 or 5s. in a Chaldron; and scarce any thing free from
Excise that belongs to it, or to the backs or bellies of the men that work it,
but the very water; and yet notwithstanding when it is boiled and all hazard
run, as spoiling or breaking of vessels, falling of the price of soap, or none
vending of it, besides many other ac^identall casualties, yet out of the very
s^et of his brows and the industry and labor of the very fingers ends, there
must Excise be paid of so much a Barrel; and that which is worst of all is
this, my House which used to be my Castle, and so it is by Law, night or day
must be at the Knave Excise man's pleasure, to search and break open for
unsealed soape when he pleases; nay, notwithstanding all this I must be had to
take my oath (after they will not trust me, but have searched what they can) at
the Excis^ Office, that I have made no more but so and so, and it may be I
judge such an Oath altogether unlawful, and therefore cannot take it, and
therefore to prison without any more ado I go, and must be fined at the will
of the chief Excisers, and pay a noble a day to the Sergeant at Arms, besides
his man's fees; and if I do take my oath can forswear my self, I hazard the
Pillory for perjury besides the wounding of my conscience; but if I be
conscientious that I cannot set my conscience upon the tenter-hooks by
forswearing of my self; then I am destroyed in my trade by others that will
undersell me by this stealing Excise, and swearing soundly to the contrary too,
judging i^ (with Cromwell as Major Huntington in his impeachment of him
declares) no sin in may be to deceive the de^^iver or oppress^^y and all this
lies upon us; in the first year of Englands Freedom by the Conservators of the
Liberties thereof, who yet ^ealously and for the peoples welfare chopped of the
Kings head for tyranny and oppression, although his ^oynes were never so heavy
as their little finger is, O brave, unerring, unsinning, and everlasting, none
such Parliamen;

And therefore last of all I had thoughts toward Winter to buy of my Uncle at
S^^derland to lay up some coals at my habitation in Winchester-house, to fell
in January and February, and in the mea^^ime to lay out my money in some
adventure for Holland, and there I met with these difficulties: First*
although, I was as wary as any man in England could be, to see that Master
Devenish title to the house was good in Law, and so I might justly and quietly
expect the enjoyment of my bargain from him; And thereby I see First his
deeds, and the Parliaments Ordinances thereupon, and Secondly I went and spoke
with Master John Cook the Lawyer, who drew up the conveyances betwixt Master
Devenish and Master Young, of whom Master Devenish for his life bought all
Winchester House in Southwa^k; by all which, but especially from M^ster Cooks
own mouth, I clearly and evidently found Master Levenish had as good a right
in all Winchester house, for Master Youngs life both by Law and Ordinance, as
its possible for any man in England to have to the clothes he wears, or any
thing else that he possesses, although he takes the advice of twenty Lawyers
in the buying and purchasing* of them* which encouraged me to strike a bargain
with him for three years, for as much of the House as I am to pay annually
almost 20l. and yet since a Committee of Members with the Trustees of Bishops
Lands will needs turn me and the honest man (by force of Arms) out of his
Legal possession without any valuable consideration, or rendering at the least
any reason wherefore, but only their Sovereign wills and pleasures. O BRAVE
PARLIAMENT JUSTICE! without all doubt this is the liberty of the people, and
the Law of the Land, that we have been contesting and fighting for these seven
years together, or at least as much as they intend (now they have conquered us
with our own money and our own hands) we shall possess and enjoy this
unrighteous molestation, which with their illegal imprisoning of me has
spoiled a coal-Merchant of me for the present.

And in the second place, as my adventuring to Holland, when I came to inquire
after the nature of that, I found these difficulties therein, First, A strict
Mon^poly, that none whatsoever shall ship any white cloth for that place but
the Monopolisers themselves, and Secondly a general monopoly upon woollen
commodities whatsoever, that unless you do as good as tell a lie; I found
merchants still continued to be the chief customers, who it ^seems have a trick
to steal whole ship loads of custom for their own use, by mean^ of which they
undersell any other merchant, yea and thereby break the backs of new beginners;
for being at my first inquiring thereinto with Master William Kiffin my quondam
servant, though now my prof^st and blood thirsty enemy, he told me a little
before, he was one day at the Custom House, and the chief men there had caught
a poor man that had stolen some custom, for which they were about fining and
punishing him, why Master faith he to one of them in Kiffins hearing as he
averred to me) will you be so angry with me, and so harsh to punish me for a
small ^oy, when I am but your own scholar, for I am sure its but the other day
fin^e by your own directions I help^ you to steal in a manner a whole ship load
of uncustomed good^: and you being so well pleased with that, my thinks you
should not be so angry with me for stealing a little custom for my self.

But then Fourthly, The Prince was Master of the Sea then, so that I durst not
venture it in a English bottom, some of which had laid in the Thames diverse
weeks loaded and du^st not stir out for want of convoy, which they had fought
much for then to the Parliament, but could get none; and to ship it in a Dutbh
bottom, it did not only give the traid of shipping to the Dutch, and so destaoy
our English Ma^iners, but also by law to ship it in Du^th bottom, it is
consiscated or at least must pay the custom of Aliens or strangers as appears
by the statutes of 5 R 2. chapter 3 and 6 K 2 cha. 8. and 4 H. 7 ^b 10. and 5. and
6. E. 6 cha. 18. and 1 H. 13. But having bought some cloth and stuffs I was
necessitated to run the hazard of ^hipping them in Dutch bottom; but English
woollen commodity; being so great a drug in Holland as they are by reafon of
the merchant monopolisers, alias mercha^t adventurers, that ingrosse the trade
to themselves, and buy their cloth here at what rates they please and sell it
in Holland as dear a list; and so care not how little they vend so they get
money enough by that they sell and disable all others from trayding, by means
of which the poor people here that depend upon cloth-making, wanting work are
necessitated to leave the land of their nativity and go to Holland to make
cloth for the dutchmen to get bread to keep them alive; whereby they have
almost got the English cloth making traid, and our wise* just and long winded
^arliament, are willing thershould so do, or else almost in nine years time
they would have given some satisfactory effectual answer in those multitudes
of Petitions that have year after year been preferred to them, complaining of
these unsufferable and destroying grievances and yet they can assume to
themselves a style of the Conservators of the Leberties of England in the first
year of Freedom, but I wonder where it is, for my eyes can see none at all in
any kind, but rather more bondage then ever, witness now their Treason-trap,
etc.

So English cloth being so great a drugg there, that little profit could I
expect by my adventure, unless I laid out in the return most of my money in such
Commodities as are monopolized by new Patents, Ordinances, against the Laws and
Liberties of England* and if I so did, when they come here (if the Monopolizers
catch them) they are all lost; so here is our Freedom, but yet notwithstanding,
I did order my factor to lay out the most of my money there, in such commodities
only, being resolved as soon as I could here of the ships arrival in the river
of Thames, to board her with half a dozen lusty resolved blades; and with my
own hand to give the chief Monopolizer's a b^ace of pistol bull^ts in his
guts, or a prick with my Rapier or dager, in case he came to take away my goods
from me; and then to run the hazard of a trial at common Law, to see whether by
the Law of God, and of England; I could not justify the preservation of my
self and my goods, from any that come to rob me of them, and rather kill him or
them, that would assault me and them, then suffer him or them to take away by
force my livelihood, and so by consequence the life of me and my family, but
the counsel of States robbing me of my liberty, by my close imprisonment in
the Tower has frustrated my marchandizing hopes, yea and it may be thereby
break me to the bargin, but if they do, when they have seriously cast up their
gains by it, they will not be six pence the richer, though my wi^^ and ^^tle
babe^ may be much more the poorer: But to turn back again to my coming out of
the North, besides the thoughts of my future substance, in some honest
industr^^^^ calling or other, I spent some time at Westminster, to see and
satisfy my own understanding how the t^^e sail of things stood at the helm, I
mean with the three great me^ of the Army, viz. FAIRFAX. CROMWELL, and IRETON;
and whether I could find out they had any real tho^^hts to prosecute their OWN
AGREEMENT, that so we might have a new, equal and just representativ^, which I
upon my principles (now they had laid Kingly Government aside) looked upon as
the only and alone earthly sal^^ to heal and cu^e the wounds of this dist^acted
and dying Nation, and to make it flourish once again in peace, Trade and all
kind of outward prosperity, and without which our wounds could never be hea^ed
^r cured by any other means that could be invented o^ conti^^^d, looking in my
own thoughts upon the then small sitting remnant of the last Parliament, as a
quite contrary inte^est to the peoples good or welfare; distributive Justice
and universal righteousness, being their bane, and that which would be the
unavoydable ruin by reason of that horrible g^ilt they have contracted by
their self-seeking unjust ways upon themselves; the great bugbear the King
being now gone, they would be necessarily l^d, for the supportation of
themselves in the evil of their ways, and continuance of their intended
perpetual Greatness, to court, support, and make much of the chief Supporters
of all the remaining corrupt Interest in England, as the Priests, and their
robbing Tithes, the banc of industry; the Laywers, and their monopolizing
pleadings, and all their old and base inslaving corruptions in the execution of
the Laws, as bad in a manner as the old bondage of Egypt; and of old and
illegal Charter-mongers, the inhaunsers, engrossers, and Monopolizers of
Trade, and all the base bondages thereunto belonging; the peoples freedoms and
liberties being the only thing now dreaded by them ^^ the only engine to pull
down all the steps they have long laid for their elective Kingship, and the
single enjoyment amongst themselves alone (and their vassals, slaves and
creatures) of all the great places thereunto belonging, and thereupon
depending, which yet they must not immediately do, but go about it gradually,
and first get the power of seeming legal authority, into a narrower compass
then it was, in their purged House of Commons; that so that might rule, counsel
and direct their mock*Parliament; and the Council of the Army ^ight rule that;
by means of which (what with the service of Irelan^, etc.) they might so
mo^^lize their Army, that it in due time might totally become slavish by
obeying without dispute what ever their great Officers command them, and so
unanimously elect, and impose upon the people their present general for their
King, as the only fit, able, and best deserving man in England for that
sovereign Place; provided, underhand he would engage too high and mighty
Oliver, and his Son in law Henry Ireton, to be sure to do a^ they would have
him, and in his Kingship to promote those that they would have advanced, that
so one of them might not fail after his decease to succeed him; and so in time,
with their long continued power and wills, keep it in their Line, as the only
deserving Family in this Nation, who saved it from its enemies (for their own
ends) in the day of its distress; whose battles it fought pretendedly for the
Liberties of England, crying out Jehu like, 1 Kings 10. 16. Come, See my zeal
therefore in cutting off the Kings head, etc. and razing out his Family: And
undoubtedly it is of the Lord, for he has prospered me in it (and so he did
Judas in betraying Christ) and no^e has been able to stand before me, When as,
alas, all this success may be no more but the rod of God to chastise a then
more wicked Family, designed by God to that destruction; for the
transgressions, sin, or blood thereof; Yet for all this, the heart may be no
more upright then John's was, which vantingly lifted up by his great su^c^ss,
and took no beed at all to walk in the Law of (JUSTICE, TRUTH, and OBEDIENCE)
the Lord God of Israel with all his heart, but followed after (MAN'S INVENTIONS
and DEVICES) JEROBOAM'S wickedness, to win the golden calves in DAN and BETHEL;
for which wickedness and pride of his spirit, (after all his success in
fulfilling the express will and command of God in cutting of from the earth
Ahabs family, for the transcendent wickedness thereof) yet God begun to plague
him, and in those days cut ISRAEL sho^^, ye and afterward for the pride and
wickedness of his posterity (unto whom to the fourth generation God gave the
Crown of Israel) for JEHU doing well in executing that which was right in his
eyes, in utt^^^y ^^ing of the house of AHAB for their ^lo^dt^ir^^y wi^kedness,
according to the heart and mi^^ of God, verse. 13. brought such plagues upon him
and his people, that they became a spoil to all their neighbors, which made
their affl^ction very bitter; insomuch that there was not any shut up, (...)
any left, nor any helper for Israel, chap. 14. 26. And as JEHU to the eyes of
men conspired against his Master and killed him, being but a Captain in Isra^l;
so Shalum the son of JABESH conspi^ed against the last of his race, and smote
him before the people and sl^w him, and reigned in his stead, Chap. 15. 10. but
because those that followed after took no wa^ning by the righteons and grievous
punishment of their predecessors for their wicke^nesse, to w^lk righteously and
justly before the Lord; Therefore he made their R^ignes very mort, and full of
blood and bitter affliction; and brought their heads to their graves most
commonly by Conspiracy, and that many times of their SERVANTS and CAPTAINS; as
the sequel of the Story shows.

And in my Observations and private discourses at Westminster, I apparently
found it to be as I fea^ed, their main endeavors being closely carried on to
perpetuate this Parliament for ever, and by it, a new (and then) endeavored to
be erected Council of State, and the Council of War, for the future (by the
rules of their wills) to govern this declared Free Nation arbitrarily; and to
make some Gr^nd examples of ^error, as that none for time to come should dare
to stir; Which I there clea^ly saw, to my vexation and trouble, but was
inwardly forced to bite my lip and be silent: but that which perplexed me most
was that I found promotion and promised hopes of honor and gain had very much
changed the principles, and cooled the zeal of three or four of my familiar
acquaintance and bosom friends, ^^at not long before had been visibly and
frequently the valia west, stoutest, ablest Champions* for Englands Libe^^ies
and Freedoms that I know in the Nation; some of whom very fairly and smoothly
dealt often with my self, to be as prudent and wise in acceptance of the
favors, and familiar respects of great men, as they had done; and at my coming
to town Duke Hamilton, and the stout Lord Capel etc. had newly entered upon the
stage for the trial of their lives, and I confess, I was exceeding curious, in
satisfiing my self about the manner of dealing with them, and so up into the
court I got and heard the beginning of their defense, and afterward went and
spoke with them, looking upon them as part of the people of England, unto whom
if any injustice was done, it became a p^esident to destroy me, or the most
righteous man in England, if the swaying faction pleased, and s^e^ng thes^m^n^a
knowledge themselves subject ^^ the penal part of the Law, as well as the
directive part (which the King never did but to his dying hour maintained,
those two most ABOMINABLE AND ALL HUMAN SOCIETY-dest^o^ing (...) viz. that he
was acco^^table to no power on earth, (but God a one) as to punishment for any
of his actions, though never so wicked: And secondly that the people have no
share ^n Government, I thought my self and the liberties of my native Country
concerned in the manner of their trial *though I neither the^ nor now liked the
cause in which they i^ga^ed) as knowing and seeing very well when the hedges
and freedoms of our liberties and freedoms have but a gape broken down in
them, it is likely in time not only to become a path, but ^ high (...), to let
in such an inundation of illegalities and arbitrarits as shall over^^ow all and
(...) down all underfoot, which is plainly to be read in Sit Walter K^^leys
(...) H^story of the Thirty grand Tyrants of Athens, in his History of the
World, lib. chap. 9. (...). 2. ^ol. And which in time might become a means to
pervert all the whole (...) of the whole English Government, of which my mind
being full, I argued th^^ with my s^l^e.

(...) be these men's lives they would have right or wrong, then they should
have killed them in the heat of blood and not have given them quarter, or after
quarter given (...) notwithstanding broke, and so have dispatched them by
shooting or otherwise killing them in their Chambers or the like; but to
reserve them many months together alive, and b^ing them out in the face of the
Sun, preten^^ing to take away their lives by the rules of Justice and Law.
Well then what is done unto them in this case, must be (...) in the means and
method of Justice as well as in the end, and the Law of England (...) their
b^^th^ight and inh^ritan^e in every puncti^^io of it as well as mine or any
man's in the Nation, and indeed the end of the making of the Law is for
transgressors, by the (...) of which their actions ought to be measared, the
privileges and benefit of which all their (...) ought not to be denied (nay if
they be ignorant of their legal privileges, the Judge ought to instruct and
inform them thereof) nay or any stander by else that is present at the trial,
and the law renders this reason, lest the prisoner at the Bar should unjustly
(...) his life by the errors of the proceedings of the Court, 3. p^^. insti.
fol. 29. 137. (...), for a righteous man the Law was never made for him,
neither has he any need to claim the benefit of the several privileges of
it, because he does not transgress it; but because so much malice and
wickedness is in the hearts of the sons of men, that many times the wicked and
guilty accuses the righteous and innocent, therefore the wisdom of our
fore*^^thers, and the righteousness of the Laws they made for us and have left
unto ^s is such that no man though never so notorious in public fame, is to be
esteemed or (...) i guilty man or transgressor (in the eye of the law) till he
be legally and duly convided of the crime laid unto his charge by the rules and
methods of the Law:the law of England is as much to be magnified, as Sir Edward
Cock often styles it, being a Law of (...), 2 par. insti. fol. 315. favors
much the life of man, because of all things in the world it is most precious,
fol. ibid 30 see his exposition of magna charta in 2 par. inst but especially
fol. 42. 43. 46, 47. 51. 56. but above all read that most excellentest of all
his discourses upon the righteousness, equity, safety, and justness of the
trial by Juries of 12 (^iber (...) lega^is home) free and legal men (NEXT) of
the neighborhood in his 1 pa^. Insti. ib. ^ chap. 12 Sect. 234. which
Parliaments cannot destroy nor change, because it is impossible for them to
find out a juster or better way of trial and they (...) to provide for our
weal, but not for o^r woe, ^ par* book. Doc. p. 150. and (...) do what they
list but what they ought 1 par. ^ook dee. p. 172. 205. 214. 266. 267. (...)
494. 497 499. 656. 660. 666. 696. 706. 707. (...) 2 par. fol. 95. and Declarat
17 March 164^ p. 6. 21, 28, 27. For all the idle pratings of any new upstart
'SONS OF BELIAL amongst us, such as the Author of the late abominable Book
called the DISCOVERER which is commonly reported to be partly Master Frosts
Secretary to the (...) called the (...) of (...), and p^incipal^y that
Apostate, JOHN CAN law if (...), and now of the Parish of B^w, whose conscience
by that appears so bread (...) it will without doubt lead him to worship with
the Turks Alkeron if it were in (...), and fat livings to be got by so doing;
But let all men in Authority and great place^ (...) value they own heads and
lives; Remember Dudly and Epsons punishments Privy Co^cellors to H^n^y the^
eve^^^, for proceeding by the rules of their discretion i^ (...) (...), laying
aside the trials by Juries of twelve men, the ancient and undoubted birthright
of the Subject 4 part inst. fol. 41. for which they lost their heads as
Traitors for subvert^ng the fundamental Liberties of the people, although they
had an Act of Parliament (viz. 11 Hen. 7. ch^. 3. recorded 4 par. inst. ^ol.
40) made by as unquestionable power in Law as ever was in being in England, in
a free and full Parliament, c^^sisting of King, Lords Spi^ituall and Tempor^ll,
and Commens; to authorize and beat them out in what they did, of whom you may
read most excellently in Cooks inst. viz. 2 par. fol. 51 and 4 par. fol. 41.
197, 198. 199.

And in my musing with my self of their conditionn, my thoughts were something
to this purpose the actions done and acted by them, were either crimes or no
crimes, crimes as to men they could not be, unless they were transgressions of
a known and declared law in being in the Nation before their acts were done,
(for says the Spirit of Truth, Where there is no Law there can be ^^
transg^ession, Romans 4. 15.) and if so then to punish them for their acts (or
facts) any other ways, or by any other rules, manner or methods then is by
those Laws against which they had transgressed, is expressed and pres^ibed, is
very grand injustree* and the most righteous and justest men in the world,
(under such practices) can never be safe or secure, but are always liable in
liberty, estate and life, to be levell^d and destroyed by the will, malice and
pleasure, of the present s^aying grand faction, in which condition a man
differs nothing from a brute beast, but in shape; But the High Court of
Justice, erected to try them, was a pretended Court of Justice, not known to
the visible and declared law of England (being in its constitution altogether
against all the English Rules of justice, No nor in being when their facts were
committed; And therefore had no pretense at all being but a new constitution to
meddle with Judging of their facts committed before it had a being, or was
brought forth into the world. Besides the erection of it (I mean a High Court
of Justice) to try men for siding with the King in? the late wars against the
Parliament is a mere and clear giving away, and surrendering up the legallity of
their cause in o the Kings hands, telling the people in effect hereby, its true
we have waged war against the King, but if his sword had been as long as ours
he might easily if he had pleased have hanged us all by the rules of Justice
for transgressing ^ l^w in being.

But we having by the chanc^ of war prevailed against him alas, we have no law
of our sides, by the rules of which we can hang any of his party, but must be
forced to take away their lives by the rules of our own wills and power, by
rules of pretended Law m^de after their facts committed, and for the
demonstrating of this unto all that have adhered unto us, we Erect a New High
Court of Justicely new rules never known in England to try them, that so our
friends that have adhered to us, may see where they are, and betimes provide
for their own safety, and never trust or believe OUR DECLARATIONS AND
REMONSTRANCES ANY MORE; for though we formerly told you we had the Law of our
sides; yet by our setting up this High Court of Justice, to be both parties,
Jury and Judges, we plainly tell you there was no such thing, but that then what
we told you was lies and falshood^ and that you should believe us no more: for
though then we told you we would maintain the Law, especially of Liberty and
Propriety, and that it was ^ transcenden^ wickedness in us to destroy it, and
by our votes at our wills and pleasures to disposeor level all the peoples
estates, liberties and properties; yet now we iell you, we never in our hearts
intended any such thing, but that our design was totally (if we did overcome)
never to keep any of our promises: but absolutely to destroy all Law, and by
our absolute will, by all manner of new erected engines, to debase and break
the peoples Spirits, and to dispose of their liberties, estates and lives by
the absolute rule of their own wills, and as a cle^^ demonstration to your
understanding that we never intended otherwise,, we erect this HIGH COURT OF
JUSTICE, composed of suck (...) we know will obey and execute the absolute
dictats of our wills, ^e they (...), without ever examining whether our
commands be consonant to law, reason, eq^ity, justice or conscience, being of
as absolute implicit faith in belcl^ering of us (because we have promised they
shall ^aign with us or under us) as ever any papish in the world were believing
the Pop^.

Thirdly, Admit this had been an unquestionable (representative of the people)
Parliament, who by ve^^^^ th^^^^f has had a power to levy what money they had
judged conven^^nt upon the people b^ ^^neral tax for the common safety of the
Nation, which act both by law, and reason ^h^y may do; yet they cannot in law,
equity or reason, lay all tha^ tax upon th^ee o^ four men alone, and make them
bear all the charges of the public; ev^n so, although the Parliament may erect
Courts of Justice, for the good of the people, to administer Law in ^esinitely
to all the people of England alike without exe^p^ion of persons; yet they can
neither by Law, nor Reason, erect a Court of Justice on purpose to try three or
four individual persons, and no more because it is against common equi^y, ^^
Englishmen o^ people being all born free alike, and the liberties thereof
equally intasted to all alike;and therefore in common equity and justice, three
or four individual persons ought not to be burdened with an iron yoke, when
the universal are only b^rthened with a wooden one; and therefore in this s^^rt
is my judgment. that that high Court of Justice was altogether unlawful in
case th^se that set it up had been an unquestionable representative of the
people, or a legal Parliament, neither of which they are not in the least; but
as they have managed their business in opposing all their primitive declared
just ends, a pack of traiterous, self seeking tyranical men, usurpers of the
name and power of a Parliament. I say considering with my self some such things
as these are, I was something diligent at the beginning of their trial to see
and hear all; yea and often converse^ with th^mselve^, but when I came to hear
st^ut CAPEL make his defense for himself, (which was before he had any counsel
assigned) and so GALLANTLY and ac^utely to pl^ad the Law, and demand the
benefit of it; which he did as acutely in my judgment, as ever I did hear any
^^ an in his own case in my life, alleging fifthly the Statu^e of 25. Ed 3.
chap. ^. and cited the very word of those ^ notable Statuts for his benefit, of
the 1 ^^n 4. chap. 10. and 11 Hen. 7. chap* 1. the last of which indemnifies
the Kings followers i^ wars, and also cited the first and second of P. and M.
chap. 10. and pressed therefrom that ^ll treasons should be tried by the ^^les
of the common Law and not by ext^a^^din^ry ^ays and means according to the
declared Laws in being citing the petition of right for the proof of that,
looking round about him, and saying I am an English man, and the Law is my
inheritance, and the benefit of the petition of right my birth right, if so
then says he l^^king upon the president, (...) my Jury. I see none of my Jury,
that is to pass upon me* I demand the sight of ^^ J^^y legally pannelled, as my
right by Law, without the verdict o^ whom I cannot in Law be c^^demned, and
when it was ^eply^d upon him by the pre^^dent, that the members of the Court
was the Jury; he most g^^lan^ly and resolu^^ly answered to this effect, I (...)
you will not deny me the bene^^^ of the Law, which you ^^etend you have sought
this Seve^ years to maintain: I hope, Sir, You will not deny m^ the benefit of
the Declarations of those by whose power you sit: And producing ^^e Declaration
(of the pretended House) made the 9th F^br. 1648* To maintain the Fundamental
LAWS of the Nation; he held i^ forth, and desired it to be read, which was
refused by the President, telling him, They knew it well enough: Well then
says he, Here Is a Declaration made but the other day, whe^ein the Parliament
declares, That they are fully resolved to maintain, and shall and will up
hold, preserve and keep the Fundamental Laws of this Nation; for, and
concerning the preservation of the Lives, Properties, and Liberties of the
People, with all things incident thereunto* with the alter^tions touching
Kings, and House of Lords already resolved in this present Parliament, FOR THE
GOOD OF THE PEOPLE: And says he, It is one of the Fundamental Liberties of
the Subjects of this Kingdom, to be tried by JURIES; and I hope you will not
deny me the benefit of the Parliaments Declaration, and so break it as soon as
it is made: but all was to no purpose* he must have no Jury, but Council, if
he would; at the denial of which unto him, I confess my heart was ready to
s^^k within me, and my spirit was inwardly filled full of fire at these
wretched men, whose now decla^ed de^ig^s was clear to tread under their feet
all the Liberties of England, notwit^standing a^^ their oaths and promises to
the contrary; and then in that ^^y in ^y own thoug^^s I cl^arly bid adieu unto
all Englands glorious (amongst men) Lib^^ties and dea^-bought F^eedoms, and
much ado had I in the open Court to contain my self from an a^^wed
d^te^^ation of their A BOMINABLE WICKEDNESS, my heart was so full; but being
withdrawn I was something free in my discourse in all companies I came in* but
yet upon the principles of the Law and their own Declarations, as being almost
overwhel^ed to see what I then saw; and several discourses I had with the
prisone^s, and diverse of my books and law pleas, with Sir John Maynards and the
four Impeached Aldermen I sent them, and much pressed some of them to put
their lives upon the hazard of a Plea and protestation against the Jurisdiction
of the Court, telling them if they dyed upon that score, they would not only die
as lovers of the King their principal, but also of their Country, as brave
Englishmen in the eyes of the people; whereas if they stooped finally to their
Jurisdiction, they might easily perc^ive they were resolved to sacrifice them,
and if they so died they dyed upon a poor and begparly score; ye^ in a manner
upon the denial of their own principals; but the Gentlemen having as ^o me
appeared, large promises of their lives upon conformity to the Jurisdiction of
the ^ourt were merely gull^d thereby of their lives, and could scarce ever
believe the should dye till the house of death came upon them.

And yet notwithstanding this, some of them sent to me, to desire me to be one
of their Council, to plead for them in matter of Law; unto whose friends I
returned an Ans^er to this effect, That I could not be ^o unworthy in my own
esti^ation, as to plead any plea they could plead for a justifi^ation of their
^ctions (though I conf^ssed there were much in Law to be said for them; ^f
e^^ally, as the case stood with them) unless it were a plea and protestation
against their Jurisdict^on; and so procrastina (...) trial, if it were a
possible till a new Parliament; upon which plea, I ^ould willingly have ve^tred
my heart blood for them, because my int^r^st, and the inter^st of all the free
and honest men in En^l^nd was as much concerned in that fa^^ll president of
that abominable and wicked Court, a^ C^pell or Hambleto^s life, etc. was; but
they would not venture there, and so I declined them: And when HOLLAND came to
it, a Lady, and some other of his friends came to me, to my house about hi^;
but I was still upon the same string, yet sent him word of several
particulars, in reference to my Trial and arr^igament at Oxford, that was very
material to his present cause, and if he would call me in the open Court, as a
Witness; he should s^e I would speak my mind freely and effectually, although
I smarted for so doing; and he appointed a day to call me; whereupon, I went
into the Court, and conveyed w^rd to him, I was there, but whether his heart
failed him or no, I know not, but he never called me; so when I understood they
were all in the way of condemnation, I took the thid part of Cooks Institutes
under my arm to the house door, and made several A^pli^^tions to some of
their Judges, and some Parliament men for them, and particularly with Colonel
Temple* Governor of the Fort near Graves End, and del^ with him upon their own
Principals, as the most probablest to do the Prisoners good* and to save their
lives, which I confest^ I much labored for, and my Discourse with him (...) to
this ^ffect at the House door:

Sir, I beseech you, let me a^k you one question, What Is that says he? It is
whether you think you^ House intend in good earnest to ^ake away the lives of
the Lord Capel etc? or whether they have only caused them to be condemned in
terrorum? without all controversy said he, they intend to take away their
lives, and it is but just they should, and do not you believe so, No indeed
Sir do I not, and ^^ you please, I will give you some part of my Reasons
therefore; I pray let me have them, Well then Sir said I, to say nothing of the
Jurisdiction of the Court by which they were tried (which is very questionable
to me) no^ of the power of a Parliament to erect such a one, nor yet of the
questionablenesse of the legality of your single House, nor of the clearness
of the letter of the Law o^ their sides; which now the King being g^ne, might
put you o^^ of fear of the future power of these men, and make you now (...)
at your mercy, and you out of fear of present hurt by them; seriousl^ to we^g^
the Qua^^ell betwix^ you and the^ in an equal and just balance; which if you
do, I am sure you will (...) it very disp^^eable in Law, and something in
Reason too, considering many of you^ late actions; especially if you consider,
you^ ever avowedly nor thoroughly stated your Cause; but begun it upon
Commissions for King and Parliament, force ^^ people to take the Oath of
Allegiance and Supremacy, Protestation, and two Covenants, ^^ all which you
force the people to swear to maintain the Kings Person, Crown and Greatness:
and this (...) the Wars begun, letting all Writs and Process of Law (...) in
his Name, and thereby your selves m^ke him as it were Alpha and Omega to the
people; yea, and in several of your Declarations fince the quarrel, you call
him the fountain of Honor, and averr he can do no wrong: See 1 part Book Decl.
page 199. 304. All which doings of yours are enough to make men si^^ with the
King, especially those that have great Estates, if it be for nothing but
safetie's s^ke alone: But I will la^ all these aside, and argue with you more
closely, upon principles that you cannot dispute against.

1. And therefore in the first place, The Law of England p^^lished by your
selves, says expresl^, No man of England in things concerning lif^ shall be
judged tw^^^ for one fact; but if once judiciall^ tried and acquitted, he never
more by Law can be questioned again for that crime, though indeed and in truth
he be never so guilty of it, and though it be never so criminous in it self;
otherwise there would never be end nor safety: And for the proof thereof I then
^ired ^ YERS Case, at the Sessions of the Peace holden at Norwich in the 32
year of Queen Elizabeth, and the Judge^ opinions thereupon, which is notably
recorded in Cooks 3 put Institutes chap. 104. of falsifying of Attainders, fol.
230. And my own Case at Oxford, which was to this effect: Being at the Fight at
Brainford (which was upon the 12 of November. 1642) taken prisoner in Arms
against the King and his party, I was carried captive to Oxford Castle* where
not long after my arrival, the Lord Dunsmore, the Lord Matrevers, the Lord
Newark* and the Lord A^d^ver came to the Castle to me from the King, as they
said, and proffered me from himself great matters, so I would crave his ^^don
for the treason I had committed against him, in being in arms against him, and
fo^sake the traitorous Parliament, and return to my obedience (as they called
it) to the King: but being then as able in my own thoughts, as any private man
in England to argue the equi^^ and Justice of the Parliaments Cause, I was then
knowingly engaged in by the hopes of the performance of their many gallant
promises to make people of England free and happy (their then only declared a^m
and end) and in whose quarrel I would then have laid down a thousand lives,
(if I had had them) and for the greatest part of an hour together, by din^ of
Argument, grounded upon Law and Reason, sc^^ning and (...) all (...) of Honor,
Riches, and Greatness, I ^eld them in play so ho^ly, that they ^^ll (...) with
me, and gave up their disputing bu^^lers; t^^eatning to hang me (...) for a
grand Traitor, without any more ado. At which I laughed, and desired their
(...) to tell me which way they would go to work to take away my life, now they
had given me quarter.

Well, say they, We have two strings to our bow, And in the first place, we
will arraigne you for a Traitor, for being the chief or General of the
Preuti^^t, that c^^e d^^^ to Westminster and White Hall, and forced the House
of P^ers, and drove away the King from his Parliament, and so begun the Wars.
Unto which I replied, Al^sse, my Lords, you will be far mistaken there. And I
cannot but wonder, that your Lordships should so undervalue your own Honors
and Reputations, as so much as once now to mention this. Why Sirrah? said one
of them. Why, my Lord? Because your Lordships may remember, that the 3 of May,
1641. the King caused Warrants to issue out to apprehend me as a Traitor for
this very thing, and others depending upon it; and as a traitor I was
apprehended by his Messengers, one of which that night kept me prisoner as a
Traitor: and the next morning I being 4 of May 1641, as a Traitor I was brought
by him to White Hall, where, (a^ I remember) old Sir Henry Vane and Mr.
Nicholas were appointed by the King himself to carry my Impeachment to the
House of Peers, at whose B^r I that day appeared (not then understanding their
Jurisdiction) and was there that day in your way arraigned for my life, and one
Littleton the Lord Keepers Kinsman, swore most bi^terly against me: but upon
further examination of witnesses, and hearing with patie^^^ my own Defense for
my self, I was by your who^e House (who look^d upon themselves as the highest
Judicatory in England) honorably and nobly (...), a^ (...) ^^nocent and f^^e
of the Kings accusation: of which, my Lords, (said I then) let me plainly tell
y^u, if I were guilty, you were a company of ^^righteous and unjust Judges for
freeing me from that Accusation: but, my Lords, being judicially tried
therefore, and acquitted by your selves, (who, if my memory fail me not, I ^aw
all at that Trial) and by your whole House (then extraordinary (...) as ever I
saw i^) who judge your selves the highest Judicature in England, I am acquitted
thereby (my Lords) by the Law of England, from any more question about that
(...), although it should be granted, I was never so guilty of it. Unto which
they replied (to my remembrance) in these words, A pox on you, for a cunning
subtle Rogue, are you so cunning in the Law, that we cannot lay hold of you
here? but yet for all your parts, we will have you to the gallows, for leavying
War upon the traitorous commands of the Parliament against the King^: And here
(said they) we are sure the ^aw will reach you. Whereupon I was immediately
after laid in^^^tons, and brought to the Bar before the Lord Chief Justice
Heath, Sir Thomas Gard^ed Recorder of London, etc. and by Indictm^^t, a^^o^ding
to the rules of the Common Law, a^r^igned for a traitor for levying War in
Oxf^^dsh^^e against the King. But my Plea to the business of W^stminst^r* and
the P^enti^^^ was admitted for good law* That being once judiciall^ ^^ed and
acqui^ted, I could no more be troubled therefore: neith^r indeed was ^. But
according to the punct^li^es of the Law, they gave me all the lair play* in the
world that the Law would allow me, s^ffering me to say for my self at the Bar
what I pleased, releasing me of my close imprisonment and i^ons, and allowed me
pen, ink and paper (which the Jailer kept from me) upon my pleading before the
Judge; such usages being altogether contrary to law: and that no such usage,
ought to be exercised in the least upon any prisoner whatsoever, that w^^ (...)
bea^^ly rude in his imp^^lonment; and that no supposed ^raitore^ (...) by law
could be put to any pa^^ or torm^nt before co^riction.

And truly, Colonel Te^^le, I should be very sorry, and blush for shame, (...)
considering my ^^rong zeal in the Parliaments cause, to see the day that the
Parliament of England (a^ least th^se that so style themselves) that has
pretended so much righ^^^^ness and justice, should be no more just to the
Covaliers (against whom they have fought for injustice and and oppression) in
denying them the benefit of the Law ^h^n they are in their power and mercy,
then the Kings Jadges were to me, and other of your prisone^^, when their lives
were in their power and mercy, in the hight of War, and of their (...)
prosperity, and yet granted us the benefit of Law in all things we claimed it
in, as Capt. Vivers of B^n^ury, arraigned with me, can witness as well as my
self.

Now Sir, to make application: the Parliament not long since, when in its po^e^
it was more a^un^^ntly unquestionable then now it is, (after its new force)
cond^^^^ed CAPEL, HAMBLETON, HOLLAND etc. to banishment, for the very (...) now
to their charge; an^ therefore in Justice and Law cannot a second time cause
them to be adjudged to die for the very same things. Its nothing to me, nor to
the King^om, for you to say, that when that J^dgment passed they had so many
friends sitting in the House as over-voted the honest Common-wealth's-men to
the pr^judice thereof; for the maj^r part is Parliament, or else th^re ^s no
parliament: Therefore Sir, I reason thus: E^ther that wherein that Judgment
passed was a parliament, or no Parliament; ^if a Parliament, then their
judgment (^s to themselves especially) was binding, and the benefit of it they
ought not to deny to them whose live^ are cons^rved in it; (...) it were unjust
in it self ^^ to the Nation: But if you, or any other man shall say, it was no
Parliament, as having forfeited their trust in treating with the King again,
and so their Judg^^nt not valid, then with much more confidence say I, this
that now fits is no Parliament, and so by consequence, the High Court of
Justice no Court of Justice at all? and if for then to execute them upon their
Judgment, is absolute Murder. But I would fain see that honest and valiant man
in your House that du^st pretest against them for no Parliament.

But Sir, besides this, mark the consequence of it to all we Parliamenteers
that have acte^ under you, and by virtue of your commands, by these Proceedings*

First, You have sold the Bishops Lands, and given them th^^ bought them, as
they suppose, good security for their quiet enjoyment of their P^rchas^s: I,
but within a little wh^le after, part of the very same Parliament alters their
minds, and being becom^th ma^or part by forcible Purgations, illegal new
Recruits, or by any other ^ricks ^^ ^^vi^es, and they vote, all those barg^ins
are unjust, and the Purchasers ought to lose both ^e^r Land and M^n^y: where is
then that stable security of Parliaments? And yet such doings would be as just
as your present dealings with CAPEL, etc. whose preceden^ (...) a precedent for
that, and much more of the same nature.

B^t secondly, The sam^ Parliament that condemded Capel etc. to B^nishment,
passed mul^itudes of Compositions with several Cav^lier^, as guilty of T^eason
in the (...) of it, ^s they: And by the same rule^o^ now cond^^n CAPEL, and
(...); after you have judged them to banishment, you ^^y adjudge all the
compounding C^v^^eers to ^^ ^ange^, after you have adjudged them to
composition, and so put the Kingdom (by (...) people desperate) in an
everlasting flame that never will have end, bec^^se (...) is ^o certainty in
any of your proceedings, but are ^s changeable as the wind th^^ (...)

(...), Thirdly, and most principally it is a common maxim^ in Law and Reason,
both, and so declared by your selves, 1 part Book Declarat. page 281. That
those that shall guide themselves by the judgment of Parliament, ough^
(whatever happen) to be secure and free from all account and penalties. B^t
diverse honest men (as you now judge them) ^ave acted and gu^ded themselves by
the judgment of Parliament, as they account y^u, in taking away the King's
life; and yet by your dealings with CAPEL, etc. they are liable to be hanged as
^rayt ^s (...) a major part of your very House, by force, or other (...), shall
vote that act (...), and all the Actors therein Traitors: So that, Sir, if I
have any judg^^n^ in ^^e, by his very single act toward them, you shake the
v^ry to^ndation of the validity of all the Parliam^nts Decrees and Judgments at
once, and m^ke (...) all the Se^uri^y and ^ndemnity that those (in ^q^^ty)
ought to enjoy, that have acted by you commands, and guided themselves by the
judgment o^ Parliament: By mea^^ of which you will find in time, you have
demolished your own Bulwarks, an destroyed your own Fences. And for time to
come, for my part, I shall be a tho^sand times more wary how I obey all your
Commands, then ever I was in my life; se^ing yo^ are so fickle and unstable,
that no man knows rationally where to find you, or fixedly to what to hold you.

But if you shall object (as some do) That that judgment of B^nishment was
only in ^^ference to the peace with the King, and that being broke, yo^ are
absolved from that judgment, and not bound by it.

To which I answer no more but this; That was a Judgment upon s^i^ous and solid
debate, of long continuance, at the passing of which you acted as individually,
and as independently from the King, as ever you did before or since: and
therefore in Law, Justice and C^nscience you ought to stand to it, and make it
good to the Prisoners concerned in it; especially, considering they desire it.

But having in length outstriped an ordinary epistle, and having much matter
remaining, j^dging it more then time this that I have here written to you,
should come to public view, (although I perish for so doing) I am forced and
necessitated ab^uptly here to break of; and leave the remaining part for a
second part to the same tune if God spare me life and health, and give
opportunity, although I be cut in ten thousand peece^ therefore; for if every
hair of CROMWELL, FAIRFAX, IRFTON, HASLERIG, BRADSHAW, and HARISONS head, were a
Regiment or Legion of armed men, I would by Gods ^ssulance in the present
righteous cause in which they have deeply imba qu^d me, (by their lawless
Cruelty and Tyranny) ^ear them no more then so many butterslyes or motes in the
sun; for behold, God (...) my salva^^on, I will trast and not be as^aid, for
the Lord JEHOVAH is my strength, and my song, he also is (long since) become m^
Salvation, Isa. 12. 2. Therefore will ^ sing ^ejoy^e and b^ m^r^y, for he has
fitted me for all manner of deaths; in inabling me through his strength power
and presence, any time this twelve years together to carry my life in my hand,
and to be always eve^ since in readiness at a quarter of an hours warning to
lay it down; which ^ shall ^s freely (...) (as eat) in t^is just and righteous
quarrel, viz. THE LIBERTIES OF THE LAND OF MY NATIVITIES AGAINST THE APOSTACIES
AND TYRANNIES OF HER MOST PERFIDIOUS AND TREACHEROUS PROFESSED FRIENDS and the
holding out of Gods Sovereignty amongst the son of m^n, as being that one,
single, (...) ^LONE (either in heaven or earth) that is to reign, rule,,
govern, and give a law by his will and pleasure to the sons of men; the
absolute workm^nship of his hands or power; And therefore to thee O CROMWELL, O
FAIRFAX, O IRETON, O HASLERIG, etc. in the power, might and strength of the
Lord God Omnip^tent and Almighty, that Rai^^s and shall Rule for ever and ever;
before whom the (...) do quake and tremble; and before whom You are all of you
as inconsiderable (...) Sun, as the dust of the balance, or the smallest drop
of the bucket: To you, I say, in my present condition, as Shadrach, Meshach and
Abednego in their great (...) the outward man, Dan 3.) said once to your
brother Tyrans Nebuchad^^zz^^; (...) unto you, that for all your power and
worldly greatness (with all your (...)) that I fear you not, not a^^ careful
to answer you in the matter in (...) us; for the God whom (with my soul and
body) I serve (with uprightness of (...)) is able to deliver me, from the
burning fiery furnace, (your cruel close (...), Banishment, Dungeons, or Death
it self) yea, an ^ hewill deliver me out of your (...) hands, O (perfidious
cruel) Tyrants.

But if he will not, Be it known unto you, O (apostatised) Tyrants, that I will
^^ serve (...) (stoop or submit unto you) nor worship your I doll or golden
Image that you have set up (your Arbitrary power and unlimited greatness.)

But least God should give or permit you a larger power over me then he did the
Devil over JOB to murder me before I can write the second part hereof;
therefore I shall now give you the heads of my intentions, and so conclude.

First, From the perplexity of my spirit with the unjust dealings with CAPEL,
etc. I left Westminster and retired home, resolved in solitariness there to
abide, whered was grievously tormented with the cries of poor people who came
to me in multitudes for advice in their tedious suits of Law, whose complaints
without any hopes of remedy that I could give them, made my house a place of
torment to me, which forced me to visit Westminster again, where

2ly, I heard the certainty of Husons, Whaleys and Major Bertons desperate
height at their Council of Wa^ at Wh^^^hall, at or near upon the 22 of Feb.
1648. to engage that Council (vi and ^^^nis) to pro^ure by Cromwels means a Law
at their pleasure to dispatch me and my honest friends the Whalboneers; which
when I examined from friend to friend, and some it to be very true by the
attestation of plurality of their own Officers, my spirit was all on fire, (and
no Lion o^ the Army to me then so full of dread, but I durst inco^^^^ with) to
consider with my self that all our Liberties and large expectations must (...)
in this, That now our lives must be at the absolute will and pleasure of a
company of BLOODY and INHUMANE Butcherers of men, that had served seven years
apprentiship to that bloody and wicked trade of cutting of men's throats for
money, and nothing else; who never had kept faith or troth with any sorts of
men they dealt with, and yet must now become our Accusers, Prosecuters,
Witnesses, Parties, Jury, Judges, and Executioners: At the very thoughts of
which I was even con^ounded in my spirit, and which justly and thoroughly
engaged me in the chief managing of the first and second part of ENGLANDS new
Chains discovered: The first of which I presented at the Commons Ba^^e, with a
speech to it, the 26 Febr. 1648. the second part of which I, etc. had got
diverse thousands of hands to: the truth of (...) ^^ne of which, (^or all its
declared treasonable) I will seal with my heart blood; and ^^dertake before a
new Representative (TO WHOM I HEREBY AGAIN APPEAL) to prove every charge in it
upon my Life. I shall also give the Reaso^^ wherefore I have flown so high, as
I have done, which is, because they have thought ^^ just in them to ac^use the
King, the supreme Magistrate, of Treason; and yet (...) thought and declared it
Treason in me, etc. to go about the doing of any such thing to Mr. OLIVER,
that I will maintain it upon my life, more (comparatis (...)) legally deserves
it then ever the King did; And yet though I, etc. (...) in the very (...) that
they themselves (I mean both Parliament and Army) (...) out unto ^^^: viz. by
P^^ition, ( 1 pa^e Book Declar. page 123, 101, 202, 548, 720. and Armies Book,
Declar. page 17, 33, 35, 44, 60, 61. yea, see page 83. and you shall there
find in the fifth Article, they impeached Mr. Hollis, Sir Philip Stapleton,
and Mr. Cly^^ for Traitors, For obstructing and prejudging of public
Petitions to the Parliament; and yet they adjudged and (...) me, etc. for a
Traitor therefore, without so much as (...) hearing me to speak for my self;
and then after they had condemned me, went about at the Kings. Bench-Bar to try
me for my life; unto whom, if I stooped, I was sure to be gone, being already
prejudged: Again, I shall also acquaint you with the several Discourses Mr.
Hollan^^, Mr. Hunt etc. had with me about these Businesses, and the large
proffers I had from them, yes, and from Mr. Alexander Rigby as the mouth of Sir
Henry Mild may the (...) Agent, who had Commission (as he said) to proffer ^^e
and my Comrades ^^ge places and preforments; so we would sit still, and let the
Grandces go on with their work: Which I with detestation refused at the house
door, the very FORENOON, I was adjudged a Treytor, and thereupon the same day
in the Afternoon, the Votes of Treason past against me, etc. and my Second part
of Englands New-chairs discovered.

And seeing the Business of Scro^^'s men is wrongfully fathered upon me, who
never will incite Soldiers nor others to declare upon any thing else but our
printed Agreement of the 1. May 1649. and that when they do draw their Swords
against their General, etc. they shall throw away their Scabbards, and rather
fight with him, then treat with him, without either resolving to give or take
Quarter; yet I say, seeing this is put upon my sco^e, I hope I shall evidently
make it appear (comparatie compara^^^)" That I am able to give 99 in the
handred to any Champion the General has in England, and from Scripture, Law,
Reason, and their own Declarations, to make their action appear more just (...)
the Generals several Rebellions against the Parliament, his Creators, and
extraordinary good Benefactors; or his Rebellion and the Parliaments against
the King in the love Wars.

And lastly, I shall show the falseness and malignity of the late DISCOVERERS
design, of fathering upon me, etc. all the erronicus tenants of the poor
Diggers at George hill in Su^rey, laid down in their late two avowed Books,
called, The true L^vellors Standard, and The new law of Righteousness, to
which they have have annexed their names: The R^ad^r^ taking notice of which
alone, may be an answer to all that abominable lying late Book, called, The
DISCOVERER. And so, Mr. SPEAKER, thanking you for some late kindnesses in your
House, I received from you, I take leave to subscribe my self

An honest and true*bred, free Englishman; that neve^^ in his life feared a
Tyrant, nor loved an Oppressor. JOHN LILBURN.
From my close, unjust, and causeless Captivity, without allowance, (the
legal right of all men in my case) in the Tower of London, this 8. of June
1649. The first year of England's declared Freedom, by the lying and false
pretended Conservators thereof, that never intended it.
FINIS.

