TO EVERY INDIVIDUAL MEMBER of the Supreme Authority of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of ENGLAND.
The Humble Address of Lieu Col. John Lilburn, by way of Answer to a most
false and scandalous Printed Petition, delivered at the House door against him,
by one William Huntington, upon Wednesday the 26 of November. 1651:
SHOWS,
THAT by virtue of a particular Act of Parliament bearing date the 30 of July,
1650. your supplient was enabled to purchase as much Dean and Chapters Lands
(as part of his reparations for his barbarous sufferings by the Star Chamber)
as did amount to One Thousand five hundred eighty three pounds eighteen
shillings and four pence, at ten years purchase in possession, and
propotionable in reversion; by virtue of which Act, he repaired to the
Contractors at Gurney House, and there amongst other things found certain Farms
in the Manor of Billingham, in the County of Durham, where his Father and
kindred lives unsold, and to the best of his remembrance, the Survay was
returned eighteen months before the date of his said Act, and at that time
when he begun to look after the said Farms, he did not hear of any one man in
the world that was about the buying of them; but finding them absolutely free,
in a Town that to the best of his knowledge he before that time never see in
his life, nor knew not, nor ever saw with his eyes to his knowledge any one of
the faces of the occupiers thereof; nor before his purchase never had any
treaty by letter, word of mouth, or message, with any one of Them, saving That
about the Time of his purchase, one M. Richard Marshall came to him in the name
of M. Gascoign Eden, (who had certain years remaining in one of the said
Farms) and for him desired to deal with your supplient for the faid Farm; unto
which he very well remembers he replied to the said M. Marshal in these words,
or to this effect; That M. Eden, nor none else could not be justly offended at
him for buying the said Farms, forasmuch as he did not go about to buy any of
their Tenant rights, or to meddle with any thing belonging to them, for about a
year and a half after their preemption was expired; and the Market was as free
for him as for any man in England, especially considering That no man in the
world, That he could hear of, was endeavoring to buy any of the said Farms,
when he began his purchase; and the Market on his part being so free as it was,
he was resolved to sell none of them, having already engaged to some eminent
friends of his, men of honor, That were instrumental in getting the said Act
to pass, That he would keep Them as his Inheritance for him and his heirs; and
having perfected his Purchase, and got his Conveiances signed, sealed, and
enrolled, he endeavored to look after the rents and profits of the said Farms,
which we^e Five in number, and a certain Rent Co^n called the Haver Malts,
which were to be paid by the Occupiers of 16 Farms in the said Town of
Billingham, and finding the said Tenants or Occupiers of the said Farms did
deny the States Title, and would not pay their rents, he, in or about the 15 of
Janu. 1650. complained thereof by Petition to the Honorable Committee of
Parliament, for removing of Obstructions, who thereupon ordered the said
Tenants to pay their rents, or else within Twenty days after notice of the said
Order, to appear in the inner Court of Wards, To show cause to the contrary, as
appears by the Original of the said Order, recorded in Mr. Nowels Book, Clerk
to the said Committee; unto which, for more certainty, he refers himself.
Upon the serving of which said Order, all the said Tenants yielded conformity
and obedience in paying the said Rents, saving the Complainant Will. Huntington.

Unto whom at Billingham, in or about Feb. 1650. your Supplient repaired, and
in the presence of his Father Mr. Richard Lilburn, and his Cosen George
Blacket, and the Father of the said Huntington, and several of the neighbors
and kinsfolks of the said Huntington, proffered the said Huntington and his
wife, (who was not long before the wife of one Shippard, possessor of the said
Farm) that if they pleased to acknowledge him for their Landlord, and turn
Tenant to him, he having bought the Farm in present possession, they should
have it at the same rate he paid for it, and that it was valued in the Survay,
which was 18 l. 15 s. 7 d. per annum; or if They would not be his Tenants, in
the second place, he proffered Them, That if They would choose two neighbors
of the Town, he would choose two more to value the Corn They had sown upon his
Ground without his leave or license. Conditionally They would quietly surrender
him the possession of his own, he would give Them in ready money what They
valued the said Corn at, and five pound more: And in regard her first husband
had left her diverse small children, in a poor condition, he would immediately
take one of her boys, and new clothe him from the crown of the head to the
sole of the foot, and take him into his own Family, and bring him up at his own
costs and charges in that which he found him most capable of, till he became
Twenty years old. Or

Thirdly, if They would do neither of these, but stood upon Their Title, Then
he told Them their regular way was to state Their Title in a Petition to the
Committee of Parliament, appointed to deside such things; and if they would do
that, he proffered them that seeing they might be destitute at London of
friends, he would present their Petition for them, and endeavor to the utmost
of his interest to get Them a speedy Answer, and engage unto Them upon his
reputation, That he would not either directly or indirectly improve in the
least his Interest or Tongue to impead their Title, further then to crave a
reprisal for their Farm.

Unto all which, the said Will. Huntington replied, It was none of his, he had
nothing to do with it, it was his wives, and the barns of her first husband;
And she replied, The Farm was her ayne, and her barns, and she wode leaves her
heart blood before either the Parliament or your Supplient should have it. But
after abundance of entreaties by your Supplient used unto her not to be
fooolish and mad, and so undo and destroy her self and children, but all in
vain; he was forced plainly to tell her the Farm was his, and he had honestly
bought it and paid for it, and had bought it of those that he durst not presume
otherwise but that they had right to sell it, and would make the bargain good;
and with a little expense of money and time could force her whether she would
or no, to surrender up the possession of it, and then she might repent too late
She did not embrace some of the foresaid fair proffers, and so he left her as
obstinate at the latter end, as she was at the beginning of the Discourse; and
coming up immediately to London, he wrote down to his Father and his said Cosen
Blacket, to go to her and her husband again before complaint was made of Them,
and persuade Them to embrace some of the said Propositions, who did so
accordingly, but all in vain. Upon the knowledge of which, your Suppliant did
upon the 22 of April, 1651. by a second Petition complain of the said Will.
Huntington, that he would yield no obedience to Their said Order, either in
paying his rent, or appearing before Them to show cause wherefore he would
not. Upon which complaint, the said Committee of Obstructions, did further
Order, That the said Will. Huntington should upon site or notice of That Order,
and Demand made by your Suppliant, or by such person or persons, as he then
had, or should appoint to receive the said rent, with the arrearages thereof,
as also the possession of the said Farm pay the said rent for, and give up the
possession of the Farm aforesaid, accordingly; or otherwise make his personal
appearance before the said Committee within Twenty days after such site or
notice of that Order; which Order being served by my Agent or Attorney George
Blacket, and who made abundance of Journeys from his own House thither (which
is about Twelve miles off Billingham) to persuade Them without the utmost of
compulsion to obey the Authority of Parliament, which was all in vain; and for
his pains therein Huntington's people with great gads or cudgels, set upon him;
and as he has told me, might have hazarded the knocking him upon the head, had
he not well acquitted himself with his Sword. After the knowledge of which,
before I would go about to execute the utmost extremity, I on purpose sent
down my wives brother Cornet Thomas Duel, to see what he could do with them
about yiedling obedience to the said Orders: but fully understanding of their
perverse obstinacy, I ordered the reserving of the Order in the presence of one
that I hired to come to Westminster, to make Affidavit of the serving it; which
being made, the said Committee made an Order to the Sheriff by force to put me
into the possession of the said Farm. The Copy of which Order thus follows.

25 June 1651. At the Committee of Parliament for removing Obstructions in the
sale of Deans and Chapters Lands.
WHereas complaint has been made unto the Committee by Lieut. Col. John
Lilburne, that he has purchased of the Contractors for sale of Deans and
Chapters Lands, several Messuages, Lands and Tenements, with their
Appurtenances, lying and being in Billingham, in the County of Durham, that the
Tenants of the said Farms refusing to pay their rents, and some of them denying
the Title of the Commonwealth; this Committee did the 15 of January last,
order that they should pay their rents, or else within twenty days after
notice of that Order, appear before this Committee, and show cause to the
contrary. And whereas the said Lieut. Colonel in a later Petition (read the 22
of April last) alleged that all the said Tenants submitted to pay the rents,
saving William Huntington, the successor of Thomas Shippard, in the said Order
of 15 of January last mentioned, who lives upon and enjoyes the profits of a
Farm lying in Billingham aforesaid, part of the said purchase rated at 18 l.
15. s. 7. per Annum in present possession, and will in no way obey the said
former order; whereupon this Commit did the said 22 of April, order that the
said William Huntington should (upon sight or notice of that Order and demand
made by the said Lieut. Coll. or by such person or persons, as he then had or
should appoint to receive the said rent, with the Arreages thereof, as also the
possession of the said Farm,) pay the said rent for, and give up possession of
the Farm aforesaid accordingly, or otherwise make his personal appearance
before this Committee within twenty days after such sight or notice of that
order as aforesaid. And forasmuch as oath has been made unto this Committee,
that the said William Huntington was upon the third of June instant, personally
served with the said Order of this Commit of the 22 of April aforesaid, and
whereas it is alleged that the said William Huntington has neither paid the
rent for, nor given up possession of the said Farm, nor appeared before this
Committee, according to direction of the said Order of the 22 of April
aforesaid: This Committee do thereupon order, That (according to an ordinance of
Parliament in that case made) the Sheriff of the County of Durham aforesaid,
do upon the fight of this Order, repair unto the said Farm and Farm-house, and
do remove the said William Huntington, or any for him, or under him out of the
possession of the said Farm, Farm-house, and appurtenances, and do deliver up
the quiet possession of the said Farm, Farm-house, and all and singular the
appurtenances thereto belonging, unto the said Lieut. Col. John Lilburne, or
unto Richard Lilburne Esquire, Cornet Thomas Dowell, and George Blacket, his
Assigns or any of them; and if he find resistance, to raise the Posse
Comitatus, and by force of Arms to possess the same, and also to break open
Doors and Gates for the clearing of the possession; and the said Sheriff is
authorized to commit unto the next common prison for one month, such person
and persons as he shall find to resist him in the executing of this Warrant.

Jo. Corbet, Nath. Hallows Cor. Holland. Richard Sallaway. John Trenchard.


Upon the serving of which Order upon the Sheriff of the county to Durham, he
with his men went to Billingham, where the said Huntington and his Wise forced
them to the utmost extremity that could be before they could get the
possession, which at last having obtained, it was delivered up to my Assigns
named in the foresaid Order. After which, my occasions in August leading me
down into the North parts on purpose to complain against Sir Arthur Hesilrigg
to the General (he being then an Officer in his Army) for robbing of my Uncle
and other of my Relations by his Will and pleasure of their Colliery at
Harraton, commonly called, The nine and five Quarter seams of Coals; which the
said sir Arthur values in his Certificate at 5475 l. per annum. I say, going
into the North, at the Post house at York I met with a large exclamation
against me for a Tyrant and grand Oppressor about the said Farm, being left
there by M. Bowls, sometimes a Chaplin in the Army; as the Postmaster told me;
which I have cause to judge arose from some of sir Arthurs Agents, one purpose
to blast my Reputation: Unto which I made my defense in the manner that is made
before: after which arriving at Billingham, the said Huntingtons Wife came to
me for to claim the enjoyment of her crop of Corn. Unto which I answered to
this effect, I knew none she had, nor had taken none from her; for, if she
would sow a crop of Corn upon my Ground in despite of me, and to force me to
all the Extremities that in Law I could be put unto to get my own, and by it
had legally recoverd it, I knew no other way if she found her self agrieved at
me; but to take the same course to right her self against me: And in Equity I
knew not of a penny she could challenge at my hand; for I did and do believe
That a crop of Corn growing upon a Farm let for under 20 pounds per annum, and
upon such ground, as by the Tradition of people there has bin constantly
plowed, without ever lying swarth for many scores of years, if not some 100 of
years, could countervails a full years Rent (which then they were almost
complete in arrear to me) and those vast expenses that for almost 12 months
together I had constantly bin at to get possession of my own; besides the loss
of all my time, and diverse of my Friends, besides the charge of reaping, etc.
of the said Crop, and therefore so long as she came unto me upon those Terms of
claiming it as her own, after she had done what in her lay to blast my
Reputation, for using no other means but what the Law allows me to get my own,
after all fair means of Composure were scorned and rejected by her, and
therefore she must now do as she had forced me to do which was to take her
couse at Law. But perceiving that with much art her Reproaches against me was
much spread in the Country; finding at my coming down the Church doors shut up,
and the Parson put out of the Living, being a sat sequestered Living, the
profits of which going to I know not what use! upon diverse first days during my
abode there, I supplied the ejected Parsons place, with Prayer, and the best
words of Exhortation and Instruction that the Incomes of God upon my Soul
enabled me to afford unto the people. And upon a day after the end of our
meeting, there being a large Auditory of many hundreds of people, I took
occasion to show what a vain and fruitless thing Notions and Speeches are, when
the Practice or Actions were quire contrary. And hearing of a rumor, That there
was hard dealing by me to some of my Tenants; which although (as I told them)
my own conscience did not in the least accuse me, having used all the fair
means that the wit of man could use to avoid extremity of Law, yet so willing
was I to avoid being my own Judge, That if any one in that Town thought I had
done them wrong, let them choose one Neighbor, and I would choose another, who
should hear us both, and to whose determination I would bind my self in Bonds
to stand unto: And I the rather spoke it in that place; That so my readiness to
give all just satisfaction to the meanest persons might be taken notice of.
After which time, one Richard Rutlas an Innkeeper in that Town, a fair
conditioned man, and her Cousin, spoke to me largely about her and her Farm;
and after I had made him a Narrative of her evil dealing with me, which he
partly knew before, being privy to my first proffers to her; I desired him from
me to go to her and her Husband, and tell them, That if they would under both
their hands acknowledge, The Parliament had a right to sell the said Farm, and
that I had a just freedom to buy it, I would then (although they had lately
been with Sir Arthur Hesilrig to petition against me.) I would then

I say, lay aside my right in law to the said crop, and in equity, come to an
exact account with them for all that in any kind of equity they can call
theirs, and lay my rent, my disbursments, and charges in getting my possession,
etc. together, and rather give them more then less, it there were any
overbalance; but as I told him, so long as they continued obstinate in that
opinion, that the Parliament was Tyrants in selling their farm, and my self no
better then a Rogue in buying it, I would never treat with them, while I lived,
and after this one Mr. Brough, as I remember his name, being the Minister of
Norton, that joins to the said Billingham came to me about the same business,
in her name, unto whom I made the same answer, in effect as is before
expressed, and told him, that if they would acknowledge the Parliaments title,
and that they had a right to sell it, I would with all my heart, he being
Judge, come to an exact equitable account with them, and do that he himself
should judge to be full of conscience and honesty, although I conceived my self
not in the least bound unto it by law, but I could never have a return of my
desire from either of them; so that in some time after, leaving the Country and
coming to London, I accidentally upon Wednesday last, being the 26. of November
1651. met with a Petition in print at the House door delivered against me; the
Copy of which thus follows.

To the supreme authority of this Nation, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
ENGLAND: The humble Petition of William Huntington of Billingham in the Country
of Durham, Yeoman;
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioner having lately married a poor Widow with four small
Children, who had the Possession and ancient Tenant-right of a Farm in
Billingham aforesaid, holden by Lease of the Dean and Chapter in Durham, which
with two Cows and a Crop of Corn was the only maintenance of that whole
family, your Petitioner being unable to purchase the Reversion thereof, the
Lease expiring, intended to have concluded a Bargain with an Officer of the
Army, who propounded to purchase the said Tenement, rendering the Moiety thereof
back to your Petitioner for his Tenant-right, and the same had been effected,
had not Lieutenant Colonel John Lilborn interposed, concluding the Purchase
thereof upon the terms of Tenant right, by virtue of an Act of Parliament given
him in that behalf, together with diverse other Tenements in that Manor,
declaring at the time of his Contract, That he neither intended or desired any
of the Tenants Estates, had not the Parliament forced him upon that course for
the gaining of 150 l. which they ought him; further promising, that if the
Tenants would at any time make good the Rates of his Purchase, he would return
their Lands and Tenements to them. Now so it is, Right Honorable, that the said
Mr. Lilborn no sooner perfected his Conveyance, but immediately thrusts out
your Petitioner, his Wife and four Children, with the addition of one to your
Petitioner, and most barbarously and tyrannically, against Law and Equity, has
possessed himself of all your Petitioners. Corn upon the ground, and threshes
out the same for his own use, taking his two Cows from him, with almost a years
stock of Hay, Straw, and a great quantity of Manure, to the value of a Hundred
and thirty Pounds, as by the Testimony of several Neighbors here attending at
your door it will appear, to the endless ruin of your Petitioners whole family.

May it therefore move your godly Hearts to pity the sad and deplorable
Condition of your Petitioner, who now stands deprived of all his Livelihood and
Subsistence, the said Mr. Lilborn leaving him nothing but a poor sickly Woman
and five small children, and not a Cows milk to stay their hungry hearts; your
Petitioner also being much in debt, and likely to lie and rot in Prison by
these merciless and inequitable Practices of the said Mr. Lilborn, who is not
ashamed of such unparalleld Cruelties, forcing your Petitioner to travel Two
hundred Miles upon his bare feet, to beg Relief at this Honorable Door being
unable to resist his rigid Power, or wager Law with him in his own defense; He
therefore humbly beseeches your Honors Order, that the said Mr. Lilborn may
either return the Moiety of the said Tenement, as was formerly offered to your
Petitioner, or otherwise that he may accept the Rate of his Purchase according
to his own offer, from a Friend of your Petitioner, who is willing to continue
him Tenant at the yearly Rent of the late Survey; and that the illegal taking
away of his two Cows and Corn, with diverse other Goods upon the ground, may be
committed to the Examination of such men as you shall appoint, whereby your
Petitioner may have some Relief in this sad and disconsolate Condition he
having stripped him of all his means, leaving him nothing but a sickly woman and
five small Children; which if I may obtain, I shall as in duty bound, humbly
exhibit my daily Prayers in your behalf, etc.

NOw most noble Senators; having exactly laid down a true Narrative of the
state of this business, the Truth of which, I do engage hereby to make good
by current proof upon the forfeiture of my reputation for ever, which I value
above my life, estate, wife, and children, and do earnestly desire at your
hands, if it may stand with your pleasure, That Sir Arthur Hesilrigge who I do
verily believe either by himself in person, or some of his Agents, encouraged
the said Huntington or his wife to come to London, to complain, and drew the
forementioned false and lying Petition for him, which he the rather believes
because Sir Arthur in the Country told my brother in law M. Thomas Gore, as he
related to me; That the said Huntingtons wife had been with him, and preferred
a Petition against me, wherein she complained of such Things, as if he should
have done the like, he should have been printed for a Tyrant indeed. I say, I
desire, That Sir Arthur as for my adversary, and Col. Henry Martin, as for me,
and his Excellency the Lord General, as an indifferent person, may be fully
empowered by the House, to hear and examine the Truth of his Narrative in his
Petition, and of mine in this Address, and upon a full hearing on both sides,
to punish either in body or goods at the pleasure of them, or any two of them,
where They find the fault to lie in lies, falsehoods, or any other baseness,
about this particular business, which I think is so fair, as nothing in the
world can be offered of more ingenuity by me, especially in regard I have a
visible estate to make him satisfaction, and he has none as he confesses, to
make me; he being not in the least made so poor by me, but by his own
letcherous baseness in conversing with Whores, and getting of Bastards, which
is the open and common brand he lies under in the Town where he lives; There
is but one Thing more in his Petition, I shall at present touch upon, and that
is my taking away Two Cowes from him, so That They have not one now to give
Them a drop of Milk. Its true, I believe my said Agent George Blacket above six
months ago according to law seized upon Two poor Cowes of Theirs, for part of
my rent, and praised them, and proffeered either Them or any of Their friends
the Cows for the money they were praised at; which they refusing, the Cows has
ever since been kept in a good pasture, and to my knowledge, I do aver it with
confidence, has several Times since I got my possession, been freely proffered
unto her again both by my self and others, that I have sent to her for That
end, which she has obstinately from Time to Time refused, although at my being
in the Country, as I was informed, one of Them was then worth both of Them
when they were taken from Huntington, they were so mended in their flesh; so
that if They have never a Cow to give Them Milk, They may thank Their own
sullenness, and not in the least my oppression: And so much at present to his
scandalous Petition.

BUt now most Honorable Senators, seeing I am compelled for my own
preservation to put pen to paper, vouchsafe me a little liberty farther without
offense, and to appeal to you, That if there be a great man that does not
appear above board, and yet under board, has a hand in this Petition, who by
himself or Instruments, sets this fellow on, whether is he not run almost to
death in his reputation, that is forced to fly to such slender props as the
complaint of This fellow is to support it; so pitifully and slenderly
endeavoring to blast the reputation of him that is his pursuer: For

First, I beseech you observe, That the Complainant and his wife, are a couple
that never would in the least yield obedience to the Orders and Commands of
Parliament signified by Their immediate Committees; but contemned them, scorned
Them, and bid open defiance to them, as will appear plainly by the Records of
the Committee of Obstructions; for which affronting contempts (which is a
scorning of Authority) he ought in law, equity, and justice, rather be clapped by
the heels then to be heard by you, before he has made expiation for his said
crimes.

Secondly, I beseech you observe and judge, whether or no before I went to
legal extremity, I did not use all fair and candid means to get mine own, that
it was possible for any man in the world to use that in the least would
maintain his own right.

Thirdly, I beseech you observe and judge, whether I have been so base, as to
use any boisterous courses to get my own, other then what the law of England
alowes to every man in the Nation; and if so, I hope I shall not be judged a
merciless oppressor by you, for walking in the known Tracts and Footsteps of
the Law of England. But most noble Senators, I perceive it is a studied
Artifice in this Age, for men that have more guilt upon Them then Their backs
are able to bear, behind persons backs to study to reproach Those They hate,
and are pincht by, and to blast Their reputation; and therefore is it spoken
privately up and down amongst Parliament men, That I lately took a false Oath
at Haberdashers Hall, about the Colliery at Harraton; unto which I shall answer
no more at present but This, That the business is of many Thousand pounds
consequence per annum of concernment to other men, and I would be very loath in
an hasty Apology for my self, to let any thing drop that might give any just
occasion to the Judges There to be peevish, and thereby to have any colorable
pretense to put off the ^inall Judgment of the case longer then Tuesday next
in the afternoon, the Time appointed for it after many days hearing, and many
hours already expended in private debates amongst the Judges Themselves. And in
the mean Time, I entreat every ingenious man to suspend his censuring of me for
a few days after the Judging of the said cause; and if then I do not with as
much ease blow off all that dirt that by art about that business is thrown upon
me, as the wind blows the lightest of chaff before it, let me forfeit my
reputation amongst all ingenious men for ever; And Therefore at present to
conclude, vouchsafe me liberty without distaste to acquaint you, That at our
grand day of hearing about that Colliery, Sir Arthur Hesilrig much insisted
upon a Book I had lately about it writ against him; and therefore desired the
Commissioners freely to give me leave to lay all the evil in the world to his
charge there; that I knew against him; unto which, when it came to my part to
speak, I told Them in these words or to this effect.

That I very much commended Sir Arthur for his wisdom to save himself, for he
could not be so ignorant to immagine, but that I very well knew those
Commissioners had no power to question him, for though it were, as he was there
subsequestrator in the County of Durham (which mean and low Office I knew never
a Parliament man in England, besides himself, but he scorned to execute) he was
under them, and ought to be obedient to their orders, and to give them a
submissive an account of his actions; but as he was a Parliament man, and
thereby one of the supreme Authority of the Nation, he was above them, and one
of their Lords and Masters and if I were such a child and fool to question him
for his offenses before them that had no jurisdiction over him, (but absolutely
inferior to him) I should be laughed at for my pains, and they if they should be
so misunderstanding of their own Authority, as to assume jurisdiction over him
upon my complaint, and thereupon go about to punish him, they might very well
be clapped by the heels for their sawsiness, for breaking the privileges of
Parliament, in judging one of their Members, that they have no authority given
them so to do unto.

But as I told the Chairman, Sir Arthur says, I have printed a book lately
against him, in which he says I call him Traitor, Tyrant, and worse then
Strafford: unto which I answered, to this effect, Sir, it is true, I have writ
and caused a late book to be printed against him, in which its possible such
expressions may be, and if there are I will justify and prove them at my
utmost peril: and that Sir Arthur and all the company may know that I am not
afraid nor ashamed to own the said book; be it known to him, that since I last
came to Town I took the boldness upon me, as to wait upon the General, under
whose command I look upon Sir Arthur (as he is a Colonel) to be, and I told him
a little of Sir Arthurs Tyranny, which I told him was somewhat fully expressed
in a late book of mine, one of which I gave him, and beged him to read it
seriously, further telling him it was mine, and I would justify it with my
life, and earnestly entreated him, that he would please to vouchsafe to take
upon him the hearing and judging of the cause, and we would ty our selves in
bonds to stand to his judgment, but he put it off as being full of business.

Upon which in the second place, hearing that in Parliament there was to be
some questioning of the Speaker, I hasted away as fast as I could to their
Door, supposing it a very fit season for me to get my complaint against Sir
Arthur heard before them, that have a proper jurisdiction over him; And at the
Door of the Parliament meeting with an honorable member of Parliament, called
Mr Love, I told him what I heard the House was to be about, and having in my
hand (I was confident of it, a higher Charge against Sir Arthur Haslerig, then
any could be pretended against the Speaker) I therefore entreated him as he
was a Gentleman, to take a Book of me, in which it was contained; and acquaint
the House with it, and tell them, It was mine give to him to bring in, and I
was at the Door ready at their Bar to justify and prove it. And (as I am
informed) he did acquaint the House with it, sir Arthur himself being present,
who it seems had not so much Innocence in his Breast, as to dare to press to
have me called into justify it: And therefore said I to the Chairman, as earnest
as sir Arthur is to desire you to give me free liberty to lay all I can to his
charge before you, that he very well knows have no jurisdiction over him; so
earnest am I with him to question me, and call me, if he dare, to the Bar of
the Parliament (his proper Judges) to justify my said Book; and so much at
present to Sir Arthur. And now, said I, if you please Gentlemen, a word or 2 to
some of you Commissioners. Some of you say, I have writ a Book, in which I have
abused you. Its true said I, a Book I have written against you, but I have not
belyed or abused you; and if you please to join Issue with me, you shall find
me very ingenuous, ready either as a Christian, or an Englishman to give you
full satisfaction. And therefore,

First, As a Christian, if you please to choose 2 honest godly men, I will
choose 2 more, and bind my self in large Bonds to stand to their Arbitration
and Judgment; and if upon the hearing of both sides, they shall find I have done
you wrong, and judge it Just for me to repair you by a public printed
Recantation, I will freely do it with my Hand to it. Or, Secondly, If you like
not this Proposition, as a rational Man, I will give you satisfaction, that is
to say, if you please to enter your Action in the Vpper-Bench, or any Court of
Justice in England, I will appear to it gratis; and give you such satisfaction
as by the extremity of the law you can obtain, which I think is so fair, as no
ingenious man in England can offer fairer. And therefore (Right Honorable) to
conclude all, give me leave to make this Proposition to you, seeing sir Arthur
indirectly struggles so to maintain his guilt; That if you please to declare,
That I may have as free liberty, and the same privileges against sir Arthur
Haslerig, as your selves had against the Earl of Strafford, I do hereby engage
my Life against his, in the behalf of the Commonwealth of England, to prepare
and bring into your House, in a very short time, as formal a charge in the ey
of the Law, as high and criminal in its nature, against sir Arthur Haselrig, as
ever yours was against Strafford; and before you openly, by legal and good
testimony to prove it, or otherwise let my life go for his.

So humbly craving pardon for my tediousness, I take leave to subscribe my
self, Your faithful Suppliant, who desires to live no longer in this world,
then he is able (the frailty of poor, weak feeble man set aside) to justify
the honesty of his Actions and Dealings with all private persons whatever,
before the Judgment seat of the strictest Justiciarie in England. JOHN LILBURNE.
London this 28 November, 1651.
Finis.

