The second Part OF ENGLANDS New-Chaines DISCOVERED:

Or a sad Representation of the uncertain and dangerous condition of the
COMMONWEALTH: DIRECTED To the Supreme Authority of England, the Representors
of the People in Parliament assembled.

By several well affected persons inhabiting the City of London, Westminster,
the Borough of Southwark, Hamblets, and places adjacent, presenters and
approvers of the late large Petition of the Eleventh of September. 1648.

All persons who are assenting to this Representation, are desired to subscribe
it, and bring in their Subscriptions to the Presenters and Approvers of the
foresaid Petition of the 11 of Sept.

London, Printed in the Year, 1649.

The second Part OF ENGLANDS New-Chaines DISCOVERED:

Or a sad Representation of the uncertain and dangerous condition of the
COMMONWEALTH: DIRECTED To the Supreme Authority of England, the Representors
of the People in Parliament assembled.

By several well affected persons inhabiting the City of London, Westminster,
the Borough of Southwark, Hamblets, and places adjacent, presenters and
approvers of the late large Petition of the Eleventh of September. 1648.

And as it is avowed by Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn, Mr. Richard Overton,
and Mr. Tho. Prince, upon peril of their lives; and for which they are now
committed to the Tower as Traitors.

London, Printed in the Year, 1649.

To the Supreme Authority of ENGLAND, the Representors of the People, in
Parliament Assembled. THE Sad Representation of the uncertain and dangerous
Condition of the Commonwealth: By the Presenters and Approvers of the Large
Petition of the 11. of September, 1648.
IF ^ur hearts were not over-changed with the sense of the present miseries and
approaching dangers of the Nation, your small ^egard to our late serious
Apprehensions, would have kept us silent; but the misery, danger, and bondage
threatened is so great, imminent, and apparent, that whilst we have breath, and
are not violently restrained, we cannot but speak, and even cry aloud, until
you hear us, or God be pleased otherways to relieve us.

Nor should you in reason be withheld from considering what we present you
withal, through any strangeness that appears therein; For what was more
incredible, than that a Parliament trusted by the people to deliver them from
all kinds of oppression, and who made so liberal effusion of their blood, and
waste of their estates (upon pretense of doing thereof) should yet so soon as
they were in power, oppress with the same kind of oppressions, which yet was
true in the times of Hollis and Stapletons faction, and who, (as the King and
Bishops had done before) labored for an Army to back and perpetuate them
therein.

Nor were our Petitions then presented (wherein we justly complained of those
oppressions, and forewarned them of the danger ensuing) the less considerable
for their burning them by the hand of the common hangman; Nor the Petitioners
the more blameworthy for being reproched with the names of Atheists,
Heretics, and seditious Sectaries (as now with Jesuit, and Leveller)
Aspersions being the known marks of corrupt Statesmen, and usually working no
other effect, but the discredit of the Aspersers. Yet were there then many who
believed their reports of us, and they were as impatient with us, for our
taxing them with their wicked and pernicious designs, as others are now for our
presuming to detect them, who are so high in present power and reputation: But
it is now evident, that it is possible for our Physicians to bring us into a
more dangerous condition than they found us.

And though experience has made us woefully sensible, that nothing is more
danger us to any people than their bearing with unjust, covetous, or ambitious
practices in those they trust; Yet did we forbear to interpose our judgments,
or to oppose those men's designs, until they had made a large progress toward
our bondage, and endeavored to grasp the power of the Army into their hands,
thereby to enforce their Tyranny upon us; insomuch that it was almost too late
to give check to their wicked intentions: so unwilling were we to believe it
possible for men who all along pretended liberty and redress of grievances, to
degenerate so soon into the grossest Principles and practices of long settled
Tyrannies.

And much more do our Consciences bear us witness of our backwardness to
believe any evil intentions in those who not only were most vigorous and
successful against the common enemy, but seemed so sensible of the injustice
and treachery of that prevalent faction in Parliament, as to engage with the
utmost of their might, as if they had really intended to deliver the Nation
from that dangerous thraldom, so that we both durst, and did many of us,
venture our lives upon their fidelity; Yea so powerful, persuasive, and
contentful were their first Engagements, Papers, and Remonstrances, so fraught
with self-denying Doctrines, tender regard to the peace of the Nation, and
satisfaction to all interests; as even lulled all peaceable People into a sound
sleep of security, casting all their care upon the General Council of the Army,
as upon a People they thought could never have the face to decline either those
principles, or to neglect the performance of so many engagements, promises, and
protestations, made as in the presence of the all-seeing God, frequently
calling upon him, the searcher of all hearts, to bear witness to their
integrity and sincerity therein Insomuch that we (who always with some
wariness observed them) many times denied our own understandings rather than
we would ^^w hasty conclusions from evident testimonies of their defection.

But when after they had once slighted the Agitators. and discountenanced
those Officers and Soldiers, who first engaged against the destructive Votes
of Parliament; such as stood firm to their engagements at New Market, and
Triploe Heath: when we saw they not only neglected them, but adhered to persons
sent from Parliament and City, in those corrupted times, and fell immediately
to plead for Negative Voices in the King, and Lords; checking and controuling
those that opposed: When we understood their General Councels (which according
to their engagements ought to have consisted only of two select Commission
Officers, and two private Soldiers, chosen by every Regiment, with such
General Officers as assented to the Engagement, and no other) were
nevertheless overgrown with Colonels, Lieut. Colonels, Majors, and others,
not chosen; and many of them dissenters from the said Engagement; and that some
few eminent persons presumed above measure therein, and in effect overawed and
controuled those Councels: and that the contrivance of a Counsel of State, was
the great engine which those Councels labored to bring about: when we found
them not only to Court the King, by kissing his hand, and the like, and that a
correspondency was held between him and the General Officers, and Agents sent
to and fro continually, whereby they came to so near a close, as that their
Proposals were not only received, but corrected and amended by the King, before
they were sent to the House, till they became very consistent with his ends and
Prerogative: and those Officers so engaged thereby, as to be moved to
impatience toward any that spoke a syllable against this their trafique and
intercourse with him: upon which likewise, they concluded an Agreement with the
opposing Citizens of London, without so much as calling the Agitators to
advize thereupon. Seeing, Hearing, and Understanding these things, no maryel if
we were staggered in our Belief of their integrity.

But that a person so deeply charged as the Earl of Manchester, and other grand
self-seekers of this House should be entertained with so great respect, and
guarded to their places in Parliament, and that notwithstanding the prevailing
power of the Army^ those who had usurped the Authority of the House, and Voted
a new war, were nevertheless permitted to sit and Vote there, and that
contrary to the importunate desires of the Agitators, and the Remonstrance of
the Army: and then one of the first fruits of this their conjunction was the
passing of an Ordinance for Tithes, upon trebble damages, which the corrupt
Clergy had presented (in the absence of the Speaker) to Pelhams Parliament; and
the burning of Mr Biddles Book, by the Common Hangman* and imprisoning his
person: and that notwithstanding their glorious March through London, the
prerogative Prisoners in the Tower, Newgate, and else where, were utterly
neglected, and the Council of those friends slighted, who had been
instrumental, even to the loss of some, and the hazard of all their lives, to
mak^ an easy and unbloudy passage for the Army into Southwark and the City:
Upon observation of these and abundant more particulars, which we could
enimerate, we concluded, that the Councels of the Army were not steered as at
their first engagement, by the s^lect persons chosen thereunto, nor for the
ends in that engagement expressed; but by some other powerful and overruling
influences, that intended other matters then were pretended, and that labored
by all possible means to convert the honest endeavors of good men in the Army,
and elsewhere, and the happy successs God had blessed them withal, to the
advantage of their Lusts, Pride, and Domination: And as time came on, it more
and more appeared, that they intended merely the establishment of themselves in
power and greatness, without any regard at all to the peformance of their
promises and engagements, or any respect to the faith and credit of the Army,
or to the peace and prosperity of the Common wealth, and that they walked by no
rules or principles either of honesly or conscience; but (as mere pollititians,
were governed altogether by occasion, and as they saw a possibility of making
progress to their designs, which course of theirs they ever termed a waiting
upon providence, that with color of Religion they might deceive the more
securely.

Now that this may appear no slander, we entreat that without partiality, their
after proceedings may be thoroughly scanned: as first, at Kingston it was
proposed by the Agitators, friends of London, Southwark, and the places
adjacent, that the Tower, City, and Borough, might be secured by the
well-affected Inhabitants, and not by Soldiers, that so trade and tralfique
might be preserved, which otherwise would be driven away (as it soon after
proved) And that it was hoped they intended not to secure any place by
Soldiers, when the well affected Inhabitants were able to secure it. Which
advise proceeded as well from our respects to the City and neighbor places, as
upon fears of what we know to be the practice of other Tyrants (and therefore
doubted would be exercised by those) namely, the garisoning great Towns,
thereby to keep the people, as well in poverty, as in continual aw and
subjection.

Which advise, though assented unto by the Agitators, was yet reject^d by the
grand Officers, and a new Regiment raised, to the further charge of the
Commonwealth; the Proposers themselves being dismissed with reproaches, and the
Agitators thrust out, and not permitted to observe how they were dealt withal.

At which time also its very remarkable with how much height of State they
observed the King at Hampton Court, visiting him themselves, and permiting
thousands of people daily to visit him, to ^iss his hand, and to be healed by
him, whereby his party in the City, and every where, were exceedingly animated,
his Agents being as familiar at the headquarters, as at the Court. Then on a
sudden, when the House complied not with their purposes, in all have it was to
be purged, and thereupon they publish a large Remonstrance, Aug. 18. stuffed
with public reasons, to show the justness and necessity thereof: but the House
again complying, through the sight of their Remonstrance, though no whit
changed in respect of its corruption; and they finding, if it were purged, it
would not be for their design; they make nothing of their former resolution,
but continue it in its corrupt condition, and sit with them themselves.

Then they fall to work again about the King, and send the propositions of
New Castle to him, which they knew, and were agreed he should not sign; in the
mean time, they so wrought the King by deep promises, and hopes of
restoration, as that he inclined much to countenance the Army, gave out words
in their favor, and in his answer to the House, preferred their Proposals,
before the Parliaments Propositions; in lieu thereof, the great ones of the
Army themselves, endeavored the revival of a Treaty, and some of them in the
House, were very violent against motions of no more Address, and expressed it
was the sense of the Army that further Address should be made, and that except
they would make Addresses of another nature to the King, they could not pro^^^^
them the assistance of the Army; and accordingly they take pains to work every
man at the headquarters; upon which; petitions were attempted in the Army, in
favor of a Treaty, and some conscientious, but weak people, were drawn to
second their design, with a Petition for a Personal Treaty, which they had
ready at the House door.

These strange and mysterious proceedings, occasioned a new face of things in
the Army, many of the Officers being much distasted thereat, and whole
Regiments choosing new Agents to look after the public, as fearing things were
running headlong into a most dangerous condition: The far greater number of the
Officers, would not by any means endure to hear of the Armies compliance with
the King, and the Agents finding all former engagements, promises, and
declarations broken, and utterly neglected, and the Common wealth in danger of
utter dissolution, produce an Agreement of the People, upon grounds of Common
Right, for uniting of all unprejudiced people therein; the great Officers very
much oppose it a while, as having set up another Interest: but seeing the same
take with the Army, profess though at present their judgments could not so far
close with it as to act for it, yet they would never oppose it. Hereupon the
whole frame of the design alters, and the matters in projection with them were
how to dis-ingage themselves, and be rid of the King, and how likewise to
discountenance and keep under the discerning party in the Army. In order to the
first, they cast about how to get the King into the Isle of Wight, where they
might both easier keep others from him, and the more entirely possess him
themselves; and that he might with willingness be hurried thither, they work
upon his fear; suggesting to him, that there was an intention in some violent
persons to murder him, and persuade him to leave that in a letter, as the cause
of his remove. To make which the more credible, they wrought L. Col. Hen.
Lilburn to asperse his brother John (who then stood in the way of the great men
of the Army) with a base and abhorrid resolution of being one that intended to
murder the King; to the proof whereof they would never suffer the Asperfer to
be brought (though solicited thereunto by a Petition from diverse well-affected
persons) but instead thereof, for that persideous service, they advanced him to
the government of Tinmouth Castle, above his brother Robers, where retaining
the leven of his Apostasy, which the Genesis Officers had laid in him, he suffered
the deserved reward of a perfidious traitor.

And though the General Officers inclined him to this revolt themselves, as
well by their example, as by countenancing him in the beginning thereof; and
though for the same he incurred the extreme displeasure of his Father, and
Kindred, yet are both his Father and Kindred by the Officers themselves and
their Associates aspersed with the fact, as if tainted with guilt and
contammination thereof.

Thus did they kill two birds with one stone, framing a Name for them which of
all others is most distastefull to the People, and was therefore most likely to
beget a belief of the pretended assassination.

Where (by the way) we desire it may be observed, that notwithstanding the word
Leveller was framed and cast upon all those in the Army (or elsewhere) who are
against any kind of Tyranny, whether in King, Parliament, Army, Council of
State, etc. And though it was not so much as believed to concern those upon
whom they cast it, the inventers having often professed as much, yet have they
both themselves and by their Instruments industriously propagated the same, and
insinuated both this and other slanders of us into the hearts of all the easy
and credulous people they could meet withal.

But to return, The King thus removed, they judge themselves at good leisure
to deal with the Agreers for the People, and so suddenly violent they became
in that work, that at the first Randezvous near Ware, they shot a Soldier to
death; for pursuing the ends of the Engagement at New Market, and for insisting
upon the Agreement for the People: unworthily abused Major Skott, a Member of
this House, sent him up a prisoner, and accused him and Col. Rains borough for
appearing in behalf of the Agreement, and therewithal sent Col. Airs, Major
Cobbet, Capt. Bray* and many others after them prisoners to Windsor, where, as
Parties, Judges, and Juries, the Officers did what they would against them,
sentencing some to death, others to disgraceful punishments, restraining and
releasing at pleasure, and with as much Arbitrarinesse as ever was in the
world, and could not be diswaded though Mr Sal^marsh and others bore full
testimony against the cruelty and injustice thereof. Hereupon at the House they
procured at once the imprisonment of five cordial Citizens, for justifying the
Agreement of the People, and requiring J^ice for the blood of the Soldier that
was shot at Ware, dis^ra^ia^d them, and under the notion of London Agents
forba^^ their meetings. And when now they thought they had m^^lded and q^d the
Army to their own bent, and had gratified their complying Officers; with the
cruelty upon the Levellers, (for so they have styled all who have manifested
any sense of Common Right) and had found that they could be nothing so great,
rich, and potent, upon a close with the King, and that it would be impossible
for them to hold either Officer or Soldier firm to them, in case of such
composure. Hereupon uterly to frustrate his hopes that way, they prevail with
the House to Vote no more Addresses; and so vanished away all their glorious
flattery of the King and his Party, and their notorious dissimulation appeared,
abusing thereby the Faith of the Army, and making it clear to all discerning
men, that such as could so break with one sort of men, will make no Conscience
of keeping faith with any.

Their next work was to new-mould the City, and make it theirs, for which
purpose they brought some Regiments of Horse and Foot, to White Hall and the
Muse, to the extreme discontent of the City, and provoke them further by
keeping their Lord Mayor, and some of their Aldermen in the Tower, without
admitting them to a Legal Trial, though upon Petitions and earnest Desires: at
last they were referred to be tried by the Lords, contrary to the known Law of
the Land; but their jurisdiction being disclaimed, after a while they were
released without any Trial at all, their end being accomplished, which was the
terror of the City, and changing the Magistrates thereof, so as should best
serve their designs.

About this time also they began to exercise their Marshal power over persons
not of the Army, and did sentence Mr William Thomson to death at White Hall.
And then also they began to new moddel the Army, and for that end, (though the
new raised Regiment for the Tower was thought no burden, yet upon pretense of
easing the charge of the Common wealth, the Lifeguard must be disbanded,
because consisting of discerning men, faithful to their Country and former
promises, and many others of like principles were picked out of every Regiment;
the design being by weeding the choicest and best resolved men, to make the
Army wholly mercinary, slavish, and the Executioners of a few men's lusts and
lawless Pleasures.

All which those good men perceiving and resolving thereupon not to be
disbanded, according to the Agreement at New marks, till the ends therein
expressed were fully gained, they were enforced thereunto by Tire (...) call
Sentences of Imprisonment and Death (though the Officers themselves had
formerly refused to disband upon command of Parliament upon the same grounds
and strength of the same engagement:) By all which it is evident, that according
to the maxim of Po^ititians, they judge themseves loose, where other men are
bound; and that all obligations are to them Tra^sitory and Ceremonial, and
that indeed every thing is good and just only, as it is conducing to their
corrupt and ambitions interests.

And thus the most hopeful opportunity that ever England had for recovery of
our Freedom, was spent and consumed, in such their uncertain, staggering
motions, and arbitrary, irrational Proceedings, whereby all parryes became
extremely exasperated, as People that had been merely mocked and cheated by
fair promises, and under the most religious Pretenses, etc. Hereby the Army,
that had but few months before been the joy and hope of all sons of Rational
People, was made a by word, a hissing, and a Reproach to the whole Nation:
insomuch that those (in hope of their large good Promises, and protests in
their Declarations) who thought nothing too precious for them, now grudged them
bread, and were ready to stone them in all places where they came; Trade fled,
Poverty increased, and discontents abounded, till at length broke out such a
flame, as no time had ever seen before; and no doubt was the propper issue of
such horrid de^usion, ministering such matter for a general Rising and Revolt,
as all former policies could never attain to, and more threatening the ruin of
the Nation then all the former forces and stratagems of the enemies: and which
is rightly to be imputed to the unjust partial and perfidious dealings of
these men.

But when they saw what a strange predicament they had brought themselves into,
and which they would never believe, till it was come upon them (no more then
now they will) they had before manifested a greater obstinacy, then now they
did a serious Repentance (which yet as the sequel proves, was but counter^eit)
though (as God knows) we were overjoyed to believe it real: Acknowledging,
with the greatest expressions of sorrow, that they had walked by corrupt
Pollitick Principles; That they had been to blame in Actings against honest
men; That the name of L^^^ller, Jesu^te or the like reproaches, should never be
more heard amongst them, that if ever the Nation be happy, in must be by a
conjunction in the L^vel^ers Principles, calling upon all, (...) ^ly by all
Discontents, to forget and forgive, and to unite all against the Common enemy
and promising with greatest asseverations, That if God, upon our joint
endeavors, should be pleased to deliver us out of this Sea of danger, that they
would never divide from just Principles, nor in the least discountenance honest
men as they had done, nor endeavor to set up a party, but cast themselves upon
an ag^^ement of the People for the future settlement of the Peace of the
Nation: but how and what performance they have made, that we shall entreat, may
be impartially observed in the ensuing story; And for a full and timely proof
of their Re^aps^, and Discovery of their dissimulation: No sooner had they
(through Gods blessing and the assistance of their reconciled friends) finished
their work at ^olechester, but presently they call to question certain
Persons, that had appeared at St. Albanes in behalf of Captain Re^^ald^,
choosing rather to forsake the Service, then to be commanded by Captains, that
had been violent against them, that had drunk the Kings Health upon their
knees, and professed they could rather fight against the Levellers then
Cavaliers, and these (according to their old wont) they sentenced to Death, and
soon after releast them, as finding or supposing this kind of Discipline most
effectual, to the breaking and debasing the spirits of the English.

And because Col. Rain borough had ever opposed their unjust Preceedings, they
withdraw him from the Army, by a plausible* but only a Ti^^ular command at
sea, whereby the straitness of his Commission, he not having thereby the
command of the Ships or Officers, he could neither restrain their Revolt, nor
preserve himself from being expu^sed at the Seamans pleasure out of that
employment.

Then upon his return, the ruling Officers finding him as inflexible to their
ends as formerly they put him upon that dangerous and unhappy Service before
Pomfr^t (notwithstanding a Commander had been appointed thereunto by the
Committ^^ of ^ork^) whether he went with much Reluctance and discontent, as
wondering at the Cause of his being Designed thither, and expressing as much to
his Friend, his sad soul presaging the misfortune, which after befell him. But
that which gives greatest cause of gr^^f and suspect to his friends, is, that
his Brother receives no furtherance, but rather, all discouragement that may be
in searching af^e^, and prosecuting the causers of that so bloody and inhuman:
a Butchery.

In the North, though during the Service and Necessities of the Army, the
Levellers (as they are called) were countenanced, and taken into the Boosmo,
who thereupon (forgetting all former affronts and disrespects) did liberally
hazard their lives, without suspicion of fraud and delusion; Yet the
Nece^ssities being over, and the enemies subdued, they renew fresh disgraces,
and fall into a greater Odium, and contempt then ever.

First, diverse Soldiers for Petitioning in the behalf of Major Reynolds, that
he might serve in the room of Major Huntington, were therefore rated, and
threatened to have their skulles cut, and some of them struck for so
Petitioning; Major John Cobit, who with the extremest hazard had regained
Tinmouth Castle, where his Superior Commander had through the dangers thereof
refused, was notwithstanding rejected, and a Member of Parliament taken from
his duty there, and contrary to the self-denying Ordinance, made Governor
thereof. Major White, who in all the desperate serv^ces in the North, had
performed the duty of Lieutenant Colonel, and Major both in the General
Regiment, yet because a constant man to his Promises and Principles, was
refused the Lieftenant Colonelship, and a man of a more complying Spirit
fetched from another Regiment to officiate therein.

And this was the usage not only to these Gentlemen, but to all others whether
Officers, or soldiers in North or South (for their Counsels were one in both)
that did retain a sense and Resolution to prosecute those good things
intimated in their former Engagements.

And as before, upon their first great Success against the City, when now
again it justly was expected they should have made use of so notable and
^^expected Blessings to the benefit and advantage of the Commonwealth, (as
their late repentances, promises and Pretenses gave men cause to hope) the
event proved, they intended another use thereof, for (having now subdued all
their enemies, they proceed with greater confidence to their former purposes,
of making themselves absolute masters over the Commonwealth, wherein there yet
appeared one main obstacle, and that was an unanimous and universal Resolution
in all Well-minded People (especially in that ^merous PEOPLE that concurred in
the PETITION of the Eleventh of September to center in an Agreement of the
People, which if not evaded, it would be impossible for them) to go through
with their Work: hereupon again they cry out for Union, and employ their
Agents to get meetings, and Treaties with those that were most forward for an
agreement and contract with them to center in an Agreement, and that the Matter
of the Petition of the Eleventh of September (as was desired) should be the
substance of that Agreement: There being no other way then by this y^^lding in
show: to amaze this busy watchful Party, and to k^ep them quiet, whilst they
went on with other pieces of their work.

For what else, has all the time spent thereabouts produced, but a mere
amusing blinding and deluding all that cordially desired the same it being
(before they left it) so obscured and perplexed in the sense thereof so short of
what was intended, and so corrupted in many perticulars, that those most
loathed it that most desired it: in the mean time, whilst they had fixed good
men's eyes and thoughts upon that Work, they secretly and swiftly prosecute
their other Designs as principal in their purposes, wherein question^e^^e they
had not had the assistance of good men but that it was verily believed in show
of driving on their own Design, they were really and cordially producing a
perfect and complete Agreement of the People, as large both in grounds of
Freedom, and redress of grievances, as the Petition of the Eleventh of
September, in the uttermost extent thereof did import.

Many of which Petitioners were not satisfied but that such an Agreement of the
People might then have been obtained without any of those extraordinary sudden
and violent Courses lately taken, neither in bringing the Army to the City
breaking the House in pieces, or removing the King by such an extra Judicial
Proceedings and Court of Justice as had no place in the English Government and
did really foresee, there would be nothing but abuse in their pretense of an
Agreement of the People: and that their own domination, in and by a Counsel of
State, was the maine thing aimed at, and intended.

The Removing the King, the ^aking away the House of Lords, the overawing the
House, and reducing it to that pass, that it is become but the Channel,
through which is conveyed all the Decrees and Determinations of a private
Counsel of some few Officers, the erecting of their Court of I^^tice, and the^
Counsel of State, The Voting of the People the Supre^^^ Power, and this House
the Supre^^^ Authority* all these Particulars: (though many of them in order to
good c^^^s, have been des^^ed by We affected People) are yet become (as they
have managed them) of sole conducement to their ends, and Intents, either by
removing such as ^^od in the way between them and the Power, wealth, or command
of the Commonwealth; or by actually possessing and invest^ng them in the same.

An^ though all this was foreseen by us, yet so persuasive were their
insinuations in the ears of many good and well disposed People, both Sou^^iers
and others, that they have been really carried away with belief of them, and
reliance upon them, and have thought they could not better employ their time
and abilities then in affording them all furtherance, and assistance that might
be.

So that their only Fears remain upon our D^coveries, to prevent which they
use means, that either we might not have opportunity to lay open their
Treacheries, and Hypocrifies, or not be believed if we did it.

In order to the first, They strictly stop the Press; In order to the second;
They b^ast us with all the Scandalls and false Reports their Wit or Malice
could invent against us: and so monstrously wicked have they been in this
particular, that they have pried into all our Actions, made use of all our
acquaintances, and friendly in^imacies, and in conclusion have ^^ery pr^^^^ed
such ^^andalls, as have been customarily used by former Statemen^ and such when
can'd and examined, c^ntaine both contrariety in themselves, and have not the
least ground of Truth, as concerning us.

By these Arts are they new ^a^^ (...) in their Power. (...) either by
opposition from the enemy which they may well expect God will raise against
them* as the deserved ^ecompence of their vile Apostasy; or by the ^eight and
violence of their many Injustices (which in the wick'd course they are (...)
must every day be multiplied, (...) they be thrown down from their ^urp^d
greatnes^e.

They have already on the Affection of all People, and are only supported by
their present strength: but when once those good men that hold them up; shall
perceive how instrumen^^^ they are made, contrary to their intentions, in
advancing a fe^ lofty and imperious men's designs; and how easy it is for them
to convert their abilities and power to better, and more co^^^^ ^^ds expressed in
their former engagements, and which the compla^^^ of the agrieved people, and
their own understandings can furnish them withal, they will then lament that
they have so long been out of the way, and set themselves with the utmost
courage and resolution to free their d^s^^essed Country from the ^^^rs and
captivity it now groans under. They may talk of freedom, but what freedom
indeed is there, so long as they stop the Press, which is indeed and has been
so accounted in all free Nations, the most essential part thereof, employing an
Apostate Judas for executioner therein who has been twice burnt in the hand, a
wretched fellow, that even the Bishops and Star Chamber, would have sham^^ to
own. What ^^^do^^ is there left, when honest and worthy Soldiers are sentenced
and enforced to ride the horse with their faces reverst, and their s^^^d^
bro^en ever their heads for but Petitioning and presenting a Letter in
justification of their Liberty therein: if this be not a new way of breaking
the spirits of the English, which Strafford and Ca^^erbury never dreampt of we
know no difference of things. A taste also of Liberty of Conscience they have
given us in the Case of a worthy Member of your House; so as we may well judge
what is like to follow* if their Reign continue. And as for Peace, whilst the
supreme Officers of the Army are supreme in your House, in the Council of
State, and all in all in the general Counsel of the Army when the martial
power is indeed supreme to the C^vill Authority, what Peace can be expected; we
profess we see no counce^ls tending to it, but hereof mighty and vast sums of
money to be taxed upon the People per ^^en^e^^, as if war were become the
only trade, or as if the people were bound to (...) Ar^^es whether they have
trade or no^ yea, whether they have bread or no.

And as for the prosperity of the Nation; what one thing has been done that
tends to it? Nay, has any thing been done since they were in power? but what
increases the ^ancot, hatred, and malice, which our late ^^^^ppy differences
have begotten amongst us, as if they had placed their happiness and security in
the total division of the People, nothing being offered by them, that has any
face of reconcilement in it, nothing of cheerfulness or general satisfaction,
the mother of trad* and plenty, that might take away the private remembrances
and destinctions of parties: nothing indeed, but what tends to implacable
bitter n^sse of spirit, the mother of confusion penury, and beggary.

Nay what se^ce of the b^a^^ ^^r de^^ of the p^^ple h^^^ they ^^^^fested of
late, has it not been by their procurement that the Judges their creatures
have a thousand a year allowed to every one of them above the ordinary fees?
which were ever esteemed a heavy oppression in themselves: is there any
abridgement of the charge, or length of time, in trial of causes? are they
touched with the general burden of Tithes, that ca^^er of industry and (...)
or with that of E^ize, which out of the bowels of laborers and poor people
enriches the Usurers and other Catterpillars of the Common wealth: or what have
they done to free Trade from the intolerable burden of Customs? except the
setting fresh hungry fly upon the old ^^es of the People? What one matterial
thing did they offer unto you in their late Petition, which you gave them so
many thanks for? terming their desires modest and descreet; when it is evident
by the contents, they did it only to stop the mouths of their Soldiers and to
amu^e them into a pleasing dream, whilst they go on with their design^ of
absolute domination and which should you in the least oppose, you would find
their modesty no more toward you then toward your (...) cludid members: In
the mean time, where is their Charge against those Members? or why find they
not who a^^^st them have conferred offices upon each other and upon their,
Creat^^es and relations? or who they were that gave so large Donations of
thousands and hundreds per annum whilst the Public Faith is ^^^aken, and
F^^^hes are ready to starve for emptying themselves to serve the public
necessities; or ^^y discountenance not they al^ those who have betrayed the
must of Feofees for Bishops, and Deli^qu^nts lands? and are bee^^e purchasers
themselves of great Est^t^, for very f^^ (...) purchases, the due value rightly
considered: or why blame they not the Lord chief Justice and Lord chief Baton
for keeping their places, which were conse^^ed on them (and the like o^ others)
by this House, when those Members sat^^^ere, they have excluded or why find
they not o^^ those perfi^^^^ persons that have (...) (...) conscience of
breaking the self denying Ordinance; and persi^^ therei^? or is the reason
vis^^l^ why they have nothing to pay against these sorts of men, namely,
because (...) are their own and their Creatures cus^^? Ob wretched England,
that sees, and yet suffers such i^^^lleriable master^. What can be expected
from such Officers, who frequently manifest a thirst after the blood of such
People, and Soldiers as are most active for the common Freedom ^^ate and
prosperity of the Commonwealth, and against whom they (...) also to object
(...) what can be expected from such a Counsel in the Arm (...) agree that the
supreme authority should be moved to make a l^w, That that Counsel of Officers
may have Power to have and put to death all such persons ^^ough ^^e of the
Army, a^ ^hey should judged, were (...) of she (...).

Certainly these things cannot but manifest unto you (...) very hearts, their
inward purposes and Intentions representing visibly before you and all the
Word, the most dangerous condition, that ever yet this Nation has been in: And
if there be any Conscience toward God or man to be found amongst you, the
whose sine^s and progress o^ this our sad Representation, is so ^^ly known,
and from in memory, that it is impossible, but it must work upon all amongst
you that are not Co partners with them in their Design, or are not engaged (as
the Lawyers are) in these corrupt Interest.

But though this long betrayed and miserable Nation should prove so unhappy as
that there should not be one found amongst you, to own these known Trueths,
which yet ring in every m^ns ears, throughout the Land; but through fear, or
other ^^^e respects, should shut your eyes against the light: it shall be so
fa^^e from inducing us, to repent of what we have herein (or in our late
Apprehensions) expressed, and set before you that we shall rejoice above
measure, that we have witnessed to the Truth; and against all those Delusions
and persidious Stratagems, laid by those men to betray and enslaue the
Commonwealth, to their own Pride, Ambition, Lusts, Covetounesse, and
Domination, if not Dukeship, or Kingship; their Creatures discoursing of late,
That the Power must be reduced to one: what their meaning is, time (if they be
not hindered) will manifest: but the Premises duly weighed, does evidence, what
^^eit be, it wi^^ be as b^d, at bad possibly can be.

And as we shall not altogether doubt of the appearance of some, in this
Honorable House, that will conscionably perform that Supreme Trust which is
really and essentially resident in your integrity: what ever may be suggested
to the contrary, (it being not others treachery, nor anyes violence, that can
dive^^ you of that Authority:) but if you all should sail therein, as God
forbid, yet we shall not doubt, but that what we have here presented, and
published, will open the eyes, and raise the hearts of so conscionable a number
of the Sould^^ry and People in all places, and make them so sensible of the
bondage and danger threatened: as that these men, this Faction of Officers,
shall never be able to got through with their wicked intentions.

It being an infinite shame that they should be suffered to proceed so far
therein, as they have done, the having been no party hitherto so inexcusable,
for it is possible, if not probable that the King and his party, might at first
be induced to offend through error of breeding, long custom, and sway of
times, (although that excuse neither him nor them). That Hollis, and that
party, might at first be drawn into their violence, against people faithful
to the Common wealth through an erroneous zeal against supposed Sectaries, and
for uniformity is Presbytery (though that also but little extenuates their
offense) but neither the one nor the other can be imagined to have transgressed
against so evident light, nor against so many and great obligations of love,
and great respects from the people as this party has done; so that the
in^entions, and endeavors of these men, to enslave the Commonwealth, or their
continuing of burdens, without any remorse at the dearnesse of food, and and
utter loss of trade, exceeds in the nature and measure of it, all the
wickedness of both the other parties put together.

And therefore upon due consideration of the premises and in utter detestation
of their most perfidious and treacherous dealing with the Army, Parliament and
Commonwealth; we do in behalf of our selves and all wel-minded people, here
before this Honorable House, as in the presence of Almighty God, protest
against their breaking the says of the Army with all parties, their dissolving
the Council of the Ag^tator^, and usurping a power of giving forth the sense of
the Army to the Parliament and people, also against the shooting of the
Soldier to death at Ware, and their cruelties exercised on other persons, to
the debasing of their spirits, and thereby new moulding of the Army to their
own designs, then playing fast and loose with the King and his party, till
they brought a new a dangerous War upon the Nation.

We also protest against their dissembled repentances ^s in no measure
satisfactory for so abominable offenses: we also protest against all their late
extraordinary Proceedings, in bringing the Army upon the City, (to the ruin of
trade) there breaking the House in pieces without charging the Members
particularly: And then judging and taking away of men's lives in an
extraordinary way, as done for no other end, but to make way for their own
absolute domination: we, also protest against the Election and Establishment of
those High Courts of Justice, as unjust in themselves, (...) of dangerous Pe^
(...) ^e to come ^^as likewise against the Co^^^ell of (...) putting some of
themselves therein contrary to their (...) ^greement: we also protest against
all other the like (...) of those officers, that on Thursday the 22 of February
(...) ^^^^ted for so bloody a (Law, as to hang whom they should (...))
disturbed the Army, (as having no power either by such O^^cels; either to give
the sense of the Army), or to judge any Person not of the Arm^, or to do any
thing in reference to the Commonwealth, more then what any, so many fifty
Soldiers or persons not of the ^^my have power and may lawfully do though all
the General officers were continually present (...) we protest against, as
things unjust abominable and dangerous and declare that our present not seeking
for Justice or (...) therein, shall be no bar against us for the future, when
we shall see cause to seek for Justice and relief therein.

And for the truth of our Judgments herein: we should with gladness submit
unto the determinations of this Ho^^^able House, were not their High hand as
yet held over ^o^. And therefore we are enforced to appeal to a new
Rep^^^tive, equally chosen in such like manner, as is expressed in (...) ^^^ons
apprehensions lately presented unto you, and do (...) desire that you would
encourage the Army in chu^ing a Rep^^sentative, consisting of select persons,
chosen by every ^^^ment of the Army, as at the first at New-mark^t: (...)
humbly pray that you will not any more receive the result (...) few officers,
as the sense of the Army the officers of (...) my having no more power to make
Laws for an Army, (...) the officers of the Common wealth to make Laws for
(...) ^^ple; both of them being constituted only for the Dis^^^^, (...)
Government thereof. We hope you will proceed (...) Agreement of the People;
according to our (...) serious Apprehensions, and also speedily (...) effect
those other things therein desired, tending very (...) the abrogation of the
bondage intended.

Thus have we once more un^^^^uend our (...) dise^^^ged our duries to our
C^morry giving (...) dangerous thra^dom and misery that yet threatened this much
(...) on, ^i^d much we doubt not, (...) mixed with (...) honest reso^^ be (...)
prevented: which we shall-exceedingly rejoice to (...) after so ma^^y y^^rs of
sorrow the people may (...) La^d (...) There (...) ward for the righte^^s, and
that there is a God that judges the earth.

FINIS.

