LILBVRNS GHOST, With a Whip in one hand, to scourge Tyrants out of Authority;
And Balm in the other, to heal the Sores of our (as yet) Corrupt STATE;

Or, Some of the late dying principles of freedom, revived, and unvailed, for
the Lovers of Freedom and Liberty, peace and righteousness to behold.

By one who desires no longer to live then to serve his Country.

London, Printed for Livewell Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-Head-Alley. 1659.

Lilburns Ghost.
MUST we continue for ever in the Wilderness, and not obtain our Promise, viz.
the possession of Canaan, nor yet return to our Egyptian servitude? Surely a
Divine Hand has kept us from our possession, and made us know the time was not
yet come, till the Lord has cut off the murmuring, self-seeking and perfidious
Israelites from amongst us; the same Hand also has kept the faithful ones from
turning to the Egyptian fleshpots, and forsaking the Cause of God, for which
we have so long contended. How near we are to our desired Haven, we cannot
precisely fathom; or how many of our Civil and Martial Grandees (loaded with
the ruins and spoils of the People, and gorged with pride, covetousness,
self-seeking, and all manner of filthiness, which can in no wise enter the
promised Land) must be first thrown by, before we come to enjoy our promised
and much desired possession, time will shortly discover.

The Lord has in some measure returned to our Camp, and with a strong hand
has thrown down the Mighty from his Throne, overthrown his Chariots, and put a
Bit in the mouth of his unruly and pampered horses; and has raised a spirit
among the people, to cry up the Cause of God, and the liberties of the People;
both which to our great grief and sorrow, had like to have been (violently and
barbarously) buried alive at White hall.

Rouse your selves, O ye Freeborn people of England, and make it appear that
de jure, the Original of all just Power and Government, is and ought to be in
you. Be no longer cheated of your right, nor let the Parliament and Army saddle
you with slavery. The Scripture clears the point, that you are the Original of
all power: the Apostle Peter calls it, The Ordinance of Man. When the murmuring
Israelites cried out for a King, God bid Samuel hearken to their voice; as if
he should have said, Let them make use of their natural Rights, in making
choice of the form of Government: and after God had nominated the person, he
left the confirmation and ratification of the Government to the people, to show
that the Right was in them, and to that end, Samuel calls them together, and
with shouts and acclamations they proclaim him King: an evident Testimony that
the validity of the Government depended wholly upon the peoples consent and
confirmation. And indeed, the acts of all Tyrants and Usurpers do evidence the
same; who to make their Actions as just as they can, do always endeavor the
consent and ratification of the people, and to enter into some compact with
them, and to establish themselves with a show of Legality; which if seriously
considered, is a manifest confession of what I here affirm.

I shall insist no longer upon this subject, for I hope we may take it for
granted on all sides, that the Original of all just power is in the people; but
proceed to the removal of all such blocks which have lain in the peoples way,
and hindered them of the possession of their just rights and Liberties.

1. The first foundation of Tyranny, and hinderance of the peoples just rights;
is the division of a State into Ecclesiastical and Civil. It is true, the
Commonwealth of Israel was thus constituted by God himself: but to say that
there is the least ground or reason for such a division under the Gospel, or
for congregating national Churches, to be drawn from the Scripture, is more
then the Learned or Gravest of the Orthodoxal train can produce. It is clear
that Christ came to put an end to the administration of the Jewish form, and to
take away the pale which confined the Church to a particular nation, that all
nations might be taken into the Church, I mean here and there a few, whom the
Lord should choose: his Church now is not National; it is not a political, but a
spiritual, Body, according to the saying of Christ himself, My Kingdom is not
of this world. This division of State is the right hand of Antichrist, which
has built up and nourished the man of sin, from an infant to a perfect man:
and has in all ages persecuted the people of God, and been the cause of mo^^
of the blood that has been shed in the world. For whatever Reformation or
change happens, either in Church or State, the Clergy can soon transform
themselves into that shape, join Issue with the present power, and under
pretense of error and heresy, bind men to believe their arbitrary Dictates,
Traditions, Errors and blasphemies, or persecute them to the death.

Therefore, O Parliament of England (whom the good people are pleased at
present to own as the supreme Authority, and will do so, provided you own them,
and do their wills, and fulfill their intents) beware you suffer not the
Ecclesiastic power to twist it self with yours; but on the contrary, to
prevent making of parties and factions upon a religious account, and all broils
and jars in the Nation) declare to the Nation that yen have nothing to do in
matters of Religion: as you are the civil Authority, labor to make good Laws
for the punishing of sin and vice, and keeping all men civil, peaceable and
quiet; and let Christ alone with his Church, whose work it is, not yours.

2. Secondly, that which hitherto has smothered our declared-for Free State,
in the very birth, was want of care (upon the alteration of Government) to
hinder the passage of Tyranny out of one form into another: the affairs of past
ages and nations, and not only so, but the late actions in this Commonwealth,
do fully demonstrate that the interest of Monarchy and its inconveniences have
been fatal to other forms, and are undeniable proofs that they may reside in
the hands of many, as well as in a single person. We might here, for
illustration sake, produce the case of Athens, after they had laid aside their
King, the Kingly and Tyrannical power sprang up among their Decimal Governors,
and their Thirty, whom the people commonly called Tyrants; and not only so,
but crept among the popular form, who were elected by the Commonalty, for want
of a strict watch over them, to prevent their acting more for their own then
the peoples interest. Not much unlike this, was the State of Florence: the
Kingly interest sprang up always in one upstart or other, in advancing his
ambitious ends, stepped up into a Kingly posture, and robbed the people of their
right. Even so fared Rome with the Tarquins, Consuls, Senates, Decemviri,
Triumviri, Dictators and Tribunes, all whom acted the flagitious enormities of
an absolute Monarchy.

Setting aside all foreign examples, good people of England look at home, and
O Parliament of England, behold your own body: have not you cut off Charles,
and let the King live to this day? Consider what is the interest of Monarchy,
but an unlimited, uncontrollable, unaccountable station of Power and Authority,
in the hands of a single Person, or Many, who govern according to the Dictates
of their own will and pleasure. If GOD has so much mercy for you, that you now
at last prove our Redeemers, and Restorers of our Liberties, declare for it in
a due and orderly succession of Authority in our Supreme Assemblies; that Ages
to come may have a reverent and noble respect of you, as the Founders of our
Free State and Commonwealth.

Thirdly, and since (to the grief of honest hearts) there are many discontented
humors in the Nation, who endeavor to insinuate themselves into the Body of
the Nation, to undermine the security of the Commonwealth; to gain a share in
the government, to bring about their corrupt ends, great care ought to be had
of the composure and complexion of our Representatives. And that you may be
careful herein, pray shut the door; and not only so, but stop every crack and
cranny, to keep out the old and new Malignant out of Authority: you must be
cautious not only in excluding the wild Geese, but the tame; not only the
old, but the new Malignant, being full as dangerous as the other: There is
another tame beast yet, more dangerous then the other two, viz. the Neutral
Laodicean, who can live in any Element, sail with any wind, close with the
Malignants or any for his own advantage, transform himself into an Angel of
light, to bring about his deeds of darkness: Let not such be named in
Elections: And good people, be not threatened by some, or deluded by others to
sell your Birthright for a Mess of Pottage. And as you ought to be careful of
the persons to be elected, so you ought to be as careful of the Persons
electing, who ought to be such as have made contribution of their purses,
strength and counsels, to manage the Cause for the Liberty and Freedom of the
People: for in this case those only ought to be reckoned the people; the rest
having by a traitorous engagement, compliance, neutrality, or apostasy,
endeavored to destroy the people, and by consequence have forfeited their
Rights and Membership of free people; are no longer to be called Patriots, but
Parties in Faction, having acted against the declared Interest of the
Commonwealth.

4. Fourthly, the permitting of the Legislative and Executive power to rest in
the same hands and persons, is a means suddenly to overthrow a Commonwealth.
Reason clears it: for if the supreme power, the Lawmakers, be also the
Administrators and Dispensers of Justice, the people would be lost without
Remedy, in case unjustice be measured unto them: for what appeal have we under
heaven, against those that have the Supremacy? For true policy always
presupposes the worst, that governors may be unrighteous; and therefore in all
determinations, points at the enormities and remedies of government.

If I could insist upon Examples, the state of most Kingdoms and Commonwealths
in the world would evidence the truth of what I here assert; but passing by
all, I come to our own State, and the affairs thereof, which are fresh in every
man's memory. The late King, who was and ought to have been no more but as
Officer in trust, to see to the execution of the Laws, strained (by the ruin
of Parliaments) to get the Legislative power, as well as the Executive, into
his own hands: and whilst he strived for this absolute Tyranny, he pulled a
swift destruction upon Himself and his Family. Oliver Cromwell, for his time,
was a rare Proficient in such projects, and for the same (instead of it blessed
memory, which might have been celebrated for his valiant and bold
achievements) he has left but a stinking savor behind him, in the nostrils
of all honest men.

O Parliament of England, have you been free from this enormity, in the time of
your government? Labor to be faithful Patriots to your Country now, and lay a
foundation upon which the building may stand firm and sure.

5. Fifthly, There is another rank weed, that grows fast, and is apt to choke a
Free State, whilst it is young and tender; and it is called Reason of State; by
Reason of State here, I do not mean the equitable Results of Prudence and right
Reason, for upon these ought their Determinations to be founded, and is the
safety of States and Princes: by Reason of State, I mean that which flows from
a corrupt Principle to an indirect End, which is the States-mans will and lust,
when he has admitted ambition, preferment, profit, revenge, etc. to be his
reason. It is a sovereign Commander, an important Counselor; it answers all
objections and quarrels; it makes War and Peace, raises Taxes, cuts off and
pardons Offenders, treats Ambassadors: It can say and unsay, do and undo, make
by-ways highways, and what not? Many mighty Things it has done in all ages.
It was Reason of State that made Pharaoh keep the Israelites in bondage,
contrary to the commands of GOD: It was that made Saul spare Agag, and endeavor
the ruin of David: It made Jeroboam set up his Calves in Dan and Bethel: It
made A^itophel give counsel to Absalom to defile his Fathers Concubines: It
made Abner take part with the house of Saul: And it caused Joah afterward to
kill him: It made Jehu to mingle his own interest with the commands of GOD: It
made the Jews cry out, Crucify, and Pilate to pass sentence: It made Richard
the Third murder his Nephew: It was is that made Henry the Eighth persecute
the Protestants; and shifting his Religion, fell as heavy upon the Papists: It
made his Daughter Mary fill up the cup of her Fathers iniquities: It brought a
Scotch Coward to be our King: It made his Son, the late King, endeavor, by a
bloody war, co ruin Religion and Liberty: And O Parliament of England, it was
Reason of State that made you imprison many of the free people for demanding
their Rights: It made you falsify your Trust, and keep the Liberties of
England to your selves: It made Oliver Cromwell aspire to the Top of Supremacy:
It made him leave his power to a Goose, instead of a Fox or a Lion: It was
Reason of State that made the Grandees of the Army bring you again to the Helm;
and if you do not now sweep it out of your House, and take in the Rule of
Honesty, it will unavoydably bring Ruin upon you, as it has done upon the
aforementioned Tyrants.

6. Sixthly, Breach of Vows and Promises, a violation of Faith, Principles and
Engagements, upon every turn of time and advantage, is a great error among
Politicians, an Enemy to a Free State, and an Impiety that ought to be exploded
our of all Nations, especially such as bear the name of Christians. The people
that discern but little, magnify it for admirable policy; and the Impostors
that use it, for the only Politicians. This is the old Court-Gospel, which
has gained many, Proselytes, That a Prince cannot, nor ought not to keep his
faith given, when the observance thereof turns to disadvantage, and the
occasion; that made him promise are past. Surely then the interest of the
people should lead them never to trust Princes, nor Engagements and Promises
made of Men in power, but ever to reserve a power to themselves, either to
reject them, or to make them perform their promises, whether they will or no.
And if Princes or men in Authority do sometimes resemble the Lion, and
sometimes the Fox, let the free people observe them in both disguises, and keep
a power to themselves, to cage the Lion, and to unkennel the Fox.

I might here bring plenty of instances, both foreign and domestic, wherein
might appear the benefit to a Commonwealth, which has accrewed by a strict
observance of Vows and Promises, and what sad effects the contrary has
produced; but for want of Paper, I wave them, and put you in mind, O
Parliament of England, that your apparent violation of your Engagements and
Promises, had like to have smothered our Free State, in its infancy, and
hurryed you, and the Good Old Cause, to Utopia. I know you can frame excuses,
and I could give you Machiavils reasons for it; but I question not, but most of
you have read them, as well as I.

Seventhly, and lastly, the peoples ignorance what their Liberty is, how to
obtain it, and how to preserve it, is an error in true policy, and an enemy to
a free State: by this means have the Grandees of the world, and the Clergy
(holding their old Maxim, That Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion) kept the
people in ignorance, and shared the government of the world between them.
Therefore let the Parliament of England now let the people know what their
power is, and let them lay the principles of a Free State before the People.
Let Children be trained up and tutored in the Principles of Enmity and dislike
against Kingly government, and all enter into an oath of abjuration (as the
Hollanders do) against Kingly government for ever. Let the people know that it
is inconsistent to a Free State for particular persons to grandize or greaten
themselves more then ordinary; for that breeds in them an aspiring to Kingship:
thus had the State of Holland like to have lost their Liberty, by the greatness
of the Orange Family: And this Parliament has cause to remember their old
General. Let them not commit the continuation of power in any one Family,
because it gives them an opportunity to bring in their particular interest in
competition with the peoples. Let the peoples Majesty and Authority of their
Votes in their Supreme Assemblies be kept inviolable. Let the Arms and Militia
be placed in the hands of such men who were always firm to the interest of the
peoples Liberty, and let them be trained and made perfect in the use of them.
And principally, let it be an unpardonable crime to incur the guilt of Treason
against the Interest and Majesty of the People. First, let it be Treason
unpardonable to endeavor to bring in the Kingly power: For this cause Brutus,
the Founder of the Roman Liberty, caused his own sons to be put to death, for
conspiring to bring back the Tarquins to the Kingdom. Secondly, the Romans held
it an unpardonable crime for a Senator to divulge the secrets of the Senate.
Thirdly, in the Venetian State it was held Treason for any Senator or Officer
to receive any gifts or pensions from any foreign Prince or State upon any
pretense whatsoever; or to have any private conference with any foreign
Ambassador.

The people being thus restored to their just Rights and Liberties, and placed
in the Majesty of government, let them observe these brief Rules following.

First, That in a Free State it is above all things necessary to avoid
dissension, and not to use the uttermost remedy upon every slight distemper and
default of those with whom they have entrusted their Liberties, lest the cure
prove worse then the disease: For the enormity of tumult, dissension and
sedition, has been the main objection of Tyrants and their Creatures, against
the peoples government. Therefore let the people be moderate and discreet in
their behavior, and give a due reverence to those whom they have elected for
their Superiors.

Secondly, That their guardianship of Liberty may be safely placed, Let them be
careful, in their Elections, to have an eye upon the public, and choose such as
have appeared most eminent and active in the Establishment of Love and Freedom.

Thirdly, Be not led by faction, affection, or alliance, to choose any, but
merely upon the account of Merit; this will engage your very foes, when they
see men put into Authority that have a clear Reputation of transcendent Honor
and Wisdom.

(...)
