The PRISONER's Most mournful Cry Against the present Oppression and Tyranny
that is exercised upon him. OR, An EPISTLE written by John Lilburn Esquire prisoner
in Newgate, July 1. 1653. Unto the Right Honorable John Fowke Lord Mayor of
London.
My Lord,
I Know you are a rational wise man, endowed with a large stock of brains, and
understand very well the Fundamental Laws and Liberties of England, for which
many years ago you were a sufferer: and, I am confident, you have not the least
cause in the world to be personally my enemy, for any unhandsomeness that ever
I acted against you in particular in my life; and all this, that afternoon your
Marshal brought me before you, you acknowledged and confessed before a great
many of my friends; and further did declare, freely and publicly unto all my
friends, upon my opening of Empson and Dudley's Case to you, (and the danger
that might come unto your self, in your apprehending me as a Felon, and thereby
endeavoring to destroy me, upon an unjust, injurious, and illegal Act of
Parliament) that you were forced to do what you did to me, for the saving your
own head upon your own shoulders, and, as your seeming-justification, produced
me, and suffered me to read the Generals and the Gentlemen's sitting at
White Hall ( commonly called the Council of State's) Warrant: and yet,
notwithstanding all that I said unto you against that unjust Act, you committed
me to prison, and sent me so far on the way to my execution at Tyburn, which
you know very well I have born with patience and contentedness, without much
grumbling against you, or any other that have been administrators in that
Injustice, Tyranny, and Oppression that I now suffer, and, through the strength
of the Almighty, my never-failing Rock of salvation, undergo with comfort and
rejoicing.

My Lord, you cannot but know, (because they are so publicly in Print, all up
and down the streets) that I have presented (upon the 14, 16, and 20 of June
last) from my self, three submissive, fair, sober, modest, and rational
Petitions unto those Gentlemen sitting at Whitehal, that have by their wills
and pleasures assumed the present governing of the free Nation of England
(after they have destroyed and rooted up by the roots, by their swords, wills,
and pleasures, all the formal settled legal Power and Government of this ancient
free Nation) in which I have offered them so fair, that it is impossible for
any just man in the world to offer them fairer: and my friends, and many of the
honest private Soldiers, signed an honest and just Petition in my behalf,
which also was presented to them, upon the said 20 of June last, and is now
published also in Print: But the answers unto all of them being nothing but an
absolute Declaration from the greatest amongst them, of their blood-thirsty
pursuing my innocent life and blood, and their endeavor with lies and
falsehoods, by gilded agents and instruments, to fix the honest, conscientious,
just, and compassionate private Soldiers against me, from Troop to Troop, and
Company to Company, (as my certain intelligence tells me) that so they whom I
never in the least wronged in my life, might become desirous and sollicitous to
have me cut off, as a man that their great Officers would confidently make
believe has absolutely confederated, combined, and sworn unto the present King
Charles (commonly called King of Scots) to come over into England, to be his
Agent; to embroyl the Nation in Blood and War again, and thereby to destroy not
only the General, but all his Officers and Soldiers, and, by consequence, the
prosperity and tranquillity, liberty and freedom of the Land of my nativity;
although I had rather be boiled alive in hot Lead, then either directly or
indirectly to have the least hand or finger in any such most
unspeakably-mischievous design, the very thought of which, my soul abhors: and
yet their great Officers are not ashamed (as my intelligence tells me) to aver,
They have Letters under my own hand, fully to justify all this against me.

In which regard, I was unavoidably compelled and forced, unless I would by my
silence in a great measure be Fel^ de se, a betrayer of my own innocence, and
an executor and destroyer of my own life, and therefore did pen and cause to be
printed An additional Appendix (dated the 23 of June last) to my first Address
from Flanders, of the 4 of May last, to the General and his Council of
Officers; in which I have, in honesty, truth, and faithfulness, answered
particularly all their foresaid murdering calumniations against me.

And it seems, other people at liberty being very sensible of their Fundamental
Liberties, very much encroached upon, in the Tyranny at present exercised upon
me, have therefore penned two Books, the one entitled, A Jury-man's judgment
upon the Case of Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn; and the other entitled,
Lieutenant Colonel. John Lilburn's Plea in Law (dated the 28 of June) against
an Act of Parliament of the 30 of January, 1651.

Of either of which Books, if I should say I am the Author or Penman, of them,
or either of them, I should absolutely aver a lie: But yet thus much I must
say, and avow it with my life, That having read the books with seriousness, and
finding them so much tending to my advantage, good, and preservation, and so
neatly compiled, upon the pure and clear Principles of the Fundamental Law of
England, and the unspotted and undefiled Law of Nature and Reason; and the
publishing of them so useful, profitable, and advantageous to all the honest,
and commonly called freeborn people of England, and in no sense hurtful to
any, unless it be those that already have, or hereafter intend to assume to
themselves an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Power; to give a Law unto, and to rule
and govern the people of this ancient (and renowned) free Nation, by their
Lusts, Wills, and Pleasures.

In all which regards and considerations, I have caused to be printed, and paid
with my own money for diverse thousands of the foresaid books; and to avoid the
displeasure of your Marshal, and his envious and mischievous catch-polls, I
have given many hundred of the said books, and other papers freely and gratis
away, till the charge began to grow too heavy for my poor purse; which has had
nothing in it, for above this six months together (a very few small tokens
excepted) but what I have been forced to borrow; and I must avow, that by
reason of my present malicious and cruel sufferings, it has cost me already
above forty pounds since I left Callis, which yet was but upon Monday last was
fourteen days: in which regards, and my own necessity, I was forced and
compelled to set a true friend or two at work (and to enter into an engagement,
to bear all the charges of any trouble they should come into) to disperse
amongst the people called Hawkers, my foresaid books and papers, that I justly
and honestly paid for; and which thereby are become as much my proper goods, as
any upon my back; and whosoever by violence, without due process of law, takes
them from my said agents, (...) whom they legally sell them, are in the eye of
the (...) for any thing I can find in the law, as guilty of Felony, as any
person or persons, that robs, and picks my pocket; and having credible
information, that, that busy and soft-headed man, Alderman Atkins, with your
Marshal, his brother, and other of the Marshals servants, have by will,
pleasure, tyranny, force, and violence, without due process of law, taken away
several hundreds of my said books and papers (especially the Plea in law) now
my proper goods and propriety, bought with my money, and sold by me to my said
agents, for twelve pence a quire, or twelve pence every twenty five sheets, and
by them to the Hawkers for fourteen pence a quire, or fourteen pence every
twenty five sheets.

And having at the present no remedy in law left me, but to complain unto your
Honor hereof, and to desire you as the Supreme Magistrate of London, forthwith
to call the said tyrannical Alderman Atkins before you, with your Marshal, his
brother and servants, and cause them to make me restitution of my said proper
goods; and also to make me satisfaction for the damage they have done me in
spoiling my market and sale thereof; and I entreat you, and beseech you
further, that seeing without all shadow of law or justice, I am by Sir Arthur
Haselridge robbed of all my estate, and like to be murdered without mercy or
compassion, by lies, and falsehoods, and the letter of a most unjust and
injurious Act of Parliament; and have no legal Magistracy left in England, now
to appeal unto for my preservation; in which regard, I humbly beseech you
speedily to send unto me your best assurance, freely, to the utmost of your
power, to permit me to vend and sell within your jurisdiction, all such
moderate, sober, and rational vindications of my own unspotted innocence, as
are grounded upon truth, and the fundamental laws of England; in the failor of
which, you do unavoidably compel me forthwith, most bitterly to cry out of my
sorrows, calamities, and cruel bloody tyranny, that is exercised upon me, by
your Lordship, and your Underofficers, with all those above you, that pursue
my blood and life without law or reason; and to make the mournfullest cry to
the body of the honest, and free people and soldiers of England, that either
my pen or brains can invent or devise, for help, relief, compassion, and
protection: and in case I be locked up amongst the Felons, as I am informed,
has been endeavored already by no mean ones, before I can do it, I do hereby
beg of some of my friends at liberty to do it for me; which extremity, if it
be possible, from my very soul I desire to avoid; and therefore do hereby
again (as I have often already to the General) assure you, that yet there is
nothing in reason that the General shall desire at my hand, but he shall
command; but if nothing will satisfy his indignation, but the last drop of my
innocent blood, I do hereby declare before God, Angels, and men, that he does
hereby compel me to endeavor to the utmost of all the power I have in the
world, to sell my life to him at as dear a rate as ever Sampson sold his to the
Philistims. So earnestly entreating, and expecting your Lords speedy answer in
writing, I take leave to subscribe my self,

From my unjust imprisonment, and yet soul-rejoycing, and heart-chearing
captivity in Newgate, this 1 July 1653. A true and faithful English man, and
your Honors most humble servant, if you please, John Lilburn.

FINIS.

