The Upright Man's Vindication: OR, An Epistle writ by JOHN LILBURN Gent.
Prisoner in Newgate, August 1. 1653. Unto his Friends and late Neighbors, and
Acquaintance at Theobalds in Hartford shire, and thereabouts in the several
Towns adjoining;
Occasioned by Major William Packers calumniating, and groundlesly reproaching
the said Mr John Lilburn.
Gentlemen and Christian Friends,
IT is the saying of Solomon, who therein was guided by the infallible Spirit
of God, That a good name is better then precious Ointment, Eccles. 7.1. And
that a good name is rather to be chosen then great riches, Prove. 22.1. And that
a good report makes the bones fat: In which consideration, give me leave to
appeal to all the unbiassed and understanding people amongst your selves that
knew me, and observed my walkings and actings, while I lived amongst you; for a
justification of my integrity, uprightness, meekness, gentleness, and
single-hearted walking amongst you, to be really so far, as man was able to
judge, to be such as it became one that owned, and sensibly enjoyed by faith,
the choicest of spiritual Union and communion with the Lord of life and glory;
and groundedly expected, looked, and longed for a blessed immortality with the
Lord of life and glory, when this fading or earthly house or tabernacle of mine
shall be dissolved; And that believed and declared, that the grace of God in
particular had appeared to my soul, for that end, to teach me to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly and godly in this present
evil world; abstaining as much as in me a poor frail man lies, from the very
appearance of evil; and in all my actions, to the utmost of my power and
ability, to let my light really and indeed and in truth so shine before and
among men, that as Christ himself says, they seeing my good works, might
glorify my father which is in heaven; and to do to all men as I would they
should do to me (which as to men is the only or principal badge or mark of a
true Christian indeed) and not in the least to do evil, that good may come
thereby.

I say you know my walking while I was with you to be in sincerity, peace,
meekness, and uprightness, and in the demonstrations of true love and
friendship, as became a Christian; which made me willing many times in public
in prayer amongst you, largely to spend some time, effectually to declare unto
you, that infinitness of fullness, faithfulness, truth, and loving kindness,
that I had found in the Lord of Hosts the Lord Jehovah; my long enjoyed, and
long experienced enjoyed Rock of Salvation; who I often truly told you is and
was long since, largely become my sensible lot, portion, joy and rejoicing; and
was the only single good that the soul of a Believer could glory and rejoice
in; all earthly delights of riches, honor, greatness, pleasure, and all
relations whatsoever in comparison of him, were but fading vanities, fly-blown,
cobweb, moth-eaten contents and delights.

And yet in the midst of all these Declarations of mine amongst you, of the
goodness and kindness of the Lord Almighty manifested unto my soul, nothing at
the same time was more frequent and common amongst my great, potent, and
seeming religious adversaries, then with confidence to brand me for an Athiest,
a denyer of God and the Scripture. Just as Major William Packer, a great
seeming-religious man amongst you now, does (both to several of you and others,
as my certain Intelligence from some amongst your selves by Letters, etc.
inform me) brand for an hypocrite, an apostate, and a great combining enemy
with the Nations enemies beyond the seas against its welfare, peace and
freedom; which although they be things my soul detests and abhors as I do the
devil, and although I am confident no honest man in the world that really and
experimentally knows me, can really in the least believe these things spoke
against me to be true; or that there, is any other ground or reason to report
them, then the Machiavilian devises, of gilded pretended religious men, by
craft, cunning, deceit, cruelty, policy and shedding of blood, got into great
places and power, which they would keep in their own hands arbitrarily by will
and pleasure, to destroy all the lives liberties and properties of all the
honestest and quick-sighted people of England at their pleasure. Yet
notwithstanding, I judge my self obliged in duty and conscience to my self and
the Nations welfare, to make an Apology unto you to open your eyes to see
clearly through those foggy dark mists, that the said Major Packer would
cunningly cast before your eyes, for the keeping of his rich and great place and
interest up, that has raised him from the Dunghill, or a mean condition, to be
one of the arbitrary and cruel Lords or unjust Task masters of the people of
England. And I shall begin the said Apology with the inserting here my honest
Addres from Calis, which the world for the reason declared in the 38 P. of my
late printed Trial, never saw; the true Copy of which said Address, thus
follows.

For the Honorable the Council of State sitting at White Hall in London, these
present.
MAy it please you to vouchsafe me liberty to acquaint you, that being at
Calis, by the means of our last Tuesday Post, I saw and read a print^ed address
unto you, made by some honest and well-minded people of Colchester, as I have
cause to judge them, by those honest (though somewhat too general) things that
they desire of you in their said address, by which I perceive you are a kind
of a settled power in Engl. unto whom by that as the very first paper I have
seen of that nature, I apprehend, the honest and national people of England
expect great matters from you, in reference to your assisting in the settling in
a rational security of their laws, liberties and freedoms; the dear purchased
and true price of all the late blood and money shed and spent in the late wars:
In which regard, I am imboldened my self by these lines, to make this address
unto you, although I must truly acquaint you, that upon my wifes coming to
Bridges in Flanders to me, and fully informing me, that General Cromwell, and
Major General Harrison with other Marshal men, had by force and violence
dissolved the Parliament for their wicked, unrighteous and unjust actions, and
being very confident that they never did an action (nor could) of more
injustice, and unrighteousness, then their voting to banishment of me without
ground or cause, and thereby also robbing me of my estate, and of all the
comforts of this life, in which tyrannical Votes or sentence, I dare avow it
(and upon my life in particulars maintain it) they have dealt more cruelly,
more unjustly, more illegally, more unrighteously, and more harshly with me,
then ever they dealt with the most professed enemy, that they have had in
England, Scotland, or Ireland in arms against them, or any that they have
supposed did aid, assist, or abet those that were in arms against them; Besides
their destroying of the fundamental laws and liberties of England contained in
that most excellent Law the Petition of Right thereby, and so overthrowing all
the ends that we pretended to fight for against the King, and thereby making us
guilty of murdering all the people destroyed in the late Wars.

In all which considerations, etc. I was prevailed with the 14 of May last (new
or Dutch style) to write an address to the General and his Officers of the Army
for my Pass, to return from my destroying compeld remaining beyond the seas,
and pend it in rational, moderate, and respective phrases and terms, as by the
Copy of it here enclosed in print does appear: It being impossible in reason to
imagine, that the Officers of the Army should deal so severely with the
Parliament, their Lords, Masters, Creators and plentiful Providors for, and who
were fenced about with several laws to make it treason in all or any of those
that should but attempt or endeavor without their own free and voluntary
consents to dissolve them, upon which very declared and printed statutes I my
self was most severely prosecuted and arraigned two days together for my life
as a Traitor, at Guild Hall in London in October. 1649. with the greatest and
earnestest persuit, that ever was exercised upon a man; upon a bare pretense of
my endeavoring to dissolve them, but by pening and printing (as was pretended,
and if it could have been proved I had died as a Traitor for it) arguments and
reasons, grounded upon the declared, printed, and published laws of England,
and the received, acknowledged, printed and published Rules of reason, declared
both in the late Parliament, and the Armies declarations: I say considering
which, it was impossible in reason to imagine, that the General, etc. should as
they have done, deal so severely with the Parliament for their wickedness, and
oppression, and deny me a Pass upon my bare desire to them, being one of all
men in the world, that the Parliament it self had dealt most wickedly and
oppressive with, and banished in that barbarous and tyranical manner that they
had done: And also considering that I am a man, that even in field have
adventured my life with as much hazardousness, gallantry, and bravery, as any
man whatsoever in the whole Army for those very principles, that they
constantly in all their Declarations have declared, the undoubted birth right
and inheritance of all the people of England, as well the poorest as the
richest; And considering that for this 15 or 16 years together, I have been
more then the General himself, and all the Officers in the Army put together in
one, emptied from vessel to vessel, winnowed, sifted, and tried, gagged, whipped,
pillored, ironed, arraigned for my life several times, imprisoned, close
imprisoned, attempted to be starved, poisoned, violently murdered, pistolled,
daggered, often divorced from enjoyment or sight of wife, children, servants,
kindred, friends or any other relations; and have had my friends and
acquaintance bribed, hired, and corrupted with large sums of money, and vast
proffers besides, to lay snares, traps and gins, (to counterfeit my hand, to
swear falsely against me) to take away my life. And all this has been done
unto me, for no other cause, ground, nor pretense of crime in the whole world,
but only and alone for standing for the foresaid laws, liberties, declared
freedoms and birthrights of the people of England, that the Officers themselves
in all their declarations, have declared themselves to be Patrons of, and
standers for; as things of so much excellency and worth, as that they prized
them above their lives and all other enjoyments that this world could ^fford
unto them. The substance of all which they have centured in that excellent
piece of theirs, as the sum of all their desires and endeavors, called, The
Agreement of the People, which they themselves presented to the Parliament
about 4 years ago, as containing the only principles, mood and way, to
establish in security for the future, the full and safe enjoyment of the
liberties and freedoms of the commonly called, the freeborn people of England.

Yea a man that by all provocation whatsoever, or courtings whatsoever (which
has been in both kinds many and great) could never be provoked nor induced to
turn his back upon the said declared principles of liberty and freedom; nor in
the day of the many straits of those, that stood for them, although he has
been never so injuriously dealt with even by diverse of the chief pretenders to
them. And to conclude, a man as to men for the worst of all his outward actions
ever since he came to man's estate or knowledge (the frailties of provoked
passion, or humane infirmity excepted, which the righteousest of mere men are
not totally exempted from) that never to this day could justly be taxed or
blemished with any the least outward baseness in any kind whatsoever, that
could in the least spot or stain his outward reputation; being confident
according to the true fundamen^al laws of England for any thing whatsoever from
his childehood to this very day acted by him, that justly can be laid to his
charg, he may at the strictest legal bar of Justice in England, with clear and
confident assurance of the safety of his life, limbs, liberty or property, bid
defiance to all his adversaries though never so great) that he has in the
whole world. I say again upon all these considerations it could not rationally
be imagined, but upon the Generals and his Officers first knowledge of my
address to them, they would after they had by force dissolved the Parliament,
immediately have given me a Pass to return from my causeless and ruining
bonishment, and my poor credulous wife took her journey from me into England,
with as much confidence immediately to obtain my longed for Pass, upon my
foresaid Address, as she did believe, she should live after that to eat or
drink.

But after a tedious delay, and a longing expectation, she with several of my
friends, the last Dunkirk Post, sent me several Letters thither, dated the 27
of your May or old style, which is the sixth of our Flemish present June, or
new style, in reading of all which at Dunkirk the last Sunday, by all which, I
expressly find the General gives my wife good words, (which makes her believe
him infinitely to be her friend) and that in the midst of the debate of my
address, by the Council of Officers, he was sent for by the Council of State
to come from the Council of Officers to them, and that immediately after they
rise, viz. the Officers or some of them, gave my wife, etc. this answer, viz.
That they were not willing to break an Act of Parliament in a private case, but
there would speedily be a power or a new Parliament, as they called it, that
would do it, and some of great power, inquired or demanded, Whether if I came
home I would be quiet or no, and others said mine was but a private business,
and the Council were so full of the public affairs of the Nation, that they
had scarce time to eat or sleep, and therefore I must be patient, quiet, and
wait with contentedness till a new Parliament.

At the reading of which I was even confounded and amazed in my understanding,
and looked upon my wife and her stories of the Officers intended honesty and
public good to the Nation, as the perfectest artificial cheats, that ever was
put upon me in the world, to deceive and cozen me, and that you that now sit as
a Council of State, with your Masters and Creators, viz. the General and his
Officers, never hated nor dissolved the Parliament, for any real hatred or
disgust at them for any mischief, injustice, or Tyranny that they exercised
upon the people of England (free (never since they were about 4 years ago
declared a free people) in nothing else but bare name) but only because they
grew something stubborn and surly and would not be ruled merely as
school-boyes, to act as the General and his great Officers (and you, now his
and their substitutes) would have them, in which regard, great and glorious
things was merely pretended, but never in tended for the peoples good, to break
the Parliament in pieces, and totally dissolve them, that so you alone might
get the power into your own hands, to do withal the lives, liberties, and
estates of the people of England what you pleased, giving the people only good
words, until you had rivited your selves fast in your power, by securing your
selves so with force, that Julius Caesar like, the General might style and
declare himself by a new name, but with a power in reality far above a King, as
perpetual Dictator, or Lord Conservator of the peace of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and I confess that the Generals words to my wife, and some of yours,
together with the Officers, were so far from pleasing me, as they did her, that
I clearly see by them I had ground to believe, that it is resolved privately by
the General, I shall never so long as he lives, or at least so long as his
power lasts come into England again, because it was resolved by him (who I
clearly then judged so rules and over aws you, that you nor the Officers durst
not conclude to give me a Pass without fully and plainly knowing his will and
pleasure) to drive on another intrest then in the least the peoples welfare,
peace, safety, liberty, or freedom; all which to my utmost power, and the
often apparent hazard of my life for many years together, I have been a
constant and resolute patron too, and asserter of and never could be threatened
therefrom, nor in the least by Gold, Silver, or promotion (which has times
often enough sufficiently been proffered me) courted to forsake them, this
being the only and alone crime or true cause I have been hated, and almost
often to death persecuted, by all great powerful intresis, that have been
great, and up in the government uf England for many years together, and
therefore now, and for this only reason and none else, did I judge I must now
be kept out from coming into England: the Generals good words to my wife, and
yet denying my Pass (for so I absolutely judged the delay of it) made me
immediately think of the 18 chapter of Nicholas Machiveli's Prince, who is a
man, (though through the grand corruptions of the age and place in which he
lived, and the safety of his own life, was forced as may rationally in charity
be judged to write in some kind of unhandsome disguises.) I must call for the
excellency and usefulnes in corrupt times and places for his works sake, one of
the most wisest, judicious, and true lovers of his country of Italies liberties
and freedoms, and generally of the good of all mankind that ever I read of in
my days (of a mere man) who though he be commonly condemned with his Maxims
and Tenants by all great state politicians, as pernicious to all Christian
States, and hurtful to all humane societies, yet by me his books are esteemed
for real usefullnesse in my streits to help me clearly to see through all the
disguised deceits of my potent, politic, and powerful adversaries; above any
one of all the human Authors in the world, that ever I read (which yet are very
many) the reading and studying of which in the day of my great streights in
contesting with the great Arbitrary powers in England, has every way been as
useful, advantageous, necessary, and requisite to me, as a Compass or
Prospective glass, can be to a master of a rich laden ship fallen into
dangerous and unknown seas, where he is every hour in fear to be cast away and
destroyed by dangerous sands, Rocks, or Pirates: or as a pair of spectacles can
be to a weak or decayed pair of eyes, in writing or reading that is compelled
thereunto, and must do it and can get none to help him or do it for him, his
book called his Prince (especially) if it were scarce to be got, being reputed
by me of more worth than its weight in beaten Gold; for by my serious observing
of his sayings, and the practice of most of those great men that in England I
have been necessitated for the safety of my life to struggle with, I clearly
find him, and the worst of his Maxims and Tenants, most practiced by those
great men in England, that most condemns him, and seems outwardly most to abhor
and abhominate him, and yet would willingly (as the translator of his Prince,
in his Epistle to the Preader says) walk as Thieves do with close Lanthorns in
the night, that so they being undescried, and yet seeing all, might surprise
the unwary in the dark, and having him by me in my present travels, I
immediately turned to his 18 chapter, which is contained in page 135, 136, 137,
etc. where he speaks in these very words of Pope Alexander the sixth, in whose
time himself lived, and who was the man or Pope that quarrelled with Henry the
eight K. of England; Alexander the sixth says he, never did any thing else
then deceive men, and never meant otherwise, and always found whom to work
upon, yet never was there man would protest more effectually, nor aver any
thing with more solemn Oaths, and observe them less then be; nevertheless his
cozenages all thrived well with him, for he knew how to play his part cunningly.

Therefore (says he) is there no necessity for a Prince (or great man) to be
endued withal those above written qualities, of pity, faith, integrity,
humanity and religion; but it behooves well that he seems to be so; or rather I
will boldly say this, that having these qualities, and always regulating
himself by them, they are hurtful, but seeming to have them they are
advantageous, as to seem pitiful faithful, mild, religious, and of integrity,
and to be so indeed provided withal thou be of such a composition, that if
need require thee to use the contrary, thou can, and know how to apply thy
self thereto; And therefore for a great man, but especially for one newly
attained to his greatness; it beboves him (says he) to have a mind so
disposed as to turn and take the advantage of all winds and fortunes, and as
formerly I said, not for sake the good while he can, but to know how to make
use of the evil upon necessity; And therefore let him (says he) seem to him
that sees and hears him, all pity, all faith, all integrity, all religion, but
there is not any thing more necessary for him to seem to have (says he) then
this last quality, (viz to seem to be religious) because all men in general
judge thereof rather by the sight, then by the touch for every man can come to
see what thou seem to be, but few men come to perceive and understand what
thou art indeed and reality. For (says he) if great men can feign and
dissemble thoroughly, other men are so simple and yield so much to the present
necessities, that he that has a mind to deceive, shall always find another
that will be deceived, it being natural and common to the vulgar to be
over-taken, with the apprehension and event of a thing, seldom or never
rightly and truly weighing and examining the righteousness and Justice of the
way and means, that great men use to attain to their ends.

And at the same time when I seriously considered the high pretenses of the
Major Generals Lambert and Harrison, to Justice and Righteousness in its
purity and height, and the seeming contrariety of intrests betwixt them and
their General: it made me seriously to think of what I have with a great deal
of observation read (in those most excellent and famous Roman and Greek
Historians Titus Livius and Plutark) of the Triumvery of Rome, consisting of
Lepidus, Anthony and Augustus Caesar, whose intrests the said Authors
plentifully shows, in many things were as inoonsistent with each other, as
light is with darkness, yet they all could agree in the main, viz. to make a
sacrifice of each others choicest and dearest friends, that each other of them
hated, or that they knew were or had bin great lovers of the liberties and
freedoms of Rome, which some 100 of years before then, had been one of the most
famousest, most splendidest, and gloriousest Commonwealths in the whole world,
by means of which; they not only brought into their native Country and City
most horrible and bloody massacres and wars, but also totally subdued the
liberties of their famous Common wealth, the people whereof could never regain
them again to this day, although it be above 1600 years ago; and in conclusion
the two eldest Triumveries, viz. Lepidus, and Anthony, were cheated and outed
of their Government, and one or both of them of their lives, and the youngest,
viz. Augustus Caesar carried the bell away of the whole, and thereby made
himself Emperor of the world, then in subjection to Rome, and the grounds and
reasons of all these and many more considerations of my then perplexed
conceptions, arise from your foresaid answer and speeches to my wife, etc. for
can there be any difficulty or danger, or dishonor in it (if you were willing
at all to let me come into England) to break a particular Act of Parliament in
my particular case, of so high and palpable injustice, when you have accounted
it no difficulty, danger, nor dishonor unto your to break, or at least all of
you to approve of the breaking and dissolving, of that Parliament by force of
arms, that made the said particular unjust and unrighteous Act, that were
settled in their power, and secured in the continuance of it, by so many Acts of
Parliament, diverse of which made it Treason for any English man or men, so much
as to go about, or but attempt, or endeavor to dissolve them without their own
free consents, and which some of your very selves had been formerly active upon
most strict penalties, even of losing the benefit of all Law, and being
esteemed no Englishmen, to force the people to take an oath or engagement to be
true to them and to maintain and preserve them; so that I confess this piece of
your answer was then such a riddle to me, as I could then no otherwise unfold
it, then as is already before declared.

In the second place, as for that part of your Answer that tells her, there will
speedily be a new Parliament that will relieve me, which very thing is a
greater mystery to me then the former; because that in all the readings that
ever I read in my life in divine or humane Authors, I read but of three ways
of governing the world or the poople thereof; the First is, immediately by
inspiration, and visible or evident command from God himself, and such was
Moses Government, and the Judges of Israel; But I believe all of you nor none
of you, will so much as pretend to so immediate and evident conversing with God
as Moses and several of the Judges of Israel did, in your governing the people
of England: if you do I hope you will show the people of England (at least
those that you judge honest, and have no more upon your own declared principles
forfeited their hereditary birth rights, of enjoyment of their fundamental
laws, liberties, and freedoms, then any one of you have done) your commission;
And also carry them where they shall evidently hear the voice of God speaking
unto you, thereby infallibly guiding and directing you; after which, if then
they will not believe your special assignation from God to be Englands Law
givers, and Rulers, you will show them your signs and wonders, that by the
power of God therein, and thereby, you will confound and destroy as Moses did
grand unbeleevers and rebellers; For without all these things, all your
pretenses to walk in Moses and the Judges arbitrary steps, in giving a law
unto, and by will and pleasure governing the people of England, will be but
mere impostorisms, for which you can expect from God and the people of England,
no other recompense but what Impostors received in Moses time. The second kind
of Government, or way of administration of Government, is by Conquest (and such
was Nimrods the mighty Hunter) which is so mightily condemned, even by the
declarations of your own selves for a beastly, inhumane and unnatural
government, as nothing can be more; and therefore although at present I have
not your printed papers or declarations at Calis by me, yet by the strength of
my memory I dare avow, that in one of your printed papers, published by you to
justify your late proceedings against the late executed King. Conquest is
called a title or government fit to be amongst Bears and Woolves, but not
amongst men, and say I much less Christians, but much less of all other,
amongst the pretended refined'st of Christians, as you would have men judge you
to be. Read but your late Acts, Declarations and printed papers about the
Trial of the late King upon this very subject, to make you now abominate of
governing by Conquest or any other way like it; especially that of the Officers
of the Army of the 16 of November. 16^8. dated at St. Albons, and John Cook your
Soliciter Generals stated Case of the King. And as to the nature and extent of
implied and tacid trusts, read in the first part of the Parliaments book of
Declarations page 150, 151. And the Armies Declaration of the 14 of June 1647.
made immediately after their League, Covenant, and Contract made and signed at
New market and Triplo heaths, and printed in their Book of Declarations, about
page 44, 45. And can any man be so irrationally brutish as to imapine and
think, that those that you account honest people in England, whom I am sure
with my individual self, have adhered with lives and estates to this very day
to their fundamental laws and liberties, and to the primitivest and best of the
Parliaments and Armies Declarations, that ever they will be so fellonious to
themselves, as to assist and enable you with their own power, with their own
estates, with their own lives and bloods to enable you to set up that, that
shall destroy them and all that's near and dear unto them if you please, and
when you please; but such a thing for any thing I can apprehend, is that
Parliament that you tell my Wise you intend speedily to set up, which I cannot
in the least discern is to be chosen and entrusted by the people, or any part
even of those, that have in all things as firmly as any of your selves adhered
unto this very day, and ventured their lives and fortunes to maintain their
fundamental laws and liberties, published and declared in the best of the
Parliament and Armies declaration. But a Parliament picked and culled by your
selves, that have not with all the Officers of the Army ( the honest people of
Englands paid and hired servants, who therefore ought not by your own
principles, and for quoted Declarations to act for their woe in the least, but
only and alone for their weal and good) any other pretense to set up such a
Parl. but the right of Conquest (which yet will be one of the most vildest
assertions in the world for you to maintain, against my self and thousands and
ten thousands more, that have assisted you, and never acted against your
declared and honest principles by which you engaged to maintain our fundamental
laws and liberties, in reference to the free and secure enjoyment of our lives
liberties and properties) which by your foresaid declared principles and
declarations can be no other, but a Parliament of force, will, and pleasure,
and thereby the perfect badge of Conquest, and by consequence by your own
acknowledgment, only fit to make laws amongst Bears and Wolves, but not
amongst men, and what justice or relief I may expect from such a Parliament is
beyond my apprehension. The third way of governing or way of administration of
Government, is by a Nation, or company of peoples mutual agreement, or
contract, or long settled, well approved of, and received customs (there being
not in the least in either of the Oldor New Testament, any prescript form of
Civil or earthly politic Government left by God, to be binding and observed,
by all Nations and people in all ages and times: men being born rational
creatures, are therefore left by God in or to the choice of their Civil
Government to the principles of reason (all which centers in general in these
two, viz. do as you would be done to; and ye shall not do evil that good may
come thereby) and to choose such a government as themselves or their chosen
trustees please to impose upon themselves, under which they may in a rational
security live happily, and comfortably, which the very Charter of Nature does
intayl, or intitles all men under all Civil government unto, and such was our
Government in England in a great measure under the establishment of Kings, who
as in your Declarations and the late Kings own confession it is justly avowed,
and truly acknowledged, was to govern the people of England, according to the
known and declared fundamental laws (and no otherwise) made by common consent
in Parliament, or national, common or supreme Councels, and to grant such laws
for the future, as the folk or people (for the good and benefit) in National
common Councels or Parliaments should choose; which I dare avow was with all its
imperfections, in the constitution of it, the best, rationalest, and for the
people of England most securest of declared and settled Governments now extant
in the whole world (our change for only a nominal free State, or Commonwealth
hither toward, I will maintain it upon my life in abundance of particulars
against the ablest man or men in England, being as yet only for the worse, but
not in the least to the generality of the people for the better) the late
Parliament of Lords and Commons, being according to the declared law of England
called and summoned by the Kings Writ, in whose power by law, it was at his
pleasure to dissolve them, till such time as in the year 1640. he past an Act
of Parliament in full and free Parliament, That they should sit during their
own pleasure, and not be dissolved but by their own consents, all which
ancient, legal, much approved of, long settled government, being absolutely and
totally dissolved by you, there can now (according to your foresaid principles,
and the principles of nature and reason) by no power or persons whatsoever in
England be summoned, called, or chosen a new Parliament, but by a new and
rational contract and agreement of the people of England; especially (and at
least upon your own foresaid principles) made amongst those that have adhered
with their lives and fortunes to their own fundamental declared laws and
liberties, according to the rational and just principles of the Parliament and
Armies best of Declarations. And therefore a Parliament called by you in any
other way as you pretend, now to be in a Commonwealth, in my shallow
apprehension can be no other, but the perfect demonstration of absolute
Conquest, which is a title or government fit only for Bears and Wolves, but
not for men (much less for Englishmen) by your own forementioned printed
Confession and averment. The constant effects of which, can in reason and
experience be nothing else but murder, shedding of blood, war, misery, pover'y,
famine, pestilence, and utter desolation (to now more then ever divided poor
England;) from which good Lord deliver poor England, my dear and entirely
beloved Native Country (for whose welfare and freedom as for many years by past
(to the best of my poor understanding) I have been ready (and I hope whilst I
breath shall never cease to continue willing) to become a sacrifice.) And I
also beseech God to cause the eyes of the wise and judicious ordinary people
and common soldiers thereof, seriously and constantly to be fixed in their
thoughts upon the miseries of those unexpressible murders, devastations and
desolations that were occasioned and brought upon poor England, by the Conquest
of the Romans (and Julius Caesar as their first Captain) and some hundreds of
years after by the conquest of the Saxons, and several years after that by the
Conquest of the Danes, and some hundreds of years after that by the conquest of
the Normans under the leading of William the Conqueror, afterward admitted
King of England about 600 years ago; to the people or inhabitants of which he
three several times took formal or solemn eaths inviolably to maintain their
laws and liberties, all which the said people and private soldiers may
particularly read in our English Chronicles, but especially in that excellent
History or Chronicle of famous and laborious John Speed) that so their souls
may for ever loath the exposing of themselves and their poor Native Country,
with their fundamental laws, and rational and just liberties, to the conquest
and unlimited will of any foreign or domestique power in the world, though
never so specious in their religious pretenses of godliness and piety. All men
by reason of Adams fall and his own corruption thereby, being naturally if left
to their own wills and pleasures, more brutish, bloody, and barbarous, then the
brutishest or savagest of wild Beasts (that seldom or never prey upon and
devour their own kind) may plentifully be seen, even in the civil, moralized,
and much refined Commonwealth of Rome, in the bloody proscriptions, massacres
and barbarismes of savage Marius and Sylla; when they got absolute and
uncontrollable sword-power into their own hands, and the bloody and most
unmatchable Plot and Conspiracy of Catiline and his accomplices. Therefore I
have read amongst the wisest and rationallest speeches, of the high esteemed
for reason and justice, Parliament men at the bebeginning of the late
Parliament, that they do avow in their long since printed Speeches for constant
successive Parliaments; that all rational, just, imperial, and wise Lawgivers,
or Lawmakers in the making of Laws, must proceed with a sinister opinion of
all Mankind, as supposing it impossible for a just man to be born, either to
have them to be executed upon, or to be an executer of them, and therefore
should proceed to make them so rational, just and exactly strickt, as that as
little as possible in reason, should be left to the discretion, will or
pleasure of the Administrator, or he upon whom they are to be administered; so
that as much as rationally may be, they should become a rational and equitable
bridle and curb upon them both, to keep them off (for their own safety and well
being sake) from incroaching upon one another rights, or destroying of one
another b^ings.


In the third place, As to that demand, whether if I come home I will be quiet
or no? I answer;

First, I am as free born as any man breathing in England (and therefore should
have no more fetters then all other men put upon me) And I have actually done
as much in my poor contemptible sphere for the real preservation of the
FVNDAMENTAL LAWS, liberties, and freedoms of England (held out in the best and
choicest of the Parliaments and Armies Declarations) as any man breathing in
England, I dare with confidence and truth avow it, what ever he be, excepting
never a one; nor never coveted nor desired either gain or riches therefore, but
only my bare common share in the enjoyment of the felicity and happiness that
would redound to the universality of the people in general, by a rational
settling and for the future securing to them the free enjoyment of their lives,
liberties, and estates; and that so I might truly and solidly upon good
grounds, call that my own, which with the sweat of my brewes, the labor of my
hands, or in dustry or honesty of my brains or tongue, I had justly got: And
that it might not be taken in the least from me, but only in a common equal
just way, for a common end, and good; or for a transgression of a rational and
just declared law, reaching the universality as well as me, and that I might
truly and upon rational grounds call my wife (that great and chiefest earthly
delight of many men) my own, and the children that I got by her (or at least
confidently believe so) my own, and not have me taken from them nor them from
me by will and pleasure as often has been practiced upon me already, which
give me leave truly to aver and avow, is more the propper issue of the
Government of Bears and Wolves then of rational and just men.

Secondly, I answer, it is ridiculous and foolish to ask me such a question; if
honesty, justice, righteousness, and the true freedom and liberty of the Nation
be in the least your real intentions: for if I come home, and find you, as
before is expressed, it is my interest (which is that great thing that swayes
and rules the world, and all the men therein) not only to be quiet with you,
but hazardously venture my life, and all that ever in this world I have, in
common with you, for the good of the whole Nation; And give me leave with
confidence, and as much modesty as I can to aver it, my interest is none of the
meanest in England; but even amongst the hobnails, clouted shoes, the private
soldiers, the leather and woollen Aprons, and the laborious and industrious
people in England, is as formidable as numerous, and as considerable as any one
amongst your whole selves not excepting your very General; (let him but lay
down his sword and become disarmed as I am) a cleerer proof, for the
manifestation of which, cannot be given in the world, then was given at my
forementioned late Trial at Guild Hall London, in October. 1649. where the
Officers of the Army, and in manner the whole Parliament, and Council of State,
and Magistrates of London, were universally my bitter enemies; yet at my
deliverance from death by the Verdict of my honest Jury, the private Troopers
of the very Guard there upon the very place made their Trumpeters (as from good
hands I have been informed) in spite of their Officers sound Victoria;
themselves shouting and discharging of their pistols for joy of my deliverance
from complotted death: yea; and some of their Comrades begun to build
bone-fires at Fleet bridge, which all my then bloody Judges, nor their Officers
of the Army, that to their Lodgings guarded them for fear of the peoples rage
and sury, with many Troops and Companies of Horse and Foot, could not prevail
with the soldiers, either of Horse or Foot, to put out the said bone-fires:
nay, nor none of the Parliament, nor Council of State, nor Lord Major, nor
Court of Aldermen of London, durst none of them appear to hinder the people
from filling the streets of London in a wonderful manner with bone-fires that
very night of my deliverance, thousands and ten thousands of the people of
London (and the Countries of England) openly by there redoubled shoutings,
feastings, drinkings, and other open and apparent rejoycings, manifesting as
much visible joy and gladness at my then deliverance, as ever the famous old
Grecians did at the free restoration of their ancient laws, liberties, and
freedoms, by the famous General Titus Flaminius (that delight and desire of
Mankind, as in History he is styled) after he had beaten Philip King of Macedon
in pitched bettel, with a great slaughter, who held the said Grecians in
bondage, under the notion of friendship, and being their Protector; which
rejoicing was wonderful great, as Plutarch in his famous History declares: the
Epitomy of which is expressed in my late printed Letter to Col. Henry Martin,
entitled, John Lilburn revived.

Yea, abundance of the middle sort of the people of London, openly avowed and
appointed a day of Thanksgiving, where, as I remember, six or seven persons
spoke, and prayed, and praised God publicly for my deliverance from death; as
being one of their stout Champions for their Libeties and Freedoms: And from
the place where it was performed, we marched in great Troops and Companies to a
great Feast to the Kings Head Tavern in Fish street; which was so confiderable
a Dinner or Feast, as that the Master of the House, (as from some of the
Stewards themselves I have been informed) demanded of the Stewards about 12 or
14 li. for bare fouling of his Tablelinning; besides the charges of Wine, and
other Necessaries; and forced them to pay him, as I remember, above 6 l. for
the use of his Linning: so that if you intend honesty to the Nation, and
seriously consider what is before truly expressed, its no way in he world for
your interest and benefit (especially, being at bloody wars with foreign
people) so to contemn and despise me, by keeping me out of England, and thereby
endeavoring as much as in you lies, to make me from a present friend that now
courts you, to become your open and professed enemy to defy you, and to do you
all the mischief, that an enraged and greatly provoked metled and nimble Spirit
can invent or devise, which may in shortime be fatal to some, or all of your
particulars, though not to the whole Nation.

Besides, in keeping me out of England, and thereby continuing my unjust
banishment, you justify and take the guilt upon your own shoulders of all the
Parliaments wickedness and unrighteousness acted upon me, in passing for
nothing, and without all Law. (as in my forementioned printed Address to the
General, etc. of the 14th of May last, I have punctually evinced) that most
wicked Sentence, which they say concerns me. And so you ill honor the
beginning of your Government, and give small hopes to any understanding
impartial man in England, to expect any real good from your future Government.

Thirdly, I answer, in case I come home and will not be quiet, if you intend to
be just and honest, what need you fear me; for I am sure my unquietness in such
a case can do you no hurt at all; but mischief, ruin, and destroy sufficiently
my self. Besides, I was never in my life so ridiculously mad, and so foolish,
as ever in my life to go about such a thing, all the sufferings or unquietness
that ever I was engaged in, in my life, against any sort or kind of your
Predecessors in power (yea even the unjustest of them) was never so much as
once acted by me, until I was forcibly compelled by their high injustice
exercised upon me thereunto, and even through mere necessity and force from
them, being absolutely necessitated to do it or perish And Machiavil that wise
and shrewd man, most truly shows, that to be a just ground for a public War;
for in his notable Exhortation to free Italy, his Native Country, from the
Government of the Barbarians (or tyrannical Usurpers) in the latter end of his
Prince, page 215 says, That War is just, that is necessary; and those Ar^^ are
religious, when there is no hope left other where but in them. And I do avow, I
cannot remember, that ever in all my days, since I was a man, I begun a
Quarrel with either great or little man in my life; or that either in any
quarrel, engagement, or contestation that I was in, that ever I refused any
just, rational, moderate, or legal ways and means, to come to a speedy and
final end of it; but have always been an earnest and constant pursuer of a fair
and just accommodation, in all the contests I was engaged in in my self. And
therefore must here with the greatest of confidence avow it, for the greatest
falsehood, and scandalin the world, laid constantly upon me by my: malicious and
great enemies, when they avow me to be a man of an unquiet, unstable, and
troublesome spirit: that man not being in the whole world, I am confident of
it, that can justly instance in one thing, that ever I begun a quarrel or
contest in my life; or that ever I took up the Buckler against any great man or
interest in England till I was compelled by necessity; which before both God and
Man justifies an open War betwixt Nation and Nation; and therefore much more
justifies me in all the contests that ever I had in my life; or hereafter may
have with you (which from my very soul I desire to avoid by all means possible)
if you continue in your denial to let me come home, and breath in the air of
the land of my Nativity, (unto which I have as great, as true, and as legal a
right as any one of your selves, or any other man whatsoever now breathing in
it) which to do, is the earnest desire of my heart.

The fourth thing I have to answer, is, that it is said mine is but a private
business, and the Public takes up all your time: To which I answer: Can there
be a more public business in the world, then the doing of justice, and
relieving the Oppressed; and redeeming the captive, or unjustly banished: I am
sure the Parliament at the very first beginning of their fitting on the 3d of
November. 1640. made it their work at the very first desire, and relieved me and
my fellow captives, then even at the very first knowledge of our address to
them, and got their honor and glory amongst the people by it; which in the day
of their great distress, became more then a shield and buckler unto them for
their preservation.

In the second place I answer, that the injustice done to me in my banishment,
is so evident and palpable to all men whatever that have eyes in their heads to
see, that the debate of my business needs take up no longer time then the bare
reading of my Address, and granting an Order upon it.

The last thing I have to answer is, that in regard of the fore mentioned parts
of your Answer, I must be quiet and patient.

To which I answer, it is impossible I should: First, because my banishment,
and Sir Arthur Haslerigs cruelty, has robbed me of all my Estate, and rich
Employment besides; so that I protest as in the presence of the Almighty, in a
land of strangers, I have not one penny to buy me bread, but what I am forced to
borrow. Secondly, I am already in diverse of hundred of pounds debt; and how
long in reason considering thereof, I shall be able to subsist, I leave it to a
rational and impartial man to judge; and to be beholden to the charity or
benevolence of friends, is a thing so ugly in my estimation; a thing so subject
to be hit in future time in a man's teeth, and brings with it so much slavery
and captivity of a man's Reason and Understanding to the wills and pleasures of
those that a man in such a case is beholden to, that I loath and abhor the very
thoughts of it more then death: And having in all my banishment to this day not
been beholden, to the best of my remembrance, for the gift of a farthing, or
its worth, to all the kindred or friends I have in England, Scotland, and
Ireland (saving for two pieces of Gold, as two tokens, that my wife at her last
being with me brought me from two friends, and for a little Rundlet of Sack
sent me in Winter by another, with some Ribbonds for shooe-strings by another,
and some friendly entertainments at Amsterdam by some friends now in England)
and I am resolved to keep from being in that kind beholden to my friends, till
absolute, and pure, and unavoidable necessity compels me to cry out openly,
bitterly, mournfully, and publicly, in printed Briefs, both to God and Man, of
all Nations and Conditions for aid, help, and relief. Thirdly, I answer: How
can patience and quietness be expected by you from me, in my condition, when
my life has been, and yet is (for any thing I know to the contrary) in
continual danger, even by the hired and pentioned Agents of some of those that
were very zealous in my unjust and tyrannical banishment; one of which, an
Irishman, or Rebel, and named Hugh-Rily, I hear is now in England, who in the
face of the main Court of Guard at Dunkirk, without the least provocation or
affront, presented several times his pocket pistol to me, and swear most bitter
Oaths (in the presence of several honest Englishmen as Witnesses) God dam and
sink him if he did not immediately pistol me: Upon which, I complaining to some
of the Magistrates of Dunkirk, their chief Bailiff, in his own person, and by
diverse of his Officers, searched for him to punish him, for the breach of their
Law, for offering to disturb the quiet of their Garrison. But he knowing his
own notorious guilt, fled and hid himself: whereupon the chief Bailiff himself
seized upon the said Rily's Portmantle, and all other things belonging longing
to him, that he could lay his hands of: Which Rily I am able sufficiently to
prove is one of the bloodiest, falsest, cowardest, and villainous Rogues in the
world: of whose tyrannical carriage at his late being in Rebellion in
Colchester against you, by Mr Beacon (a man as I am informed of good repute in
Colchester) at whose house the said Rily was quartered, may be sufficiently
informed. And yet he was one of Mr Scots pentioned and hired Agents, as by some
of his letters which I have intercepted, I certainly know, and have too much
cause to think he hired him in Flanders, either to murder me himself, or get
it done by others. And yet this wicked Villain, as my Wife writes me word, has
that impudence to petition against me, which she looks upon as one of the
greatest Reasons to hinder my desired Pass.

These, and the like considerations, noble Gentlemen, perplexing my head, my
heart, and my spirit at the reading of my Letters the last Sunday at Dunkirk,
compelled me in that condition to write several private letters the last P^st
over into England; One of which its possible may come to your knowledge, and
thereby very much displease you: In which consideration, upon my coming to
Calis, and finding and reading the said Colchester Address unto you, I was
thereby encouraged and imboldened notwithstanding that to pen this Address
unto you.

By which I do most heartily and earnestly entreat you to do your selves that
right and honor, and me that justice, as to grant me my speedy Pass, in
security, to return into England; for which I shall really and truly be obliged
to subscribe my self,

Your obliged friend, in all just things to serve you, JOHN LILBURN.
From my present Lodging at Callis, Saturday June 14. 1653. Dutch style.

And along with this Address I sent several Instructions; the last part of
which being most pertinent to evince the thing I drive at, viz. That my
affection to my Native Country, all the time I was beyond sea, was one and the
same in truth and reality; without staggering or wavering in the least) that
ever it was in any time in my abode in England; and that my love, and the
manifestation of it to my Native Country, has been great while I was in
England, at least sometimes; I think Major Packer, nor none of his great
Masters, my greatest Enemies, will deny in the least: And that it was the same
to the height all the time I was beyond the seas, I shall in part appeal to the
latter end of my said Instructions; which I am confident has such Propositions
in them for Englands good, as never was made in England by a private man; nor I
believe cannot be immagined which way to be brought or made practick, by any
private man in England besides my self; And although they are in print in the
38 and 39 pages of my late printed Trial at the late Sessions, upon the 13, 14,
15, 16. of July last; yet shall I judge it very proper and pertinent to the
purpose in hand, to insert the copy here, which thus follows.

FIfthly, I beseech you have a special care of spies, false Brethren, Neuters,
Dissemblers, Ambo-dexters, and sneaking quench-coals, any of which in the
least, as soon as you apprehend to be among you, take special notice of them,
and at least desire them to depart out of your meeting. And this with
confidence, if your resolute and unwearied endeavors bring me home, upon my
reputation and life I will make it evident and apparent to your chosen
Commissioners you shall authorize to discourse with me about what I have to say
to you, that my time, brains and interest, in my compulsive being beyond the
seas, has been spent to as much advantage, for the good in general of my
Native Country, and the people thereof, as ever man in the worlds was, that was
forced from his Native Soil, and particularly, If I can be permitted to come
home in peace and quietness, I do hereby engage and bind my self, at my utmost
peril, demonstratively, rationally and evidently, to lay down such Rules, ways
and means, as if speedily and effectually persued, shall undoubtedly make
England to be either honored, courted, and respected by all neighboring
Princes and Commonwealths round about her (even Holland it self) or else
undoubtedly shall make her to be feared and dreaded of all those that refuse to
do the former, and that this shall be done by honorable and just ways in every
particular.

2. I will lay down such honest, just, rational and feasible grounds, as if
speedily and effectually persued in the eye of reason, shall undoubtedly make
England in Trade and Traffic in one year, or two at the most, more to flourish
in Trade and Traffic, then ever it did before the late Wars; yea, even to
equallize and go beyond Amsterdam and Holland in its greatest glory, which in
their true and natural effects shall much increase the people and inhabitants
of England (and in particular shall make thousand and ten thousands of Watermen
more then now they have) which are and must be, now the Bulworks of England)
shall raise the price of Land, and by consequence of all commodities produced
by it, the Loans of which at the present is like to break the poor Husbandman,
and in a very short time shall ease the people of three quarters at least of
their present charges in Taxes and Excize; and for the future, the middle sort
of people shall not bear half so much as they do now in proportion; nor the
richest be oppressed at all, nor compelled to pay above their proportion; which
with Gods blessing in a very few months shall produce to whole England such
peace and plenty, as shall evidently yielde an unoppressive way and means to
give to every Soldier now in Arms in England, etc. and settle upon him and his
heirs for ever, without alienation, so many Acres of Land as shall be worth ten
pound, or fifteen pound sterling a year; and upon every poor decayed house
keeper (like the Law Agraria amongst the Romans) shall settle for ever so many
Acres of Lands, as shall be worth after the first years husbandry, to him and
his heirs for ever, five pound or fix pound sterling per year: and shall also
provide for all the old and lame people in England, that are past their work,
and for all Orphans and Children that have no estate nor parents, that so in a
very short time there shall not be a Beggar in England, nor any idle person
that has hands or eyes, by means of all which, the whole Nation shall really
and truly in its Militia, be ten times stronger, formidabler and powerfuller
then now it is: all which if you get me home in safety, and thereby free me
from the murtherous dealings of Mr Thomas Scot, and his cursed and blood
thirsty Associates, if by evident reason and demonstration I do not make all
the abovesaid things apparent to your Commissioners chosen by you to discourse
with me upon the premises, let me dye, and be esteemed for ever by you all, the
veriest Cheat and Rogue that ever in your lives you had to deal withal:
Therefore, as you love your own welfare, and the welfare and happiness of the
Land of your Nativity, act vigorously, stoutly, industriously, and unweariedly
night and day, for the preservation of your own interest, liberties, and
welfare, very much concerned in your speedy getting me a Pass: for which I
shall account my self as much obliged to you all that are vigorous actors in
it, as ever man did to a generation of men in the world: so with my honest and
truest love to you all, I rest,

Yours faithfully, if his own, J. LILBURN.
From my present Lodging at the Silver Lion in Ca^^is, this present Saturday,
June 4th 1653.

And because in the latter end of my foregoing Address from Calis Page 19.
there is mention made of one Letter being written from Dunkirk, which probably
may come to the knowledge of the Council of State, which will not please them,
and seeing the said Letter is constantly hit in my friends teeth, as my
information tells me by Major Packer himself, and other of his great Masters, as
if it were fully fraught with treason, felony or the highest manifestation of
malice and hatred to my native Country, that possible can be expressed; and
though since my coming into England I have made it my studied work, rather to
heal and close up breaches betwixt me and my potent adversaries, then to make
them in the least wider, and therefore in my three first Addresses to the
Council of State, I did in sincerity and truth, proffer them what ever in my
imagination, could be proffered by a rational, peaceable, just and honest man:
but yet notwithstanding that, my life and innocent blood ever since has been
with that eagerness persued; and still is ordered to be persued, and no ear at
all in the least will be given to any of those many Petitions or thousands and
ten thousands well affect^d people, that has constantly been endeavored to be
presented to the Parliament for me, that I am confident I may justly say, the
persecution raised and persued against my innocent life, is far beyond the
persecution in bloody Queen Mary's time, that was raised and persued against
the righteous and just Martyrs, or any of them: For in the first place, she
dealt in that particular so justly with them, that she made them known and
declared Laws to walk by, and to take heed of, before that ever she went about
in any the least ki^de to punish them, but no such thing in the least is there
in my case; although our Governors pretend to be a thousand times more
righteous and godly then she was, and yet in actions even in my present
particular, are abundantly more abominable in wickedness and thirsting after
innocent blood then she was; And besides, we have in England been fighting
(pretendedly for the securing of our Laws and Liberties) for this ten or
eleven years together, and yet fall far short of bloody and wicked Queen Mary
in outward justice and righteousness.

Who secondly, would never have any of the righteous Martyrs condemned, but she
would have them to have due process of Law, and fair hearings and trials, and
their crimes and offenses laid unto their charges, and either proved against
them face to face, or confessed by them: But no such things at all in the least
is there in my case; for I never had any due process of Law in my life about my
banishment, nor no crime in the least laid unto my charge, nor never saw
accuser, nor witness against me; nor never was asked the question what I could
say for my self? nor never permitted to speak one word for my self, and yet
Major William Packer and his great pretended Religious Masters, General
CROMWELL, Major Genereal HARRISON, and Major General DESBOROVGH, are the only
men that principally pursue my life upon this score to have it taken away from
me; which is a deliberated and a consulted action of higher tyranny I am
confident of it, them ever was acted by the greatest Tyrannical King, that ever
since the Creation of the World Ruled in England, that ever in the least
pretended to govern by Law and Justice.

Nay I do hereby avow it, and will pawn my life in every circumstance to make
it good, that the present dealing with me by the General and his Confederates
aforesaid, is an action as full of injustice in it self, as it would be for the
present Parliament to say;

Resolved upon the Question,

That all the Men, Women, and Children in England, besides our selves and our
Wives and Children, be forthwith hanged, drawn and quartered:

And then when such a Vote is past, endeavor with all their might to put it in
execution without mercy or compassion: For I am endeavored to be destroyed and
hanged as a Felon, without in the least having any action of Felony committed
by me, laid unto my charge; or any other crime whatsoever, but that my name is
John Lilburn, and that I am in the Land of my Nativitie, and continue as honest
as ever I was in my days: in all which considerations premised, I am forced to
insert a Copy of my Letter to the General from Dunkirk, which is rendered to be
so strange a kind of monstrous piece, and so unlike an Englishman, that has
the least spark of affection to his Native Country in him, and judge my self a
thousand times more able to defend every line and clause in it now I am alive
(which by all means the General intends shall not be long) then any other man
whatsoever is, after my death; which is now so violently persued to be
perfected and consummated: And therefore the Copy of the said Letter thus
follows.

For the Right Honorable Oliver Cromwell Esquire Genesis of the forces of England,
these at Whitehall present.
My Lord,
THough I know it has been your constant design to pursue my life like a
Partridge upon the Mountains, for these six or seven years together, with all
the unhansome and unmanlike ways of ignobleness and unworthiness, that possible
could be acted or invented, with any seeming pretense or color. And though now
and then in the midst thereof, you have seemed to carry an outward face of
respect unto me, yet it has always been with a double heart, and only at
those times, when your own wickedness and unrighteousness, and turning your
back upon all your declared promises and principles, has brought you into such
streights, snares, and dangers, as that in the eye of Reason the Kings party
and the Presbyterians have had you fast in their mouse-traps, your own life and
safety, and nothing else, then forcing and compelling of you to houl and cry
like the great hypocrites in the days of old, mentioned in the Old Testament,
to me or such sturdy fellows as I was, and also to acknowledge your own
baseness, and for the future, promise the performance of honest and just
things, on purpose to engage our helping hands, to be conjoined (in the day of
your great straights, brought upon you by your own constant unworthiness, and
habituated falseness) to yours: either to help you through your present
streights, or at least to fit still, without any prosecuting revenge of you in
your streights: which by reason of your constant meeting with ingenuous spirits
amongst those sturdy people, whom with my self you on set purpose (at Putney)
reproachfully baptized, or maliciously nicknamed Levellers, and men that
minded in their own thoughts the public interests more then their own
particular concernments. And because the King and his party was never so wise
for their own ends and advantages as to make that fair and rational use of
those signal advantages that they often had by your folly and madness, to hold
out publicly rational security to the body of the people of England of all
interests, for their future enjoyment of their lives, liberties, and estates
from the fear of arbitrary destruction at pleasure; but rather chose to act the
contrary, by slights, contempts, scorns, and abuses: by means of which, you
have enjoyed constant and valiant helps to free you from the dreadful fear of
your many blots, even by those persons that you have formerly highly
disobliged; from which you have been no sooner delivered, but you have
immediately been like the dog that returns to his vomit a gain, and with the
greatest detestation in the world, have immediately endeavored the destruction
of your very preserv^rs; which I having so many known and certain experiments
of, as I have, and of those bloody ways and means you have pursued the total
destruction of me, my wife and children, (three of whom, as the chiefest
earthly instrument, I dare aver rationally to evince you have murdered and
been the death of) and of your activity and zeal (if I may believe the relation
of an able and rational member of the late Parliament that heard you in the
house) to appear openly in the late Parliament as the principal man to have me
banished (in which unrighteous and unjust sentence, I do with confidence here
avow it, no honest, nor just man, could have a hand or finger in approving of
it, or acting in it) and thereby to be robbed of my estate, and not now lest
worth a groat to buy me bread, and thereby to be deprived of the comfortable
enjoyment of my wife, and tender babes: (the greatest delight formerly to me in
the whole earth) and of all other comforts of this life, yea to breath in the
air of the Land of my nativity, yea and by you causlesly exposed to an
exilement amongst worse then barbarians for baseness, and most detestable
falseness: even amongst my contriving, plotting, lying, and bloody enemies; set
on, on purpose to destroy me, as I have too much grounded cause to believe, by
large gifts and pensions, flowing originally by your instructions to your late
vassal and slave Tho. Scot, late Secretary of State, one of the most basest
(...) and rotten whoremasterly villains in the whole world.

In all which regards, it was below me, and inferior to me, and inconsistent
with my interest and reputation in many respects, to write of late in any
respectful way unto you, without a kind of compulsive force and necessity; but
in regard first for that ^nderedness of affection that I owe to her, whom I
formerly entirely loved as my own life: though your late barbarous tyrannical
dealing with me, has exposed her to so much folly and lowness of spirit in my
eyes, in some of her late childish actions, as has in some measure, produced an
alienation of affection in me to her. Yet by reason of her persuasive and
urgent importunity in the first place, and 2. many ways for my own politic
ends, and 3. to leave you without all manner of excuse in the eyes of rational
men, was I induced and in a manner compelled, upon the 14 of May last, to write
an Address into England in a respective way, particularly to your self, who (to
deal plainly with you) I then did and still do believe, was so engaged in
interests, wrath, and malice in your own heart, as rather sooner (as I have
often told my poor simple wise) to hazard your life and well-being, then ever
suffer me again to breath in Englands Air, in peace, security and quietness; In
which regard, I told her, if she were wise, she would willingly permit me,
according to my own well and rationally grounded genius, to scuffle neither
with small nor great, but you alone, as the chief author of my banishment, and
chief Patron and true earthly causer of all the grand mischiess and Tyranny
acted in poor England: yet though I could not draw her to that, I so penned my
said Address, as that if upon the speedy delivery of it my Pass were denied or
delayed, I could in my own thoughts make sufficient use of the publishing and
printing of it; and therefore confidently believing you would be like that
grand Ty^ant Pharaoh, hardened in heart to your own destruction, I got 1000 of
them in these parts printed in Dutch and English, and immediately sent another
copy to Paris to be printed in French and English there; and also sent another
copy to Amsterdam, to be printed in Dutch and Latin there: which I hope if it
be not already done, it will be speedily done; and another copy by another hand
then my wife, to be printed, besides the original I sent to London; but my wife
having heard of it, has most irrationally hindered it, so that now I must take
some other course to get it printed, whether she will or no; let the issue be
good or bad I care not: and fully understanding by this Post, by six or seven
several Letters, that my desired Pass is delayed; which I have cause by the
length of time, to take for an absolute denial, and also have too just cause to
judge that you alone, are the principal cause of it; in which regard, not to
complement with you, which now I scorn, but in my own imagination to leave you
amongst all rational men the more without excuse, I send you these lines, upon
which most particularly, I do most heartily and earnestly entreat you (who I
know is able with the bare lifting up of your finger if you please) to send me
speedily without any the least further delay, my Pass, to return into the Land
of my nativity, from my causless, illegal, and unjust banishment: and if when I
come into England, you have any thing to say to me, for any evil I have done
you, either in word or action, or any way else, I do hereby engage to give you
real satisfaction face to face, either first as a Christian, or secondly as a
rational man, or thirdly as a sturdy (though very much wounded and cut) fellow,
that dare yet subscribe himself,

From Dunkirk Monday the 2: of June, 1653. Dutch or New style. Honest and stout
JOHN LILBURNE, that neither fears death nor hell, men nor Devils.


A second piece that I intended when I begun this to have produced, to evince
my strong and earnest affection to my native country, and its liberties and
freedoms, and my constant study to endeavor its welfare, even while I was
beyond the seas, whilst I was daily struggling with the complotted-designes of
my death, by the barbarous, wicked, and most vile agents of Master Thomas Scot,
the Generals Secretary of State; and as I am informed is yet his bosom,
cabinet, and darling friend, although in all manner of wickedness and baseness,
he is so vile and putrified, that I am confident, honest Job would have scorned
to have set so unworthy a man with the dogs of his flock. I say the second
piece that I intended to produce, was an Epistle writ by me, from Bridges in
Flanders, the last of October last English style, unto Colonel Martin, which is
printed beyond Sea, at the latter end of a book, Entitled John Lilburn
revived; and which has so many clear demonstrations in it of my true affection
to my Native Country, and its welfare, and prosperity, and that in the way of a
Commonwealth rightly constituted; that by no understanding man that shall read
it, can I (I am confident of it) in the least be judged, a man in league with
any manner of Royallist in the world, to do England or its liberties and
freedoms the least hurt in the earth: but it would make this Epistle much too
long, and take up too much of my precious time to look after, my second trial
drawing on so nigh at hand, as Wedensday come seven days is; and that with
that fury and rage, that I understand the General, etc. drives it on with; and
therefore I shall here earnestly desire some of the seriousest amongst you, for
your further satisfaction in this point, to make a journey to London, to one
very well known to the most, if not all of you, and that is Master William
Kiffin, one judged even by my great adversaries sufficiently well-affected to
the present interest that now rules; and ask him but these two questions:
First, whether since my abode in Flanders, etc. beyond the seas, he did not
receive diverse letters from me? Secondly, desire to know of him the particular
contents of those letters; and particularly, whether diverse of them were not
filled with as clear demonstrations of my real affection to the welfare of
England, as any letters possible could be filled, and whether they did not
selve him often to use for the good of England or no.


But now my friends, should I put you upon a serious consideration of the
public ways of Major William Packer, and his great masters; truly I think I
might truly aver, that all the histories of the whole world, will not afford a
generation of men, that in printed Declarations have promised more to a people
of good, and in actions done less then they; there being not the least
suitableness in the world, betwixt their public Declarations and their
Actions; for although it was only Law and Liberty that declaredly we fought to
secure for these eleven together against the King, yet I would now but ask any
ingenious man in England this question, Whether there be any law in reality,
liberty, or propriety left in England, but the Generals will and pleasure; who
although he was but a mean man a while ago, and now at most but the peoples
daily hired and paid mercenary servant; Does he no pick and cull Parliaments at
his pleasure? and when those that he has left has given him and his
associates out of that that is none of their own many thousand pound lands of
inheritance a year; does he not at his pleasure pluck them up by the too^s?
although by his consent and seeking, they had hemmed themselves about with
diverse laws, to make it treason for any man or men of England, whatsoever, but
to endeavor to raise force against them to dissolve them; and does not he and
his Officers when they have created necessities of their own making, without
the least shadow of Parliamentary authority, expressly against the tenor of
the Petition of Right, and all our fundamental laws, most arbitarily, as if the
people of England were the most absolute conquered, invassalized slaves upon
the sace of the whole earth, lay a tax of sixscore thousand pound a month upon
the people, to fill his pockets and his fat associates? and does he not do more
then all the foregoing Kings and Tyrants of England durst do, in choosing by
himself and such of his mere mercenary Officers joined with him as he pleases,
a Parliament or Legislators of whom he pleases, to make laws for the people
without asking their consents in the least? Sure I am, the Chronicles and
Records of England declare, that it was one of the Articles for which King
Richard the second was discrowned, and lost his crown, That by himself and his
own authority, he had displaced but some Burgesses of the Parliament, and ^ad
placed such other in their ^oomes, as would best fit and serve his own turn.
See William Martins Chronicle of the last Edition, folio 128. Article 21.

And in Article 22. He is accused for causing certain laws in Parliament to be
made for his own gain, and to serve his own turn.

And in Article the 20. He is accused for over-awing the Members of Parliament,
that they durst not speak their minds freely.

And as for our lives, it was Master Peter's averment to me long since in the
Tower, we had no law lest in England; and it was his averment yesterday, being
Sunday the last of July, in the presence of the General, before some of my
acquaintance, two of which aver to me, that he averred to them, we have now no
law left or in being in England, so that it seems the Generals will must be our
rule to walk by, and his pleasure the taker away of our lives, without any
crime or charge in law laid unto our charges, or any defense or speaking for
our selves permitted to us, or required of us; which is absolutely and
perfectly my case, as appears by the Votes of Parliament of the 15. Jan. 1651.
printed in my Trial: Therefore Judge seriously of your own, and consider
impartially, whether now in your present condition, under your great high and
mighty pretended Christian master and lawless Lords, You are not in a worse
condition then ever any of our forefathers were, under their Heathen, Pagan,
Papal, Episcopal, or Presbyterian governors; having now to deal with a company
of mighty pretended Christians and Saints, who yet make it their trade to get
their bread and livelihood, by shedding the blood, and butchering of their
neighbors and countrymen (they know not wherefore) whose tables are daily
richly spread and decked with the price of the blood of the people of England,
and their back and houses richly clothed and adorned with the same, whose laws
and liberties they have destroyed and confounded, although they receive their
daily wages and subsistence from them; and that for no other publicly owned
and declared cause, but for the preserving of them.

And being it is against the law of God, the light of nature, reason, and the
law of England, as the Officers of the Army in many of their Declarations have
declared, for a man to be Judge in his own case as they are with me, in
constantly picking and nulling my Judges, of what persons they please; yet in a
way of equity and justice, I challenge all my adversaries amongst them, even
from the General to the meanest Officer, to choose 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 honest
friends, and I will do the like; and in the face of the Sun, even to the utmost
hazard of life, I will refer my self to a bide by their judgment, upon a fair
and open public hearing, for all manner of things, from my Cradle to this
hour, that they are able to lay to my charge; and if they refuse this (do they
not declare thereby their own guilt?) which I am confident there is none of
them all dare embrace it, but only continue in their belying me behind my back,
when I am not present to maintain my own innocence, which to preserve amongst
you, and other honest people in England, I shall desire you seriously to read
the honest papers already printed and published by my self and friends or
well-wishers, for my vindication and justification, the names of which thus
follows.

1 My three addresses to the Council of State. 2 A Jury man's Judgment. 3 A
defensive Declaration of Lieut. Col. John Lilburn, the second Edition published
July 1. 1653. 4 A Plea in Law for John Lilburne, the second Edition of July 2.
1653. 5 The prisoners mournful cry, or an epistle to the Lord Mayor of London,
July 1. 1653. 6 The second Letter to the Lord Major of the 10. July 1653. 7 The
fundamental laws and liberties of England claimed. 12 My petition to the
Parliament of the 12 July 1653. 13 Malice detected. 14 A conference with the
soldiers, or a parley with a party of horse, which with drawn swords entered
the Sessions al Mr. John Lilburns trial. 15 Oyes, O yes, O yes, at the Quest of
inquiry holden in the Court of common Reason. 16 A cavet to those that shall
resolve whether right or wrong to destroy J. L. 17 My friends petition of
London of the 9 of July 1653. to the Parliament, which has relation to their
large petition formerly delivered, with another petition, with my letter to the
Lord chief Baron on the back of it, dated July 14 1653. with a paper to every
particular Member of the honorable Parliament to back the former. 18 The honest
women of Londons petition, with their paper to back it unto every Individual
Member of Parliament. 19. The young men and Apprentices of Londons petition. 20
The honest people of Kents petition. 21 Tne exceptions of John Lilburne
Gentleman, to the Bill of Indictment, printed by Rich. Moon at the seven Stars
near the great North-door of Paul's. 22 The trial of John Lilburn prisoner in
Newgate, at the Sessions in Old Bailey the 13, 14, 15, and 16 of July 1653. 23
The honest men of Hartford shires petition for John Lilburn, which is the only
thing of all the forementioned that is not printed.
But in regard I am naming of books for my vindication, I beseech you to take
notice, that there is one of the excellentest pieces that lately I have read in
England, for clearing up the ancient fundamental laws, rights, and liberties
settled by our forefathers, lately published by that sober and rational man,
Captain Robert Norwood, and printed for the foresaid Rich. Moon, Entitled An
additional discourse, etc. which has much relation to a most laborious piece,
commonly reputed to be made by Master Sadler, the Town-Clark of London, and
which is Entitled, Rights of our Kingdom, or, customs of our ancestors,
Printed at London by Richard Bishop 1649. a^^ in a special manner, mentioned in
the 27. page of the foresaid Captain Norwoods book; in the diligent reading of
which, you may exactly see what your ancient and legal freedoms are; and the
absolute slavery and bondage in which now you are, from which God in mercy and
loving kindness speedily and fully deliver you: and so I rest,

From my soul-rejoycing captivity in Newgate, although my life is pursued with
such eagerness, and high injustice by the General, principally, as I believe
never man's in England was before, Aug. 1. 1653. Yours faithfully in Justice and
Righteousness, JOHN LILBURNE.

Postscript.
HOnest Reader, here being some spare room, I shall desire to fill it up with
some matter lately come to my hand, of great concernment to my self, which thus
follows.
August the first, one thousand six hundred fifty three.
We whose names are underwrit, the day and year above mentioned, do testify,
That we were with Master Henry Scobel Clarke to the Parliament, and Master
Ferman his Clarke, which said Ferman showed us the Journal book, and the Votes
therein again Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne, which agreed with the Votes
printed. We desired the said Ferman to show us the Record of the Act and
Judgment passed in Parliament against Lieuterant Colonel John Lilburn: but the
said Ferman said, he could not show it us till his Master came home; but said
that he had a copy which he writ for Master Prideauxes man: but Master
Prideauxes man refused it, saying, he must have it in Parchment. And the said
Ferman said, he writ it him in Parchment, but because it was not certified, he
made him write it over again in Parchment, to have it certified by Writ into
the Chancery, and he said it was done lately: and the same day we spoke with
the said Henry Scobel, and desired him to show us the Original Act and
Judgment that passed in the House against Lieut. Col. John Lilburne: and he
brought us several papers which he read unto us, which said papers were full of
scratches, and very many words and lines crossed out. We asked him whether that
was the Orginal, that passed the House, to which he answered, Yes. We further
asked him, whether it was engrossed in Parchment, and then passed in the House
after it was engrossed; but he said No, and that there was no other passed in
the House but those papers he showed us: and in those scratched, blotted,
patched, interlined papers, writ to our apprehensions, in several hands, and
some of it newly done, as we told the said Master Henry Scobel. The fines
therein mentioned, were writ in figures, which we said was a great error in a
principal bond, much more in a principal Act. We also asked him to show us the
Original of the Judgment which the Act makes mention of, to be passed the
fifteenth day of January, one thousand six hundred fifty one, against
Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn, for high Crimes and Misdemeanors by him
committted; but he showed us certain Resolves, which are as follows.

Resolved, etc. That the Fine of three thousand pounds be imposed upon Lieut.
Col. John Lilburn, to be paid to the use of the Commenwealth. That he be fined
two thousand pounds more, to be paid to Sir Arthur Haslerig for his damages;
and two thousand pounds more to be paid to James Russel, Edward Winslow,
William Molins, and Arthur Squib Esquire four of the Commissioners for compounding;
that is to say, to each of them five hundred pounds for their damages.
Resolved, etc. That Lieut. Col. John Lilburn be banished out of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Islands and Territories thereunto belonging, and
not to return into any of them, upon pain of being proceeded against as a
Felon; and in case of such return, shall suffer death accordingly. Resolved,
etc. That Lieut. Col. John Lilburn do depart out of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and the Islands and Territories thereof, within thirty days now next
coming, and in case the soid John Lilburn shall after the said thirty days be
found within England Scotland, or Ireland, or the Islands and Territories
thereunto belonging, or any of them; the said Lieut. Col. John Lilburn shall be
proceeded against as a Felon, and shall suffer the pains of death accordingly.
Resolved, etc. That the Sergeant at Arms attending the Parliament, do apprehend
the said Lieut. Col, John Lilburn, and bring him to the Bar of this house upon
Tuesday morning next, to receive the Judgment of Parliament aforesaid, and
that Mr. Speaker do direct a Warrant to the Sergeant at Arms accordingly.
But he could not show us, as he said himself, any Judgment given for high
Crimes and Misdemeanors, the 15 day of January 1651. or any other day against
Lieut. Col. John Lilburn: and further said there was nothing that passed but
only those Resolves: we asked him how often the Act was read, and he said it
was read twice upon the twenty first of January one thousand six hundred fifty
one, and then committed, and read the third time upon the thirtieth of January
1651 (but the said Mr. Scobel refused to show us the indorsement, although we
earnestly desired it, but he snatched it away from us) and corrected, and put
to the Question whether it should be engrossed, but (as it appears by the
Journal book which he showed unto us) it passed in the Negative that it should
not be Engrossed: but was resolved that it should be printed and published.

Thomas Prince. William Lilburn. Isaac Gray.


Unto which foresaid Certificate, I shall only desire to annex a penned answer
unto some objections about my carriage beyond sea, penned by a mere stranger
that I know not, and sent unto me: which paper being very pertinent to the
foregoing treated of business, thus follows:

ITs objected that John Lilburn held correspondencie with malignants when he
was beyond the seas, being banished out of England.

Answ. If John Lilburn being banished did hold affinity or correspondencie with
Malignants being beyond the seas, yet he betrayed no trust reposed in, or unto
him; for they that banished him, put no Charge or Trust upon him to act for
them in his banished condition* but by their banishing of him deprived him of
all duties and performances: and putting him there in a capacity of an Alien,
and excommunicated person from the Commonwealth of England, making of him an
enemy, and so leaving him free in himself to act for himself either with or
against those the banished him, as he pleased: for in their Act of banishment
which they say concerns him and now would take away his life for pretended
breaking of it, They did not lay any Injunctions upon him in his banished
condition to act for them, nor restrain him to act against them: so that in
reason he the said John Lilburn cannot be blamed for what he said or did beyond
the seas, although it were ten times worse then his adversaries report it: the
reason is, for that they made him an Alien and stranger to England, putting him
in the condition of an enemy, depriving of him if he pleased, from all the
obligations, duties, and performances of an English man. But if he had not been
banished, then in the eye of the Law of nature he should have endeavored to
preserve the well-being of his native Country: and did not David go with the
Philistians to battle against Saul, as is recorded, when he was forced to fly
for his life to escape the fury of Saul? and does not David call Saul and all
that took part with Saul enemies? and God does not lay any sin to David's charge
for it, as it may be observed in the Scriptures, 1 Samuel 21.10, 11. and 29.1, 2,
3.6. And 1 Chro. 12.19. Neither ought John Lilburn to be accused as a
malefactor, for what he said or did against those that sought to take away his
life, as Saul did, or would have done to David when he was in an exile
condition, seeing that they then esteemed him as an enemy.

But Objection the second, John Lilburn is come to England to embroyl this
Nation in a new war, and to destroy most of our Statesmen, as is reported or
said.

Answ. When there is no action committed, there is no transgression to be
charged; and where no transgression is charged, no Law condemns, for neither
the Law of God, nor the Law of Nature condemns before some transgression be
committed: for Adam was not condemned before he had transgressed, but was
forewarned that he should not transgress, that he might not be condemned, Genesis
2.16, 17. and if a horse look over a hedge where Corn is, and break not in, the
horse is not presently pounded, unless he committed some actions by breaking
into the Corn, and so be under transgression, then he is liable to be pounded,
says the Law. Neither can it stand in Reason, with men of Reason, that ever
Mr. John Lilburn could or can embroyl this Nation in a new war again with it
self, for in reason how can it be? has not the people or Parliament thousands
of foot and horse now in Arms, both in England and other places, and a great
Navy at Sea? and besides, the constancy of Mr Lilburn to the trust reposed in
him for the public or common good, might let all men see and fully understand
thereby, that those aspersions cast upon him is merely out of malice against
the person of the man. Nay all men that have but natural understanding, may see
the good intentions of Mr. Lilburn by his many sufferings in the days of the
Bishops and late King, and often since; not that Mr Lilburn ever did oppose
powers, or Magistrates as powers, but the abuse of their power, which they
inflict and exercise upon the people, whom both by the Law of God and Nature
they are bound to preserve and comfort: but when Powers make their lusts to be
their Wills, and their Wills to be Laws, then honest Mr. John Lilburn opposes
that corruption; and for opposing Vice, and not Virtue, Mr. John Lilburn is
often contemned and counted a turbulent man; but the truth is, tyranny is
resistible in whomsoever it is found (it is the Armies and grandees own
Doctrine, and they have preached and practiced it in the highest) and will and
ought to be resisted by all well principled and minded men both by the light
and Law of God and Nature. Also if Mr. John Lilburn had been of such a base
Spirit as some great in place are, that when he was employed for the
Parliament, to revolt, and then turn to the King and his Faction, and from the
King to the Parliament again, and had now under his command great store of
ships at Sea, or soldiers on Land; then there might be some color of show,
that he would put forth himself for the Kings interest; but Mr. Lilburn never
stained as yet his reputation, by betraying the trust reposed in him for the
good of this Nation, but valiantly and honestly has performed his part in all
actions as has been offered him. So it may be expected and feared that some
who make a fair show of the peoples Freedoms and Liberties, do intend the
peoples Bondage; as may appear by those unjust dealings and proceedings against
Mr. John Lilburn, that stands for nothing so much as the peoples Liberties,
Freedoms, and Laws: although his life is dear unto him, and his wife and
children, yet he has acted more for the true Freedoms of the people, then ever
he did for them. So having answered these your Objections, I remain yours and
the peoples well wisher of Freedom and Liberty, both according to the Law of
God and Nature, and that to do as men would that others should do to them,
which is both the Law and the Prophets, Matthew. 7.12.

FINIS.

