To every individual Member of the supreme authority of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England, but more especially to Colonel George Thompson
Chairman to the Committee for regulating the new Impost of Excise, and
particularly for that of SOAP:
The humble Address of Lieutenant Coll. John Lilburne, a Freeman of the
Commonwealth of England.
With all humility and respect humbly shows,
THat upon the Sope-makers late Petition to this honorable House, for the ease
of their grievances therein complained of; Your House were pleased to refer it
to the Consideration of the foresaid Committee, where Colonel Thomson has the
Chair; Upon the hearing of which there; several Propositions and printed papers
have been presented to the Honorable Parliament, and particularly, Some
considerations of the said Sope-makers, were presented to the Honorable, The
Parliament of England, upon the 5. of this instant, with the hands of Alderman
John Hayes and 19. more of the said Sope-makers thereunto annexed: in answer
unto which was presented the next day after, a paper subscribed by one John
Walker a Sope-maker, living in White-Chappel; at the conclusion of which he
has these very words, viz.

There is a great Report about London, that some of the eminent Subscribers
report, that I (the said JOHN WALKER) ought to come and present my Proposals,
Quaeres, and Considerations with a halter about my neck, to which I (the said
JOHN WALKER) reply, it was a Custom among the Lacedaemonians made so by
Licurgus, that if any man presented any thing to the Senate, they came with
halters about there necks, signifying, that if any thing was presented
prejudicial to the commonwealth, the party was executed; if it was approved by
the Council he had a Chain given him; to which if any Subscriber EQVAL TO ME,
shall be so contented, I willingly will submit to it, and leave it to the
judgment of this great Council to give to each of us his demerit; my conscience
bearing me witness that if there be any Error in my PAPERS it is Reipublicae
error amoris, not Amor erroris, to the Commonwealth an error of love, not love
of error.

To which, with all humility I crave leave from your Honors favor, to join
issue with the said John Walker, provided I may but a little enquire and digg
into what he means by those words in his foregoing proposal, viz. EQVAL TO HIM.

To which I Querie, if by Equal to him he means one, That was a Silkman and
afterward broke; as he himself confessed to Mr. Thomas Pulteney he did, at that
time when he said unto him, That a broken Silkman would make a good
Sope-boyler; I confess amongst the Subscribers I know none such to Equal him.
Or,

Secondly, if by one Equal to him, he means such a one, as after his being a
Silkman broke, and after that turned Sope-boiler, and then being too hasty of
being rich before his time, turned Ingrosser of all or most of the Potashes,
about a year or two ago, that he and his partners could ingross into their
hands, in and about the City of London; by the falling of which they justly
lost diverse Thousands of Pounds; which gave John Walker such a second pull, as
that it made him (as Alderman Hayes informs me) confess to Major Brett (one of
his Creditors) that now he is not worth a groat: And if by equal to him he
means such a one, I know no such amongst the foresaid Subscribers. Or,

Thirdly, if by Equal to him, he means such a one as has been an open
professed notorious Royal Malignant Cavalier, as John Walker has been, and an
active underminer (upon the late Kings score) of all the Parliaments
proceedings for about 8. years together; yea, and one so full of Zeal
therefore, that it led him in the nature of a Spy or Inteligencer to travel
from London to Oxford, and other parts of the Kings Quarters: for which as a
Traitor he was (as Alderman John Hayes informs me) clapped in the Tower about the
year 1643. and had like therefore to have been hanged by the Council of War
then sitting at Guild Hall: If by his Equal in these particulars, he means
such a one, I know none such amongst the Subscribers. Or,

Fourthly, if by Equal to him, he means such a one as himself is, who (as the
foresaid Alderman John Hayes says he will justify and prove him to be)
managed the Petition of several persons in and about London, and was their
active mouth at the Bar of the Common Council, when the Petition was presented
for the Conjunction of all the Suburbs Militia's to that of London, which was
then looked upon by the Parliament and Army, as a Plotted Design, to cut the
throats of all those commonly called Zealously well affected in Parliament,
City, and Army* I know no such Equal to him, amongst us. Or,

Fifthly, if by his Equal, he means one that listed men privately upon the late
Kings score, on purpose to cut the Parliament and Army's throats, about the
time of the last Hambletonian Invasion, as the said John Walker did a Cooper
and others in White Chapel, and made him or them drunk to boot, as the said
Cooper has confessed to a friend of mine, who avowes that the said Cooper is
ready to justify it; We have no such Equal to him, in this particular that I
know of amongst us Subscribers.

But lastly, if by Equal to him (although upon equal terms, I should abhor and
abominate my self to compare my self to so worthless a fellow) he means, a man
as much an honest man, as he is a knave; or a man as much a true Parliamenteer,
upon their own constant declared Principles, as he is a Royal or Regal
malignant Cavaleer; or a man that dare be as valiant for a Good Cause, as he
dare for his life be for a Wicked: I do hereby throw him the Gantlet, and
Declare my self in this sense to be his Equal; And upon that score, do humbly
and submissively Propose to the Parliament, That if upon the reading and Debate
hereof, they please to pass an Order that upon such a Day as they please to
appoint, that my self and the said John Walker, shall each of us (with a Halter
about our necks) appear at their Bar, I will face to face undertake by dint of
Argument and Reason to maintain, There is more peace, quietness, justice,
honesty, profit and benefit to the State in the Proposals of the Sopemakers
Petition, and Answer to his and his thrice broken brother Booths Proposals, and
the forementioned printed Considerations presented to the Parliament-members,
upon the 5 of this instant November, then there is in all or any of his printed
Proposals or papers; and the issue of this (totally to end the controversy) I
will and do to the utmost extent of life and death hereby put upon the Vote and
judgment of the House. In witness whereof I have hereunto put my hand this 6.
of November 1650. provided we may each of us have the nomination of a
Shorthand-writer to take the arguments as exactly as they can, that passes at
the Bar betwixt him and

Nou: 7.th. 1650 John Lilburne.


