A SVBMISSIVE AND PETITIONARY LETTER SUBSCRIBED.
To the Right Honorable the Lords of Parliament, in the upper House of
Parliament Assembled. October: 24 1642
And Entitled The humble Submission and Supplication of the Lord LITTLETON,
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England.

IT may please your Lordships: I shall humbly crave at you r Lordships hands a
benign Interpretation of that which I shall now write, for words that come
from wasted spirits, and an oppressed mind are more safe in being deposited in
a noble construction than being incircled with any reserved caution.

This being moved, and as I hope obtained in the nature of a Protection, to all
that I shall say, I shall now make into the rest, wherewith I shall at this time
trouble your Lordships, a very strange entrance, for in the midst of a state
of as great affliction, as I think mortal man can endure, honor being above
life, I shall begin with the profession of gladness in some things.

The first is that hereafter the greatness of a Judge or Magistrate shall be
one sanctuary or protection of guiltiness which in few words is the beginning
of a golden world.

The next is, that after this example it is likely that Judges will fly from
any thing, that is in likeness of corruption, though it were at a great
distance as from a serpent, which tends to the purging of the Courts of
Justice, and restoring them to their true honor and splendour.

And in these two points, God is my witness, though it be my fortune to be the
Anvill upon which those good effects are beaten and wrought, I take no small
comfort.

But to pass from the motions of my heart, whereof God is only Judge, to the
merits of my cause, whereof your Lordships are Judge next under God, and his
Lieutenant, I do understand there has been heretofore expected from me some
justification. And therefore I have choson one only justification of Job, for
after the clear submission and confession which I shall now make unto your
Lordships, I may say, and justify with Job, in these words: I have not hid my
sin, as did Adam, nor concealed my thoughts in my bosom.

This is the only justification which I will use.

It rests therefore that without fickleness, I do ingeniously confess and
acknowledge that having understood the particulars of the charge, not formally
from the house, but enough to inform my conscience, and memory, I find matter
sufficient and full, both to move me to desert the defense, and to move your
Lordships, to condemn and censure me, neither will I trouble your Lordships by
singling out those particulars, which I think may fall off.

Quid te extempta juvat spinis de pluribus uva? neither would I prompt your
Lordships to observe upon the proofs, where they come not home, or the scruple
touching the credit of the witnesses, nor will I represent unto your Lordships
how far a defense might in diverse things extenuate the offense in respect of
the time, or manner of the gift, or the like circumstances, but only leave
those things to spring out of your noble thoughts and observations of the
evidence and examinations themselves, and charitably to wind about the
particulars of the charge here and there, as God shall put into your minds,
and so submit my self wholly to your piety and grace.

Now as I have spoken to your Lordships as Judges, I shall say a few words to
you as Peers, and Prelates, humbly commending my cause to your noble minds and
magnanimous affections.

Your Lordships are not simply Judges but Parliamentary Judges, you have a
further extent of arbitrary power, than other Courts, and if your Lordships be
not tied to the ordinary course of Courts, or presidents in the points of
strictness, and severity much less in the points of mercy and mitigation. And
yet if any thing that I shall move, be contrary to your Honorable and worthy
ends to introduce a reformation, I should not seek it. But herein I beseech
your Lordships to give me leave to tell you a story, TITUS MANLIUS took his
sons life for giving battle, against the prohibition of his General. Not
many years after, the like severity was pursued against QUINTUS MAXIMUS by
PAPIRUS CURSER, the Dictator, who being upon the point to be sentenced, by
intercession of some principal persons of the Senate was spared; whereupon
TITUS LIVIUS makes this grave, and gracious observation: Neque minus firma est
disciplina militaris, periculo QUINTI MAXIMI, quim miserabili supplicio TITI
MANLII. The discipline of war was no less established by the questioning of
QUINTUS MAXIMUS, than by the punishment of TITUS MANLIUS; and the same reason
is of the reformation of Justice, for the questioning men of eminent place has
the same terror, though not the same rigor with the punishment.

But my case stays not here, for my humble desire is, that his Majesty would
be pleased to take the Seal into his hands, which is a great downfall, and
may serve, I hope, in it self for an expiation of my faults.

Wherefore if mercy and mitigation be in your power, and do no ways cross
your ends; why should not I but hope for your Lordships favor and
commiseration.

Your Lordships will be pleased to behold the chief Pattern, the King our
Sovereign, a King of incomparable clemency, and one whose heart is
inscrutable for wisdom and goodness; your Lordships will remember that there
sat not these hundred years before, a Prince in your House, and never such a
Prince, whose presence deserves to be made memorable with Records, and Acts
mixed with mercy and justice; your selves are either Nobles, and compassion
ever breaths in the veins of Noble blood, or Prelates, who are servants to
him, that will not break the bruised Reeds, nor quench the smoking Flax.

You all sit under one high Stage, and therefore cannot but be more sensible of
the changes of the world, and of the fall of any in high place; neither will
your Lordships forget that there are vitia temporis, as well as vitia hominis,
and that the beginning of reformation, has the contrary power of the Poole of
Bethesda, for that had strength to cure only him that was first cast in, and
this has commonly strength to hurt only him that is first cast in, and for my
part I wish it may stay there, and go no further.

Lastly, I assure my self your Lordships have a noble feeling of me as a
member of your own body, and one that in this very Session had some taste of
your loving affections, I hope it was not a lightning before the death of them,
but rather a spark of that grace, which now in the conclusion will more
appear. And therefore my humble suit unto your Lordships, is, that my penitent
submission, may be my sentence, and the taking away of the Seal my punishment,
and that your Lordships will spare any further sentence, but recommend me to
his Majesty's Grace, and pardon for all that is past. Gods holy Spirit be
amongst you.

September 28. 1642. Your Lordships humble servant and Suppliant, E. L.

FINIS.

