NEWS FROM WALES OR, THE PRITTISH PARLIAMENT.

CALLED, And assembled upon many cood Reasons and Considerations, and for the
benefit of her Countries to secure them from her Roundhead, Long-tayld
Enemies, by the crave and politic wisdoms of her Prittish Purgesses.

With many other Pusinesses, Projects and Purposes, tending to the Relief of
her Prittish Commons, and the Honor and Reputations of her Country of Wales.

Newly sent up py her trusty and welpeloved Cousin the Welsh Empassadour, to
give all the World Notice of her purpose, to call a Welsh Parliament.

And lately her manifold Grievances hereunto joined and annexed.

Written py her loving Cousin and Well-willer Morgan Loyd.

Printed for J.G. and A.C. 1642.

The Welsh Parliament.
HEr Countries of Wales peing te ancient Nurceries and habitations of the true
Prittish plood, ascending from old anticke Families, having to her creat
disgrace received many affronts, indignities, and injuries from her cunning
enemies, especially from that Rascal, Repellious Rogue or Roundhead Robin
Little-eyes; and having in due and hasty considerations thereof penned and
published her Declarations, Complaints, and Petitions, together with her
Protestations, in hope to have good answers and satisfaction thereunto; and
contrary (look you) to her expectations, have to her further reproaches
received nothing put contumelies and dirisions, and no orders taken for the
peating out neither with Cuns, Pikes, nor long Pills, her long-tayl'd enemies,
who make her countries poor and peggarly, to the construction and ruin of her
Coods and undoing of her wifes and shildren: Her plood peing therefore very
hot, and her heads full of learned knowledges in all points and politic
pusinesses, and having creat understandings, and many quick piting griefs in
her posome, her is in the names and appellations of all her shires and their
mountains, purposed to dissemble and call a creat and crave company of
Prittish Purgesses, who sitting in her cray apparels and long Hooks in her
hands shall lay apout them in judicature and sentences, and shall make the
creat Malefactors and defenders with te small eyes to run into punishments,
and not tare to appear before their pold prittish faces dissembled and
gathered together on one of the Welsh Mountains, in manners and fashions
(though a far off) like unto a Parliament, and then her will amongst her own
com^^^^ men and cosen Purgesses find respects and favors, and have all her
Pills and Petitions not withstanding their bad orthographies and English
enditings read to the end, and beyond the end, and more revenges, botes and
shudgements past and repast upon her Round-headed Long-tayld Enemies then her
out of her cood natures and compassions can desire. And some part of her
Countries and the Prittish Ocean being in prospects and sights and very near
unto Ireland, where it may be supposed, that py the running away of Rebels,
creat pieces of pred and scheese have for have dropped out of their knapsacks;
whereby her Long tayld enemies have bin ready to fall on, it is therefore
thought fit in her prittish wisdoms, that her Countrymen should be ready at
morning, noon and nightwith creat watches in Sea-towns, to peat her enemies, if
they should out of their cruel stomachs come in creat troops come upon planks
or poords of ships, swiming over her prittish Seas, with purposes to land in
Wales, and this he do purpose shall first pe concluded and agreed uPon in the
prittish Parliament. He do next mean though her purses pe not so p^g, yet her
have hands cods plutter a nails and arms too, and therefore he will not pe put
into fears with her creat huge high Mountains, put he do purpose to make to
make Taxations and Easments upon all her shires and lay on silver two pences
upon all her cuntry-mans heads and pates, and with cood moneys as her have
contrived and plotted the pusinesses and sharges to a farthing, her will make
all her mountains whereon her Coats, sheeps, Rvnts, do take bare Commons
together, to be as plain as her table in her house, and this her will pring to
defears and purposes, with her shovels and her spades and all her poys shall
work till her proud mountains pe turned into creen middows, that so her cows
and coats may fill their pellies, and make her creater store of putter and
sheese, than ever was in any lnowledge or memory in Wales, And whereas her poor
tenants in her Countties are forced to pay creat store of Rents for her poor
Cottages, her must also pay shillings and pence to her Shentries and Landlords,
her will have therefore public laws contrived in goodfashions, that her may
dwell in pig houses, and pe not subject to sell her Cows at her markets, to her
great hindrances and losses, to make moneys for such unreasonable and prvtish
payments, put that her may pay two pennies yearly, according as it was in the
dais of King Arthur, a creat while ago, and not be found to run away in her old
apparels up to Loudon, to hide her self from her Countryman Landlord. He is
also resolved, that this shall be also taken into considerations and
consultations in the Prittish Parliament. He is also very angry, and in great
Furies, against her pabling Countrywoman of hers, that when her is in her rages
any where, and do out of her blood swear by S. Taffie her will in similitudes
and imitations answer her again with polices and repetitions, and cry S. Tavy,
then if her cast her looks into admirations apout her, and if her ask what
pooby is that, that makes her in the pryars, her will say what pooby is that,
then if her say come out if her dare for her nails, her will say if her dare
for her nails, and when her after much molestations of mind inquired and asked
the questions of Sir senkins the Curate of her parish, concerning the affronts,
and what welsh Devils han ted the vds, he made his resolutions and definitions,
that it was her puling Countrey-womens Echoes, as he calls her, who had in the
stony powels and pellies of the mountains, Her will therefore make her humble
suits, that this welsh she lived gen Echoes by names and surnames may pe
punished out of her vds and mountains, cause her has so often stird up her
prittish plonds with hermow and sheers, and her could never in all her dais
have a blow at her crowns with her long welsh hooks, for if her culd her wuld
have cut her tongues out of her heads, for mocking her Cuntry wen, but cause
her is her unknown cuntry woman the fore her will put in strange Articles and
Inditements against this Tivell in the uds, that so her pritish Parliament may
rake Order to punish the pawling tongue of Mrs. Nobodies, or Mrs. Echoes as
they call her. There is also a kind of fellows in leather tublets and plew
priches, that when her pring her cood peace, parley, Oat, and pread corn to crind
at her mil; was never honest man, put cosen her in the measures of her parley
and other corns, her will desire her prittish Parliament either to turn her out
of her mils in her cuntries, or make her honest if her can or hang her on the
mountains. And whereas in her countries there are apundance of very pleasant
prooks and River, and was creat store of cood fish in them, the pritish
Parliament shall make laws and statutes for the cood of her Commonwealths and
Countries, that Red-Herrings with pels apout her necks shall pe put into those
prooks and Rivers, that her shenerations may multiply, and with her angle her
may go to the prook, and take red herring at her pleasure with pels about her
neck, and this matter of cood note her welsh Parliament was take into her
consideration, And moreover whereas many creat Goats take their foods and dyets
on the crags and mountains, her was desire her welsh Parliament, that cause her
have as long peards as her country man, they may pear Arms as well as her
countryman against her so, with Roundheads, and small eyes, those putter and
these eaters, and in dangerus occasions, pecsme soldiers in definces of her
countries of Wales. There was moreover a prown politic enemies, that with much
cruelties suck the plood, and eat the pones of her sheeps and young lambs, and
do much oppressions, and then slip into the vds, and hide her selves in
habitations under the ground, put her welsh Parliament shall put her politic
v^ships to trials, and having found her a plood-sucker, shall if her can,
command that all her head may pe cut of on a plock And her welsh Parliament
shall make a cood law and order, that when her comes to markets or Fairs, and
fall to pribble prabble with her country man, her may soundly past his pody and
preak his crown without fear of being carried pefo^e Shustice Morgan her cosen,
to make her appearance for fait and Patteries of her Countryman. And because
her Parishes are consisting of a few pighouses out of which a little smoke does
break forth at the top of shimneys, and that her Schoolmasters have put poor
and peggerly pensions, for her Instructions of her shildren, he was therefore in
intention to desire her welsh Parliament to give her child's Tutors and
Schoolmasters tens. more yearly for to pay her pooks reparre's, and other cood
necessaries, than so her children may learn to make petter Orthographies, then
her Forefathers, and not put up derision for her pad-English. And moreover her
Parliaments shall provide that there was be more cood Leeks sowd in peds to
wear in her Monmouth Caps upon St. Taffies tay, and that none shall mock her
for her customs and fashions in doing so, in adorations of her cood codly
countryman. And that if her rice or co a wooing to her cosen ap Ienkins, or her
cosen ap Williams daughter out of mere amors and affections, and with her
cood actions and playing on her Welsh Harpes do get ^er in tunes and
matrimonies, and do happen afterward to like petter of her cosen Powels
daughter and heir to awle her lands and coods, her Welsh Parliament shall
allow her to have a pair of wives as well as a pair of poots, that her may
commit Matrimonies with the one for affections, and with the other for her
creat and rich portions, and not be hanged on shibbits for her cood wills And
her will also sue unto her parliament, that her may have Cr^nstones in awle
Towns and creat Corporations, to ^tind and make sharp her tongues welsh pills,
that they may cut her enemies into ships and small pieces, and desend her lands
and coods and awle her countries against her pragging foes, that would invade
her pounds, marches and Territories of Wales. And that if any of her poor cosen
or country men do through necessities, wants, and poverties, steal or porrow
of her next Neighbors, any cow, sheep, coat, or peast, and be apprehended for
felonies, her shall py statutes of Parliament not pe put to her pook because
her is pad reader of English Pooks and languages. Put as for points and crounds
of Religions, her care not for entering into such creat disputations, put her
do with all her Papists in her countries were panished, that her might as true
Protestants live on her lands in creat honors and Reputations, and her will
be always ready with pills and hooks to peat down papists in awle her
countries, and spend her best plood to maintain the cood Gospels, and that her
self is true Prittain and ancient shen, tlemen of Wales, as it shall be
recorded in the Welsh parliament which we call from the top of the Mountains
that her cosen ap Jews, her cosen ap Griffeth in the Vale, her cosen ap
Thomas, ap Jones, ap David, ap Williams, ap Morgan, ap Powel, and ap Iinken,
with awle their other urships in Wales, may upon the mountains in creat haste
and expeditions meet as Purges of the welsh Parliament.

The Pusinesses and considerations of the welsh Parliament are these.
THat cood watch may be kept in Sea-towns, to prevent the landing of the long
tayl'd enemies. To lay two pennies on all her Country man's heads, for her
Mountains with her Villages. That her may pay small Rents to her pritish
Landlords. That Red-herrings with pills apout her necks may pe put into prooks
and Rivers, to make creat generations. That coats with as long peards as her
country man, may pear Arms against her foes and enemies. That all her politic
plood-sucking Foxes heads may be cut off on a plock. That ber may preak her
country man's pate at market, and not pe troubled for salt and patterie. That
Schcolmasters may have yearly 10. s. pensions more to puy her pooks.
FINIS

