A True MINISTRY ANATOMIZED.

Where it is clearly proved by SCRIPTURE, I. What a true Ministry is, and what
a Ministry God set in the Church. II. A Ministry not so set, is not the
Ministry of Christ. III. Our Ministers of England have not the gift of
Tongues. IV. Truth is not obtained by Study.


By Thomas Lipeat, not the Author, but the Actor.

LONDON, Printed by J. C. and are to be sold at the Black Spread-Eagle at the
West End of Paul's. 1651.

Gentle Reader,
HAving a cloud of Witnesses to witness with me the Truth contained in this
little Treatise, and having a great Battle to fight, even with beasts after the
manner of men; The weapons of our warfare are spiritual, warranted in
Scripture: And these our enemies are Merchants that make the Nation believe
they trade in Divine things. Indeed, they have large Shops: their Shops are an
evil Conscience; the things which they sell, is frothie stuff, foaming out
their own shame, Envy, Hatred, and Malice; poisoning the understandings of
them that trade with them: yea, they trade in the Temple: we buy, and they
sell; but both buyer and seller shall be whipped out. And, gentle Reader, my
desire for thee is, that if thou have bought a cup of Poison of these Merchants
here discovered in this little Treatise, That thou may drink a cup of
Blessing to cure thee withal.

Thus leaving thee, I desire thou may be so wise, even with Wisdom it self,
to discern the Truth, to believe it, and love it, and to hate even the
appearance of evil with a deadly Hatred. Fare ye well.

Yours, in all Love, and tenderness of spirit, Thomas Lipeat.

A Clear description of a true Ministry, differing from the Ministry of
Antichrist: and this Ministry of Antichrist is that which overfloweth this
Nation, from the one end to the other as it will appear proved in Scripture,
which Record is true. The Apostle Paul does clearly set down what a true and
faithful Ministry is, as we find in 1 Cor. 12.28. saying, God has set some
in the Church; as first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after
that Miracles, then gifts of Healing helps in Government, diversity of Tongues:
some of every sort, according to the express words of the Apostle. As also the
same Apostle does further declare, in Ephesians. 4.11. saying, God gave some to be
Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and some
Teachers. As if the Apostle had said, If any man desire to know the Ministry
of Christ from the Ministry of Antichrist, here it is recorded by me Paul
which am also a Minister of Christ: This is the Ministry that is set in the
Church; this is the Ministry that did plant the Churches in that Order of whom
we find in record of Scripture: This Ministry is infallible; this Ministry
spoke as the Spirit gave them utterance: this Ministry is able to deliver the
mind of God in the purity of it; for they were vessels in whom God did speak:
they spoke by the inspiration of the holy Ghost. We find not in all the
Scriptures, that any Ministry was short of this that is here recorded. We
never find in Scripture, that any Churches were planted, or that any did
administer the Ordinances, but this Ministry that is infallible, as Paul
declares, in 1 Cor. 11.23. saying, That which I have received of the Lord, I
have delivered unto you.

But there is a Ministry in this Land, which has deluded this Nation, making
men believe that they are the Ministers of Christ, and that they have the gift
of Tongues, when indeed they do but tell you a false thing. Also, they make men
believe they are Divines; when it is clear in Scriptures, there is no Divine
but God alone. Indeed, if they be Divines, it is but as the maid did divine, in
Acts 16.16. And it came to pass, as we went to prayer, a certain damsel
possessed with a spirit of divination met us, which brought her master much
gain by soothsaying. So indeed they get to themselves great Livings by the
spirit of Divination by deluding and bewitching the Nation with their Sophistry
and cunning, and making men and women believe they have the gift of Tongues,
when at the best, and the most that can be said of all they have, it is but
humane Learning. We find in Scriipture, that Simon Magus could not buy the
gift of the holy Ghost with money: but when he did desire to purchase this
gift, what was the answer of Peter to him? Thy money perish with thee.

But to make it appear that our Priests of England have not this gift of
Tongues, is to be proved. I first prove this to be true, from this ground. All
that they have more then other men have, it is but to read the Hebrew and Greek
Tongues; and this is learned for money, even as a child learns to read the
English Tongue: thus Antichristian Ministers indeed have this Humane Learning.
But Humane Learning is no help to the understanding of the mystery of
salvation: this is bought with money, and therefore no gift: it is, at the
best, but a practice, and not a gift. If you will know what a gift of Tongues
is, look into Acts 2. there it is said that when God was pleased to give the
gift of Tongues, then they spoke as the Spirit gave them utterance. We do not
find that these Galileans went to Schools of Learning, to speak the wonders of
the Lord in so many several Languages. Now the text says, There were of every
nation under heaven, as we see in the fifth verse. And when this was noised
abroad the multitude came together, and were confounded, because they heard him
speak in his own tongue wherein they were born. This indeed was the gift of
Tongues; it was not bought with money, as their Humane Learning is, which is
but a practice, and not a gift, as is before declared. Oh that the Nation had
that discerning spirit, to discern the true Ministry of Christ from the
Ministers of Antichrist! These Ministers of Antichrist, under this notion of
the gift of Tongues, make poor ignorant men and women believe that they are
able Ministers to define an infinite God: poor finite creatures as they are,
they know not what God is in Himself, nor what he is to his Creatures. Christ
says, No man knows the Father, but the Son, and him to whom the Son will
reveal him.

The Ministers of Christ did not study to find out truth; as Christ said to
his Disciples, To you it is given to know the mysteries of salvation. And yet
thus Ministers of Antichrist make men believe they find out truth by study. I
remember there is a saying in Scripture, where the Lord said, I was found of
them that sought me not and I was made manifest to them that asked not after
me: where then was Studies? where then was Humane Learning, which is the God of
the Nations? And again, we find in Gal. 1.11, 12. But I certify you, brethren,
that the Gospel which was preached of me, is no after (...); For I neither
received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the revelation of Jesus
Christ.

But it may be it will be objected that i^ these times revelation is ceased;
there is to such revelation now in our days as has been in former time.

Answ. There is the same Revelation and Inspiration as was in former time; else
how can finite creatures know the mind of an infinite God, and his love to them
in Christ from all eternity? Truly those that deny Revelation and Inspiration,
must also deny the Scriptures: and in Jer. 31.33, 34. the Lord declares, that
he will make a Covenant with his people, and will put his Laws into their
hearts, and write them in their inward parts: and there the Lord says by the
witness of his Spirit witnessing to our spirits, that we are the children of
God. And in ver. 34. the Lord says, And they shall teach not more every man
his Neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord; for they shall
all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, says the Lord.
And again, mark that saying in 1 John 2.27. But the Anointing which we have
received of him, abides in you; and ye need not that any man teach you, but as
the same Anointing teaches you of all things: And truly, if these immediate
Teachings of God be not by Revelation, nor by Inspiration, I wonder how it will
be made to appear that these Scriptures are true; seeing it is not in the power
of any finite creature to make known the mystery of salvation, or the love of
God in Christ according to the purpose of God from all eternity?

We find in 1 Cor. 2. to the fourth verse, the Apostle declares, that he came
not in the excellency of man's wisdom declaring unto them the testimony of God;
declaring that he did desire to know nothing but Christ and him crucified; even
to preach a naked Christ to declare nothing but a bare Christ upon his own
terms: and truly he did not come with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in
demonstration of the Spirit, and of power. Where is there such a Ministry now
with us in England as this is? The Apostle says in vexse 7. We speak the
wisdom of God in a mystery: and in the ninth verse declares, that eye has not
seen, neither has it entered into the heart of man, the thing which God has
^rep^^ed for them that love him: And in the tenth verse he says, But God has
revealed them to (...) by (...) spirit: for says he the Spirit searches (...)
of God. Yet our Ministers of A^^christ which (...) with us in England say, We
must study to find out Truth. Truly this is contrary to he Ministry which is
recorded in Scriptures as clearly has been proved.

Truly our Ministers study how to (...) the Rich of the world to be their
friends and how to have the sword to befriend them and study to get fat Livings
and study how to rail against men that walk not in the same form with them,
even with madness and bitterness of spirit: where is there a Minister in
England that is familiar with the poor as they are with the rich? no, they are
for the most part proud persons, haughty, high minded, g^rmandizing greedy
belly gods; a false dissembling lying generation; they are such as are spoken
of in Hosea 6.9. saying and as Troops of Robbers wait for a man, so the company
of Priests murder in the way by consent; for they commit lewdness. Truly so is
it with our Priests of England; how many years have they committed murder by
consent? they live like dro^es, and ly in their dens to study mischief, and to
set the Nation a burning with Madness one against another.

But some may say, why do you term them to drones? Truly, I understand this
term to be most fit and suitable for them; and for the most part you shall find
but one in a parish, as commonly you shall see but one drone in a Hive of Bees.
But we see in a hive of Bees where a drone is that lives upon the honey that
the poor Bees work for: The nature of the Be is, they with one consent will
take the Drone and drag him out, they will not suffer the Drone to live there,
to eat up the honey that the laboring Bees work for: Oh the Wisdom of God to
behold in these little creatures that they should be so wise in their
generation; it is a wonder of wonders to consider of in these small creatures:
and truly I can but wonder to see how this Nation is besotted, to maintain in
every Parish one Drone, and in some Parishes two Drones to eat up the honey
that all the laboring Bees work for; and as it is with these Drones in a hive
of Bees, they will not work; so is it with our Drones, they will not work, but
they will compel the poor Bees to work for them, and they will eat of the best
honey too; and when these Drones ly upon their beds of Down; the Ministers of
Christ must ly in a Dungeon, or some stinking prison; as Paul declares in 2
Cor. 11.23. saying, Are they Ministers of Christ: I speak as a fool, I am more;
in labors more abundant, in stripes above measure, in Prisons more frequent,
in deaths often. And so the Apostle goes on from this 23. verse, to the end of
verse 27. and in verse. 27. he says, In weariness and painfulness, in
watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and
nakedness: and in verse 28. he concludes, Besides all these things, he had the
care of all the Churches: Thus you see what Paul did undergo being a Minister
of Christ. Peter also in Acts 5.18. Paul and Silas, Acts 16.24. This is
recorded of the true Ministry of Christ and what they did undergo for the
Truth. Whereas our Drones ly lurking in their dens, studying how to get the fat
of the Land, and how to rail against the people of God. But I pray mark, they
are not set in the Church according as that Ministry was which is recorded in
Scripture by the Apostle Paul, and which is mentioned in the former part of
this Treatise; as we find in 1 Cor. 12.28. there the Apostle faith, God has
set them in the Church: And again in Ephesians. 4.11. he says, God gave some to
be, as it is there declared. Here is as great a difference betwixt these that
God gave and that God set to be in the Church, and these Drones of England, as
there is between light and darkness; the one is given of God and s^^^b God; the
other stusty to be as he is: and he is ordained of Antichrist in that place he
is The Ministry which was given of God, or set in of God s^^^k as ^^e Spirit
g^ve them ^^terence: these study what they must speak; and yet they are not
ashamed to say they are fit and able Ministers of Jesus Christ and that they
are Divines; indeed if they are Divines they are divelish Divines, as has been
proved in Acts 16.16.

There is one thing more to be noted by this Ministry of Antichrist, which is
worthy of observation; the thing to be noted is this, Oh, say they, None can
declare the mind of God but we that are men of Learning: Illiterate men cannot
find cut the Mystery of Truth they cannot understand the Hebrew and Greek
Tongues as we can; therefore notable Ministers of Christ. But I pray mark the
cunning of the men of this Craft. They say, men that are not learned in these
Tongues cannot find out the Truth, for there are things in the Hebrew Tongue
which must be interpreted into English, which they cannot do that are
illiterate men: But I desire that all the Nation did but understand their craf;
they say the Hebrew and Greek must be interpreted into English, and yet they
say we have the word of God in our own Tongue perfectly; if that be perfectly,
the word of God in our own Tongue, which they say it is then what need any
further Interpretation? And if it need to be interpreted, then it is not
perfect: But the word of God is as pure and perfect in our English, as ever it
was in the Hebrew and Greek Tongue; Therefore it need not help of the Hebrew
and Greek Tongue to interpret it into our own Tongue.

The word of God is one entire being, it cannot be so divided as they make men
believe; the Word that was in the beginning, and was made flesh, and dwelt
amongst us, as we find in John Cap. 1. and the beginning cannot be divided:
The word of the Lord does endure for ever: This which they call the pure word
of God, which is the Scripture, these silly Drones count it impure themselves
from this ground, and yet do not see it themselves: The Reason is because there
must be made a more clear interpretation from the Hebrew and Greek into our own
Tongue: But if they were the true and faithful Ministers of Christ, as they
say they are, then I wonder how they dare be so unfaithful in their office
that they do not let us have that which they call the word of God without
further interpretation in our own Tongue: But if you have any conference with
them, they will tell you it is the pure word. Now mark I beseech you in the
former part of this Treatise it has been proved by diverse places of Scripture,
what a true Ministry is and where it follows on the contrary part, that
whosoever he be under the Sun that is not thus warranted in Scriptures, and
that delivers not the mind of God with that infallible spirit, with inspiration
or Revelation is not the true Ministers of Christ, but the Ministers of
Antichrist: And therefore I desire the Lord to set it home to the
understandings of men to discern a true Ministry; and the Lord say unto all
those that desire to know a true Ministry as P^^^ said in Collos. 2. v, 8.
Beware lost any man deceive you through Philosophy and vain deceit after the
tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ; to
believe a Ministry not warranted in Scriptures, for there it has been proved
that our Ministers of England has not the gift of Tongues, for their learning
is bought with money, therefore no gif^. Again, the glory of salvation is not
obtained by study, for it is a free gift, also a finite creature cannot define
an infinite God no otherwise then he does discover himself by inspiration or
Revelation; as the Lord says in diverse places, as in Isaiah 44, v. 13. Ier.
31. v. 33, 34e John 1. v. 20. and 27. Heb. 8. v. 10, 11. Also Christ said to
his Disciples, To you it is given to know the Mystery of Salvation. And Christ
declared the same thing in John 6. v. 45. It is written in the Prophets, and
they shall be all taught of the Lord, every man that has heard and has
learned of the Father, comes to me. Christ did not say, He that does hear this
man or that man what they say, shall come unto me. And again, it is written He
that has an ear to hear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.
It was the Spirit that said in 1 Cor. 2. v. 12. God has set that Ministry in
the Church. And in Ephesians. 4, v, 11. God gave that Ministry there recorded to
be in the Church: But we never find in all the Scripture that God said that man
shall go to Schools of Learning to be tutored by man, to be made fit and able
Ministers of Jesus Christ But in 1 Cor. Chap. 2, v. 4. My speech and my
preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of
the, Spirit and of power. Paul that was a faithful and true Minister of
Christ, exhorts the Collossians to take heed of a false Ministry, saying to
them, Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit, after
the traditions of men, and not after God. Now it is not warranted in Scriptures
that men must go to men to learn humane learning to be made able and fit
Ministers of Christ; therefore a Tradition of man, and not an Ordinance of God,
But indeed these men are wise in their generation as Christ said, The children
of this world are in their generation wiser then the children of light: For if
they once leave interpretation, then they know the hope of their gain is lost,
and then what shall they do; work they cannot, and to beg they are ashamed, and
they will not do as Paul did, when he said, These bands of mine have ministered
to my necessity, and to those that are with me. Truly, if Paul were now alive,
this generation of Ministers would have judged him to have been a Ranter or
some false Teacher, when he became all unto all: Now if men do not believe all
they say to be true, and not be in the same Antichristian form with them, then
what follows? Oh such a one is a Rauter, or a Blasphemer of God, and of the
ways of God; then they rail and revile such persons that will not own their
worship and Ministry: And truly it must be so, for the Scriptures must be
fulfilled; as Christ said, Ye shall be hated of many for my Names sake. Indeed
this stone is cast aside of you Builders.

Object. But some may say, Why do you call them builders? In the former part of
(...) Treause you did call them lasie idle Drones that ea^^s be ^o^^y that the
laboring Be works for, and in this place you call them Builders how can these
two things stand together?

Answ. Truly they are Builders, and that according to Scriptures; they are
Builders that seeks to make up the breaches in B^b^l; but we have a Proverb in
England, When men begin to justify a bad matter, we use to say. The more they
strive, the more it stirks: So is it with our Antichristian brood, with our
crcking Frogs, that came from the bottomless pit^ the more they go about to
prove themselves to be the Ministers of Christ the more it does appear to the
godly, they are but the Ministers of Antichrist: For when they build it is what
they study and what they conceive, or what they think will serve their own
turn, to maintain their standing in great pomp, even to Lord it over others
that for Conscience sake hold forth things contrary to their Light. These
things are declared not to envy the person of any in the Nation, but that where
a Candie is light, it will show ^ight to those that are in the house: So now
light is come amongst us in England, even Truth it self is broke forth to us,
Notwithstanding mauger the malice of the Devil, and envy of Truth; Yet Truth
shall never be ashamed.

THOMAS LIPEAT, Not the AVTHOR, But the ACTOR.

FINIS.

