A COMMON COUNCIL, HELD At GUILD HALL, In the City of LONDON, the 31. of
December. 1641.

LONDON: Printed by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. MDCXLI.

COmmune Concilium tent. in Camera Guildhall Civit. London tricesimo primo die
December. 1641. post meridiem, An. Reg. Dom. nostri Caroli nunc Regis Angliae,
etc. decimo septimo, coram Richardo Gurney Milite and Baronetto, Majore Civit.
Land. Tho. Gardener Milite, ejusdem Civit. Record. Ed: Brumfield Milit. and Ed.
Wright Mil. and Alderm. dictae Civit. Ioh. Cordell Mil. Ioh. Gayer Mil. Iacobo
Garrad Mil. ac Alderm. Tho Atkin Alderm Ioh. Wallaston Mil. and Alderm. Thom.
Adams. Ioh. Warner. Ioh. Towse. Abrah. Reynardson, and Thom. Austin praedict.
Civit. Alderm. ac Georgio Garret, and Georgio Clarke Mil. and Alderm, ac
Vicecam. Civ. praedict. necnon majore part Conciliariorum de Com. Concilio
ejusdem Civitat. tune and ibidem assemblat.

AT this Common Council Master Recorder declared, That by the direction of the
right Honorable the Lord Major, he was to signify to them the cause of their
now Assembly, how that his Lordship had yesterday received a Letter from Sir
Edward Nicholas Knight, one of His Majesty's principal Secretaries, intimating
that it was His Majesty's pleasure, his Lordship would call a Common Council
against this time, and then his Lordship should be advertised of His Majesty's
further pleasure: And that there was now at this present in the Council
Chamber an honorable person, being the Lord Newburgh, Chancellor of His
Majesty's Court of the Duchy, and one of His Majesty's most honorable Privy
Council, come hither to deliver His Majesty's Message or Request to this
Court: And thereupon the right honorable the Lord Newburgh was desired to come
into this Court, who being here, declared and said in this manner; Gentlemen,
His Majesty out of His good affection toward the City, and acknowledging of
your great loves lately showed unto His Highness, has sent me in a Message
unto you, assuring it to be the same contained in a Paper, which he presented
and desired to be read to this Common Council, which was accordingly done, the
tenor whereof follows in these words, viz.

THere having been of late many tumultuary and riotous Assemblies of people
about Our Palaces of White Hall and Westminster, to the great disturbance of Us
and Our Parliament: and We having received information, that some ill-affected
persons do still endeavor to incite the like tumults again, We have thought
fit to recommend to your especial care the preventing them, as far as in you
lies, especially the ensuing Holidayes, at which the idleness of many may make
them apter to such disorders. We have thought fit likewise to let you know,
that We are so well assured of the good affections of Our City of London, by
the great expressions which it has made unto Us of them of late, that We can
in no wise understand it to have any share in the fault of these tumults and
distempers, but that they proceed merely from the mean and unruly people of the
Suburbs. And as We are most confident of the hearts and good affections of Our
City of London toward Us and Our Government, and will not entertain any other
opinion; so We do desire them not to be disturbed by any jealousies that
ill-affected persons may endeavor to sow, but to rest most confident and
assured, that the safety, the protection, and the prosperity of the City
shall ever be with Us a principal care.

After the reading of which most gracious Message, whereby is fully manifested
and expressed His Majesty's gracious goodness and great care for the safety
and prosperity of this City (The Lord Newburgh having withdrawn himself) this
Common Council took the same into their serious consideration, and how for the
present to return by this Honorable person unto His Majesty an answer with
all humility and thankfulness; And after much debate, it was fully agreed and
resolved of by this Common Council, That in the first place should be returned
and rendered unto His Majesty from this Common council as the representative
body of the whole City, their humble duty in the thankful manner, for His
goodness and gracious love and care manifested to this City.

Secondly, that it should be signified unto His Majesty, This Court, nor any
particular member thereof, has had any hand in these Tumultuous and Riotous
proceedings, and that they, and every of them do disavow and disclaim the same.

Thirdly, that it may be likewise signified, That this Court (as the
representative Body of the whole City) does promise from henceforth their best
endeavors to prevent and suppress in time to come (as far as in them lies)
all such, or the like Tumultuous Assemblies, and all Mutinous and Rebellious
persons.

And lastly, That the humble desire of this Court may be presented unto His
Majesty, to be gradually pleased, that all the delinquents and causers of
these Tumults, Whatsoever they be, being apprehended, may be brought into
examination, and receive condign punishment according to the Law.

And these four things thus agreed upon, were by direction of this Common
Council here openly declared and delivered by the mouth of Master Recorder,
unto that Honorable person the Lord Newburgh here present, with desire that
the same should be by his Lordship accordingly presented unto his Majesty, the
which he promised to perform with trust.

And afterward this Court entered into further consultation and debate,
touching the tumultuous and riotous Assemblies lately spread night and day in
several parts of the City, to the great trouble and affrightment of his
Majesty's good Subjects, and also touching the great neglect of that due
respect which ought to be given by the Inhabitants of this City, to the
several Precepts lately issued out by my Lord Major, for a continual Watch
and Ward day and night for prevention and suppression of such tumults and
distempers;

And likewise touching the great neglect in appearance of the tranced Bands of
this City to their Colors at the beat of the Drum, especially in these times
of danger, in contempt of Authority, being a matter of exceeding great
consequence and not fit to be suffered. And thereupon this Common Council
taking much to heart, that such disobedience should grow and be found in the
Inhabitants of this City, to the great disrespect of Magistracy and contempt
of Government; And that such disorders and tumultuary Assemblies should be
permitted in such a City as this, formerly famous for the good and quiet
Government thereof, has thought it very expedient and behovefull, for redress
and remedy to be had in these abuses, being not fit to be any longer induced,
That every Member of this Common Council now assembled, shall in their
several Precincts, spread it abroad, and make it known, That if any person, or
persons, shall from henceforth neglect his duty and service to be performed, as
aforesaid, and shall not do his best endeavor to suppress, or prevent any
Tumults, or riotous Assemblies, that shall hereafter be attempted within this
City, or Liberties thereof, that then he or they offending, shall receive
condign punishment, according to his or their demerits.

And it is further thought fit, and so agreed by this Common Council, that my
Lord Major may send out his Precepts in such manner, and to such purpose, as
his Lordship, and his Brethren the Aldermen, shall think fit, for Watch and
Ward, raising of Arms, or otherwise, for the safety and preservation of this
City; to which this Court, and all the Members thereof, promise all due and
cheerful obedience.

FINIS.

