By the Major.
FOrasmuch as notwithstanding diverse good Acts and ordinances of Parliament,
and the frequent admonitions formerly given in this behalf by the present Lord
Mayor, and his Predecessors late Lord Majors of this City, it is observed, that
the Lords day, and the days of public Fast, are in these sad times of
distraction and calamity much profaned, and not so strictly and solemnly kept
as they ought to be; And that the odious sin of Drunkenness and profane
swearing and cursing is still too common, being the root and foundation of many
other enormous sins, drawing Gods heavy Judgments upon this Kingdom; Which
offenses are apprehended to arise and continue, to the great dishonor of
Almighty God, and reproach of the true Protestant Religion, through the neglect
of due execution of the said Acts and Ordinances made and established for
redress thereof: Wherefore John Warner, Lord Mayor of the City of London,
intending by all the best means and power that he can use, a reformation of the
said evils and mis-demeanors committed within this City and Liberties thereof,
has thought fit again to revive and publish this in print, and hereby strictly
to charge and command, that henceforth no person or persons whatsoever shall in
any wise show forth or put to sale upon the Lords day, and days of public
Fast, any Wares, Merchandises, Fruit, Herbs, Goods or Chattells whatsoever
(except in extreme necessity) nor upon those days shall travail with Horse,
Cart, or Wagon, without just cause for the same, nor shall carry any burdens,
or do any worldly labor unnecessarily: and that no Vintner or Taverner,
Inholder, Alehouse-keeper, Cook, Tobacco-seller, nor other Victualler or
keeper of Ordinaries whatsoever, shall receive into his or their houses upon
the Lords day, and days of public Fast, any person or persons to drink or
tipple; nor shall permit or suffer any person whatsoever upon any other day, to
remain and abide tippling and drinking in his or their houses contrary to the
Acts and Ordinances of Parliament, and shall shut in his or their gates and
doors by nine of the clock in the evening, and keep the same shut until six
of the clock in the morning, for and during the Winter season; and by ten of
the clock in the evening, and keep the same shut until five of the clock in the
morning, during the summer season; and between the said hours of shutting in
and opening, shall not receive any persons into his or their houses to drink or
tipple. And the Lord Mayor does hereby also charge and command all and every
the Constables, Churchwardens and others, whom it may any way concern, within
their several and respective Parishes and Precincts within this City and
Liberties thereof, to notify and make known this his Proclamation to all the
Vintners, Inkeepers, Alehouse-keepers, Cooks, and other victualling houses
within the same, and to make diligent search and enquiry of all and every the
said offenses committed upon those days, and other times, as well in the day as
in the night, in any the Taverns, Innes, Alehouses, and other Victualling
houses and places within their several and respective Divisions, and to take
the Names and dwelling places of all such persons as they at any time shall
know not to observe strictly the Lords day, and days of public Fast,
according to the Acts and Ordinances of Parliament in that behalf made; and
also the Names of all such persons as they shall find at any time drunk,
profanely swearing, cursing, tippling, or drinking contrary to the said Acts
and Ordinances; and likewise to take the Names and dwelling places of all and
every the Inhabitants of every such House where the offense shall be committed,
and present the same, or bring the offenders before the Lord Mayor, or some
other of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace, that such punishment may be
inflicted upon them, as by the said Acts and Ordinances are imposed. And the
Lord Mayor does hereby further charge and command all and every the said
Constables, Churchwardens, and other Officers whatsoever, to whom it
appertains, to see that no rogues, vagabonds and Beggars do hereafter wander
or beg in the streets of this City upon the Lords day, and days of public
Fasting, or at any other time; and that all the Acts and Ordinances of
Parliament, in all the parts and branches of the same, as well against the said
Rogues, Vagabonds, and Beggars, as against any other offender in the premises,
be duly and exactly executed, as they, and every of them will answer the
contrary at their uttermost perils. And his Lordship does also hereby require
the Aldermen of the several Wards of this City, or their Deputies, and Common
council men to endeavor to their utmost power a reformation of the said
offenses, in pursuance of the said Acts and Ordinances, and to take care that
the Names of all such of the said Constables, Churchwardens and other Officers
as shall at any time be found remiss or negligent in the performance of their
respective Duties required by the several Acts and Ordinances of Parliament
heretofore made for redress of the several offenses aforesaid, be returned
unto his Lordship, or some other of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the
City of London, to the end such course may be taken for the severe punishment
of such of them as shall so offend, according to Justice, and as the said Acts
and Ordinances require.

Guildhall London, the eight Day of August, 1648.
London, Printed by Richard Cotes, Printer to the Honorable City of London.


