By the Major.
WHereas by an Act of Parliament, Eutituled, An Act against unlicensed and
scandalous books and Pamphlets, and for better regulating of Printing; It is
enacted and Ordained, That no such vagrant persons, of idle conversation, who
after the manner of Hawkers, do cry about the streets, and sell Pamphlets and
other books; and under color thereof, disperse all sorts of Lybills, be
permitted, but that all such Hawkers, and Ballad-singers, wheresoever they be
apprehended, shall forfeit all Books, Pamphlets, Ballads, and Papers by them
exposed to sale, and shall be seized upon, and conveyed unto the house of
Correction, there to be whipped as common Rogues, and the Constables and Officers
who shall neglect their duties concerning the premises, are to be punished in
such manner, as by the said Act is directed: And whereas upon a complaint
heretofore made by the Master, Wardens, Assistants, and Commonalty of the
Stationers London, against a multitude of vagrant persons, Men, W^omen, and
Children, which after the manner of Hawkers, do openly cry about the streets
Pamphlets and other books, and under color thereof, are found to disperse all
manner of dangerous Lybells, to the intolerable dishonor of the High Court of
Parliament, and the whole government of this Commonwealth, and of this City in
particular. The Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons in the Common Council
assembled the ninth day of October, 1643. conceiving it very necessary by all
due means to suppress the evils then growing by such unlawful selling of
such Pamplets and Lybells, did then think fit, and Ordain, That from
thenceforth, The Laws and Customs of this City, which made a forfeiture of the
Goods that are carried about the streets by way of Hawking to be sold: And
also the statutes made against Rogues and Vagabonds should be strictly put in
execution against such vagrant persons selling as aforesaid, being petty
Chap-men within the said statutes: And for the more sure execution of the said
Custom and Laws; It was by the said Court then further ordained, that the
Officers of the Chamber, for the offenses against the Custom and law of
Hawking, and Marshalls of the City, and the Constables of every Precinct within
this City, are thereby straightly charged to do their uttermost duties in their
several places or offices in apprchending and bring before some of the
Justices of the peace within this City, all and every such person or persons
which shall offend in crying, offering, or putting to sale by way of Hawking,
any Pamphlets, Books, or Papers whatsoever, as aforesaid, whereby they may
receive such punishments, as by the Custom and Laws aforesaid ought to be
inflicted upon them: And for neglect of the said Officers, Constables, and
Marshalls in their duties and places as aforesaid, informations or indictments
as the case shall require, shall be preferred against them, that they may be
punished for their neglect according to the Law. And to the end none may
pretend ignorance of the premises, but expect the due execution of the Laws in
such case: I the said Lord Major, with the advice of the Aldermen my brethren,
do hereby enjoine all persons whatsoever, that they nor any of them do
presume to offend contrary thereunto; and for the better performance thereof,
have caused the said Act of Common Council to be again published in print; and
do hereby require all Constables, Marshalls, and other Officers and persons
within the City of London, and liberties thereof, to whom it shall appertain, to
put in execution the same, and that they carefully and diligently in their
several places see done accordingly, as well what is injoined them by the said
Act of Parliament, as in and by any former law, custom and usage whatsoever.

Printed by Richard Cotes, Printer to the Honorable City of London, 1649.


