AN Act and Declaration OF THE COMMON COUNCEL Of the City of LONDON, Touching
the late INSURRECTION: WITH An ORDER of the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, For a Public Thanksgiving to be made on the next Lord's Day,
within the late Lines of Communication, for the great Mercy of God in
delivering the City of of London from the late horrid Outrage and Tumult.

Die Jovis, 13 April, 1648.
ORdered by the Commans assembled in Parliament, That the Act of the Common
Council upon the late Insurrection, be printed, and read on the next Lord's Day,
when Thanks is appointed to be given to Almighty God, the Author of this great
Deliverance from the said late Insurrection.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
April 14. 1648.

Die Jovis, 13. April, 1648.
Resolved, etc.

THat this House does approve of the Act of the Common Council, touching the
late Insurrection.

Ordered,

THat the Act of the Common Council upon the late Insurrection, be printed, and
read on the nexts Lord Day, when thanks is appointed to be given to Almighty
God, the Author of this great deliverance from the said late Insurrection.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Die Jovis, 13. April, 1648.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That a public
Thanksgiving be made by the several Ministers within the late Lines of
Communication, on the next Lords Day, for the great mercy of God, in delivering
the City of London from the late horrid Outrage and Tumult; And that the Lord
Major of the said City do give notice thereof to the several Ministers within
the said Lines of Communication.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Commune Concilium tentum in Camera Guihald Civitatis London undecimo die
Aprilis, 1648. Annoque regni Domini nostri Caroli nunc regis Angliae, etc.
vicesimo quarto coram Johanne Warner Majore civit' London, etc.
AT this Common Council, Mr. Alderman Fowk and Mr. Alderman Gibs, by the
directions of the Committee of the Militia of London, did make a large Relation
of the great Tumult, Insurrection and Mutiny which happened in this City on the
last Lords day, and on Monday last, by many evil disposed persons, which first
began on the Lord's Day in the afternoon in the County of Middlesex, where they
seized the Colors of one of the Trained-Bands of the said County, who were
there employed for the suppressing of such persons as did profane the
Lord's Day; and being dispersed by some of the Generals Forces, did gather
together within the City of London and Liberties thereof, and in a Riotous
manner did break open diverse houses and Magazines of Arms and Ammunition, and
took away Arms, Plate, Money and other things, and did seize upon the Drums of
the Trained-Bands of this City, which were beating to raise their Companies,
and armed themselves, and beat up Drums, and put themselves in a warlike
posture, and seized upon the Gates, Chains and Watches of this City, and then
marched to the Lord Majors house, and there assaulted the Lord Major, Sheriffs,
Committee of the Militia of London, and other Magistrates of ^^e same; and did
shoot into the Lord Majors house, beat back his Guards, killed one of them,
wounded diverse others, and seized and took away a piece of Ordnance from
thence, with which they did afterward slay and wound diverse persons, and
committed many other Outrages: All which matters being largely debated, and
many particulars insisted upon, both for the Discovery and Punishment of the
said Misdemeanors and Outrages; and also for the preventing of the like for
time to come, It was at the last concluded and agreed by this Common Council as
follows:

First, This Common Council does generally conceive that this City was in great
danger, by reason of the said Outrages and Misdemeanors, and that if the same
had not so timely been prevented and stayed, the whole City would have been
exposed to the fury and rage of the said Malefactors. And this Common Council
does Declare, That the same Misdemeanor and Outrage was a horrid and detestable
act, tending to the destruction of the City, and that they do disavow the same,
and with an utter detestation do Declare their dislike thereof. And this Common
Council do appoint the Committee of the Militia of London to make the same
known to the Honorable Houses of Parliament, and also to make an humble Request
unto them, That an Order may be issued forth from them to the several Ministers
of this City and the places adjacent, that they may be directed to give
public Thanks (...) Almighty God, the Author of this great and wonderfu^
deliverance from that imminent danger wherein this City and parts adjacent were
involved. And further, the said Committee are appointed by this Court, to apply
themselves to the Honorable Houses of Parliament, for the obtaining of a
special Commission of Oyer and Terminer, for the trying and punishing of all
the Malefactors that had a hand in this detestable action, according to the
known Laws of this Land. And this Court with thankful hearts do acknowledge the
instruments under God, by which they obtained this Deliverance, to be by the
Forces raised and continued by the Parliament, under the command of his
Excellency the Lord General Fairfax; and to manifest the same, this Common
Council do also Order, That the said Committee of the Militia, in the Name of
the City, as a thing agreed upon by an unanimous consent, shall return their
hearty Thanks to his Excellency, for his speedy and seasonable Aid afforded
unto the City in this their great straight and danger. And this Court with a
general consent, do well approve of the Endeavors of the said Committee of the
Militia for London, for the raising of the Forces of the City, and in their
procuring of the said aid and help from his Excellency in this Extremity, and
what else they have done for the appeasing and suppressing of the said Tumults.
And this Court do give Thanks to the said Committee of the Militia, for their
care and pains by them taken upon this sad occasion: And they do appoint Mr.
Alderman Fowk to declare the same their Thanks to such of the said Committee as
are not of this Court. And this Court does also with all thankfulness
acknowledge the pains and care of the Right Honorable the Lord Major, and the
Right Worshipful the Sheriffs of this City therein. And this Court do generally
Declare, That it is the duty of every Citizen of this City, by himself and all
that do belong unto him, or is under his command, to be ready upon all
occasions to be ayding and assisting unto the Lord Major, and the rest of the
Magistrates of this City, for the suppressing of all Tumults and Disorders
within the same. And the several persons now present at this Common Council, by
the holding up of their hands have promised, That for the time to come they
will use their utmost endeavor, and be ready upon all occasions to do the same.

MICHEL.

FINIS.

