THE VINDICATION OF AN Injured Lady.

Written by the Lady FRANCESCA MARIA LUCRETIA PLUNKETT One of the LADIES of the
Privy Chamber To the QUEEN MOTHER of England.

LONDON,

THough I shall never take delight in being reckoned amongst the Gaste papiers
or Scriblers of this Age, yet I am at this time enforced by a more then
ordinary necessity for the defense of my innocence, to make use of a known
Right, that Custom, the practice of time, has allowed, even from the date of
Learning, which is by a modest Answer in writing, to confute the calumnies and
petulant reproaches of envious Adversaries; Ad exempla igitur rev^camus, and
majorum vobis asserimus Consuetudinem. Upon which ground I shall proceed to my
Vindication, by the Readers favor, without any apprehension of fear to be
taxed with a proud or self conceited singularity, hoping it will not be
accounted a reasonless imitation in me, if I follow the example of many prudent
and virtuous Ladies, in a moderate defense void of passion and
uncharitableness, and that my Adversaries are not so incorrigible, but that
they may be amended with the lenitives of sober language, without the help of
more operative Remedies; for having once cleared my self to the world, I shall
not so much seek their punishment, as reformation, and shall take less pleasure
in striking them with a rod of Palms, then in affording them undeserved
gentleness; for I shall always approve of that noble Italian's judgment who
says, La forza di chi vince e Cosa human ma laclemenza di chipardona e Cosa
divina. Though my Adversaries be of the sharpest and most clamorous sex, and
are like the Placentine Advocates, Qui adeo (ut dicitur) subtili pollent
ingenio, ut judicibus ipsis facile tenebras offundant, I would pass them by
with that regardless neglect which usually stifles their contumely, were not
the too facil credulity of some heavy-headed persons, who are apt prodigally to
throw away their belief on weak suggestions, greater then their subtilty; but
it being in this respect a necessary duty, and for that no duty is more
stringent to a person of innocence and generous sentiments, then the defense of
reputation; for, Qui famam negligit, dicitur crudelis says the Canonist. And
St. Paul the Apostle says, Expedit mihi magis mori, quam ut gloriam meam quis
evacuct. For these reasons premised, I am resolved to clear my self beyond
their opposition, and the doubts of all others in the world, to such as in the
perusal hereof will make use of their judgment and reason, and in my progress
I shall not let loose the reins of reason at passions importunity, though I am
provoked above imagination by those women, to resent their injuries done unto
me at the highest rate, which are greater then any others I find within the
Registry of my observation, remembrance or reading, to have been placed on a
Lady of quality, by any persons of worthy state or condition, and therefore
might have almost legitimated impatience.

But to make my entrance into this undertaking the more perspicuous, I shall
premise, as a proper adalantado, a few considerations, worthy, as I humbly
conceive, to be taken notice of.

First, I have not heard that any one man whosoever, nor any woman that is
acquainted with me, has spoken any one word to my prejudice.

Secondly, Those women who have opened their black mouths, or showed their bad
teeth against me, are only those few who are noted for their meeting
oftentimes at certain places to none of the best purposes, as I conceive, and
such as either would hold up the repute of their lessined virtues, or decayed
beauties, by crying them down in others, as if they could restore irreparables
in themselves, by endeavoring to deprive others of them.

Thirdly, As they do not pretend to have so much acquaintance with me, as
thereby to observe any thing of my deportment, to justify the character they
have given of me, so have they not to this day named any one person to be their
informer against me.

Fourthly, Of the many things uttered by them to my disgrace, there is not any
one, so much as in one instance of example verified.

Fifthly, Those women who know me not, like Sorcerers, who cast a mist upon the
brightest morning, darkly and falsely insinuate against me in doubtful terms,
those things which they dare not express or declare against me; for, ^ub
aequivocationibus latens Calumnia, lae^it tutissime.

Sixthly, There is nothing that they have uttered against me in the particulars
hereafter mentioned, but have and will be refuted by the irrefragable testimony
of those persons of credit who know me, and will speak plainly without the
allay of interest, and with great reason in my vindication, using no other
arguments then such as are drawn from the chief inducements of belief.

Seventhly, Those Ladies are not so learned, nor so wise, nor so noted for
speaking truth, as that their assertions can pretend to the dignity of Axioms.

Eighthly, No Magistrate or Person of Honor has given any shadow of
justication, or afforded the least color of allowance to their proceedings
against me, but on the contrary have wondered thereat, not without distaste and
detestation.

These Observations premised, I am now ready to encounter my furious
Adversaries in the very front of opposition, with purpose to refell every of
their considerable Objections, whereof, if any shall happen to be unanswered, I
desire it may be attribu^ed rather to the weakness of my memory, then their
strength. As for some of their lesser Objections, I shall omit to mention them
here, either out of compassion to their simplicity, or of contempt of their
weaknesses.

These Ladies, in the first place, with intent to justify the rest of their
succeeding injuries, and to give credit to what ill reports may easily be
believed on that account, have publicly reported me to be a Stage Player, but
without any color of proof. I have read, that when no proof is offered of an
Objection, then a simple Denial is Solution enough. Yet for Answer hereunto, I
say, that were I a Stage Player, or so great a Player at Dice, as some of those
Ladies are, or an entertainer of such as use that game, I could not wonder that
they should be thereby animated with hopes of impunity, to endeavor prejudice
to my reputation by never so notorious falsehoods; for I have observed within
the view I have taken of the Civil Law (whereunto, as also unto the most
eminent Professors thereof, and particularly to one above the rest, I do and
shall always bear a great respect) that Aleatorum susceptoribus injuria
damnumque datur impune. But forasmuch as I am not so Theatrical as some of
those Ladies are, who frequently spend the time in the Playhouse, which the
affairs of their household, or the exercise of Devotion might have more
reasonably and more profitably employed elsewhere, and that they fail in the
very art of injuring me lawfully, nor did I ever in my life tread on a Stage,
nor was I ever acquainted with, or allied to any Stage Players, or so much as a
Gossip to any of them, nor am I by Law, Quality or disposition of mind liable
to sustain injuries without due resentments in my self, or the endeavor of
having due punishment inflicted upon the Authors of them. I shall give these
Ladies to understand, that though I have hitherto proceeded as leisurely, as
the Knights of the Band are to walk by the Rules of their Order, that justice
to be administered shortly against them, as reporters of false news, will free
me from this their lying imputation, and make them suspected in what they shall
report hereafter against me. This I shall be forced unto in due time, for to
spare them too long in a case of this nature, would be a criminal indulgence,
and a shrinking from the due maintenance of my Honor, which I am bound to
uphold. In the mean time I shall leave it to the silent admiration of all sober
persons, how that any fancy could be so wild, as to think the world can be
persuaded to believe, that a person of a generous Education and Condition,
should turn a Stage Player, they should, to have made their stories more
current, have imitated Heliodorus, who though a fabulous Writer, as Bochartus
says of him, Conatur tamen scribere vero quam simillima. They should first of
all have persuaded the wo^ld, that I was not descended from, nor allied to the
most Honorable and Illustrious Family de la Torre in Venice, and to the Noble
Families of Genoua, where my Mother yet lives in an opulent Condition, being
the Wife of one of the States of Genoua, or that I had less to my Portion then
three or four thousand pounds, which sum I brought in Marriage to my Husband,
who is the Son of an ancient Noble man, and none of the latest Earls of this
Kingdom, or that we were destitute of means to support our Quality and Degree,
all which if they had done, they might have had more hopes to be believed; But
some guess, their purposes were to gratify the Genius of this City of Dublin
with some report of News, though never so foreign from Truth, as thinking
perhaps it was, as Guildas says of England in his time, Semper aliquid audire
volens. Lastly, some of those who have been too busy in inventing or reciting
this calumny, have at last so much ingenuity to acknowledge, that I am not
guilty thereof. This Calumny therefore which was laid on me, as an argument to
induce the belief of other untruths, having lost its force by a total
evacuation, I shall endeavor to shatter the whole superstructure, with
confidence, that my Reader will allow reason in matters of this nature to be
the Grand Patron of belief, and that the lowdness of an ungrounded clamor
ought not to prevail against the calm reason of a modest answer.

Object. 2. In the next place it is objected against me by those Ladies, That a
certain Learned Person is civilly treated by me when he comes to visit me.

Answ. For Answer hereunto, I say, That the malice of those Ladies (for so they
would all be called) is as friendly to me in effect, as it was mischievous in
their intentions, insomuch, that their detraction seems as it were suborned to
commend their enemy; for it hereby rather proves me civil, then convinces
either of us guilty of sin. But, if in their way of reasoning, they will infer
from the admittance of civil Visits an inclination to, or guiltiness of
immodesty, I must needs say, that according to my Logic, which is as
artificial as theirs, it is a too violent and forced consequence, unless they
will confess, that the much more frequent visits which they receive daily from
younger Gentlemen, and of less strict behavior, may render themselves justly
suspected of what they would seem to charge me with. Again, I appeal to several
of the said Ladies, whether the same Gentleman has not been admitted to as
private familiarities, and frequent converse with them as ever he had with me.
In the next place, I shall refer the Consideration hereof to the whole City and
Kingdom, where he has shined from his infancy hitherto, as an Illustrious
Example of refined morality, and an extraordinary gravity, which has rendered
his Company always acceptable to the gravest and most virtuous of both Sexes
wheresoever he resided. And wherefore I should be accounted an Heteroclite in
morality, by conforming to the rule and example of the Best, I shall leave to
the admiration of all judicious persons, whose ears are not stufft with
obstructive prejudice, who will easily pronounce, that this argument is as
light as the breath that framed it. Much more may be said in Answer hereunto,
but having said so much already, I shall resolve against needless
amplifications, which are but testimonies of ostentation, or at the most but
expletives to fill up the place of arguments. I shall only add this
Consideration, That these Ladies seal their own doings with the Signature of
approbation, and brand mine with a mark of dislike, whilst we do the very same
things, which I cannot conceive to be agreeable to the rules of decency, of
civil deportment, or of justice: for though they be styled a Convention, they
have not authority sufficient to bring their judgment into credit against this
transcendant rule of Nature, Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris; for
their jurisdiction being but a usurpation, it is as incompetent as their
debates have been impertinent. Finally, where the judgment of a Court is
covered with the veil of a black hood, it is no wonder if the Sentence be
erroneous.

The next Objection against me, is, That I have practiced witchcraft to gain
some ends on the Person abovementioned. I should look upon this Objection as a
matter of infinite amazement, were I not assured that it proceeded only from
the fancy of them, who use to be afflicted with their own dreams, as taking
them for divine advertisements, and who are daily troubled with Chimera's, like
those of the Allumbradoes of Spain, which have no being but in the monstrous
composition of wild and distempered brains, infected with a diabolical malice
and envy, which by singularity of denomination, is called the Sin of the Devil.

It is my happiness, and I heartily render thanks to God for it, all ears that
have heard this report are not so credulous, as the tongues of that buisie
Sisterhood are licentious; yet I shall nevertheless say something in answer to
this Objection, whereby it will appear, that I am rather mis randa, to be
pitied, for being causlesly loaded with profane calumny, then crubescenda, to
be put to shame, for any thing of guilt they can truly charge upon me of this
kind. And let the world first judge, according to its common apprehension of
things, whether most of my Adversaries have not more likely features in their
faces of such infernal intelligencers, and more Signatures of wrinkled Old Age,
the most usual characteristicks of Witches, then any they can discern in me,
who have not yet completed the 24th. year of my Age. This premised to the
consideration of the world, I shall now write a wotd or two by way of
Introduction to the understanding of the nature of Magic and Witchcraft,
though I shall not pretend to the ability of handling it learnedly; for, Magus
quo peritior, eo detestabilior, which done, I shall ente^ in^o a more
perspicuous path for the clearing of my self briefly, without bringing my Self
or the Readers into the circles of tedious Discourses. As for Magic, and all
other Arts of that pernicious kind, the invention whereof is ascribed to
Zoroastres the King of the Bactrians, who wrote much thereof, I must rather
refer it to the invention of the Devil, for no man could have invented so much
mischief, who had not the Devil for his Tutour; for these works do far exceed
humane understanding, as appears in the Canon Law, 26 q. 2. cap. Qui sine
Salvatore, where it is said, hoec vanitas magicarum artium ex (...)ione malorum
Angelorum in toto orb terrarum plurimis secu^^ (...)luit. Therefore I am of
opinion, that Zoroastres is said to be the first inventour of those Arts, not
in a strict sense, because he first found them out, but because he first
received them by tradition from the Devil, and committed them to writing, and
taught them to other men, so that I am none of those who deny Witches or
Witchcraft, but of the number of those who make the Devil the author of all
Witchcraft and Fascinations. And though the several Laws of the Code, under
this title, De Maleficis and Mathematicis, are conceived only in the masculine
Gender, I conceive they are to be extended unto, and do comprehend the feminine
Gender. For it is a rule in that Law, and, as I take it, in Divinity also, that
a masculine pronounced in a matter i^ different to man or woman, does
comprehend the feminine, ff. De verborum significatione. So that I shall grant,
that there are women of that Diabolical Art; for though the said Law of the
Code does express such persons in the masculine Gender, yet I observe, that the
Glossaries, and most Authors who have written on that Subject, do speak most
of all in the feminine Gender, not because the feminine, contrary to the
forementioned Law, does comprehend the masculine, but because these Arts are
oftener found in the practice of women then of men, which some argue from the
ensuing reasons;

First, Women having less experience and learning then men, are more prone to
believe, whereby they are more easily deceived, according to that ^^^te saying,
Quoe facile credit, facile decipitur.

Secondly, Women abound in curiosity, and desire the knowledge of such things
as least appertain to them; and it is well known, that curiosity is a great
disposition to Superstition and Witchcraft. And, forasmuch as, this, for the
most part, is the more simple sex, the Devil often deceives them, sub specie
recti.

Thirdly, Women are of the softer complexion, which renders them the more easy
to take impression from evil spirits; and, even as when, they are instructed
and governed by good spirits, they become great examples of virtue and
devotion: so when they yield to the suggestions of the Devil, they become the
worst of creatures; for, Non est malitia super nequitiam m^lae mulieris.

Fourthly, The frailty of woman is greater then that of man; wherefore the
Devil, even in the beginning, laid siege to Eve, and drew her to sin

Fifthly, This sex entertaining dislike or hatred against any persons, swells
higher in excess of anger, with sharper resolutions of revenge, then ordinarily
men do, but being weak in power. And, forasmuch as, Vana est sine viribus ira,
the Devil having obtained so fair an advantage, offers opportunities of
revenge, and promises the help of his assistance.

Sixthly, Many women are pusilanimous, and when they fall into fits of sadness
and disasterous distractions, they know not well how to free themselves from
that state and condition; and therefore many times remain so long therein,
until the Devil may have the advantage of time to tempt and overcome them.

Seventhly, Illiterate women are, for the most part, given to too much tatling;
and therefore if they have learned any evil Arts, they are apt to reveal them
to their Consorts, and can easily persuade them to desire the like knowledge.

I confess, that I have made a modest and industrious inquisition into the
secrets of Nature, but herein I labored more to humble my self by sublime
speculations, then to satisfy a vain and pernicious curiosity; for which
reason, though I have addressed my painful studies to the understanding of many
ancient and modern Philosophers, yet I never had the courage to addict my self
so much as to judicial Astrology, though in it self lawful, least it should
creare in me a desire to draw back the impenetrable veil, which hangs between
me and forbidden Knowledge; for the Casuists which I have read, for the right
information and due regulation of my Conscience, have sufficiently instructed
me of the danger that may ensue therefrom, much less then would I condescend to
the beggarly Art of Witchcraft, which is altogether unlawful. By what has been
said it appears, that I confess there are Witches, that the invention of Magic
and Witchcraft are truly ascribed to the Devil, that there are women-Witches (I
might have added, that some one or more of my Adversaries, either are skilled
in that hellish Art, or at least have made use of those who exercised and
professed the like Trade. I could also relate the curious Questions, and report
the Answers that have been given by the Professors of that Art, to one or more
of that Sisterhood) and that they, for the reasons above rehearsed, do exceed
the number of men who exercise that Diabolical Art. But for my self, I utterly
deny that I did ever exercise, or know any thing of Witchcraft; nor can any of
my Actions (though perhaps far transcending the capacity of those Ladies to
comprehend the motives and force of them) with any colorable reason render me
in the least suspected thereof; nor have they, neither can they allege any
proof thereof, insomuch, that this calumny is so far from being believed on the
evidence of demonstration, that it wants the recommendation of probability. But
if the great signs of Witches be to have no measure of their hatred, nor no
end of their malice, which commonly sends ignorant women, (and such are most of
that Sisterhood) to revenge, which makes them often consult with the Devil, who
persuades them upon such occasions to be Witches. Who then are more in reason
to be suspected of Witchcraft, they, who with infinite hatred, and the long
continued series of a most malicious prosecution, arising from no known cause
or provocation by me given unto them, nor any concernment of theirs in the late
debate of things have afflicted me incessantly; or I, who in this affliction
have used no other guard against them, then innocence, patience, and my daily
prayers to Almighty God, to right me, and pardon them, as knowing, that a
sanctified affliction is better then triumphing impiety, and that innocence is
always best, though sometimes unsafe; as also that the tears of my undeserved
affliction, will in the end prove sweeter then the immerited Trophies of their
barbarous and unheard of revenge, prosecuted by such means as were never used
before, by women of quality or prudence, insomuch, that all they, who have been
versed in those rules, which may serve to conduct us through the practical
intercourses of this life, stand amazed, as being unable to parallel them out
of the Histories of mere Scythians and Barbarians.

Again, It is ordinary with Negromancers and Witches to raise illusions and
phantasms instead of realities: So Apollonius made Achilles appear in his Tent
twelve foot high. Bantabaremus shows to Basilius the soul of his son
Conctantine, lamlicus made to appear in Syrta two figures of little children
like Cupids, all which had nothing of reality, but were mere Specter. Even so
these Ladies are not only content to corrupt some truths with many perfidious
prevarications, but represent things altogether false under the color of
truth, which is the more diabolicle Spectre, by how much the more it tends to
wrong an innocent Stranger; nay, these Ladies, for proof of their skill,
endeavor to represent that as reason, which contradicts common sense, as will
appear by that, which is the matter of my next enquity, into the reasons
wherefore, and the means whereby I should be thought to have exercised
Witchcraft, to work out some designs of mine on the abovementioned Person.

It cannot be thought that I should use Witchcraft to create an affection in
him toward me, or to increase it; for it is well known, that almost at our
first interview, even before I could well pass the formalities of becoming a
Witch, we had a high esteem and affection for one another, and settled upon
such solid grounds of virtue, that they are as unalterable as they are
unblameable.

Nor can it be supposed, that I should endeavor to squeeze out of him any part
of his goods or estate by Witchcraft, or other base means, much below me to
think of; I should rather, had I that Art, use it to those who have greater
estates, and less Charge to maintain. What other ends I could have to bewitch
one I honor so much, others may guess. But I know not.

As for the means used to bewitch him, I hear no other alleged, then my giving
him a Ring with a Greek Posie in it. First, I answer, as in the presence of
God, That I never knew that he had a Ring with a Greek Posie. Secondly, That I
never gave him any Ring at all.

In the next place, It is as groundlesly reported by some of those Ladies, as
it was maliciously invented by others of them, That I am a common Liar, which
were it a true allegation, it might easily be proved, because things that are
common, are more clearly and frequently observed. But I am so well known to all
those Persons of Quality who converse with me (who only are competent
Witnesses in such a Case) that I am not guiltty hereof, that I may say to the
loudest Reporter of that untruth. What was given in answer by Libanius to
Telemachus upon the like occasion, Velim ego apud to mendax esse, dum caeteri
te mendacem esse dicere desinant.

But to gratify them by yielding so much as I can in this particular, I must
ingenuously confess, That this their imputation only wants truth to convince
me of being a Liar. Again, So conscienciously have I always conformed my self
to the speaking of truth without equivocation, or mental reservation, and shall
always so continue to do the like, that, as I had rather these few Leaves were
an unwritten Blank then a rude Defense; so also that it were an absolute
Confession of Guilt, then a lying Apology.

Thus much may suffice in answer to this Objection, until my Adversaries shall
instance in any one untruth that they ever heard proceed from my Lips; and if
it shall be thought that I have in this, or any other particular part of my
Answer, said too much against those Ladies, I wish I could have said no more,
though it be a great satisfaction that one of them, who formerly lifted up her
voice like a Trumpet, with loudest exclamation against me, is, by denying what
she had said falsely of me, become a double liar.

But no more of exaggeration against them in this or any other particular; for
my chiefest aim, Gentle Reader, is my own inoffensive defense; for which reason
also, though I want neither information, power, opportunity, nor sharp
provocations, I have not, not shall I in the whole Contexture of this Book,
either causlesly object any thing against them, or wrongfully detract from
them, as they have done from me, but shall only call them down as base moneys
to their true value, nor will I give them any new stamp of impression, for the
Im^ge and Superscription which they now bear in the Worlds estimation,
sufficiently notify them to be what they are, not only injurious to me, but
also as blamesble for many other things, not mentioned here, as they are mainly
culpable of several of those things which they have falsely objected against me.
If these Ladies, in the exercise of their late assumed authority, had regulated
their behavior in this matter, according to the advice and example of a Noble
Lady, who did not think fit to countenance their assembly with her continual
presence, their passions would have moved according to the severe allowance of
prudedce, gravity, and piety, and the due proportions of provocation given to,
or apprehended by them, and they would have vented themselves by the sealed
measures of right reason; but not submitting to that regulation, they are
become, in the Spanish Phrase, Ieugo de muchachos, a laughing stock of
Children. And their actions, relating to me, have not been warranted in any one
particular by any Principle of Piety, Rule of Charity, Moderation, Learning,
Prodence, or Maxim of Policy; if they had had a regard to Prudence and Policy,
they would not have intermedled in this matter farther then the proportion of
concern they had therein; for, Culpa est immiscere se rei ad se non pertinenti.
If they had been tempered by moderation, they would not have managed a business
of so little concernment, extending no farther then to private persons, with as
much vigor of debate and contest, as if the entire interest and propriety of
the three Nations had been concerned in the debate: if they had been skilled in
Argumentation, they would not have labored to infer immediate consequences
from far fetched surmises, ungrounded rumors, and peevish suspicions, they
would not have represented that for reason, which contradicts common sense;
they would not have scrued up every light and temerary suspicion to the height
of a violent presumption; nor would they have thought, that their own bare
reports were to be believed on the credit of their proper Test, without farther
enquiry and examination they would not have concluded, because I was civil to a
Person of merit and civility, that therefore I had submitted to unchaste
embraces, as if every civil friend must needs be a partner in sin; or that
because that Person commended the liberality of Nature and Art, in bestowing on
me many gifts and endowments which they wanted, that therefore I was destitute
of modesty, and He guilty of a sinful Converse with me. I give but a touch of
this matter here, because I have refetted it to the more secure and prudent
management of my Council, who will prosecute it with effect in the Archbishop's
Consistory, who may easily make it appear, that they ought to be chastized with
the sharpest Rods of Ecclesiastical Discipline; for, injured reputation, in re
gravi, requires a reparation as public, as the injury is notorious. In the
m^an time it is well known to those who converse with me, that though I be
young, and in the verdure of my Age, I am none of those who sport themselves in
the green ways of fading Pleasures, but exercise my self painfully, and with no
small asperities, in those studies, which may facilitate my progress to the
chief of my aims, which is the Kingdom of Heaven; and I have always preferred
the Garland of a Marital Chastity, before all glittering favors which can
possibly flow from the glorious circle of the brightest Imperial Diadem on
Earth; nay, I had rather enjoy that virtue, then to be crowned with the Royal
State, and Imperial Command of all the Kingdoms upon Earth. Nay farther, I had
rather, were it not for the Conjugal state of life, whereunto I am bound by the
Ordinance of God, withdraw my self into the recess of a Religious Retirement,
then converse with any man whosoever he be; nay, I had rather live chastely and
innocently in the lowest and darkest dungeon of a melancholy retirement, then I
would consent to the least proposal of any immodest desire. Lastly, I had
rather die a speedy death, then to continue or prolong life with any disgrace,
which may spread it self with a diffusive stain, to the least disparagement of
those Illustrious Families from which I have descended, or whereunto I have the
Honor to be related; for which reasons, and for my own Vindication, I have
directed a legal proceeding against them for the clearing of my Reputation,
which though most tender, will bear a Trial before so indifferent and learned a
Judge as is the Archbishop, or his Chancellor. Some things, I know, are so
tender in their own nature, as if they be once fullied, they are hardly capable
of washing: as for example, Garden Envi^^, which, as Avicenna says, loses its
virtue in washing; and therefore he says in the words of his Latin
Translation, Interdictum est ab ablutione ejus lege and medicina. But though
the Reputation of a Lady be tender in its self, and requires many nice rules
and instructions for its Vindication. I shall, with very much confidence, rely
on the Judges and Advocates for the management, of my Defense, and the clearing
of my Reputation, which will neither shrink, nor lose its virtue in the washing.

But to return from whence I have a little digressed, I must needs say, That if
I had been guilty of some of those enormities abovementioned, it was no
argument of their prudence to urge them publicly against me; for if their
memories had been so officious to them, as to retain a representation of what
they have done themselves, and whereof they are guilty, they would wisely have
spared me for at least some of their own sakes; much less does it become them,
whose roofs are covered with brittle Glass, to throw stones at the more solid
covering of their Neighbors houses; for such is the prudent Advertisement of a
Spanish Proverb, El que biene teiados de vidro no tire piedra^, al de tu vezino.

Again, They have not carried themselves after the manner of Christian Charity
toward me, nor according to the duty of their own Conscience; for that would
have required, that they should first have spoken to me, with a desire to have
received satisfaction, before they had published any thing against me, at
least, without proof, to my prejudice. Secondly, They have been uncharitable to
themselves, in that they have, by their course of proceedings against me,
caught others a facil way and method of injuring themselves; for, as Ordinata
Charitas incipit a seipsa: so does uncharitableness many times end in it self:
and these Ladies may be assured, that as Tyrus had not long rejoiced at the
misery of Jerusalem, when the same misery came upon her self. So this injury
which they have done to me, if it be not punished in them, it will, as well by
example as merit, bring on them the like affliction, which hitherto I have so
sadly born, hereof I know they will become sensible hereafter (though their
Conscience be now sealed up with slumber and obduration) when the eye of their
reason (now dimmed with foggy mists, rising from their tumultuous and fiery
passions, shall behold my cleared innocence clothed with the brightness of a
greater glory (foe true metal will prove the brighter for rubbing) then will
they wish that they had been checked by the reins of a sober and religions
restraint, so as to have kept within the bounds of Truth, and that they had
followed a less passionate, and more reasonable course against me; for; without
peradventure, when they shall be returned to their more settled thoughts, they
will be of another mind, and heartily desire that they had never endeavored,
out of undeserved malice, either to mu^fle up the face of Truth in the
obscurity of a black Bag, or to fit things to their malicious desires, and
destructive designs, by turning truth into lies, as hitherto they have done,
wish a too barefaced confidence, having cast off from their front the comely
veil of due modesty; for such has been their carriage hitherto toward me,
that if I should have represented in my actions and deportment the absolute
portra^cture of Aristotle's moral ^^^tues; or should I have lived in as strict
a regularity as a Carthusian, or could my course of life and conversation have
entitled me to a Rubric in the Calendar, or justified the painting of me with
rays, yet they would have figured no better thoughts of me, then they ought to
have of themselves, they would have censured me as extremely vicious; for
deflexion from, and dissimilitude to virtue, are the fiercest censurers of the
virtuous, and will draw all their actions into the worst interpretations. It
has been said, I know not how truly, of the Belgic Inquisitours, that they
did confess, when they met with any of the Ancients, speaking otherwise then
the Church, Quovis Commento, they used any shift to remedy it; and although
these Ladies want ingenuity to confess the figments and prevarications which
they have used to make me seem otherwise in my words and actions, then truth
can warrant them to report of me; yet, thanks be to God, I am happy in this,
that he has placed me in the Noble City of Dublin, inhabited by very many
prudent and truly Noble Persons of both sexes, who have observed my deportment,
and are not unacquainted with the Maskaries these Ladies have used against me
in their late Earie-like Scenes, wherein they would have represented me to the
eye of the World, in the false dress of their malicious impositions. It has
been long since said of Stage Players, that they are many times high in
applause, but poor in reputation. These Actrices, perhaps in their first
Scenes, found some applause amongst themselves, but the World knows they have
not mended their own reputations, by endeavoring to destroy mine; and it now
appears in great visibility to every understanding person, that though they
have wounded their own consciences to stain my reputation, their wounds will
not be so soon cured, as my reputation cleared. Wherefore I do so much pity
them, as that I desire they may escape the Satirical Whip of Poets and
Lampoons, and that they may be freed from the Strapadoes of an evil Conscience,
by using the due remedies prescribed by the Casuists, which are Retractation,
Compensation, and a lowly penitent dejection of mind before God, which if they
forbear to perform, they will not only render themselves hereafter hateful to
their own imaginations, but also liable to be cast headlong to the lowest and
most painful tormentory of hell, which I pray God to prevent in his mercy, by
giving them a sight and true sense of their sins, and thereby to put a
seasonable stop to the fury of their malicious proceedings against me; for if
their own awakened prudence cannot bring them to these sentiments, yet I am
well assured it is possible, that the Omnipotent Lord of Heaven and Earth, who
made the Sun, that mighty Creature, the Prince of all the Lights in Heaven, to
stop and stand still in the rapid Career of its greatest velocity, can in an
instant prohibit their causless prosecution against me, or render it vain, and
of no effect; and that the same God, who made the impetuous Current of the
raging Sea to recoil, and the merciless flame of devouring fire to become a
soft refreshing air, can so temper the rage of these tumultuous Ladies, as to
make them immediately pull in their horns, and blunt their stings, otherwise,
at least, when their immortal fouls shall be summoned by grim Death to diflodge
from their tottering tabernacles of cold clay, and shall begin to enter into
the disputed Confines of Eternity, then will they wish that they had been as
free from injuring me by their Calumny, as I am innocent of the matters they
falsely lay to my charge.

I shall not at this time say much more to these Ladies, I shall therefore
dismiss them with a few Observations.

I must confess, that though they have all been culpable, yet I do not think
that they have been equally cruel to me, notwithstanding which, I shall say,
that every one of them has been too cruel; for it is observed, that the most
tame of Tigers is a cruel beast.

Secondly, I observe, that those Ladies who were interwoven in the Contexture
of so strong a Faction against me, are not the only persons who have injured
me, for they who have excited them to detraction are not without sin, nay
perhaps more guilty; for Malletus the Casuist says, These do not only offend,
as the Detractour, effectu detractionis; but also are unto others causa
detrahendi. Nay, the Detractour is but the Author of his own sin, but these
are Authors of their own and others: for which cause, says another Casuist,
Tenetur ad restitutionem, nisi Detractor ipse restituat.

Thirdly, Whosoever has delighted himself in hearing detractions, though, as
the Casuists say, he does not offend contra justitiam, because he is not
efficax causa damni; yet he offends against charity, for that he takes pleasure
malo Proximi, which cannot stand with charity.

Fourthly, Superiors in Government, who do not correct Detractors, do not
only sin against charity, but also against justice, Cum Obligatione
restituendi si subditus, non restituat. so say Lessius Reginaldus, and Molina.

Fifthly, Parents, Husbands, and Masters, who have silently heard their
Children, Wives, or Servants detract from any one, though without delectation,
are guilty of a moral incitation to detraction; for, Qui tacet, consentire
videtur: and Fernandes gives two reasons for this Observation, Tum quia non
impedit malum Proximi, tum quia non emendat errantem.

Sixthly, They who have defamed any one by detraction, are bound to
restitution, not only where the party had a positive good fame, i. e. been
audiebat, and therefore did suffer the loss boni cessant^^; but also where the
party had but a negative good name, i. e. non male an^ichat, and therefore
suffers an immergent loss, by positive infamy brought upon him; but especially
in the former case, wherein I have been so highly injured.

Seventhly, Restitution is not always made according to the quality of the
offense before God, but proportionable to the infamy arising therefrom; and
therefore he who divulgeth a true crime to the defamation of his neighbor,
shall make equal restitution with him who objected or imposed a false one;
wherefore Fernandes says, Aequalitas restitutionis non oritur ex aequalitate
culpae, sed ex aequlitate damni.

Eighthly, Though Tolet be of opinion, That where a good fame is not to be
restored in proprio genere by retractation, it is not to be restored by way of
another compensation: and though he enforces his opinion from this
consideration, That as life, so a good fame is not pretio aestimabilis, and
therefore cannot be proportioned to any estimation. I shall hold the opposite
opinion, maintained by the Angelical and subtle Doctors Thomas Aquinas, and
Scotus Thom. q. 32. ar. 2. Scot. in 4. d. 15. 9 4. as also by Soto 4. q. 6.
art. 3. who say, That though life as well as a good fame do entitatively and
essentially exceed any price, yet in respect to she estimation of men, they may
be reduced to a certain value: and I have read, that it is held to be the
common opinion of School-Divines, that quando debitum compensari nequit, ad
aequalitatem in eodem genere compensandum est in al^o, quoad fieri potest
compensando,

I am afraid that I have held the Courteous Reader too long in the thorny terms
of Casuistical and School Divinity; yet because it is necessary to cure my
Adversaries, not only by a prick of reprehension, but also by stirring up
their Consciences by some pungent incitations to repentance and satisfaction, I
hope to be excused, and the rather, for that I shall lead the Readers patience
by a more easy and short way to a Conclusion, having but one Consideration
more to subjoyn, which is this.

If the private dislike of so many Ladies, fomented by envy, after so many
spies set on my behavior, and so vigorous an inquisition had against me, and
having a voracious will to destroy my Credit, cannot find any evidence to
convince me of any thing scandalous, it is no slight Argument of my Innocence.
If all their endeavors against me met together, as the beams of the Sun, on a
burning-glass cannot kindle a fire to my destruction, their most frequent
attempts proving as the Rays under the meridian which cannot produce a flame
by reflection on a burning-glass, for want of solid matter to work on. I hope
the Reader will free me from all Attachments of busy suspicion for the future,
and that no man will own a necessity of believing suggestions upon the
reputation of their accusing me hereafter, for the reputation of such people as
are found false accusers, or like an Irish pair of Tongs, which grow shorter in
the use.

I shall conclude with a steadfast Declaration of a wellgrounded hope, which is,
that all Persons of Quality of both sexes in this City, which is the Metropolis
of Loyalty as well as preheminency, will compassionate my injured innocence,
hitherto groaning under the insolency of she-cruelty and oppression, trampled
upon, as it were, to dust, by the barbarous feet of pride and unwomanly
insultations; but that which begets in me my most secure confidence, is that of
Ioh, Behold now, my Witness is in heaven, and my record is on high, whereunto
appealeth

Frances Plunkett.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
P. 14. lege Syria. p. 19. l. Endive. p. 21.


