Aleyn blazon or coat of arms Mayor.
At a Common Council holden in the Guildhall London, on Tuesday the 20th of
December, 1659.
THis Court having taken notice of diverse Affronts put upon the Right
Honorable Thomas Aleyn, the present Lord Mayor of this City, with many false
with scandalous Aspertions cast upon his Lordship, and the Committee appointed
by this Court to confer with the Lord Fleetwood touching the Peace and Safety
of this City: as if they had deserted their Trust, or betrayed the Rights and
Liberties of this City, And in particular, that the said Committee seemed
satisfied with the Limitations of Parliament, called the seven Principles or
unalterable Fundamentals, printed in a late scandalous Pamphlet styled The
Public Intelligencer; The said Committee here openly declaring that they never
heard the said Principles, or had them any way Communicated to them, much less
ever Consented to the same or any of them.

This Court being deeply sensible of these great Indignities, does declare,
That the said Lord Mayor is so far from deserving any of the said Affronts or
Aspertions, that he has highly merited the great Honor and Esteem of this
Court and the whole City, having in all things demeaned himself with much
Prudence and faithful Integrity to this City and Court, which does therefore
return his Lordship their most hearty thanks.

And that the said Committee in all their Transactions, touching the Peace and
safety of this City, have also discreetly and faithfully discharged their
trust, to their own trouble and great satisfaction of this Court.

And whereas this Court and City has been lately represented by some, as
having deserted their first Cause and Declarations for their taking Arms or
joining with the Parliament in defense of the City or the Commonwealth: This
Court does declare that they still do, and with Gods assistance always will
adhere to their former Principles and Declarations in the use of all Lawful
means for the maintenance of the true reformed Protestant Religion according
to the Scriptures; The support and maintenance of a settled lawful Magistracy,
a learned pious Ministry and public Universities, with the ancient fundamental
Laws of the Nation, Just Rights, Properties and Liberties of all persons: And
for these ends will endeavor, all they lawfully may the speedy convening of a
Free Parliament to sit and Act without Interruption or Molestation, by any
persons whatsoever.

Sadler.

Printed by James Flesher Printer to the Honorable City of London, 1659.


