Aleyn blazon or coat of arms Mayor.
At a Common Counsel holden at the Guildhall London, on Wednesday the 23 day of
November 1659.
IT having pleased Almighty God to show us so much of the Fruit of our own
Hearts and Evil ways, as to let us see the very Foundations of Government
Razed; and that we have so much cause to fear our great Want of Fear and Love
to his holy Name and Word, Worship and Sabbaths, Magistrates and Ministers, may
justly provoke him to withdraw from us, and to Loath, Abhor and Leave us to the
Lusts of our own Hearts, and to our great Weakness and Folly, till Confusion
and Desolations make us become a Reproach to Religion, and a Scorn to all
Nations.

In most humble desires of that good convincing Spirit of Promise, to give us a
right sight and sense of our great Vileness, and his greater Goodness, yet able
to Pardon, Recover and Heal us; We desire to Bow down and humble our Souls
before the mighty hand of God, that he may yet Pity and Spare, Pardon and
Heal, according to the Greatness of his Power and Goodness: That his Name may
be glorified, and the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus enlarged, and these Nations
settled in Peace and Righteousness, with Governors and Counselors, Judges and
Teachers after his own Mind and Heart, according to his Holy Word: And that He
will not leave us in this Hour of Temptation, till he has brought us through
all our Fears, Troubles and Darkness, unto True Rest, Peace and Setlement.

For these great ends this Court has appointed Friday the second of December
next, solemnly to seek the Face of God, with Fasting and Prayer at Paul's
Church; and does recommend it to the Ministers of the Gospel, to give notice
hereof in all their several Churches and Congregations, and to desire their
Assistance and Concurrence in their several Churches, as the Lord shall enable
them and all his People throughout this City and Liberties thereof.

Sadler.

Printed by James Flesher Printer to the Honorable City of London.


